A TREATISE OF THE VOCATION OF BISHOPS, AND OTHER ECCLESIASTICAL MINISTERS.
PROVING THE MINISTERS OF THE PRETENDED REFORMED CHVRCHES IN GENERAL, TO HAVE
NO CALLING: AGAINST Monsieur du Plessis, and Mr. Doctor Field: And in
particular the pretended Bishops in England, to be no true Bishops. Against Mr.
Mason.

By ANTH. CHAMP. P. and D. of Sorbonne.

He that enters not by the door into the fold of the sheep, but climeth up
an other way, he is a theife and a robber. Ioh. 10.1.

I sent not the Prophets and they ran: I spoke not unto them, and they
prophesied. Iere. 23.21.

He cannot be esteemed Bishop, that contemning Apostolical tradition, and
succeeding to none, is sprung up from himself: for he can by no means neither
have, nor hold the Church, that is not ordained in the Church. S. Cypri. epist.
76. ad Magnum.

AT DOVAY, By JOHN HEIGHAM. With License of Superiors. Anno. 1616.

TO Mr. GORGE ABBAT, CALLED ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY.
MASTER Francis Mason having (as he says) received from you direction and
encouragement, in making his book of the consecration of the Bishops in the
Church of England, does therefore present you with it, as due unto you: And it
seems to have bin to your contentment, as sufficiently performing that, which
he pretends therein. For (as I have heard) you conuented diverse Catholic
Priests (whom you wrongfully kept in prison) to testify, that they had seen
such registers, as he cites for the justifying of your ordination; esteeming
(as may appear) that nothing else wanted for the full clearing of that matter.
Which sole action was the first occasion, that made me think of the
disproofe thereof. For perceiving thereby, that you and your assistents, made
reckoning of the book, as of a full justification of your calling, I thought
it labor neither idly, nor ill bestovved to make you see, (sithence you either
did not, or would not see it before) how far short it comes of that mark.
I address therefore this Treatise unto you, to the end that comparing it with
M. Masons Apologetical Dialogue, you may judge whether he has indeed
performed that, which he so confidently affirms in the first face of his
book: to wit, to have justified the consecration of the Bishops of the Church
in England, to contain nothing contrary to the Scriptures, Councels, and
Fathers, or approved example of Primitive antiquity. You may peradventure
marvel, that I should put the trial of this matter to you, knovving you so
far interested therein as you are. But the reason is, because I hold the
negative so evident, that I am persuaded you cannot, without forfaiture of
your judgment, determine the contrary.

If you had not hindered the publication of the book written not many years
ago, of this subject, by intercepting the written copy, which, (knovving
belike that it cannot be ansvvered) you still retain, I might and would have
spared this labor, or have othervvaies bestovved it. But seeing you are not
content, only to hinder the discovery of your no vocation, but do set others
on work to maintain and bolster it up, to the prejudice of the truth, you
cannot justly complain, if by this occasion, that be laid open to the view of
the world, which you desire should remain unseen, and unknown.

If you find your self proved here to be no Bishop, but a mere Usurper of
that title, I vvil desire (though I cannot greatly hope) that you should either
depose it, or at least make your self capable thereof. But if you think there
is no such thing here performed, I will expect that you should encourage
either M. Mason, or some other, to satisfy the arguments here proposed to
prove the same. If not, your silence shall be interpreted an acknowledgement of
that where with you are here charged, that is, of your no lavvfull ministry
and ordination, and consequently of your no Church, no Faith, no mean of
salvation. All which important consequences evidently follow, of your want of
lawful calling and ordination. And so vvishing you with all my heart, as much
love to the Ctholike truth (without which your soul shall never see with
joy the face of Jesus Christ) as you show hatred against it; I leave you to
his holy disposition, who would have all men saved, 1. Tim. 2.4.
and to come to the knowledge of his truth.

Your servant and frinde as you are Gods and his Churches: A. CHAMPNEY.

The Preface to the Reader.
IF Master Mason (court^ous Reader) in his Book of the consecration of the
Bishops in the Church of England, had either directly proved their lawful
calling, or impugned that of the Bishops of the Catholic Roman church, he
might have expected from his Catholic adversaries some answer to the same. But
seeing he pretends only to clear them, from the just imputations laid upon
them by Catholic Authors (which he calls slanders) and thereby makes
himself only Defendant, he cannot with any reason, expect from them any reply,
in form of answer, to his book. For there are few but know this difference
between the defendant, and the Plaintiff or Appellant: that the Defendant
must necessarily answer to all and every objection brought against him whereas
the Appellant is not bound to reply, to his answers made to every objection,
but may (if he think good to impugn either his answers, or the cause he
maintains) make his choice of one, two, three, or more, as he shall think
most for his advantage. Which if he can in such sort enforce against his
adversary, as he is not able to satisfy them, he shall clearly gain his cause
against him. For example, he that being accused of felony, or treason, and
therefore defedant, is necessarily constrained to answer to all, and every
important accusation laid against him, and if he fail in the answer but of one
only, he will be found guilty; whereas his adversary being appellant, is not
tied for the euicting of his cause, to reply upon his answer to every
accusation, but may make free choice of such, and so many, either of his former
accusations, or any other, as he finds fittest for his purpose, which if he
can press in such sort, as the defendant cannot avoid them, he shall convict
him to be guilty. M. Mason therefore making himself merely Defendant in this
quarrel, is not to expect that I, intending as Appellant, to prove their
Bishops to have no lawful calling, should reply upon every parcel of his
whole book, in form of answer to that which he says. For besides that this
would cost both me, and the Reader more labor, then the thing is worth, it is
no way necessary for my purpose: which is not to answer him (who making
himself Defendant has the place of the answerer) but to impugn the thing
that he would maintain; which whether I have performed effectually or no,
notwithstanding the answers which he has already made in this his book, I
leave to the censure of the judicious though otherwise partial Reader.

Furthermore M. Mason through his whole Book making choice only of such
arguments, as he thinks good to propose against himself, and urging them
only so far, as he thinks he can make some show of soluing them (like unto
little children that build Castles of Tile-shards, and afterward please
themselves in throwing them down) cannot hope that his adversary should favor
him so far, as (leaving his best advantage either in the choice of his
arguments, or in the manner of urging them) to bestow his time and travel in
refuting the answers, which he frames to his own objections. This favorable
course (to deal plainly) I intend not to hold with M. Mason. Yet will I
promise him, that where I find he says any thing, either for the preventing,
or answering any argument here by me proposed, it shall not be dissembled, but
set down in his own words, and peradventure urged farther, then it is by him,
which is as much, as he can with any reason expect at my hands in this cause.
But, (to note this by the way) why is M. Mason so could in this matter of their
calling, that he proposes not to himself to prove it, neither by Scripture,
Traditions, Councels, nor Fathers, (all which kind of proofs he knows to be
authentical with us) but only pretends to clear it from the slanders, In
the face of his book.
and odious imputations of the Romanists, and to justify it to contain
nothing contrary to the Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, or approved examples of
primitive antiquity. It is known they exact of Catholics with all rigor and
instance, positive and precise proof of Scripture for their doctrine in all
points of controversy. Why does not therefore M. Mason bring at least such
proofs, of Traditions, Councels, or Fathers (which he knows are not rejected
by us) for their new ministry, but contenteth himself with the buckler, and
stands only upon his defense? Marry for this reason: that neither Scriptures,
Councels, Fathers, or Traditions yield him any one positive proof of their
vocation; or if they do, I challenge him to produce it, and he shall gain his
cause. Neither will I bind him to find his proofs out of the Fathers within
the first five hundredth years after Christ, D. Humfray in the life of Jewel
says he gave the Papists to large^ scope: and M. Fulk has the like in his
Retentiue. page 55.
as M. Jewel did in his bragging challinge, and yet was reprehended by his
brethren for being over liberal: but I give him for this purpose the whole
1500. years.

Again, (to come yet more near him) what does he think is sufficient, to
clear and justify their calling, to contain nothing contrary to the
Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and Antiquities? Will he say it is a sufficient
justification of this point, not to be driven by force of argument, to confess
that it is against the Scriptures Fathers, etc.? If he will say so, I make no
doubt, but he has or will justify the consecrations, and calling of their
Bishops and Ministers, to contain nothing contrary to the Scripture etc. But
though he be absurd enough in many things, as will appear hereafter, yet I
cannot think him so absurd as to affirm this. For so shall he be constrained
to confess, that the Arrians, and all the obstinate heretics that ever have
been, have justified their heresies to contain nothing contrary to scripture
etc. none of them having yet ever been constrained by force of argument, to
confess their doctrine to be contrary thereunto.

He will peradventure say, that over and besides this, he will show the
objections made against their Bishops, to be but slanders, and odious
imputations. But how will he show this? by any other means, then by such, as
the Arrians, and all other heretics pretended to show, the arguments of the
Catholic Doctors against their heresies, to be but slanders? that is by
making show of framing some kind of answer to them, that they might not be
said to be overcome, and forced to grant the falsity of their heresy. In this
sort surely and no other, does M. Mason justify the consecration, and calling
of their Bishops to contain nothing contrary to scripture, as will appear in
the process of our dispute.

And now must I acquaint thee (good reader) with the reason for which, having
undertaken to prove the nullity, of our new English Bishops their
consecrations, and calling, against M. Mason, I enlarge my self so far, as
to disprooue also that, of all the other falsely termed reformed churches;
which reason is this. Knowing that the whole multitude of heresies, that p^ster
the world at this time (as likewise all other which have, or shall be) are by no
one kind of argument so easily and evidently refuted, as by that of the calling
of their pastors: And having occasion offered me by M. Masons brauing apology
for the Protestant Bishops of England, to show the nullity of their
consecration and vocation; Which though it have the greatest outward appearance
of lawful calling, of any other of the new stamp, and therefore it being
refuted the rest might be thaught to be sufficiently refuted with it yet it
being proper only to the pretended church of England, yea and not to that
wholly (the Puritanes, Brownists, Familians, and Anabaptists disclaiming from
it as papisticall and superstitious) I considered that it was not to any great
purpose, for the impugning of all these heresies, to refell it alone and leave
the others untouched. Therefore I resolved to make this treatise general, and
to show that no one of the new churches, called of the reformation, have any
true pastors, and consequently cannot be any true churches, nor therefore have
any true faith, or means of salvation. And because in all good method those
questions, that treat of matters more general, go before those that handle
the more particular, therefore in my discourse, have those questions the first
place, that treat of the more general points pertaining to this matter.

Yet because my purpose is specially to disprooue the calling, and consecration
of the Bishops in England, as well for that it is peculiar to our own
country, (and it being disprooued, the rest can have no great probability, for
that it has more show of true calling then all the rest) as also for that the
calling of the ministers of the French churches, which are the same with our
Puritans, is already unanswerably refuted, by that famous prelate, and terror
of the heretics of those days Cardinal of Perron, in a proper treatise of
that subject, set forth long since, yet never answered, and so much thereof
hereafter related, as pertains to the matter there in question, for these
reasons (I say) I stand longer upon that point by much, then upon all the rest.
If M. Mason or any other, shall think good, to continue the defense of this
cause, let him frame a pertinent answer to the arguments here proposed, and he
may expect a like reply, if God give health and assistance. In the mean while
if thou (courteous reader) can make any use of this my traueile, for the
maintaining of the Catholic truth, and rooting out of the contrary, either
in thy self or others, I shall esteem my pains very sufficiently recompensed
and so I commend thee to Gods holy grace.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK.
1. Chapter. THe true reason why so many in these days do err in faith, and
that many more have difficulty to find the true faith. Page 1. 2. Chap. Certain
principles of this present controversy touching the vocation of
Ecclesiastical ministers or magistrates confessed and agreed upon as well by
Protestants as by Catholics. page 9. 3. Chap. It is no sufficient proof of
lavvfull calling to ministry of Gods word and Sacraments, that any one be
judged either by himself, or others, or both, fit and able to exercise that
charge and function. pa. 13. 4. Chap. That one judged by himself or others fit
for the ministering of Gods word and Sacraments, though such as are in office
are supposed not to discarge rightly their duties, cannot lavvfully take upon
him that office, as sufficiently called thereunto: neither is such a judgment
and opinion any sufficient calling. page 15. 5. Chap. That the truth of
doctrine is not a sufficient proof of true and lavvfull calling to the
ministry of Gods word and Sacraments, nor is it any assured means for a
preacher and pastor, to prove himself authentically called to that charge,
for him to allege that the doctrine which he teaches is good and true. page
41. 6. Chap. That the sole election of the people is not a sufficient vvarrant
and calling to the lavvfull ministry of Gods word and Sacraments. page 54. 7.
Chap. Not all ordination, consecration, or impositio^ of hands is a sufficient
calling to the administration of Gods word and Sacraments. page 63. 8. Chap.
The defects found in the callings to the ministry hitherto refuted cannot be
supplied by any extraordinary calling, not is there now in the church of
Christ, any extraordinary calling to the ministry of Gods word and
Sacraments. page 78. 9. Chap. Not all external ordination, or consecration by
such as bear the name and pretend to be Bishops, is a sufficient and true
calling to the ministry of Gods word and Sacraments. page 115. 10. Chap. The
calling of the now English superintendents cannot be lavvfull, supposing that
of the Bishops of the Roman church, from which it is taken, to be unlawful.
page 130. 11. Chap. Cranmer continued not lavvfull Bishop till his death. page
141. 12. Chap. That the Bishops made in King Edward's days were no true, or
lavvfull Bi^hops. page 151. 13. Chap. The whole essential matter, and form
of Episcopal order consist not in impositio^ of hands, and these words,
receive thou the holy ghost. page 158. 14. Chap. That M. Parker bearing
sometime the name of Archbishop of Canterbury, was not true and lawful
Bishop.. page 188. 15. Chap. That M. Grindall, M. Horn with the rest
preferred to Bishoprics in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign were not
true, and lavvfull Bishops. page 202. 16. Chap. Of the oath of the Princes
supremacy, for denying vvherof the old Bishops were deprived. page 218. 17.
Chap. Those that succeeded M. Parker, and the rest in the places of Bishops,
down to this present day, neither were nor are true, and lavvfull Bishops.
page 241. 18. Chap. That neither the present superintendents in England have,
nor their Protestant predecessors ever had any lavvfull Episcopal
jurisdiction. page 310.
APPROBATIO DOCTORVM.
Nos infrascripti legimus diligenter librum Anglice scriptum cuius titulus est.
Tractatus de vocatione Episcoporum and aliorum Ecclesiae ministrorum: quo omnes
cuiuscunque praetensae reformationis ministelli legitimacarere vocatione
probantur, contra Plesseum and Fieldeu^: quo etiam peculiariter praesentes
Angliae superintendentes falso Episcopi vocari conuincu^tur, co^tra Masoniu^:
Antho. Cha^pneo Doctore Sorbonico authore. In eoque nihil inuenimus quod
sacrosanctae fidei Catholicae, Apostolicae, Romanae repugnet, vel morum
sanctitati praeiudicet, quinimo veritatem Catholicam docte and neruose
propugnat, and contrariam haeresim solid, detegit and confutat, quare
dignissimum iudicamus qui ad vtilitatem publicam gentis Anglorum praelo
ma^detur vt publicetur.

Parisijs 29. Ianuarij 1616. Frater Gabriel de S. Maria Theologiae Doctor,
Theologus Maclouiensium, Benedictinorum Maclouiensium Prior, and pro tempore
insignis monasterij and ordinis Fontisebrardensis visitator. Guilielmus Bishope
Theologicae facultatis Parisiensis Doctor.

Henricus Dei and sanctae sedis Apostolicae gratia Parisiensis Episcopus,
Omnibus praesentes inspecturis salutem in Domino.
Notu^ facimus quod viso publico testimonio quo duo suprascripti Doctores
Theologi nationis Anglicae sancte professi sunt diligenter se legisse librum
Anglico idiomate scriptum de vocatione Episcoporum and aliorum Ecclesiae
ministrorum etc. Authore Anthonio Cha^pnaeo Doctore Sorbonico. In eoque nihil
inuen isse quod sacrosancta: fidei Romanae repugnet, vel morum sanctitati
praeiudicet, quinimo veritatem Catholicam docte and neruose propugnat,
contrariamque haeresim detegit and refutat: pernisimus praedicto M. Antho.
Cha^pneo illum in lucem emittere.

Datum Parisijs die tertia Februarij 1616. De mandato praefati R mi. Domini mei
Domini Parisiensis Episcopi. Baudowyn.

THE APPROBATION OF DOCTORS.
We underwritten have diligently read a book written in English, entitled. A
treatise of the vocation of Bishops and other Ecclesiastical ministers, wherein
all the ministers of whatsoever pretended reformation are proved to have no
lawful calling: against M. du Plessis and D. Field: and wherein the present
superintendentes in England are convinced not to be true Bishops* against M.
Mason. By Antho. Champeny Doctor of Sorboune: and have found nothing therein
contrary either to the holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman faith, or good
ma^ners: but the Catholic truth learnedly and forcibly maintained, and the
contrary heresy soundly confuted and detected; wherefore we judge it very
worthy to be published in print for the public profit of all English men.

At Paris the 29. of January 1616. Brother Gabriel of S. Mary's D. in
Divinity, Theologall of S. Maloes, Prior of the Benedictins of S. Maloes, and
for the present visiter of the renowned monastery and order of Fonteurauld.
William Bish^p Doctor of divinity of the faculty of Paris.

THE BISHOP OF PARIS HIS PERMISSION for the printing of the same Book.
Henry by the grace of God and of the holy see Apostolic Bishop of Paris: To
all those that shall see these presents, health in our Lord. Be it known that
upon the sight of the public testimony of the above written Doctors in
divinity of the English nation, wherein they faithfully profess to have
diligently read a book in English written in English entitled. A treatise of
the vocation of Bishops and other Ecclesiastical ministers etc. By Ant.
Champney Doctor of Sorboune: and that they have found nothing therein repugnant
either to the holy Catholic Roman faith, or good manners, but contrariwise
that the Catholic truth is therein learnedly and forceably maintained, and the
contrary heresy detected and confuted, we have permitted the said Anth.
Champney to put it forth.

Given at Paris the 3. of February 1616. By the commandment of the aforesaid
my most Reverend Lord the L. Bishop of Paris. Baudowyn.

A TREATISE OF THE VOCATION OF BISHOPS AND other Ecclesiastical Ministers.
The first Chapter. The true reason why so many in these days do err in
faith, and that many more have difficulty to find the true faith.
IF men were but half as circumspect and wary, in those things that appertain
to their eternal felicity, as usually they are in those that concern their
temporal prosperity, (whereas reason would they should be more) they could not
be so often and fowly deceived in them, as they are. For God of his infinite
goodness and equal wisdom, has provided them of means to avoid all error
and deceit, in the things pertaining to their eternal felicity, by so much
more easy and assured, then in the affairs of this world, by how much more
the error or deceit in them, is more hurtful and less recou^rable, then in
these: and therefore in respect of them, has he promised to make a way so
plain and direct, that the very fools shall not err or go astray in it, Esaias
35.8.
which he has no where promised in respect of these.

1. How comes it then to pass, (will some say) that so many do daily err,
and many more do greatly complain, of the difficulty in finding the true way
to salvation: And not without reason as it seems, there being so many diverse
ways proposed, whereof every one is avouched by some to be the only true way?
The reason hereof is easily given, and the remedy of the evil which it
brings, as easily found, and not with much more difficulty practiced, if men
be willing to embrace it.

2. The principal yea peradventure the sole reason, why so many (not only now
adays, but in all times) have and do go astray from the way of salvation
erring from the true faith with out which it is impossible to please God; Heb.
11.6.
and that many more have difficulty to find the same: is because they first
seek to know what they should believe, before they know, or seek to know whom
they should believe, or of whom they should learn their faith and belief.
This to some may peradventure at the first, seem either improbable, or at
least doubtful. Because it may be thought little to import of whom a man
knows, or is taught the truth, so that he know it indeed: as in the like
case, it imports little or naught at all, of whom, or by whose counsel or
means a sick man recouereth his health, so that he be truly cured: or by
whom he that is bound for Jerusalem (for example) is taught the way, so that
he be showed the true way. Yet that which I said is most true, as shall
manifestly appear even by these familiar examples proposed. For if a sick man
or traveler should consult and take directions, the one for his health, the
other for his iourny, of such as are as little skillful in these matters as
themselves, are they not in evident danger to be deceived? And if they inquire
of others, of whose knowledge they have no more assurance, then of the first,
they may well be brought into more doubt and perplexity (one telling them one
thing, and another the quit contrary) but they shall be never a whit further,
the one from danger of going astray in his journey, the other from increasing
his disease. Evident therefore it is, that the first thing these men are to
seek, is to know, who can give them true directions, and teach them how to
find that which they seek, and which they desire to find.

3. And this will be much more evident, if we put the case, that these men
know, or at least may most easily know, that there are appointed by public
authority men to direct and guide them in all their doubts and difficulties,
whose direction^ and advise if they follow they shall not be deceived: and
withal are farther aduertized, that there are others, who upon pretext of more
skill then is in those that are publicly authorized, will not only offer their
counsel and advise, but will thrust it upon men, as the only necessary mean
to find that which they desire: whose counsel notwithstanding and advise if
they follow, they shall without fail be deceived. These two things (I say)
supposed, it is most clear, that he that will not in these cases be deceived,
must necessarily first and before all things seek to know who can truly
instruct, and direct him in his doubts, as appointed thereunto by public
authority, that afterward he may securely learn of him or them what he is
to do, and what course he is to hold, for the attayning of that he desires;
whether it be the recovery of his health, or the prosperous atchiuing of his
journey.

4. Even so and no otherwise does it fare with all Christians, in the great and
weighty affair of their eternal felicity. For there is no Christian but
either knows, or may most easily know these two things. First that God has
authorized and established here upon earth public Officers, and Pastors to
direct and guide all men in the true way to life everlasting, and to teach them
the only true faith: whose directions and conduct whosoever follows, shall
not go astray nor err. Secondly, that there are others, who having no
commission or authority at all in these affairs, do not withstanding take
upon them the charge of Teachers and Guides in this weighty business,
pretending to have more skill, and knowledge therein, (and therefore more right
to that office and function) then the publicly authorized Pastors have: but
indeed, teaching false doctrine, and new ways of their own invention, lead
all their followers into eternal ruin. There is nothing more evident and
certain, to those that believe the holy Scriptures then these two things. For
God by his wisdom forseeing that the ignorance or error in either of these
things could not stand with the true mean to bring men to life everlasting:
(the error in the first, taking away the mean to know, whom they should
follow or believe; and the error in the second, not permitting them to know
whom they should fly and avoid) has himself most clearly and evidently
testified both the one and the other in the received and acknowledged text of
his sacred word. Math. 28.19.20.


5. The first is testified in these words: Going teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, Pastors are appointed by God to teach (...)
^uth.
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things,
which I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you all days, even to the
consummation of the world. Here we see commission given and Pastors appointed
to teach all men, all things, which are to be observed, for the gayning of the
kingdom of heaven: and this commission is to last until the end of the world.
And that we should not fear that they might deceive us, teaching that which
they ought not, or which is against their masters doctrine: Luc. 10.16.
he says unto them else where. He that hears you, hears me; and he that
dispiseth you, dispiseth me: whereby we are taught, with what security and
confidence we both may and ought to embrace their instructions and follow their
conduct. Ephesians. 4.11.12, 13.
The same verity is delivered by S. Paul in these words. He gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors, to the
consumation of the Saints, unto the work of the ministry, unto the edifying
of the body of Christ, until we all meet in the unity of faith. Where we see
Commissioners appointed by sovereign authority, to teach and instruct all men
to their eternal salvation, and their commission to endure for ever until the
world shall fail. The true function and charge of which Teachers, the Apostle
declares in the words following, to be the certain knowledge of the truth,
saying: That now we be not children wavering, and carried about with every wind
of doctrine. And these so clear testimonies of the holy Ghost, are more then
sufficient to convince this verity, though it were gainsaied by any, as it is
not. For none of those that glory in the falsely named reformation, do deny,
that God has appointed Pastors in his Church to teach his people the truth of
his doctrine: or that all men are bound to hear, and learn of them, as shall
appear more amply hereafter.

6 The second point before mentioned, is as manifestly testified by the warning
which our Savior gives us in these words, Take ye great heed of false
Prophets, which come to you in the clothing of sheep, Math. 7.15.
but inwardly are ravening wolves. And S. Paul in like manner. I know that
after my departure, False teachers foretold.
there will ravening wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. And of
this kind of cattle, are we so often and so plainly forwarned in holy
Scripture, Acts 20.29.
that wonder it is, that any one that pretends to believe scripture, should
be so deluded by them, as we daily see many are. But the true reason hereof is
that which was said before, that men having small regard of their eternal
felicity, do not care what masters they follow or of whom they learn their
belief, and other things necessary for their salvation: whereas they should
first with competent diligence seek out those masters who are by sovereign
authority otdained to teach them, (who are not hard to be found, as shall by
and by appear) and then with like diligence, but with all security learn,
what they ought to believe and do. For seeing God has so evidently testified
that he has provided such guides to direct us in the true way to eternal
felicity, as following them we follow himself; and further that if we follow
any other teaching contrary to them, we shall follow ravening wolves, what
fair show so ever they make: who can doubt but the first thing, that any man
that desires to save his soul, is to seek to know who those guides appointed
by God are, that having found them, he may securely learn of them the true way
to everlasting life.

7. Though this discourse be of it self clear, and evident, yet because it is
a certain ground of that which is to be said hereafter, it will not be amiss
to confirm it yet further, for which purpose serve most fitly these words of
S. Paul. Romans 10.13.14.
Whosoever shall invoke the name of the Lord shall be saved, how then shall
they invoke him, in whom they have not believed? or how shall they believe
him whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and
how shall they preach unless they be sent? Thus says Saint Paul. Whereby it
is evident, that before we can know, what we ought to believe, we must first
know, whom we ought to believe. For seeing we cannot (as S. Paul says)
believe, unless we hear or be taught, and that we cannot hear and be taught
by every one, but only by such as are sent, and authorized to teach us, we
must necessarily, unless we wittingly be deceived, first and before all things
seek to know, who those are that have commission, warrant, and authoriry to
teach us, that of them we securely learn what we are to believe.

And this course or order of learning our faith, so plainly expressed in holy
Scripture, is also most conformable to that method which nature her self
observes in teaching us natural obseru^^h knowledge: first making known unto
us the things that are most easy, that by the help thereof, we may raise our
thoughts, and studies to higher and more obscure matters. So the heathen
Philosophers by the knowledge of Gods creatures rose up to the knowledge of
their Creator, Romans 1.
as S. Paul witnesses. Therefore it being a far more easy thing, to know
who those are that are authorized, and appointed to teach us our faith, then it
is to know what our faith is, or what we ought to believe: As it is a far
more easy thing in any commonwealth, to know who is a true and lawful judge,
then to know what is right judgment in any difficult case in law. We are bound
under pain of perverting, not only Gods express ordinance, declared out of
holy Scripture, but also the course of nature it self in learning our faith.
First to learn who can teach us our belief, as being authorized thereunto,
and then after to learn of them, what we ought to believe.

8 The same thing is yet made more manifest by this evident reason. Faith is a
knowledge, which is not gotten by subtilty of wit, or diligent study (being
above the reach of either) but only by authority and revelation, Romans 10.17.
Saint Paul testifying that faith it had by hearing. Therefore they only, whom
God appoints to teach unto others those things which it pleases him to
reveal, are able to teach us what we ought to believe, or what is revealed
from God: and if any other undertake to teach us contrary thereunto, we may and
ought undoubtedly to esteem their doctrine, not to be revealed from God, but
to be invented by themselves. Romans 10.
For how can they reveal unto us Gods most hidden secrets, being not sent, nor
instructed by him therein? and this is S. Paul's own argument in the place
before cited. And most ancient Tertullian deduceth the same reason in this
sort. If our Lord Jesus Christ has sent his Apostles to preach, De
prescriptio. cap. 21.
other Preachers then they who^ Christ sent, are not to be received, because
(lo the reason) neither does any but the Son know the Father, and to whom
the Son has revealed him, neither has the Son revealed him to any, but
the Apostles whom he sent to preach that which he has revealed.

9. Here some may say, seeing we have the holy Scriptures, wherein God has
revealed unto us all his will and council, what great necessity is there of
other Teachers, or why may not every one instruct, and inform himself by Gods
written word, without seeking out any other master to be taught by? The
Scriptures teach us as well the manner how to learn our belief by our Pastors,
^s what vvo are to believe: and that is first to be learned.
This same question is so far from showing that Pastors are not necessary in
Gods Church that it shows them to be most necessary, notwithstanding the use
of the written word of God. For seeing there are some that read the holy
Scriptures, and yet do not find therein the necessity of Pastors, though so
expressly contained in them, as the places before cited do show they are, is it
not evident that they had need of teachers, to make them see, what is revealed
to them in holy Scriptures? For with those, that make this objection I would
argue thus. Either you find in the holy Scriptures the necessity of Pastors,
Doctors, and Teachers to be in Gods church, notwithstanding the benefit of the
written word of God, or you find no such thing at all: if you find it, then
must you believe it, as being taught by Gods holy word, if you believe the
Scripture: if you find it not, then had you much more need of Pastors, and
Doctors to teach you the contents of holy Scripture, seeing you do not find
in them that, which they so expressly contain.

Where it is to be observed, that this argument concludes not only directly
against those, that admit not the necessity of Pastors and Doctors in Gods
Church (if any should deny them) but also indirectly against those that either
say, the Pastors may be judged by their sheep in matter of doctrine: or that
the decision of the question of the calling of Pastors ought not necessarily
go before the decision of other questions of doctrine, when there is doubt of
both. As for example, that the examination of this question, whether Luther,
had true calling, and consequently was true Pastor or no, ought not to go
before the examination of this point of his doctrine, whether after the fall of
Adam man have freewill or no: and the like. For first, it is evidently against
the nature and instruction of Pastors, and Doctors, to be guided and taught
by those over whom they have the charge of Teachars and Governors. But if they
chance to err, they are to be taught and judged by other Pastors, and not by
their own sheep: because the Disciple cannot be above his master. Secondly,
when any one is found to teach new doctrine, and is not known from whence he
comes, or who sent him to preach that doctrine, his calling and commission is
first of all to be examined, and afterward his doctrine; and not first his
doctrine, and then his calling. And the reason is, not only because it is more
easy to know when a man has true calling, Act. n. 7.
then which is true doctrine (as is said before) and therefore men are not so
subject to be deceived in the one as in the other but also because, if he be
found without true calling, let his doctrine be never so true, he shall be
esteemed a rebel and traitor to God and his Church, and all those that follow
him, and therefore can have no right to dispute of doctrine as a Pastor but
ought to hear and learn of the true Pastors as a sheep, though he esteem
himself never so fit and able to teach others. For not he that commends
himself is approved, 2 Cor. 10.17
but whom God commends As in the like cause every officer or magistrate
executing any office in the name of the Prince, must first show his letters
whereby he has power to execute that office, before he can justify his
proceedings in the same, whether they be according to equity or not. See the
reason heerof in the 2. and 3. cap. n. 2.
For let them be never so just and upright, yet if he be found to have no
commission to exercise that office, both he and all those that obey him, shall
be judged rebels, and traitors to his Prince. So that by this whole discourse
it remains manifest, that he that will not err, and be deceived in his
belief, which imports his eternal salvation, must first seek ^o know (if
he know it not already) whom he may believe in matter of faith, and then study
to know of them, what he must believe; and not first seek to know, what he
must believe, before he know who may teach him, as having authority thereunto.
This ground being laid as partly confessed of all parts, and proved by manifest
testimony of holy Scripture, and evident natural reason, it only remains to
search out by what assured means they may be known, who are by Gods
sovereign power and authority, approved and appointed to teach and govern his
people in true faith, or in the true way to salvation, which being no harder to
be known, (as by the ensuing discourse, shall appear) then the civil
magistrates, and officers in any commonwealth or kingdom, are known and
discerned from usurpers, and intruders; the way to eternal felicity will
appear to be so plain and direct as the very foolish (unless they be
wilfully and wittingly blind) cannot go astray therein. Esai. 35.8.
And therefore that which was said in the beginning of this Chapter is found
evidently true, that if men were but half as wary, and careful, in those
things that appertain to their ete^nall felicity, as they customarily are in
those that belong to their temporal estates, they could not be so fowly
deceived therein, as daily experience teaches they are.

The whole drift and scope therefore of this ensuing discourse is, to show who
those are whom we ought to believe, or who they are that have authority from
God to teach us our faith and belief.

The second Chapter. Certain principles of this present controversy touching
the vocation of Ecclesiastical ministers or magistrates confessed and agreed
upon as well by Protestants as by Catholics.
1. FOR the avoiding of superfluous, and needles questions, and also that our
dispute may proceed both more groundedly and with better order, I think it not
amiss before I go any farther to set down some grounds and principles
pertaining to this present controversy, wherein either party contending does
agree, and which do specially serve for the true decision of the whole matter
in question. Where I would have thee (Judicious reader) to note by the w^y,
that it is the Protestants ministry only (so I term for this time all the
pretended Reformists) that is in question, whether it have any lawful calling
or no. For the vocation of the Catholic Roman Priests and Pastors, was never
by their adversaries called into question or dispute. A thing worthy of
special note, as an evident argument, that it is clearly good and Canonical;
or at least sufficient, otherwise it could not have escaped the severe censure,
of some one at least, of so many most bitter and serpentin eyed enemies, as
have these many hundredth years for one quarrel or other sought the overthrow
of that church. To which purpose they could never, or ever can have so
effectual a mean, as to show her Pastors to have no lawful calling. But this
being so out of all controversy, as they could not fasten upon her any light
suspision thereof, they always have chosen to impugn her by other means, ever
leaving this untouched; which notwithstanding if she were not, or had not been
the true spouse and church of Christ, would first have been espied, and most
hotly persecuted. But this by the way only. Now let us go forward.

Confess: of. Geneua art. 29. and 31. Confess: of England art. 23.
2. The Protestants agree with the Catholics first, that the office and charge
of preaching, and ministering Sacraments in Gods church, requires necessarily a
special power and authority, to the lawful and auailable exercise thereof.
Which is to say that if any man undertake to exercise the same, not having such
authority, his fact shall not only be unlawful and wicked, but also void and
without all effect, as being destitute of sufficient power and commission, They
therefore that shall attempt any such fact, without authority, and not only
they, but all their followers and favorers, are guilty of sacrilegiouse
rebellion against God and his church. And the reason is manifested. For who
soever exercises any office not in his own, but in another man's name, and
does it without his warrant and commission, does him manifest injury, usurping
his authority (the most valued and esteemed right that any man enjoys:) and
if the thing attempted be of moment, and the party whose authority is
usurped, be his sovereign, as both happen in this case of preaching, and
ministering Sacraments in the church, the usurper and all his abettors, by the
auow of all men, cannot be but guilty of treason, and manifest rebellion. For
fuller confirmation and declaration whereof (though manifest in it self, and
not denied by the Protestants themselves) because it is a point of exceeding
consequence, it will not be inconvenient, to bring one such testimony of holy
scripture, as may serve both for an instruction, and motive to all sorts of men
to abhor such sacrilegious usurpation. To which purpose the dreadful
judgment which God executed upon Core and his accomplices, is most proper. The
story is written in the book of Numbers, Numbers cap. 16.
and in brief is this. Core being only a Leuite, and therefore could not by his
office offer sacrifice^, which belonged only to Priests to do, murmured
against Aaron the heigh priest, accusing him and Moses to the people of
tyranny, as if they took unto themselves, the office of Priesthood, and
debarred others from the same, whereas the whole number of Gods people was holy
and fit to exercise that function, as well as they. To his seditious
suggestion, harkened Dathan and Abiron, who were not so much as of the tribe of
Leui, and drew with them many of the common people, whose sacrilegious
rebellion God speedely and severely punished, for the perpetual example of all
others. For Core with 250. of his co^plices, presuming (for trial of their
right in the office of priesthood) to offer incense with Aaron, were all
consumed with fire from heaven, and their censors by Gods special appointment,
beaten into plates, and nailed upon the Altar, for a perpetual memory of
Gods wrath upon those sacrilegious rebels, and for a warning that none should
dare to attempt the like after them: and thus perished the principal
offenders. Their favorers and abettors, Dathan and Abiron with their wives,
children, and whatsoever belonged unto them, were swallowed up by a hideous,
and dreadful opening of the earth under them, and they descending quick into
hell, received due punishment for their seditious coniuration. Neither did Gods
justice cease thus; For the next day, the people murmuring against Moses and
Aaron, as if they had slain the innocent, and for this cause moueing a new
sedition, God slew with fire from heaven 14000. and 700. of them, and Gods
wrath was appeased by Aarons offering of incense. This history so
authentically recorded by the holy Ghost for our learning (as S. Paul says of
all the rest that is written) abundantly shows how grievous an offense it is
before God, Romans 15.4.
to usurp the office of his Priests, and to intrude upon his church,
exercising ecclesiastical functions without lawful calling or commission, or
any way to favor or further the same. Of which enormious crime whether our
new masters of reformation, and their adherents, favorers, and followers be
not guilty, will appear by the process of this ensuing Treatisse.

3. And it is to be observed, that if they have no other means to clear
themselves from the crime of Core, and his co^plices, but by disclayming from
having any power to offer sacrifice, in the usurpation whereof, his offense did
consist, they will nevertheless, yea though they did not heretically err in
denying all such power) infallibly be found guilty of his offense. For Core
offended by thrusting himself into ecclesi^sticall or spiritual office,
whereunto he was not called, nor had any authority to practice it which if
these men be proved also to do, they shall also be convinced of the like crime
in general, though with some difference in the particular. As he for example
that usurps the dominion or government of one town or city only against his
sovereign, is no less truly a traitor and rebel, then he that usurps the
gouerme^t of a whole province or country; though the rebellion of the one be
greater, then that of the other.

French Catechism sunday 45.
4. Secondly the Pro^estants do grant and acknowledge together with the
Catholics, that the office of preaching and min^string sacraments is by Christ
his institution so necessary, that without it the church of God (the ordinary
course of providence already established remaining) cannot be conserved, and
therefore that there must of necessity be Pastors ordained in the same, for the
lawful exercise and practice of this office and charge.

This necessarily follows of the other, and is too clear to be denied.
5. Thirdly they also grant with the Catholics, that none can have the
authority necessarily required to the lawful exercise of the office of Pastor
in Gods church, unless he receive it from God, by our savior Christ: to whom is
given all power in heaven and earth. And who sends others to preach and
minister sacraments, Math. 28.18. Io. 20.21. Hebr. 5.5.
as his father sent him: and therefore can no man of his own au^horitie take
upon himself this charge. S Paul saying expressly, that no man takes upon him
this honor, but he that is c^lled of God as Aaron. Which is so certain and
infallible, that it is also true in our savior Christ himself, who, (as the
same Apostle in the same place says) did not glorify himself that he might be
made high priest, but he that spoke unto him thus: My son art thou, this day
I have begotten thee. These principles being granted and acknowledged as
evident truths by the Protestants themselves; that it may appear whether
their ministers be true and lawful pastors or no, it remains to see, whether
they have received this power from our savior Christ. For if they have ^ot,
they will according to the former grounds granted by themselves as certain
truths, be found not only no true Pastors, but thieves and robbers, with which
names and titles, our Savior himself does style them, that enter into his
sheepe-fold which is his church, ^o. 10.1.2.
not by his authority, who is the door, but clime up another way. Where it is
to be observed, that these too things: to wit, to have true authority or
calling; and to have true and sufficient proof of the same, are not here
nicely or metaphisically distinguished, but they are supposed to be all one,
and for as much as pertayneth to the question in hand, it is all one not to have
any authority at all, and to have no proof or constat of it: and therefore he
that cannot make it appear by sufficient proof, that he has a lawful
calling to the ministry of gods word, and sacraments, is truly judged to have
none at all. Hence forward therefore shall be particulerly examined the proofs
which the Protestants themselves do bring for their calling.

The third Chapter. It is no sufficient proof of lawful calling to the
ministers of Gods word and sacraments, that any one be judged either by
himself, or other, or both, fit and able to exercise that charge and function.
1. IN this chapter (as likewise in those that follow) is mention only made of
preaching and ministering sacraments, not because these be the only functions
belonging unto the pastors of Gods church, but because these are granted by
all Protestants to belong to that office, and are sufficient for the deciding
of the present controversy, without inuoluing other questions, (of power to
offer sacrifice, to make laws or canons,) not necessary for this purpose.
Which observation made; for the resolution of the question proposed, I suppose
(as a thing so clear and evident, as can need no proof) that there is some
certain means, whereby both Pastors may so fully and sufficiently prove their
lawful mission, that they to whom they are sent, cannot justly doubt thereof;
and also whereby Christian people may be so assured of their canonical calling,
that they need not stand in fear, to receive a woolf or a thief in steed of
a Pastor or Shepherd, at least, for so much as belongs to his calling or
commission. For if there were no such assured means to know this, our savior
Christ should have small reason so often to warn his people to beware of false
prophets, woolues, thieves, and robbers. For how can they beware of them, whom
they have no sufficient means to know? And likewise how can the people of God
avoid that dangerous hazard, of despising both our savior Christ, and his
eternal father; in despising those whom he sends, to whom he says. Luc.
10.16.
He that despises you, despises me? How can (I say) Christian people avoid
this danger, unless there be some certain and assured mean to know whom he
sends, and to discern them from those, that come of themselves, being sent
by none. This presupposed, the difficulty of this question is not great.

2. For evident and certain it is, that albeit a man be judged, never so fit
and able to undergo the charge and office of a Pastor, he has not for all
that, that calling, commission, and authority, which is necessarily required,
for the lawful and auailable exercise of that function, the holy Ghost
expressly teaching that none can preach unless they be sent: Romans 10.15. Hebr.
5.4.
and that none can take upon them this office but such as are called of God as
Aaron was. For the more easy understanding of the reason hereof, it is to be
noted; That the lawful and auailable exercise of any office, either civil or
Ecclesiastical, is not like unto the exercise of an art or trade, which after
a man has learned, and is skillful therein, he may lawfully use, (some certain
formalities, which civil policy has brought in, in some places observed) yea
if without the observation of these formalities, he exercise his trade, that
which he shall do, is not void, and of none effect, but is truly and auailablie
done. As for example, if a carpenter, which is not free of London, should build
a house in London, he may, according to the statutes of the city, be amerced
or fined, but yet the house, which he set up, shall remain a house. But it is
otherwise in the exercise of any office, either Ecclesiastical or civil. For
if one that is not appointed, and approved iugde for example; should give
sentence in any case either civil or criminal, his fact should not only be
unlawful, but ineffectual yea none at all, though he should give a true
sentence. And this not for any other reason, but because he wants the true
authority of a judge: the same reason holds equally at least in the exercise
of spiritual or ecclesiastical offices. And the true reason hereof is, because
the skill, fitnes, or ability to exercise any office, whether civil or
ecclesiastical is a far different thing, from the power and authority,
whereby the officer is authorized to exercise the same; that, being or ought to
be presupposed, this superadded. For the Prince, when he makes any Officer or
Magistrate, does not make him fit for it, but finding or thinking him fit,
gives him authority and power to exercise it. A man being made fit for any
office by nature, art, industry, or grace, is notwithstanding made Officer by
the grant, patent, or appointment of him, who has power to give it. And
therefore we see, that all that are judged fit to bear office, either in the
church or commonwealth, are not forthwith Officers. The function therefore of
preaching Gods word, and ministering Gods Sacraments, being not only an office,
but the greatest in that kind, that ever was imparted to man, it does
necessarily require authority, and power for the lawful, and auailable
exercise thereof, without which no fitness, neither of nature, art, nor grace
(the ordinary course of Gods providence and ordinance remaining) sufficing
otherways to make it good and lawful. And this is so evident both by
scripture and reason, that it is not denied of any, Mason pa 9. where besid^s
diverse testimonies of holy scripture he cites Beza for the same purpose.
and M. Mason confirms it saying: though a man were wiser then Solomon or
Daniel, he must expect till our Lord send him; he that teaches without a
calling, how can he hope that Christ, will be with him?

The fourth Chapter. That one judged by himself or other fit for the ministering
of Gods word and Sacraments; though such as are in office are supposed, not to
discharge rightly their duties, cannot lawfully take upon him that office, as
sufficiently called thereunto: neither is such a judgment and opinion any
sufficient calling.
1. THIS question is moved by reason of a piece of doctrine delivered by that
great Rabin of the falsely reformed French church M.r du Plessis who seems to
affirm, that any one without any special calling, Treat: of the church cap.
11. after the beginnin^.
may preach and teach, every one having sufficient calling by his own ^eale,
and the want of others, to discharge rightly that office. For first having
showed no small disdain, that their ministers should be demanded of their
calling, he says: It is the same thing (to say unto their ministers, whence
come ye? who sent ye?) that Sedechias the false prophet said unto Micheas. 2.
Paralip. 18.23.
By what way went the spirit of our lord from me to speak unto thee? The
Pharisees to our savior Christ. Math. 13.55. Marc. 6.1. Act. 4 7.
Thou art a carpenters son, who sent thee? The high priests to the Apostles. By
what authority do ye these things? But these are testimonies against himself.
For first there is no question, nor mention of the calling of ordinary Pastors,
or Teachers in any of these places, as will easily appear, to any one that
shall see the places themselves, and therefore are they impertinently alleged.
Secondly. Though the question were there of the ordinary calling of Pastors,
and also that they were wrongfully demanded of their calling, (whereof
notwithstanding none of them complain) yet the case between them, and our now
reforming ministers, is most different. For all these parties had already given
such evident proof of their calling, that their adversaries could not deny it,
which when these new preachers shall do, they shall be no more examined of their
calling: but till then let them not look to be esteemed any other then such,
as our Savior says, Io. 10.1.2.
Enter not by the door, but clime up another way, only to rob and steal.
Thirdly; Monsieur du Plessis does make scripture of his own, when he says in
the 2. quotation ( who sent thee? for there is no such thing in the whole
gospel) we might answer (says he, to wit to the question of their calling)
in one word after our savior Christ: The words that we preach, bear witness of
us: and cites. Io. 8. But this saying of our savior is neither in that place,
nor any where else in the whole Bible, that I know. Our Savior says thus
indeed. Io. 5.36.
The very works them^elues which I do, give testimony of me, that the father
has sent me. And again. If you will not believe me, Io. 10.38.
believe the works; Which rule being applied to the new reforming ministry
(as our Savior speaking of such creatures counseleth) saying (By their fruits
shall ye know them) will descry that they came from the same master, Math. 7 16.
that the Arians and Donatists came from, Epist. of the council of Sardic in
Theodo li. 2. cap. 8. cap. 15.
their works being altogether like. As pulling down of Altars, spoiling of
churches, vnuealing virgins, banishing, imprisoning, and diversely tormenting
Catholic Bishops, Priests, and other professors of the Catholic faith, not
by ecclesiastical, but by secular and usurped judgment. The Ecclesiastical
Histories are full of the Arians proceedings in this kind, Sozomen. li. 7.
cap. 13. and 14. Atha. apolo, 2. and epist. ad solitariam vitam aegentes. D.
Bishops reproof. p. 42. D. Abbot p. 87. Li. 6. cont. Parmenian.
wherein our Protestants in those places where they have the temporal
magistrate at their devotion, do far surpass them. And for the Donatists
manners, this one testimony objected by D. Bishop, and not rejected by D. Abbot
shall serve our Protestants for a glass to see themselves in. They set
Churches on fire, cast the most holy Sacrament of Ch^ists body to bruit beasts,
th^ow down Altars, brake chalices, defiled holy oiles, made sale of the holy
ornaments of the Church: whose execrable facts ancient Optatus condemns in
these words. In this kind have ye procured as much damage to God, as you
procured gain to the devil: you have wickedly melted chalices, barbarously
broken down Alters, you have uncovered the heads of Virgins, veiled in sign
of their profession, etc. But let us suppose that Monsieur du Plessis Scripture
is canonical, I would know of him, how he would refute the Arians, Pelagians,
Nestorians, Anabaptists, or any other heretics whatsoever, who will as readily
and resolutely say, the words that we preach, bear witness of us, as they of
Monsieur du Plessis new reformed Church. For if this short answer be sufficient
to stop the Papists mouths, demanding proof of the Protestants calling, (as
Monsieur du Plessis says) surely he must by the same rule have his mouth
stopped, and admit all those for lawful Preachers, who can give the same answer,
which all heretics can as easily, and as truly do as his Ministers.

2. Besides this (says Monsieur du Plessis of the Catholics) They allege
their long succession, that they are the children of Abraham, S. Peter's heirs
etc. To whom our Savior answers for us. I know you are Abraham's seed, but
you are of your father the devil. And S. Paul: Io. 8. 2. These. 2.
Be not deceived brethren. The son of perdition shall sit and be worshipped
in the temple of God.

We allege indeed our succession from S. Peter, not to prove by it alone our
lawful calling, but by it alone to disprove the calling of all those, who have
it not: and to this purpose the argument is such, as never can be answered, as
hereafter will appear more at large.

The testimonies of our Savior, and S. Paul, are as pertinently alleged
against us, as they might have been by the Arians or any other heretics,
against the Catholics that impugned their heresy, and not otherways. But
that I may refute his whole doctrine with better method, then he delivers
it, I will first set down his conclusion, and then answers his arguments,
whereas he puts most of his arguments before his conclusion, using therein
more craft then good order: to wit, purposing by some slight and apparent
reasons, to bleare the eyes of his less careful Reader, in such sort as he
may make less d^fficulty to admit his conclusion, which is not only harsh but
most absurd thus set down.

Romans 10.
3. Not to inuert order, for we know it is said. How can they preach except they
be sent? But because in a general disorder, men respect not always the
formalities of order, and also because that to advertise either the Church of
necessary reformation, or a particular person of his salvation, every Christian
is sufficiently grounded upon a general calling, by the zeal which he owes
to the service of God, and by the charity that binds him to his neighbor,
reserving to the Church the examination by the word, whether he be well
grounded there in or not.

By th^s doctrine we see that all men, yea and women (for he speaks without
restriction, of all Christians, and if his examples serve for any thing, they
prove the same) have a sufficient calling to advertise not only particular
persons of their salvation, but the church it self of necessary reformation.
Which large and wide ground is doubtless laid of purpose; that if in case the
new ministers shall by force of plain and evident argument, be thrust out of
all other ground of calling, as they know right well they shall, they may have
recourse to this at last, thereby to maintain their credit if it be possible.
For if it were not for this end, no man endued with the least dram of reason
would ever have uttered such a proposition, which first is directly contrary to
the express doctrine of the Apostle saying. Romans 10.
How can they preach unless they be sent? which doctrine Monsieur du Plessis
confesses to know well, and therefore is guilty of greater judgment, by
contradicting it, according to that of our Savior Christ saying: He that
knows the will of my Father, Luc. 12.47.
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. What shall then become of
him, that knowing it, does voluntarily contradict it, as Monsieur du Plessis
here does? He says that this is not to inuert order, but only in a general
disorder, not to respect the formalities of order. But S. Paul esteems the
sending or mission (...) ^eachers not a formality of order, but so necessary
and e^^^^^iall a condition thereof, as without it none can preach, no more then
others can hear without a Preacher, or believe without hearing, all which S.
Paul knitteth together in one form of speech. But belike Monsieur du Plessis
thinks it no disorder to break order, where he falsely presumes it is once
broken already.

4. Secondly, it gives liberty to every wilful, wrangling, and perverse
spirit, to disquiet and perturbe the peace of Gods Church, furnishing every one
with power and authority to reform the same. Which is the very true reason
that there are as many new Reformers amongst them, as there are diverse sects of
their reformation. And how many these are does easily appear, by the
innumerable books written one against another. Whereof that the Reader may have
some little taste, he may know that one Protestant author Hospinian, Hospinia.
historia Sacramentaria part. 2.
makes mention of above two hundred books, written in the space of seventeen
years, by the brethren of the Reformation, one against another, in this one
point only of the Eucharist. Neither is there any possible means, to avoid
this evident mischief, the ground here laid by Monsieur du Plessis once
admitted. For seeing Luther had sufficient commission by this general calling
(for other he had not, as shall be showed hereafter) to reform the Church of
Rome, why should not Zuinglius have the like power, to reform Luthers
reformation; and Calvin that of Zuinglius, and so forward till they at last
have brought forth the most ugly brood of Swenkfeldians, Arians, Libertines,
Anabaptists, and many other pests of the Christian world? It is fourteen
hundred years ago that Tertullian observed this liberty of reformation in all
heretics in these words. Let me be a liar if they (Heretics) differ not
amongst themselves from their own rules, De praescrip. cap. 42.
whilst every one by his own judgment does molifie that which he received;
as he who taught it him framed it of his own brain. The progress of the
thing does declare it own nature and manner of beginning. The same thing was
lawful to the Valentinians that was lawful to Valentin himself: to the
Marcionites that was lawful to Marcion. (And why not then to the Lutherans as
well as to Luther.) to innouat or change their faith and belieffe as they
think good. And for this reason he says there are seldom schisms amongst
heretics: because every one makes a sect and a body by himself.

Neither is the prouiso which Monsieur du Plessis adds, saying: (that such
Reformers ought to reserve, to the examination of the Church by the word,
whether they be well grounded or no,) sufficient, to prevent this manifest
mischief. Yea it is like, as if one should let loose a great number of
ravening dogs, or woolues among the sheep, but with this caveat, that they
kill none, unless the Shepherd allow them to do it. For let the world (which
is already pestered with so many and diverse sects whereof one condemns the
other to hell fire for their heresies) judge, whether this caveat of Monsieur
du Plessis, be not over weak a bar to stop from rage, the furious torrent of
turbulent spirits, set once at liberty by the former doctrine, to reprove in
one another, whatsoever their fantastical spirits shall dislike, with the
li^e freedom that Luther undertook to reprove the Catholic Roman Church. For
I would know of this new doctor, whether he that upon the warrant by him here
approved, does advertise the Church of necessary reformation, as he terms
it, ought so to refer himself, to the judgment of the Church, that it
judging his adu^rtisment, to be the mere motion of an unquiet spirit, inspired
by the father of al lies, sedition, schism and falsity, should be bound to
submit himself thereunto, and to proceed no farther in his pretended
reformation, under pain to incur the censure, and penalty of a seditious
rebel, or no? If he answer that he is bound so to do, he shall give
sentence, against all his reforming brethren, who have not yielded, to the
judgment of the church, condemning their doctrine for heresy, by the same
solemn manner of proceeding, to wit, by general counsel, that she condemned
Arius, Sabellius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches, and all others, who by the
judgment of these Reformers, are, and have been lawfully condemned. Neither
can it be said, that this sentence is not iuridical, being the sentence not of
any competent judge, but only of the adverse party. For the same might the
condemned heretics before mentioned, have answered for themselves, and their
doctrine. Secondly, when Luther (upon this general calling here mentioned, for
other he had none) began his pretended reformation, there was not so much as
one man in the world, of his opinion in all points of his doctrine, no nor he
himself at the beginning did hold all the heresies he taught afterward: much
less was there any church, which he would acknowledge for competent judge of
his propositions. And therefore was either to reserve the trial of his
reformation, to the judgment of the Catholic Roman Church, or to none at all,
and then Monsieur du Plessis his caveat is nothing worth.

If M^nsieur du Plessis answer, that such a Reformer is not bound to stand to
the judgment of the Church, but in case only, that it judge according to the
word: I will ask of him, who shall determine, whether the Church judges
according to the word or no? the church, or the pre^ended Reformer? if he say
the church, he and his remain condemned: if he say, the pretended Reformer,
his caveat is no more then a very cobweb, to be blown away with the smallest
breath of every one pretending reformation; who may with as good right
challenge to reform the Church of G^neua, after the example of Seruetus, as
Calvin did that of Ausburg, and Luther that of Rome. So that the world shall
never be free from new reformations, so long as there is a devil in hell to
inspire the giddy spirits of restles, and rechles men, who are as willing and
ready to run into sedition, as he is to push them forward into it. For if
Monsieur du Plessis or any other for him think to wind himself out of this
labyrinth by saying, that this must be determined, neither by the church, nor
by the reformer, but by the word: he shall show himself too too impertinent.
For why then does he say that it must be reserved to the Church, to judge
according to the word, whether he be well grounded or no? Secondly, seeing that
in this case, the whole controversy is reduced to the word in such sort, as it
is now only in dispute, what the word does testify, it is all one to say, that
this controversy shall be judge of this controversy (then which nothing can
be imagined more absurd) and to say, that the word shall be judge of this
controversy, for the controversy (as I supposed) is now, what the word does
judge of the controversy in hand.

5. Thirdly, I would know of Monsi. du Plessis, what he will answe^ to the
Anabaptists, ^ibertines, and Arians all obiecting corruption and heresy in the
Church of Geneua and France, and therefore grounded upon that general calling
of zeal to Gods service, which he here approoueth, do advertise it of
necessary reformation. If he say the Church (to wit of Geneua) does condemn
them and their reformation of heresy, they will appeal from that sentence, as
from the sentence not of any competent judge, but of their adverse party. If he
betake himself to the written word, they will contend with him, that the word
does wholly favor them, and will at last enforce him to confess these sayings
of ancient Tertullian to be most true, Tertul. de praescriptio. cap. 11. 18. 19.
though he will not easily grant them to us alleging them against him. The
contention by Scriptures (against Heretics) profits nothing but either to
turn the stomach or the brain. Whereof he gives this reason. This heresy
receives not some Scriptures, and those it receives it peruerteth by adding
and detracting to make it serve his purpose. The false sense no less impugneth
the truth then the corrupted text. Differing presumptuous doctrines do
necessarily deny that, whereby they are convinced, and do rely upon that
which they have falsely framed. What will thou gain (most cunning scripturist?)
whilst what thou defendest, thy adversary denies, and what thou deniest he
defends? Thou shall indeed loose nothing but thy voice by crying: nor shall
thou gain any thing but choler by hearing blasphemies. And he for whose
confirmation thou enterest into this dispute by Scriptures, shall he be more
swayed to the truth or to heresy? being moved by that he sees thee to have
gained nothing, the adverse part being equal in defending and denying,
doubtless by th^s equal altercation he will depart more doubtful, not
knowing whether doctrine he may esteem to be heresy. For this they
(Heretics) will say, that we corrupt the Scriptures and their interpretation,
and therefore that they defend the truth. Therefore are not we to appeal to
the Scriptures, nor is the controversy to be settled in them, in which the
victory is uncertain, or at least not very certain. Thus far Tertullian,
whose doctrine if Monsieur du Plessis will allow for current (as he has no
reason to refuse it) he must necessarily grant, that the trial of
controversies by only Scripture is neither easy nor effectual. But whatsoever
he shall esteem of this testimony, yet shall he in fine be forced even by his
own rule here set down either to admit of their reformation, whom he
condemns, to wit, the Arians, Anabaptists, and Libertines, or confess that
his doctrine here delivered, is most wicked and pernicious, as giving liberty
to all persons under a false pretense of reformation to disturb the peace of
Gods church at their own pleasure: which liberty were it to be practiced in
temporal government, would quickly turn all vpside down in such sort, as
could never be remedied. For if it were lawful for every ambitious and unruly
spirit, to suggest against the established government, and governors, what he
list, under the color of necessary reformation: and his suggestions being
rejected by the sovereign maiestrates as seditious and wicked, might appeal
from their sentence, as parties and might cast himself upon the trial of the
law, and that to be understood no otherways then he will have it: what peace
could be expected in such a commonwealth? Which in conuenience in the
spiritual or ecclesiastical government of Gods church, is by so much more
hurtful and hateful, then in the temporal government of any commonwealth
(but that men are less careful of those things, that appertain to their
eternal felicity then in those that touch their temporal weal) by how much
more domageable it is to loose the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, then
to loose some small temporal estate in this world.

Having thus refuted this seditious doctrine of Monsieur du Plessis, (which
doubtless was first hatched there, where there is no order, but all horror and
confusion) I will now examine his grounds whereupon it is built. But by the way I
will advertise thee (careful Reader) that he brings nothing at all, for the
establishing of his doctrine, whereupon he groundeth this large commission of
calling: but such stuff as the Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians, and all other
condemned heretics whatsoever might have brought against the Catholic chutch,
and which the Anabaptists and Libertines, (who Monsieur du Plessis esteems
heretics) may allege for themselves against him, which only observation is
more then sufficient, to ouerturne all that he says to this purpose. But let
us see the particulers. They consist of similitudes, and examples, which is the
worst, and weakest kind of argument of all other. For oftentimes they prove
nothing at all but only serve to explicate the matter in question, and make it
more easily understood: and that only when they are fitly applied, as his are
not.

6. When a fire (says he) has taken in a city, Plessis p. 362.
or the enemies scale the walls by night, if the meanest citizen give the
alarm, yea or a stranger, while the sentinels are a sleep, they never ask
him, by what commission he did it; much less do they call him into question
for it, but they fetch water, and run to the walls, they see what the matter is,
and every one c^nneth him thank^s for so good a warning. Contrariwise when we
discover Antichrist siting in the Church, and take upon us, to confute him
openly in the face of a Council, and in his presence, instead of hearing us, of
weighing our reasons, of looking into the Scripture where he is so lively
painted, and by which we are to view him, they fall to examine us of our
qualities, and what Commission we have to give warning of him, yea they put us
to death worse, then if we had betrayed the common wealth.

Tertul de pros^riptio.
troubles all Heretics and was proposed by Tertullian 1400. years agone to
those of his time.

Here is nothing in all this that M.r du Plessis says which the before
mentioned condemned Heretics, might not have said for their defense against
the Catholics, or the Anabaptists may not now say against the Caluinists, and
therefore is all idle, and empty words. Whereas if he had made his comparison,
between the ecclesiastical, and temporal state, or government, his argument
would have had more show of reason. But he saw well it was not for his purpose,
but would have made evidently against him, a^oue n. 5.
as appears by that which is noted thereof, not far above. For if he would
apply his argument to the temporal government, and governors, and prove
thereby the like liberty and power, in every one to reform the same as he
would do in the ecclesiastical state, I doubt not, but he would quickly be
condemned for sedition, and treason to his Prince, and country, and yet in any
sensible man's judgment, is there more probability, in that then in this. But
let us come more near unto him.

His simile fails fowly in diverse respects. First for that the pretended
Reformers do not discover fire in the City, or the enemies scaling the Walls,
but would gladly cast and kindle fire, and scale the walls of Gods church: or if
it be otherways, let them show some evident difference, betwixt their entry,
or endeavor to enter, and of those that they themselves condemn for
firebrands, and enemies of Gods church, which they can never do.

Secondly, what man of ordinary sense will say, that it is as easy a thing to
discern error in doctrine of faith, or abuse in the Church government, as it
is to discern fire in the town, or enemies scaling the walls, (which must be
supposed for truth, or else this argument is nothing worth) seeing this is a
matter of sense, wherein none is deceived, and that a matter of understanding
and judgment, wherein the wisest, and greatest clerks have erred, as witness
the laps of Tertullian, Origin, and Lucifer, to omit an infinite number of
heretics, who were not of mean understanding, if they had had grace withal?

Thirdly, this argument supposes, that the watch of the Church may be so a
sleep, that the enemies may surprise it, the watchmen (that is, the Pastors)
being not aware thereof, which is directly against the Scripture, assuring us
the contrary. Esaias 62.6.
Upon thy walls Jerusalem (says almighty God) have I placed a watch: night nor
day shall they be silent for ever. And our Savior himself, Math. 28.
I am with you for ever, even to the consummation of the world. The devil
indeed may upon the good seed, sown in the hearts of men, sow cockle, that
is, false doctrine, whiles the Pastors sleep or neglect their office, as some
expound the parable Math. 13.24 but it no sooner appears by external word,
or action, then the ordinary servants of the master of the field, are ready to
pull it up, if he should so think good, as follows in the same parable, so
that they need not to be advertised by such, as have no charge of that
business. Wherefore with all reason, are such as come, pretending to advertise
the Church of necessary reformation, first examined whence they came, who sent
them, what commission they have? For our Savior Christ foreseeing that false
prophets would come in sheep clothing (that is under the fair show of
reformation) whereas they are indeed ravening wolves, Math. 7.15.
forewarned his spouse the Church to take great heed of them: which warning she
warily following, and withal knowing by S. Paul's rule, that none can preach,
unless they be sent, Romans 10.
does rightly demand all new Preachers testimony of their mission, and calling.
Which if they will neither show, nor yet desist from troubling the peace of
Gods church: I refer it to any indifferent man's judgment, whether they
deserve not, the reward of rebels to Christ, and his kingdom. And howsoever
this ought to be is easily known, by the severity used against those, that are
found guilty of rebellion, and treason in any humane commonwealth only.

And the more openly, or publikly, these pretending Reformers do take upon
them, (these are his words) to impugn their sovereign Pastor, under pretense
to discover Antichrist, the more impudent and less tolerable is their
rebellion. As in the like case, it would be in that subject, that should
publicly impugn his Sovereign Lord, under pretense to discover a tyrant, or
an unlawful usurper. And if these zealous Reformers, had such earnest desire
to confute the Pope, (whom they heretically, and rebelliously call Antichrist)
openly in the face of a Council, (as Monsieur du Plessis vainly brageth,) why
did they it not when there was a Council assembled, Council of Trent Sess 18
and they earnestly invited to it, with such safe conduct as they desired? But
they have as much will, or purpose, to come to any lawful Council, as the
Arians had, whose perverse proceedings not unlike those of our new Reformers,
the Reader that has desire to see, may read part of them in the Epistle of the
Council of Sardic recorded by S. Athanasius in his second Apology, and by
Theodoret before cited. Monsieur du Plessis proceeds.

Plessis.
8. If the Governors of places should do the like, when men give them
aduertisments, what place is there, that would not soon be in the enemies
hands? And what Prince would not judge them traitors, and tbinke they had
intelligence with his enemies.

Rome from time to time? was it not upon notice given, and taken, of errors and
abuses rising in the church? And can Monsi. du Plessis bring any one instance,
of any one punished or examined of his commission for giving such aduertisment?
well he may, of very many condemned, not for aduertising of errors, but for
their obstinate persisting in their errors, after canonical, and iuridical
examination had of them. And of this number is he, See the safe conduct granted
by the counsel of Trent to all heretics. Session 18.
and all his obstinate adherents, whose aduertisments have been patiently
heard, and their reasons thoroughly weighed, and by lawful authority judged,
to be repugnant to true faith, and therefore do they most wrongfully
complain, as if they had not been heard, nor their reasons weighed. But they
are grieved (and ever may they be) that the Pastors and Rulers of Gods Church,
Acts 20.28.
placed therein by the holy Ghost to govern it, will not suffer themselves to
be thrust out of their charge, and the flock of Christ, for which he has shed
his most precious blood, to be delivered into the hands of robbers, and
raueners. Of which sort all such are (by the infallible mark, which our
Savior gives of them) that enter not into the Sheepe-fould by the door, John
10.1.
(that is, by lawful calling) but clime up by an other way. See his example of
a Governor forcibly retorted upon himself, in the next Paragraffe.

Plessis.
9 The question is not here of our qualities, but of the qualities of
Antichrist, and of his doctrine: the matter touches the duty of those whom we
advertise, it concerns the salvation both of them, and of those that rely
upon them, and of our selves also. If the aduertisment prove true, it is the
safety of the Church: if it be found false, it comes of our own. The
question is then for examining of the circumstances of the aduertisment, and
not the quality of the aduertisers.

Here it well appears, Tertull. de praescriptio.
For ancient Tertullian urges the Heretics of his time in this sort; What are
ye, when, and whence came ye? what do you in my Teritory being none of mine?
It is false therefore that Monsieur du Plessis says, that the question is not
of their calling, or quality (if he will have it so termed.) For the question
between the Catholic Roman Church, and the pretended Reformers is both of
their calling, and of their doctrine, but that of their calling is first of all
to be decided, for the reasons before mentioned. Which also will more
evidently appear, Cap. 1. n. 7. 9
by the example of a Governor of a place, used by himself, if the case be put
a like. I will suppose therefore, for example sake, that one should come to
Saumeur where he is Governor for his King, and should begin to command as
Governor there telling the people that Monsieur du Plessiis is an Usurper the
Kings swo^^e enemy, and that his government is tyrannical, and therefore is
not to be obeyed, and that he himself is their true and lawful governor, the
Kings loyal, and faithful servant, and that he will govern them justly, and
according to the law: And being demanded by what authority or warrant he takes
upon him the government, and deposes, or excludes Monsieur du Plessis, who
was placed there by lawful authority, and has been so long in quiet
possession of the same, should answer (as Monsieur du Plessis does here) that
the question is not of his commission or quality, but of Monsieur du Plessis
his quality, that the matter touches the duty of those; whom he aduertiseth:
if the aduertisment prove true, it is the safety of the place, whereof he is
Governor, if it be found false, it only comes from himself. The case being
thus put (as it does most resemble Mounsieur du Plessis doctrine and their
proceedings against the Catholic church) I dare to appeal to his own
judgment for trial therein; To wit, whether he should think himself justly
dealt withal in this case, and whether the people of Saumeur, could without
evident rebellion to their Prince; and manifest injury to him, receive this new
comer for their Governor, and thrust him out. This proceeding though it be in
the sight of all men most manifestly unjust, seditious, and rebellious, yet
will it appear more wicked and perverse, if we add thereunto another
circumstance, which they use in their rebellion against the Church. That is, if
Monsieur du Plessis his adversary, should not only refuse to show any warrant,
or commission, for usurping his government, but should farther enforce him to
justify himself of those crimes, which he obiecteth against him, not before
the Kings Lieutenant, because he is esteemed by him party or partial, nor any
other ordinary judge, but by the words, and text of the law it self, and that
not to be understood in any other sense, then he (to wit, the unjust
plaintiff) will have them to be understood: I no ways doubt, but Monsieur du
Plessis would grievously complain of this proceeding, being most exorbitant,
and unjust, as it is indeed. And if it were permitted in any civil government,
it would make, that no maiestrate should be two days quiet in his charge, nor
any country should ever enjoy any peace. And hereby may the whole world see,
how just and honest, our new Reformers be, whose proceeding against their
mother the Catholic church, is no other in true sub^^ance, then is set down
in this case. For it is to be noted, that they never proceeded as accusers, but
as judges, nor did they at any time propose, their matters by way of doubt, to
be discussed and tried by canonical trial which is not forbidden to any man
to do, but they absolutely as sovereign judges, have condemned the Church of
falsity and error, and her Pastors of Antichristian rebellion. And yet do they
think much to be demanded, by what power or commission they do it. Which
manner of proceeding how perverse it is the former example does sufficiently
declare. Which also proves further, that though the Catholic Roman Church
(by impossibility) should be convinced of error, and her Pastors of rebellion
against Christ, Though the Catholic Pastors were proved usurpers: yet would it
not thence follow that the Reformists should be true Pastors.
yet could not they (to wit, the reformists) be received for lawful Pastors,
until they had made canonnicall proof of their mission or calling. For as the
conuicting of Monsieur du Plessis of treason, and intrusion would neither
sufficiently warrent his adversary, to take upon him his government without the
Kings patents, nor the people to admit of him as their governor, though he
should pretend never so much fidelity, and equity in his charge, but if they
should do it, they should all be guilty of treason, and rebellion against
their Prince. So neither can our new Reformers, nor those that receive them, be
free from rebellion against Christ and his Church, if they should without
canonical proof of their mission, take upon them the charge of Pastors: though
the Catholic Roman church should by imposibility (as is said before) be
convinced of error, and her Pastors of rebellion. And therefore howsoever the
matter, in the question of doctrine should fall out with, or against our
Reformists, yet is it manifest, that the question of calling, is necessarily to
be decided, before they may lawfully pretend, any charge over Christ's flock
either in preaching, or ministering Sacraments:

10. In the conspiracy of Cateline, the Senate gave ear to a base woman,
Plessis.
against the greatest men in Rome. When the Gauls would by night surprise the
Capitol of Rome, the Sentinels spoke not, the Dogs were dumb, there was none
but the Geese that cried, and yet every one made account of it, and ran
thither, whereby the City, which afterward conquered all the world, was saved.
Wherefore, if we were the vilest and most contemptible of the Church, we
deserve (at lest the hearing) especially seeing we seek not to speak in the
ear, as backbiters do, but in the face of the Church, and in their very ears
whom we accuse, and not from our selves, but from God by authority of his word.

Seruetus might not have said to Calvin, who caused him to be burned at Geneua,
he himself deserving as well the fire? Or the Anabaptists, Familians, or
Libertines, who are esteemed by the other Reformed Churches damnable heretics,
may not also say for themselves? They neither speak in the ear as backbiters,
when they cry for reformation, as appears by their many books written to
that end, nor from themselves, but from God by the warrant of his word, of the
testimonies whereof their books are full. The same answer therefore that
Monsieur du Plessis or Calvin himself would make unto these Reformers of their
Church, (with that which has been said above) shall serve for answer to his
complaint here made against the Catholic Church. And I appeal to the
indifferent Reader, what peace or order were like to be either in the Church or
Common wealth, if this licentious liberty of reformation, which he here
insinuates, might upon pretense or color of the warrant of Gods word, be
permitted to every one?

11. We read that Christ who was promised in the Jewish law, was revealed by
the Angel to the shepherds watching their flocks, Plessis.
and the shepherds published him among the people. Now after our Adversaries
law, they should have been set by the heels.

Monsieur du Plessis infer, that every one has power to preach, and are
authorized to reform the established Church: As though it were all one for a
man to make relation of a miraculous work, which he has seen or heard, to
others, and to preach any doctrine, (especially if it be new) with obligation
on the hearers part to believe it, under pain of their damnation: who sees
not the absurdity of this illation? That which he adds of setting fast by the
heels, is a childish taunt without either wit or weight. For the Catholic
Church does not imprison any, but such as after canonical declaration, and
decision, of their error, do obstinatly persist therein.

12. Apollo also knew not but the baptism of John, Plessis.
and consequently could not have any charge in the Church. And yet for all
that, through feruencie of spirit, he goes into the Sinagoge at Ephesus, and
being mighty in the Scriptures, declares the way of God, namely that Jesus was
the Christ. The brethren of Ephesus, who were the Governors of Christ's Church,
so far are they from putting him back, that they commend his zeal, and
exhort him to pass into Achaia, and writ to the Disciples that they should
receive him.

Apollo did are as far different, as it is for a Student at law, to plead or
dispute a cause, in the presence of others, with reasons and authorities for
the proof thereof; and for a judge by authority to decide the same cause in
public court. Now who is there so senseless as to say that he that may do
the first, may also do the second? And who knows not, that the Catholic
Roman Church, does license Laymen, that are known for learned, and grounded
in piety, to dispute in controversies of religion, either by word, or writing?
who notwithstanding were never permitted to preach or minister sacraments.
Apollo therefore did nothing, but that which the Catholic Church now allows
in such men as he was, and therefore this instance is as impertinent, for
Monsieur du Plessis his purpose, as the rest.

13. Hereof we have examples also in the Primitive Church. Plessis.
In Aedesius and Frumentius, who being by some occasion carried into the
Indies, do there preach the word of God, and make Christian assemblies, being
but mere Laymen, for Athanasius did not lay hands on Frumentius, that he
should there do the office of a Bishop, till long after. In a poor woman
slave also, who instructs the Queen of the Iberians in the knowledge of
Christ, and a while after the king himself, teaching them so well as she could
the service of God, and aduising them at least, to send to the Emperor
Constantine for some Doctors.

But how fitly these two Histories make for his purpose,

Aedesius and Frumentius being Christians and carried from Tire into the Indies,
Theodor. l. 1. c. 23. and 24.
by their Uncle, to learn the knowledge of strange countries, were by
accident, (as God permits sometimes) retained prisoners, all the rest of
their company being slain by the Barbarous people. They were presented to the
King of the Country, who understanding their prudent behavior, gave them the
charge of his house. He being dead, his son had them in greater estimation.
They having been virtuously brought up, did exhort the Merchants, that if any
Romans, that is Christians (as the custom was) came thither, that they would
meet together, and celebrate the holy rites. After long time they obtained
leave of the King, to return to their country, and Aedesius remained at Tire,
but Frumentius preferring Gods service before the love of his parents, went to
Alexandria, and informed S. Athanasius (who was then Bishop of that place) of
the great desire, the Indians had to be instructed, in the true knowledge of
heavenly things. And Athanasius thinking no man fitter for this religious
employment, then Frumentius himself, made him Bishop, and sent him thither to
preach, and instruct that Nation, which he did with happy success, God working
by him great miracles, for the conversion of that people. And thus much of
Frumentius.

About the same time was there a woman captive amongst the Iberians, who showed
them first the way of truth, she prayed continually, her bed was a little sack
laid upon the ground, and her diet was continual fasting, she being
entreated by another woman, to cure her child which was sick, took it, and
laid it in her little poor bed, and prayed to God, that it might be cured
which was done. Which then being known, the Queen herself being vexed with a
sore disease, went to the same poor captive, and was cured by her in the same
fashion, who in gratitude offered her great gifts, which she refused, saying,
she had no need of none of them, but she would think herself highly
recompensed, if she would understand the true piety, and withal as she could
she instructed her in Gods commandments, and exhorted her to build a Church to
the honor of Christ her Savior. Which the King not permitting for that time,
was afterward (by a new miracle done in his own person) moved to consent
willingly unto it. The Temple being therefore finished, but Priests wanting,
the same captive woman advised the King and Queen, to send unto the Emperor
Constantine, to send them such, as might instruct them in true piety, and he
sent them a virtuous, and learned Bishop with many gifts also. This is the
sum of these Histories truly set down, wherein there is not any word of
preaching, or making Christian assemblies, by any of those parties, (as
Monsieur du Plessis falsely affirms) nor of reforming a Church already
established, but of making known either by way of miracle, or bare narration,
the same points of Christian religion, to such as never had heard thereof
before, which is allowed to be done by the Roman Church, in the same sort, as
it was practiced by these parties, and therefore these examples make nothing
against the Catholic doctrine, or practice, yea they evidently confute
Monsieur du Plessis his doctrine. For seeing none of these though endued with
the grace of miracles, did or durst in that great, ye extreme necessity,
undertake the office and charge of Pastors without mission, or calling given
by, consecration, and imposition of hands: How can Monsieur du Plessis without
blushing bring them, for the justifying of this his no less seditious then new
doctrine, that every Christian is sufficiently grounded upon a general
calling, to advertise the Church of a necessary reformation; taking this
aduertisment in that sense and sort, that they would practice it: that is, to
judge absolutely of the doctrine of the Church, rejecting that which they
dislike, and establishing that which they approve.

But to what purpose shall we think, brings he the example of this good
woman? to prove that women may preach? Surely if it prove any thing for him, it
proves that: which notwithstanding S. Paul expressly condemns, 1. Cor. 14.34.
1. Tim. 2.12.
forbidding women to open their mouths in the Church. So that Monsieur du
Plessis has gained as much by this example, as those old, wicked, and corrupt
caitifes gained by accusing the chaste Susanna, that is, his own condemnation,
bearing as evident witness against himself, as they did. For this holy woman
so far as she did cooperat to the making known of Christianity to those
Pagans, which was not by preaching in public assemblies, and congregations,
or by exercising any other Ecclesiastical function (as is manifest by the
History) but by fasting, prayer, austere life, and evident miracle. Which sorts
of proof, being justly exacted of our new Reformists, as well for their
calling, as their doctrine (either being as truly new and uncouth in the
Church of Christ, as Christianity was to those Pagans) yet have they never
showed half so much, in either kind of proof before mentioned, as this poor
woman did: though she pretended not to be either Elder, superintendent, or
Deacon in the church, as our new fellows proclaim themselves to be, and desire
to be esteemed so of others. Rightly therefore does M. du Ples^is bring this
example, in condemnation of himself, as the wretched accusers of Susanna, did
their testimonies against her.

Plessis.
14 An^ all this in a tim^, when the Christian church had al her forms and rites.



Plessis.
Now it could not be, but they preaching the true God, and salvation by Jesus
Christ, must needs abhor idols, and consequently incur peril of their
lives, from which the exception of our adversaries would have quit them, they
having no need to put themselves so far into danger, having no calling in the
church.



Plessis.
But zeal and charity taught them, that they were bound to do it, and that
this exception could not secure them from the account, which they were to make
of their talent.

power, nor obligation to preach.

The same say we of the revealing of Antichrist. Plessis.
That questionles every Christian is bound to reueal him to the Church, when
God has made him known to him. That we must not stand upon these precise
points of formality, and so much the less for that having gotten possession of
the Church, it is to be presumed he has inuerted all order.

Monsi. du Plessis makes answer to the Arians, Anabaptists, Libertines, and
others, obiecting the same, against their new reformed church, he will find this
vain conclusion of all his seditious doctrine fully satisfied. Whereunto I will
remit him, not doubting but his own conceit will best please him. Yet would I
have the (careful Reader) to mark how he esteems the ordinance of the holy
Ghost so expressly testified by S. Paul, Romans 10.
that none can preach unless they be sent, to be but a precise point of
formality. Are these they that make such show of the respect they bear to Gods
word?

And here will I make an end with M. du Plessis, for as much as pertayneth to
this point. He adeth indeed three, or four testimonies out of Gerson, Picus,
and Aliacus, which make nothing to the purpose for this present question, and
especially the two latter, and as for the other (though his testimonies were
direct against us as they are not, being rightly cited and understood) yet
because he is known to have said many things, which were neither approved
the^, nor since, his sole authority can in equity weigh little against us. And
here once more (good Reader observe) that nothing hitherto has been said, nor
hereafter can be said, for the calling of these new Gospellers, which may not
be said in the behalf of any heretics whatsoever, new or old: yea which they,
who^ M. du Plessis here impugneth, may not say against him, if they were of any
moment. And therefore though we should grant him al his arguments, yet should he
gain nothing thereby, they having as much force, being used by us against him,
as he would they should have against us. And this thou shall easly see, if thou will take the pains to apply them one by one, for the Catholic church against
that of Geneua. But the truth is, they are of no force, neither for the one nor
the other.

16. Having thus far refuted the reasons of Monsi. du Plessis whereby he would
prove, that every Christian has sufficient calling, to advertise the church of
necessary reformation not only by way of informatio^ (for that is not in
controversy) but also by way of absolut judgment and condemnation, which is
the plain drift of his discourse, and the practice of all the pretending
Reformers it remains to prove the contrary, and withal to satisfy the
question proposed in this Chapter.

Conclusion.
It is no sufficient calling to the ministry of Gods word and sacraments, that
any man be judged either by himself, or others fit to exercise that charge:
and that those who are in that office, are judged not to perform their duty
therein. And therefore if any one upon these grounds take upon him that office,
what disorder soever he shall suppose to be already in the Church, he
commits sacrilegious rebellion against Christ and his church. I will not
stand long upon the proof hereof, because it is evident to all those that know
and believe the scriptures. And were it not that Monsieur du Plessis in his
doctrine already refuted, did not evidently insinuat the contrary, yea and
expressly teach it in these words. Treatise of the Church. page 371.
Although some of our men in such a corrupt state of the Church, as we have
seen in our time, without waiting for calling or allowance of them, who under
the title of Pastors oppressed the Lords flock, did at first preach without
this formal calling, and afterward were chosen, and called to the holy
ministry by the church, which they had taught, to the which they had vowed
their service and ministry: yet this ought to seem no more strange, then if
in a free Commonwealth, the people without waiting for the consent, or for the
voices of those, that tyrannize over them; should according to the laws make
choice of good, and wise magistrates. Were it not I say for this doctrine of
Monsieur du Plessis, wherein as we see, he expressly approves, the preaching of
some of their men (he might have said all, or at least all their first runners)
without formal calling, only upon the opinion, that those who were in the
Pastors places, did not rightly discharge their duties, I should have supposed
this conclusion (which is so clearly expressed in holy Scripture) to have
been so evident, that it needed not any proof. But seeing we must prove a
thing so evident: Heb. 5.4.5.6.
First S. Paul says, that no man takes upon himself this honor (of
Priesthood) but he that is called of God as Aaron. And farther he adds, that
Christ did not glorify himself, that he might be made high priest: but he
that said unto him. My son art thou, I this day have begotten thee. As also
in another place he says. Tho^ art Priest for ever, Io. 5.42. c. 7.28. c.
8.28.38. Io. c. 14 31.
according to the order of Melchisedech. And our Savior does often testify,
that he came not of himself, or in his own name, but being sent by his
heavenly Father. That he speak not of himself, but th^^ which he learned of his
Father: and that as his Father commanded him, so he did. Now if the son of
God came not, without being sent, nor preached not but that, which he heard,
nor did not but that which he was commanded, (and that in a time, when there
was greatest necessity of reformation) who is he that can lawfully do any of
these things of himself, though he pretend never so great disorder in the
Church, or necessity of Reformation?

17. Secondly S. Paul says How can they preach, unless they be sent? Romans 10.
the heretical evasion and declyning of which words is before urged against
Monsieur du Plessis, tearming it a formality of order, not necessary to be
observed, in a general disorder: such is the peruersity of these new masters,
who pretending to reform the Church by the word are not ashamed, nor afraid,
to contradict the plain words, and sense of the holy Ghost, having no other
means to maintain there falcities by.

Thirdly, the same Apostle in another place, setting down the order
established by our Savior in his Church says: 1. Cor. 12.28.
Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Doctors? showing manifestly, that
none are such, but those that our Savior ordained, or constituted such, having
imediatly before said. Some God has set in his Church first Apostles,
secondly, Prophets, thirdly Doctors, etc. But Monsieur du Plessi^ more
liberal in gifts, then God himself, will have all Christians, Doctors, to
teach the Church, and advertise it of necessary reformation, and that (as I
have noted before) not by way of information, but by absolute judgment, and
sentence. This is one of the great masters of reformation, that breaths
nothing forsooth but the word, which notwithstanding the devil himself could
not without blushing, or trembling abuse so evidently as he does. Pardon me
Reader, if thou think me to exceed, for I cannot support these hippocritical
pests of men's souls, that pretending the purity of the word, do thrust upon
the simpler sort, their own fantastical inventions, instead of Gods word and
truth.

18. Fourthly, our Savior himself gives us this rule, to discern true
Pastors, from usurpers, and intruders, saying. Amen, Ioh. 10.1.2
Amen, I say unto you, he that enters not by the door into the fold of the
sheep, but climeth up another way, he is a thief and a robber: but he that
enters by the door, is the Pastor of the sheep. Now who can more manifestly
clime up another way into the sheepfold, then they that come of themselves, to
preach, and minister the sacraments, being sent by none? especially seeing so
many heretics are confessed to have come, under the same fair pretense of
reforming the church and purging it from the corruption of false doctrine, that
our new Reformers also use as a sheeps skin, to cover their woluish hearts.
Mason p. 9.
Beza cited by M. Mason says, it is an order appointed in the Church by the
Son of God, and observed in all the Prophets and Apostles, that no man may
teach unless he be called.

19. The second part of the foresaid conclusion, to wit, that if any one upon
the before mentioned grounds shall take upon him, without being sent, the
ministering of Gods word and sacraments (what disorder soever he shall suppose
to be already in the church) shall commit sacrilegious rebellion against
Christ, and his church, and all those that wittingly favor, follow, or adhere
unto them, are also guilty of the same crime in their degree; is proved by
diverse dreadful examples of Gods wrath, and indignation, showed against such,
as have presumptuously thrust themselves into Ecclesiastical functions,
without calling or commission. Which, if our new masters in reformation, were
as sincere searchers, and followers of Scriptures, as they pretend to be, would
make them to be well assured of their calling, and commission, before they
took upon them that charge, which they so boldly challenge to themselves: Cap.
2. n. 2.
The only example of Core and his accomplices related before with that dreadful
sentence of S. Jude: woe be to them that have perished in the contradiction of
Core, as all they must needs follow his example, in usurping the offices of
the church without calling. Surely if there were no other example in the whole
Scripture this alone would abundantly testify this truth. Notwithstanding I
will add here some others of the like nature.

1. Reg. c. 13.1.3.14.
Saul was rejected by God, and his posterity excluded, from being Kings over
the Isralites, for once offering sacrifice, and that in a time when he thought
himself pressed thereunto by necessity. In which case M. du Plessis likely
would have justified his fact, saying that in such cases formality of order is
not to be observed.

2. Reg. c, 6.7
Oza was stricken dead by God, for only putting his hand to hold up the Arc,
(which he thought was in danger to fall) In which case by all likelihod Monsi.
du Plessis would have dispensed with him, seeing he allows their men in such
a corrupt time as we have seen in the Church, to preach at first without
calling.

King Ozias was stricken with a leprosy, 2. Paralipo. 26.18.19.
and continued leper all his life time, for attempting to offer incense, and
not desisting from his attempt at the admonition of the high Priest Azarias,
who told him, that that office pertayned not to him, but only to the sons of
Aaron, whom God had consecrated to that ministry. Here indeed was no necessity
pressing to do this, whereby Mnosieur du Plessis is wont to cover, and excuse
the sacrilegious intrusion of his reforming ministers. But neither does the
high Priest allege that as a reason, why he should desist from his attempt,
but directly tells him that it is not his office, but the office of such
only, as God has appointed for that ministry.

Hereunto also may be added the indignation of God, against the false Prists of
Jeroboam, who that wicked King by his power, 3. Reg. c. 12. and 13.
and not by Gods ordinance raised, to serve an Altar erected by himself,
against that which God had commanded, and to withdraw the people from
frequenting the true church, and his true worship in Jerusalem. To whose most
wicked and sacrilegious fact (to note this by the way) the new fashion of
ordayning Priests and Bishops invented in King Edwards time, and continued ever
since, is most like: Ann. 1. Ed 6. was an act made that Bishops should be made
by the Kings letters patents and not by election of Dean and Chapter as says
Rastal in his abridgment. And therefore in the beginning of Q. Elizab. Bishops
writ thus. n. virtute literar^ patentium Domine Rogina.
as well for the manner of their ordering, to wit, only by the Kings
institution, without example or warrant either in Scripture or antiquity, as
also for the end of their ordering, which was to withdraw the people from the
frequenting the true Catholic Roman church, and Gods true worship, and
religion observed therein.

20 To those authorities of holy scripture, I will add only one clear, and
manifest reason, for the confirmation of the whole conclusion before set down.

Nothing can be more evident in civil government, then that he, that being
subject, or vassal to any Sovereign, takes upon himself any office, charge,
or ministry over his subjects without his warrant or commission, does thereby
usurp his Sovereigns authority, and consequently commits manifest
rebellion: if his usurpation be in matters pertaining to command or gouenme^t,
as it is in our case. For no act of rebellion can be more manifest, the^ that
whereby the subject equalleth himself with his Soueraign (thereby impeching his
sovereignty, and withdrawing from him his due subjection) which was the crime
of Lucifer, the first, and father of all rebels, Isa. 14. v. 14.
saying. I will ascend above the topp of the clouds, I will be like the
highest. But by no other means, can any subject more equalize himself with his
Sovereign, then by taking upon him that power and authority, which is proper
to his sovereign: one great part whereof consists in ordayning magistrates,
and officers in his dominions, who, every one in their degree represent
himself, exercising their offices not in their own names, or by their own
power, but in his. He therefore that without his sovereigns appointment, or
order, makes himself officer in any charge over his subjects, does manifestly
usurp his authority, and therein does equallise himself with him, and
with-draweth from him his service and subjection, which is a direct act of
rebellion.

Farther it is also evident, that not only he, that does this, is guilty of
rebellion, but all those that consent and concur with him in the same act: in
which manner transgressed all the other apostate Angels, that fell from heaven
with Lucifer. As also the accomplices of Core, as is mentioned before. And of
this S. Paul gives a general rule, Romans 1.12.
saying. Not only those that do wickedly are worthy of punishment, but also
those that consent unto them.

This being manifest on the one side, and it being also clearly proved on the
other, that such as have no other calling, to the ministry of Gods word and
Sacraments, but an opinion that they are fit for that office, and that such as
are already employed therein, do not rightly perform their duty in discharge
thereof, have no sufficient calling, or warrant from Christ, (he never, either
by himself, his Apostles, or his Church, warranting any such usurpation, yea
expressly condemns the same, as appears by the testimonies before alleged)
it must needs follow, that such, as upon the now mentioned grounds, take upon
them the charge of Pastors of Christ's flock, are rebels against him, as being
sovereign over his Church, Math. 28.
and to who^ all power in heaven, and in earth is given. And not only they that
do this, are rebels against Christ, and his Church, but also all that favor,
follow, and adhere unto them in the same fact. Whether our new Gospellers, and
their adherents be of this number, or no, will appear hereafter. For if they be
proved to have, no other true calling, but that which is here mentioned, and
already disproued, they are evidently convinced, of the hateful crime of
rebellion against Christ, and his church.

The fifth Chapter. That the truth of doctrine is not a sufficient proof of
true and lawful calling, to the ministry of Gods word, and sacraments. Nor is
it any assured means for a Preacher and Pastor, to prove himself
authentically called to that charge, for him to allege that the doctrine which
he teaches is good and true.
1. HAVING proved in the precedent chapter, that the sole opinion of the
fitness of any person, to exercise the ministry of Gods word, and sacraments,
joined also with an opinion, that such as are in that charge, do not rightly
discharge it, is no sufficient warrant for any man, to take upon himself that
office, it follows, that we examine whether every one, that pretends, to
teach true doctrine, has true and lawful calling, to the ministry of Gods
word. And the sense of the question is: whether they, that should have no other
proof of their calling, to the ministry of Gods word and sacraments in his
church, then that which is drawn from the nature, and quality of their
doctrine, and manner of ministering the sacraments, in this sort: The doctrine
which we preach and manner of ministering the sacraments, which we use, is true
and conformable to Gods written word: therefore our calling to preach and
minister the sacraments, is lawfully, and sufficiently warranted. The question
here (I say) is, whether this be a sufficient proof of calling, to the lawful
ministry of Gods word and sacraments.

2. For the clearing whereof it is to be observed, that two conditions are
necessarily required in that whereby another thing is to be proved. The first
is, that it be better known or more evident, then that which is to be proved
by it. For it is an evident absurdity to prove one thing unknown, by another
thing, that is as little, or less known. As for example, if one should prove
the stars in the firmament, to be even or of equal number, because they are
not odd; or if one should prove himself no bastard, because he is borne in
lawful wedlock, the latter being no better known then the former, which
should be proved by it? or (which is more to our purpose) if one should prove
himself to be a lawful judge or justice, because he judges all causes
according to equity and justice; I say, that these, and all other such like
proofs whereby we would prove the matter, which is in doubt and in question
being as little or less certain then that, which we would prove by them, are
evidently absurd, and of no force. For in this case, that which should be
proved, is made no better known, nor no more certain, then it was before.

The second condition required in that thing, which is to be the proof of
another, is, that it be always certainly, and infal^ibly joined with that,
which is to be proved, (if we speak of certain, and infallible proofs, as
here we do): for though one thing should be more evident, and better known
then another, yet unless it be found always joined with the other, it cannot
make any certain, and infallible proof of it. For example, it is more evident
to him, that sees a tree blossomed, that it is blossomed, then that it will
bear fruit: and that a man, whom we see move, does verily move, then that he
does ride on horsbacke, and yet neither is that an infallible and certain
proof, that the tree blossomed, will bring fruit: nor this, that the man which
moves, does ride on horsbacke, because neither the one, nor the other, is
always certainly joined with that, which should be proved. This being
observed.

Conclusion.
3. It is evident, that it cannot be any convenient, or sufficient proof of
lawful calling, to the ministry of Gods word, and sacraments, to allege or
affirm, that the parties, whose calling is in dispute, as doubtful and
uncertain, do teach true doctrine, and minister rightly the sacraments. And
the reason is easy; because in this proof, is neither of the conditions,
which are required in a sufficient proof, much less are they both, and
therefore is it not only insufficient but very idle and absurd. But let us see,
how neither of those conditions is found in this proof.

First it is no less uncertain and unknown, that the doctrine preached by
any new master is true, and conformable to the holy Scriptures, then that his
calling, who preaches it, is good and lawful: yea unless it be the same
doctrine, with that of the whole Catholic Church, (as if it be new, it cannot
be) it must needs be far more uncertain, and more difficult to know, then is
his calling, and therefore can be no sufficient proof thereof. For whether the
proof of doctrine consist in the conformity, with the true sense and meaning
of the written word only, as the Protestants teach, or of the unwritten, and
written word together, as the Catholics believe, evident it is, that the
proofs of doctrine, drawn from thence must needs be far more difficult, then
are those of calling because the difficulty, in finding out the true sense of
holy scripture, is far greater, then that, which is in trying out the true
calling of any Pastor; as evidently appears, as well by the confession, and
example of the greatest wits, that ever have been in the Christian world; some
willingly confessing great difficulty, in finding out the true sense, and
meaning of the holy Scripture: S. Augustine the Eagle of the Latin Church,
with admiration confessing the profoundnesse of Gods word, breaks forth into
these words. O wonderful profoundnesse of thy words: wonderful profoundnesse
(my God) wonderful profoundnesse, Confess. l. 12. c. 14.
it makes a man quake to look on it: to quake for reverence, and to tremble
for the love thereof. And in another place, the same holy Doctor says: that
for no other cause, De Genesis ad lit. c. 9. l. 2.
are heresies made but because men not rightly understanding the scriptures,
do obstinatly affirm their own opinions, against the truth of them: others
of as great understanding peradventure as he, but less humility, have
evidently erred from the true sense, and meaning of the Scriptures, as witness
the laps and errors of Tertullian, Origin, Lucifer, with many others: as also
by the evident testimony of the scripture it self. How can I understand the
things, which I read, Act. 8.31. 2. Pet. 3.16.
(says the religious Eunuch) unless some man show me? S. Peter also says:
that in the Epistles of S. Paul are certain things hard to be understood,
which the unlearned and unstable deprave, as also the rest of the scriptures,
to their own perdition. Which difficulty our Savior Christ well knew, and
therefore for remedy thereof, he opened the understanding of his Apostles,
Luc. 24.25.
that they might understand the scriptures.

4. Neither does the answer, which the Protestants use to make to this, any way
satisfy, saying; that though there be many hard passages in holy scripture,
yet are they either explaned in other places more easy, or else they do not
contain any other points of doctrine necessary to be known, then those that
are contained in the more easy places: This answer (I say) does no way
satisfy. For besides that every place of scripture contains doctrine
profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct in justice, 2. ad Timo.
3.16.
as S. Paul teaches, (and therefore not only the easy, but the hard places
also): the many expositions given by the Protestants, contrary to the
understanding not only of the Catholics, but also of other Protestants, upon
diverse places of scripture, containing chief points of faith, as for example of
these words: This is my body: Math. 26.
to omit the misunderstanding of holy Scriptures, by all former heretics: (the
true cause of all heresies, as S. Augustine says) do evidently show the great
difficulty, in finding out the true sense, and meaning of Scriptures, even in
places containing points of doctrine necessary to be known and believed, and
therefore this their answer is both false and frivolous. De doctrina Christiana
li. 2. c. 6.
And though S. Augustine says, that nothing almost is drawn out of those
obscurities, which may not be found in other places uttered plainly: yet is
neither his saying universal, as is evident by that word (almost) neither is
his meaning such, as that without the interpretation of the Church, all the
plainer places of scripture may be easily understood: As the variety of
interpretations opposite to the true meaning of the Scripture, and therefore
causing heresies as the same S. Augustine says, does evidently convince. And
thus much of the difficulty of finding out the true sense of Gods words, from
whence the proof of doctrine is to be had. It remains, that we now see, what
difficulty there is in finding out the proof of true and lawful calling, that
afterward it may appear, whether the truth of doctrine, may be a convenient
proof of calling, or no.

5. In the proof of calling there is neither other difficulty nor mystery,
then that he, that pretends to be lawful Pastor, Preacher, or minister of
Gods word, and sacraments, do produce some authentical instrument, or
testimony witnessing, that he is put in that charge by him, that is confessed
to have authority to give it, That this is the only known, and common way of
making proof, of the ordinary calling to the ministry, there is none of the
Protestants, that deny it. I say of the ordinary calling, for of that only I
speak here, leaving the extraordinary to another place. This being so, no man
of any judgment will say, that it is a more plain, and easy thing to know,
what doctrine is conformable to the true sense and meaning of the Scripture;
then to know, who has lawful calling of the ministry of Gods word and
sacraments: but the quite contrary: and therefore that the allegation of the
truth of Doctrine, or the conformity thereof with the word of God, cannot be
any competent or convenient proof of lawful calling, according to the grounds
proposed, in the beginning of the Chapter.

6. And this is manifest by this clear example. No civil magistrate, and in
particular, no judge or justice, was yet ever found so extrauagant, as to prove
himself true and lawful judge, by the right, and just deciding of causes: But
before any man can or dare to take upon him to sit in judgment, as a public
justice, upon any matter, be it civil or criminal, he produces his patent,
or warrant, whereby it authentically appears, that he is established in that
charge, by the sovereign authority of the Prince: without which neither the
alleging nor the manifest proof, both of his skill, and equity in deciding
of causes, would avail him for the proof of his calling to that charge. Yea
though he were furnished with both kind of proofs, to wit, as well with that
of skill, and equity in judgments, as with that of the Kings patent, yet who
sees not, that the latter is not only a more certain and authentical, but
also a more easy, and plain proof of his establishing in that office. For to
discern this, the only view of the Kings authentical patent or other writ,
accustomed in those affairs, with a small knowledge is sufficient; whereas to
discern the other, the skill as well in the nature of causes, as also in the
tenor of the Law, (which is found in few) is required. And therefore he that
should prove his Commission, and power in this case, by his good behavior in
his office, should prove that, which is more clear and easy to be known, by
that which is far more obscure, and more difficult, which to the sight of all
men, is ridiculus and absurd. And this is true, though we should suppose, that
the proof of his knowledge, and sincerity in exercising that office, should be
sufficient proof of his lawful calling, and establishing therein: which
notwithstanding is far otherways, as will evidently appear by that which
follows. The like absurdity they commit, that labor to prove their lawful
calling to the ministry, by the truth of their doctrine, and manner of
ministering the Sacraments, though there doctrine were known, to be most
conformable to holy scripture, and their manner of ministering the sacraments
likewise approved.

7. But our new Reformists do commit a far more gross and foul absurdity.
For the truth of their doctrine, and their manner of ministering sacraments,
being as much in doubt and dispute, as their calling, is it not more then
absurd to produce the truth of their doctrine, for proof of their lawful
calling? And is not this proof altogether like unto that, whereby the stars
in the firmament, should be proved to be even in number, because they be not
odd, this being as uncertain as the other? And yet there is this difference,
betwixt these two proofs, that he that should indeed prove the stars not to
be odd, should sufficiently prove them to be even: Whereas he that should
prove the Protestants doctrine to be true, should not for all that prove their
calling to be good, as shall be showed by and by.

Hitherto it has been showed, that the proof of calling to the ministry, by
the truth of doctrine, is inconvenient and absurd, though the doctrine should
be admitted for true. But in the case of our adversaries, where the truth of
doctrine is also in controversy, it is most ridiculous and impertinent. But
now let us consider the second condition necessarily required in a lawful
proof.

8. Where there is true doctrine, there is not always lawful calling, to the
ministry of Gods word and sacraments: and therefore the proof of calling by
the truth of doctrine, fails in the second condition necessarily required in
a lawful proof: and is like to this. Peter is learned in the Law, and an
honest man, therefore a lawful judge: or John is a valiant captain, and
faithful subject, therefore the Kings Lieutenant general. For the truth of
doctrine does no more infer the lawfulness of calling, to minister Gods
word, and sacraments, then the knowledge of the Law, or skill in martial
affairs, joined with honesty, and fidelity, do infer the office of judge or
Lieutenant.

It is evident by many instances out of holy scripture, that the the truth of
doctrine is not always with lawful calling to ministry of Gods word and
sacraments. For S. Mathias before he was chosen to be an Apostle, had
doubtless the same doctrine, that the other Apostles had, and yet had he not
any lawful Apostle-ship. And S. Joseph surnamed the just, who was chosen to
stand with S. Mathias for the Apostle-ship, Act. c. 1.
from which Judas fell, had no doubt the same truth of doctrine, that S.
Mathias had, and the rest, yet was he not an Apostle.

The like may be said of the rest of our Saviors Disciples, and of those of
the Apostles, who though they had the truth of doctrine, yet were they not for
all that al owed for lawful Pastors, and Preachers, until they were ordained
thereunto by the Apostles, or those that had that power from them. For why did
S. Paul leave Titus in Creete, Tit. c. 1.5.
to ordain Priests in all the Cities, as he had appointed: but because more is
required to the lawful power of Priesthood, then truth of doctrine? whence it
is manifest that wheresoever is true doctrine, there is not always lawful
calling, to the ministry of Gods word and sacraments. Which is yet more
evident by the example of Core and his accomplices, who differed not from Moises
and Aaron in any point of doctrine, or manner of Sacraments, sacrifice or
ceremonies, but only in the usurpation of that function, whereunto they were
not called, for the which they were so severely punished, as is before
mentioned. Who notwithstanding might with much more reason, have used this
argument against Moises and Aaron, then our adversaries can use it against us,
and might have said, we have true doctrine, and the lawful manner of
ministering the sacraments, as well as you, therefore have we the lawful
Priesthood as well as you. Which very example S. Ciprian uses against some
heretics in his time saying; It cannot help them any thing, Epist. 76. ad
Magnum.
that they are said to know the same God the father with us, and his son
Jesus Christ, and the same holy Ghost. For Core, Dathan, and Abiron, did know
the same God, with the Priests Aaron and Moises, living in the same law, and
religion, inuocating the only true God, yet because ecxeeding the degree of
their ministry, did usurp unto themselves the license of sacrificing against
Aaron who by Gods ordinance had the lawful Priesthood, therefore were they
stricken from heaven, and received presently conding punishment, for their
presumptuous attempt. Thus far S. Cyprian, who had he either lived in these
days, or had our adversaries lived in his, he would have said unto them the
same, their case being like to theirs, to whom he says this.

Homil. 11. in epist. ad Ephesios in the moral. part.
And S. Chrysostom confirms the same in these words. Do ye think it is
sufficient to say they are true believers, and that it imports not, though
the election of Prelates perish? For what does it avail, if this be not exact
and perfect? for we ought to contend for this as for the faith it self.

9. By these irreprouable testimonies both of holy Scriptures, and the ancient
Fathers, it is evident, that the truth of doctrine, cannot be any sufficient
proof of lawful calling to the ministry of Gods word, and Sacraments. And
the reason is, because the truth of doctrine, and lawful calling proceed from
principles, that are different in themselves, and not so dependent one of the
other, but that the one may be well without the other. For the truth of
doctrine is taken from the conformity it has with Gods revealed word: but the
calling of Pastors, or commission to minister lawfully Gods word, and
sacraments, is received from the person of our Savior Christ (to whom all
power is given in heaven, and in earth) by such means as he has ordained, and
instituted for that purpose, whereof there is frequent mention in holy
Scriptures, as we shall see more at large hereafter. Which being so, no marvel
it is, that the one may be without the other, and consequently that the one
cannot be any certain, or sure proof of the other. And this diversity of
principles or beginnings* whence the truth of doctrine, and lawfulnes of calling
do proceed, is made more manifest by the example before mentioned of a civil
magistrate. For the equity and iustnes of every sentence, or judgment in cases
of the law, is taken from the conformity it has, with the law it self, and
with the nature of the case decided; And the authority of the judge is r^ceiued
from the Sovereign, by such public instruments a^^ means, as in every
commonwealth are ordained for that p^^pose. Which two things who does not see
to be so different, and so independent one of the other, that the one may
easily be without the other? as it is also in the thing we speak off. For
though the lawful calling to preach, and minister Gods sacraments, does
presuppose truth of doctrine, with other qualities requisite, or at least ought
to do, yet does not truth of doctrine necessarily infer lawful power to
preach, as is manifest by that which is already said.

10. But here may be made a cavil in this manner. This question, What is
calling? necessarily goes before this other; A cavil prevented.
where is lawful calling, or who has lawful calling? For it is in vain to
ask where it is; unless it be first known what it is; But this question,
what is calling? is a point of doctrine, and not of calling, or authority, and
therefore questions of doctrine must, or ought to go before those of calling,
and consequently truth of doctrine may be proof of calling. And because
questions of doctrine are to be decided by scripture, therefore is this
question also to be tried by Scripture. For the satisfying of this cavil, it
is to be observed. First, that though this question: What is calling? be a
question of doctrine, and necessarily goes before this other, where is calling
or who has it? yet does it not therefore follow that all questions of doctrine,
ought to go before all those of calling. As in the like case, though this
question, what is lawful iuridical power? be a question, of law, not of power,
or authority, and necessarily goes before this other, who is a lawful judge,
or who has lawful iuridical power? yet does it not therefore follow, that all
questions of law are, or ought to be decided before this question of power or
office, to wit, who is a lawful judge or who has the lawful power to judge?
But when this is in doubt, it must necssarily be decided before all others,
excepting that one, what is a lawful judge? because without the decision of
this question, who is lawful judge? no other questions in law can be rightly,
and iuridically decided: and the same happens in our question of
Ecclesiastical calling.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that the difference or dispute, between us,
and our adversaries is not about this question: What is lawful calling? For in
this we all agree, to wit, that it is the lawful power to minister the word of
God, and sacraments, in the church of Christ, therefore is not necessary to be
disputed, it being supposed by either party. But the difference between us is,
where this lawful power is, or who has it. To wit, whether the Protestants
have it, or no: Which is the first question of controversy, that by all right,
and lawful proceeding, ought to be decided betwixt us.

Thirdly, it is to be observed that though the Scripture does sufficiently
express both what this calling is, and by what means it is given, and derived
to those, that are made Pastors, as also the temporal law does the office of a
civil magistrate: yet does it not nor can it express, who or what particular
person has this calling. For this necessarily includes a matter of fact,
which is as often repeated, as there is any new Pastor created, and therefore
cannot be expressed in holy scriptures: as neither can the temporal law
declare, what person in particular is true and lawful judge, or justice. So
that we may truly say, that the scripture does declare what is calling, but it
does not, nor cannot declare where it is, or who has it. And again, that it
does indeed declare it, but it does not give it, as neither does the temporal
law give the civil mag^^trate his office. Therefore though it be true, that
this question where is this calling? be to be decided by scripture; yet this
other question: where is this calling? or who has it? which is only in
controversy here, cannot be decided by Scripture, because this includes, or
supposes a matter of fact, which the Scripture cannot express. But now I will
go forward with my purpose, whence I may seem to have somewhat digressed, by
reason of the objection made and answered.

11. This kind of proof of calling, by the truth of doctrine being so evidently
impertinent and defective, as is already showed, some that are not so thoroughly
acquainted, with the absurd shifts of our new Reformists, may peradventure
think that they use it not at all, but that they are wronged by this
imputation: therefore it will not be amiss to set down their own words, that
they may be heard speak in their own cause.

Answer to a demand of their vocation.
First certain Ministers of the pretended Reformation in France say thus. If
there were no other reason, to prove our vocation to be good, this would
suffice, to wit, that we have the true, and pure doctrine wholly, whereupon the
true calling does depend. This therefore we say, that where is ture doctrine,
there also may be true calling, which is an order in the church prescribed by
the doctrine. But we have the true doctrine, as we will ^^^r maintain; and
therefore do we conclude, that we may have the true calling, though we have it
not from others. These are the self words of these new Pastors, and Monsieur
du Plessis says the same in effect, when he says, that to those, that ask
them for their calling, they may answer in one word after our Savior, the
words which we preach, bear witness of us: which is a text of Scripture of
his own coining, as is before noted. All which sufficiently shows, that they
would prove their calling, by the truth of their doctrine.

But how ridiculous this argument of theirs is, every child may see. We have
(say they) the true doctrine. (well for disputations sake, we will suppose it
so, though in it self it be most false) therefore (say they) may we have true
calling. Be it so what then? does it follow hereupon, that they have true
calling? As well surely as if one should say, I am a true merchant, and may
have a thousand pounds in my purse, therefore I have so much in my purse. Who
would not laugh at the vanity of this fellow? And whereas they seem to brag,
that they have other proof of their vocation besides the truth of their
doctrine, when they say: if there were no other proof of our vocation, then the
truth of our doctrine: it is but a vain brag of theirs, for they have none at
all, as is inuincibly proved against them, by their own public confession,
proposed to the world for a declaration of their faith in these words. we
believe that no man ought to intrude himself into the church government,
Confession of Geneua arti. 31.
but that this be done by election (so far as is possible, and as God does
permit) which exception we wittingly add, because it has bin needful
sometimes, and namely in these our days, when the state of the Church was
interrupted, that God should raise men by an extraordinary means to redres his
church, which was in ruin, and desolation. This is the public confession of
their faith, whereby they openly profess themselves, to have no other
vocation, but extraordinary. Now I conjure them, for the maintenance of this
their extraordinary vocation, to bring some other proof of it, then the
pretended truth of their doctrine: which they can never do, seeing thy have
not, and therefore do not allow of, any miracles.

12. I know well that Monsieur du Plessis in France, and D. Field in England
do say, that the new ministry has the same ordinary vocation, that is
confessed by themselves to be in the Catholic Roman Church. The truth of which
affirmation shall be examined in due place. In the mean while the judicious
Reader may observe, that these Doctors in affirming this, do directly
contradict the confession of their chiefest reformed Church of Geneua, whose
Pastors, as we have seen above, do profess to have no other then an
extraordinary vocation. And so doubtful even among themselves is this matter,
which ought to be most clear, as being the ground of all their preaching and
belief, that they cannot tell whether they should call their vocation ordinary,
or extraordinary. Some saying it is ordinary, as Plessis Tretise of the Church
c. 11. sect. If therefore.
Monsi. du Plessis and Field 3. book of the church c. 39.
D. Field: some extraordinary, as the confession of Confession of Geneua artic.
31.
Geneua; some both ordinary, and extraordinary, as the Ministers of France
answer sect. For as much as perta^neth to the first.
Ministers of France, in the treatise before mentioned: all speaking of the
same churches, without inuoluing that of England, which has special
privilege, as we shall see afterward. All which being well waied, it cannot
be much marueiled that the Reformists would make some show of proof of their
vocation, by the truth of their doctrine. For being on the one side destitute
of all other probable proof, and on the other side knowing right well, that if
they should once confess themselves to have no calling at all (as indeed they
have not, but come of themselves, being sent by none) they should quickly be
discried to be false prophets, and such, as in the holy scripture are called
wolves, thieves and robbers, they are necessarily constrained, to use this
absurd shift of proving their calling, Io. 10.1.2.
by the pretended truth of their doctrine. The absurdity whereof, though evident
to every one, that with any small attention waigheth it, yet is it not so
apparent, but to such, as either are prevented with a preiudicate opinion, of
the corruption of the Roman Church, which they impugn, or to such, as through
carelessenes of their own eternal good (of which sort the world is full) will
not stand to weigh the vanity, and leuity thereof, it may seem sufficient. This
apparent shift therefore they willingly, and craftily use, that under the color
thereof (if it be possible) they may pass this point of their vocation, which
is such a strait, as being kept with any indifferent ward, they know they can
never pass: and therefore is by our Savior Christ called the door of the
sheepfold, Io. 10.1.2.
which being by any slight once passed, they are straight in the maine dispute
of doctrine. Wherein though they have no more ground of truth, then they have
true calling, yet are they not so easily, and evidently convinced of falsehood
and error (to the capacity of every one) as they are of the nullity of their
vocation. For as it is far more easy to keep the door, that the thief enter
not into the sheepfold, then to thrust him out again, being once entered, so is
it far more easy to convince all heretics, of their intrusion, and want of
calling (which is, as it were, to keep them out of doors: then to convince
them of false doctrine, and error in faith, which is, to trust them out again,
after they be once entered. And the reason hereof, (for so much as concerns
our controversy with the pretended Reformers) is evident. For they not
admitting any other trial of doctrine, the then words of the scripture, and
those interpreted and understood, as they themselves will, it is no marvel
though they cannot easily be convinced, of error in doctrine, (I say) convinced
so, as they have no evasion: which is not peculiar to the heresy of these
days, but common to all heresies, that ever have been. For never were there
any heretics, that did not allege scripture for themselves, which if we
should suppose to be understood in no other sense, and meaning, but as they did
understand it; no marvel would it be, though they could not easily be
convinced of error and falsitie. And for a pregnant proof heerof, may serve
the example of that silly Arian Legate, not long since burned in Smith-field,
whom all the Doctors and Bishops in England, could not convince of heresy by
only scripture, at least as he though. Whereas in the point of calling, there is
no such means, either by obstinate wrangling or false pretense of scripture,
to cast dust into men's eyes, and to make their case if not probable, at least
doubtful. For unless they bring forth the sensible testimony of their
calling, by the known Pastors of the church, they are immediately without
farther proof, or trial, known to be intruders, and ravening wolves. And
this is the very true reason, why our new masters would so gladly skip over the
point of vocation, (wherein they know they cannot hide their woluish fangues)
and at the first leap, iumpe into the dispute of doctrine, where they know
that only obstinacy, and wilfulnes, and a resolution to stand to no judgment,
but their own, will furnish them of sufficient means, to wrangle till the
worlds end. And this is evident not only by the disputes, they maintanie
against the Catholic doct^in^, but by the endless iarres, they have among
themselves.

The sixth Chapter. That the sole election of the people is not a sufficient
warrant, and calling, to the lawful ministry of Gods word and Sacraments.
1. THat is that lay persons, be they Princes, or subjects, Magistrates, or
common people, few, or many have no power to ordain Pastors, and to give them
authority, whereby they may lawfully preach, and minister Sacraments, or
(which is the same thing) that no person elected by them, may lawfully without
any further calling or commission, take upon him the ministry of Gods word,
and Sacraments with them, who have so elected him.

Monsieur du Plessis, finding belike, that without this help, it is not
possible to maintanie the calling of their reformed brethren in general, but
that some of them at least must needs be found, to have intruded themselves
into the ministry without any calling, delivers this doctrine, which though
it suit well with their religion, yet is it not only most false and absurd in
it self, but also contrary to their cheifest masters of reformation, as we
shall see by and by; his words are these.

Plessis of the churh cap. 11. sect. and though etc. He seeks all corners to
maintain their calling but in vain.
Although some of our men in such a corrupt state of the church, as we have
seen in our time, without waiting for calling, or allowance of them, who under
the title of Pastors, oppressed the Lords flock, did at first preach without
this formal calling, and afterward were chosen, and called to the ministry,
by the churces, which they had taught, to the which they had vowed their
service, and ministry: yet this ought to seem no more strange, then if in a
free commonwealth, the people without waiting either for the consent, or for
the voices of those, that tirannise over them, should (according to the laws)
make choice of good and wise Magistrates, and such (happily) as God would
serve his turn of for their delivery, and for the public restitution. Thus
Monsieur du Plessis. Where it is evident, that in his doctrine, the election of
the people is a sufficient calling to the holy ministry, at least in such, as
have labored amongst them in the want of others, and have vowed their service,
and ministry unto them. And this do all his arguments prove, if they did
prove any thing, as we shall see by and by.

2. This doctrine is evidently confuted by Calvin himself in these words: He
condemns himself for he was never so ordored. Institut. l. d. c. 3. sect. 16.
Although there appears no other certain precept of imposition of hands,
notwithstanding because we see it to have been ever used by the Apostles: their
diligent use thereof ought to be to us instead of a commandment. And to exclude
Monsieur du Plessis customarie shift of pretended necessity, it is to be
noted that Calvin speaks of a time, wherein there was greater necessity of
Pastors, then was or could be ever since, to wit, of that time, when the
harvest was great, and harvest men but few, as our Savior himself says: Math.
6.37.
And Luther the father of all the reformers. Inquire diligently, if they can
prove their vocation: In locis communibus. page 38.
For God never sent any, but either called by man, or declared by miracles, no
not his own son. But let us see how this doctrine of Monsieur du Plessis
agrees with the holy scripture.

First, it supposes for a ground, without which it cannot stand, that the
church of Christ may be so oppressed, and ouer-run with Antichrist, that there
remain in it no true and lawful Pastors: For so long as there remanie any
such, others may be ordained by them, and so it shall not be needful, to
recurre to any extraordinary manner of ordination by the election of the
people, as Monsieur du Plessis here mentions. But this suppositio^ is not
only without all warrant of holy scripture, (which sole reason according to
their own doctrine, is sufficient to convince it of falsitie) but is also
manifestly, against the express testimony of the same, and therefore is
evidently heretical. Cap. 62.6.
Upon the walls Jerusalem (says almighty God by the Prophet Esaias) have I set
watchmen: day nor night shall they be silent for ever. If these watch men, who
are manifestly the Pastors of Gods church, shall not be silent for ever; how
can it be true, that the church shall be at any time so deuoide of lawful
Pastors, that there shall none remanie to ordanie others?

And our Savior Christ gives us most infallible assurance of this never
failing order of Pastors in his church, for being, to leave the world by his
corporal and visible presence, and to go to his father, giving that power and
commission to his Apostles, by virtue whereof, they were to plant his church in
the whole world, he says. All power (...) given me in heaven and in earth.
Going therefore teach ye all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son and of the holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, Math. 28.20.
and behold I am with you all days even to the consummation of the world. Now
if Christ be with the Pastors of the church all days until the worlds end;
how has his church been so without true Pastors, from the time, wherein she
first failed (as our adversaries pretend, until Luthers apostacy, which has
been for many hundreths of years) that there were none to give lawful calling
unto others, but they were forced to come, not being called, and run, not being
sent? Let Monsieur du Plessis, and all his crew either deny this to be holy
scripture, or say that our Savior has failed of his promise, or that the
church never wanted true Pastors. I leave them to make choice of one of these
three things: for one of them must necessarily be true; And because the two
first are blasphemous heresies, they are forced to accept of the third, which
being no less true, then the other two are false, does convince Monsieur du
Plessis his doctrine to be heretical: and farther, that all those, that take
upon them the ministry of Gods word and sacraments, without the lawful
ordination by true Pastors, under pretense, that all such as are, or were,
failed in Gods church, are thieves and robbers, as not entering by the door, but
climing up another way.

Io. 10.1.
3. S. Paul also, after our Savior Christ, testifies the same perpetual
continuation of true Pastors in Gods church, in most express words saying. He
that descended, the same is also he that is ascended above all the heavens,
that he might fill all things: And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and
other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors. Ad Ephesians. 4.
To the consummation of the saints, unto the work of the ministry, unto the
edifying of the body of Christ, until we all meet into the unity of faith,
and knowledge of the son of God. Is it not evident here, that our Savior
has ordained Pastors, and Doctors to continue in his church, till we all meet
in unity of faith (that is) till the end of the world? Let the prudent reader
judge what pastors they are like to be, that can pretend no other right, or
title to that charge, but the surmised fail of all true Pastors. Surely if S.
Paul's doctrine be true, such fellows must necessarily be thieves, that come to
rob and raven, and not shepherds, that should keep, and govern the flock
of Christ) as our Savior himself does style them. Io. 10.1.2.
And these so express testimonies of holy scriptures, do manifestly convince,
the supposition of the fail of Pastors in the church, to be most false, and
heretical: And consequently it does also convince, the calling, or ministry
of those pretending reformers, that is built thereupon, Confess. act. 31.
(as the falsely reformed church of France confesses theirs to be) not only to
be no lawful ministry, but also to be a manifested sacrilegious rebellion,
and usurpation.

Farther the Apostle teaching expressly; that no man takes upon him the honor
(of priesthood) but he that is called of God as Aaron: And again; that no man
can preach, unless he be sent. It is manifest, that those whom Monsieur du
Plessis confesses to have preached first without this formal calling, have
transgressed the express prescript of the holy Ghost. And though the choice,
and election of the churches taught by them, (whereof Monsieur du Plessis
speaks) should be granted a sufficient warrant, for their preaching
afterward (which no man will ever grant) yet himself cannot deny, but their
first preaching was without commission, or warrant, and therefore usurped.
Neither is it less manifest, that the churches, which these men taught, could
have no power to call them, and make them lawful Pastors. For neither had they
this power of themselves, as shall appear by the answer to his first
argument: neither had they it from God by any grant, for no such thing
appears, either in holy scripture, Ecclesiastical tradition, Councels, or
Fathers, but manifestly the contrary (I speak of such election as gives power
to preach, and not of such, as goes before ordination) neither could they
receive it from their new Pastors, who having it not themselves, could not give
it to their hearers, or disciples: And therefore had they it not at all, how
could they therefore give any lawful authority to their Pastors to preach, or
minister sacraments? Certes they could not do it.

This being most clear: whence will Monsieur du Plessis say, that their new
ministers (descending from these first convinced usurpers) have their calling?
Doubtless from no other, them him, who taugh Core to take upon him, the office
of sacrificing for the usurpation whereof, he was destroyed with fire from
heaven. Are they not therefore subject to that heavy sentence, Numbers. 16.
thundered out by the holy Ghost in these words; woe to them, that have perished
in the contradiction of Core.

Jude 11.
4. Now for the preventing of certain frivolous cauils, which in the behalf of
our adversaries may here be made, it is to be observed, that the question is
not betwixt them and us, whether all the Pastors of Gods church, either were,
when Luther first began to preach his heresy, or now are, without all fault or
note of blame, for their lives and manners; but whether there were not then,
and are now in the Catholic Roman church, Pastors furnished with true, and
lawful calling; and at least such, as our Savior speaks of, Math. 23.2.3.
when he says: upon the chair of Moises have sitten the Scribes and
Pharisees, all things therefore, whatsoever they shall say to you, do ye, but
according to their works do ye not, for they say, and do not. Where our
Savior does evidently distinguish between the office or function of Pastors,
or Prelates, and their life and manners, and will have them to be obeyed, in
that they command and teach as his officers, but will not that they should be
always immitated in their life and works: to wit, when their deeds be
contrary to their words, as sometimes they happen to be. This observation
frustrateth all the cauills, which the adversaries draw either by calumny, or
otherwise from the lives, and manners of the clergy, and Prelates of the
Catholic Roman church. See an excellent saying of S. Aug. cap. 8 before the
end some what.
For though they were all granted as true (as they are not) yet do they prove
nothing against their function, and calling, as appears evidently by our
Saviors own words even now elleaged. Neither can the wickedness of the Pastors
of the church, (were it as great, as the adversaries do falsely pretend) any
more justify their schismatic revolt, and rebellion against the same, then
can the corruption, or wickedness of the Kings officers, (supposing they were
most Wicked) justify the revolt, and rebellion of his subjects against him,
though raised, and begun under the fair show, of reforming abuses in his
officers. For if they had sincerly intended, any true reformation in the
church, and not the ruin thereof, they would most carefully have kept whole,
and entire the unity of the same, and labored by such means, as the holy
Ghost has ordained for that purpose, to amend, and correct that which was
amiss: and not by running out into open schism, to have broken the unity of
faith, and communion with the church; and thereby to make the evil altogether
incurable, and irremediable. For until their Apostasy, the unity of the
church, and communion of all the members thereof remained whole, not
withstanding watsoeuer corruption of life, and manners, whether truly being, or
falsely surmised to be, in particular persons, were they private, or public.

5. If they reply hereunto and say, that this course had been good, and
necessarily to have been observed, had the unity of the church, or the church
it self, continued, but the true church being long since utterly perished, and
abolished, and nothing thereof remaining but a Sinagogue of Antichrist, under
the shadow and color, of a Christian church, or congregation, this course
could have no place, no take any effect. To this reply (because it is a matter
that cannot here be fully handled) I will say no more, then that no man that
believes either the old, or new testament, can think, that the church ever
has, or ever shall (until the worlds end) fail or perish in such sort, as
here is supposed; and therefore to say, or think this, is, but to maintain one
error, and heresy by another, which cannot be any fit mean, to justify
their running out into rebellion, and schism. And albeit my present purpose
will not permit me, to prosecute at large the proof of this proposition, (that
the church neither has, nor shall fail) yet lest any should think, that I
have exceeded therein, and said more then can be justified, I have here pointed
to some few places, as well of the one, as the other Testament, that make clear
proof thereof, which I leave to be farther viewed, and considered by thee
(careful Reader) at thy best liking and leisure. Esaias. 59.21.
My spirit that is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed (says our Lord) from henceforth, and for ever.

In the days of those kingdoms, the God of heaven shall raise a kingdom,
Daniel. 2.44.
that shall not be destroyed, and his kingdom shall not be given to another
people, but it shall break in pieces all those kingdoms, See also Dan. cap.
7.14.27.
and it shall stand for ever.

And behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world.
Math. 28.20.
Upon which words M. Fulke disclayming from the doctrine, that supposes the
failing of the church says. We neither say, Annotations upon the testament.
nor think that the church has failed: but do constantly believe, that it
has always continued, and always shall continue to the end of the world.

Luke 1.33.
And he shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there
shall be no end.

Math. 16.18.
Upon this rock will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it.

Ephesians. 4.11.12.13.
And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and
other some Pastors, and Doctors, to the consummation of the saints, until we
meet in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God.

Cap. 8. n. 4. and after.
The arguments, which our adversaries use to bring, for the proof of the
churches failing, are herafter satisfied upon an other occasion. And now I
proceed in my purpose.

6. Having thus refuted this absurd point of Doctrine, of Monsieur du Plessis,
by authentical proof of the contrary, it remains to show the impertinency
of his arguments, which he brings for confirmation of the same. His first
argument is this in effect: It is no more strange for a Pastor, to be called to
the holy ministry, by the people in time of necessity, then it is for a
civil Magistrate, to be chosen by them in the like necessity. But this is
nothing strange; neither therefore is the other. Whereunto I answer, that it is
a most gross absurdity, and ignorance to compare the Ecclesiastical
ministry, or magistracy, with the temporal, or civil in this point: the one
being a mere spiritual power, to minister, and dispense spiritual things,
having their effect in men's souls, which as they can only be instituted of
God, so also can they only be lawfully dispensed by him, who is ordained by
God, and therefore the Apostle says: Let men so esteem of us, as ministers of
Christ, 1. Cor. 4.1.
and dispensers of the mysteries of God. The Other is a mere temporal power,
over men's bodies and goods, which no doubt may be given by men, as we see in
the first institution of kingdoms, or common wealths. As therefore it is
impossible for any one, to give that unto another, which he has neither of
himself, nor by commission from any other, so is it impossible for the people,
to give to others the authority, to minister Gods word and sacraments, which
they have neither of themselves, nor by any commission from God: or if they
have, let it be showed, where this power and commission was given them. For as
none does take unto himself the honor of Priesthood, Hebr. 5.
but he that is called of God, as Aaron (as the Apostle says.) So doubtless
much less does any man take upon him to give this authority, but he which
receives it from God, who is the sole author thereof.

His second argument is this: Philip who was but a Deacon, preaches in Samaria
without the calling of the Apostles, Act. 8.
yea and without their priuitie, who notwithstanding gave their allowance to
the work. In these three lines are two notable falsities, not in the
circumstance, but in the substance of the argument. The first, that Philip
preached without the calling of the Apostles. Act. 6.5.
For he was Deacon by imposition of the Apostles hands, whereby he had
authority to preach, and baptize, which was all he did. The second, that he did
this without the Apostles priuity, which is not said in the scripture, but
added to it by Monsieur du Plessis, who would gladly have S. Philip like unto
their Ministers to have run not being sent, S. Cyprian (if his authority be of
any weight with him) says expressly, that he was sent in these words. Epist. ad
Iubaianum.
They that believed in Samaria, believed in true faith: and were baptized by
Philip Deacon, whom the Apostles sent,

His third argument is the example of Frumentius before alleged, and retorted
upon himself, as an evident argument against his doctrine both there and here.

His fourth argument is drawn out of these words of Origin. Hom. 11. in 18.
numeri.
Et consideremus ne forte sicut in aliqua (verbi gratia) ciuitate, vbi nondum
Christiani nati sunt, si accedat aliquis, and docere incipiat, and laboret,
instruat, adducat ad fidem, and ipse postmodum ijs, quos docuit, Princeps and
Episcopus fiat: ita etiam sancti angeli eorum, quos e diuersis gentibus
congregauerint, and labor suo, ac ministerio proficere fecerint, ipsi eorum
etiam in futuro principes fiant. That is: And let us consider whether
peradventure, as in a city where Christians are not yet borne, if one come
thither, and begin to teach, and labor, instruct, bring them to the faith, and
afterward is made their Prince and Bishop, whom he has taught: so also the
holy Angels may be Princes of those, whom by their labor they have gathered
together of diverse Nations, and whom they have made to profit by their
ministry. Now what argument Monsieur du Plessis can draw out of these words to
serve his purpose, I see not. For Origin says nothing, but that he, that has
converted any city to the faith, may become their Bishop, which no man denies.
For S. Peter did so in Rome, S. Denis in Paris, S. Augustine in Canterbury, and
others in other places. How does this prove, that the people may make their
own Bishops or Pastors? But Monsieur du Plessis helps himself with his
accustomed manner of corrupting his Authors, which is so ordinary with him,
that many authorities shall thou not find (good Reader) either of Scripture,
or Fathers sincerely used by him. And therefore, no marvel, that for such
falsity, he received that shame, and confusion, in the presence of Henry the 4.
King of France, and all his court, at Fountain Belleau, Conference of
Fountain Belleau.
the year 1600. by that learned Prelate the Bishop of Euereux, now the most
illustrious Cardinal of Perron, which sticks in his forehead till this day,
to the confusion of himself, and all his adherents, nor ever will be blotted
out, but by the humble recognizing thereof by them all. With this art he
helps himself here and says We have example of the people, calling their
Pastors in those of whom Origin speaks, that shall come by chance into a
City, where never any Christian was borne, shall there begin to teach, to
labor, to instruct the people in the faith, whom the people shall afterward
make their Pastors and Bishops. Mark I pray thee (judicious Reader) where
thou find in Origin these words: (shall come by chan e) and these more
important (whom the people shall afterward make their Pastors and Bishops) and
learn to know Monsieur du Plessis his fidelity, in this point of citing
Authors.

7. To these frivolous proofs of his foul, and absurd doctrine, he adds
like impertinencies in these words. In all the Scriptures, there is not one
place, that binds the Ministry of the Gospel, to a certain succession: But
contrariwise the scripture shows, that God would send two special witnesses,
to prophecy against Antichrist, against the beast, (a calling merely
extraordinary) now against this beast, properly and indeed, do our Martyrs,
and our witnesses cry out. This shoe is so well shaped, that it will fit any
foot, as well the Arians and Anabaptists, against the Caluinists, as the
Caluinists against the Roman Catholics: therefore the same answer, that they
would make unto it, being urged against them by the Anabaptists, or Arians
shall serve them for this time. Cap. 8. n. 19. and after.
What there is in holy Scripture, for the succession of Pastors in the Church,
shall appear in due place. In the mean while the Reader is to note, that
Monsieur du Pless^^ does always keep a door open, that when he has no other
shift he may recurre to the extraordinary vocation, which is the drift of this
parenthesis (a calling merely extraordinary.) And in very deed much need
has he of it, whiles he is driven, to take it from the Lay People: which no
man will deny, but to be very extraordinary indeed. But of this sufficient.

The seventh Chapter. Not all ordination, consecration, or imposition of hands
is a sufficient calling to the administration of Gods word and Sacraments.
HAVING in the three immediately precedent chapters refuted, three several
sorts of calling, approved by some of our adversaries, and necessarily
maintained by them, because they find themselves to have no better; it
follows, that here we examine the fourth, which as it has some more
appearance of probability, so has it more maintayners. And the question is
only, State of the question.
whether the ordination, or imposition of hands, by a simple Priest, or
Priests, being no Bishop, or Bishops, is sufficient to lawful calling. For the
imposition of hands by such of our Adversaries, as are, or pretend to be
Bishops, shall be examined hereafter at large.

All the pretended reformed Churches descending from Luther excepting that in
England) are constrained to maintain, this sort of ordination by Priests only,
to be a sufficient, and authentical calling. For well perceiving on the one
side the pretense, of internal and extraordinary calling, avouched by the
Caluinists to be so strongly impugned, that they despair to make it good, as
in the next chapter shall be proved: And on the other side being manifestly
destitute, of all other ordination, or imposition of hands, then by Priests
only: they stand hard upon the defense of this sort of ordination, hoping or
at least attempting by this means, so to color and mask their intrusion, that
they may make it appear a lawful vocation or mission.

Where before page 369. or 376 for the cipher is false.
2. Monsieur du Plessis having therefore made a long discourse little to the
purpose, of their Ministers that were sent by their first men, and are come
even unto them now living (for of these only the present difficulty is, whose
dessent is not so great, but may easily be reckoned, being yet not one hundred
years since it began) he comes at last a little nearer to the matter and
makes this objection against himself, in the behalf of the Catholics, and
says. Against all this they can allege nothing but that these first Reformers
of the church, John Hus, Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, and others
from whom ours are descended, were not Bishops, but only Priests, or Doctors.
Whereunto we have answered in one word: that a Priest, and a Bishop in the
Primitive Church were all one, and if they differ now in titles and miters, in
the essential dignity, the differ nothing at all.

But it is false, that nothing can be alleged against their Ministers, except
their ordination by simple Priests: which though it be abundantly sufficient,
to prove the nullity of their Ministry, as shall appear by and by, yet is it
not the sole thing they want. For though their ordayners had been true Bishops,
yet their ordination had been none at all, wanting the true matter, and form
of holy order. The defect which comes of heresy is spoken of at large
hereafter.
Which they must necessarily confess to have been wanting, either in the
ministers, that we now speak of, or in those that ordained them, which is all
one for the proof of the nullity of their order. For the true form of holy
order being only one in substance, and these having been ordered by a form
quite distinct from that, wherewith their ordayners were ordered (as is
evident) it cannot be, but the one of the two wanted the true form of holy
order. Which if they will say to have been in the first, they must necessarily
likewise say, that they were not true Priests, and consequently that they could
not make others such, and therefore that these new Ministers of theirs, that
pretend to have been ordered by them, to be no lawful Ministers at all. But
let us see, how solid this answer is, to wit, that Priests and Bishops were
all one in the Primitive Church.

3. Doctor Field our Countryman, laboreth to justify, 3. book of the Church
cap. 39. The French ministry was instituted by Calvin who was not so much as
Priest.
the ministry of these reformed Churches, and namely of that of France, by the
same doctrine, which must necessarily be the doctrine of all those, that will
maintain any show of ordinary calling, in all these pretended Churches. For
evident it is, that they have no ministry ordained by Bishops. So that it
rests to be examined, whether such as have the sole order of Priesthood, and
are not Bishops, have power to ordain Priests: or whether Priests,, and
Bishops are of equal power and authority: Which question may have two senses.
Two diverse meanings of the question.
The first, whether these functions be equal in any respect, the second,
whether they be equal in all respects. As concerning the first sense, all
Catholics do teach that Priests, and Bishops are equal in that, which is the
prime and principal power of Priesthood, consisting in the consecrating of
the true body and blood of Christ, in a true and proper sacrifice of the new
law. Which power our Savior gave to his Apostles, (and in them to all Priests
lawfully descended from them by true ordination) in his last supper when he
said: Hoc facite, Luc. 22.
do ye this. For this reason these two appellations of Bishops and Priests,
are often taken the one for the other in this sort, that as well in holy
Scripture, as in the ancient Fathers Bishops are called Priests, and that
truly, for they are so indeed: as judges may truly be called Councellers: or
a man may as truly be called a living thing, the greater or more perfection
containing the less. And contrariwise Priests are sometimes called Bishops,
which does not argue, that they were equal in all respects, but in some one,
which is true, as is already noted. Now how far or in what other respects,
this equality is to be acknowledged, between Bishops and Priest pertayneth not
to this place to examine. For supposing they be unequal, in this one point of
power to ordain Priests and Pastors; though they should be equal in all other
respects whatsoever, it will be sufficient to determine this question, in our
favor, and against our adversaries.

4. For as much therefore as concerns the second sense and meaning of this
question, it is the uniform doctrine, and belief of all Catholic men in all
ages, that Bishops have this power above Priests, that they can consecrate or
ordain Priests, and Pastors, which Priests cannot do. This being proved true,
it will manifestly appear, that none of the ministers of all the pretended
Churches reformed, which are known, and confessed to have received their
ordination, and calling from Priests only, (as they all do, excepting those in
England and in France, the latter coming from Calvin who was not so much as
Priest, no nor Deacon) are lawful Ministers, but mere Laymen, and manifest
intruders, and usurpers.

For proof therefore of this verity, I will begin with Saint Hierome, who of
all the orthodox Fa^hers equalleth most Priests with Bishops, and of whose
testimony, our adversaries bear themselves most confident. This holy Father
handling a question, which gave him occasion to extol all that he could, the
pre-eminence, and dignity of Priesthood, and where indeed he says as much, as
can be said in that point; yet does he even there expressly teach, that the
power of ordayning Priests, is peculiar to Bishops in these few, but not
auoidable words. Epist. ad Euagrium. Hom. 11. in 1. ad Timot. initio.
What does a Bishop except ordination, that a Priest does not. Saint
Chrysostom has the same in these words. Betwixt a Bishop, and a Priest there
is almost no difference: for the cure of the Church is permitted also to
Priests, and that which he (S. Paul) said of Bishops, agrees also with
Priests. For Bishops exceed them only in ordination, and seem to have this
only more then they. But to convince this from more ancient authority S.
Athanasius says thus of one, that was brought in by the Arrians his
Adversaries, as one of his accusers. Apolog. 2. epist. presbit. Mareoti ad
Flaui.
They suborned one Ischyras, whom they brought with them: one that was in no
sort Priest, albeit he boasted himself to be one. For being ordained by one
Coluthus, not a true, but an imaginary Bishop, who was commanded by Hosius with
the rest of the Bishops present in the general council, to carry himself as
a mere Priest, as he was before, and that all those, that had been ordained
by him, should return to their former degree. And the Council of Alexandria
speaking of the same Ischiras says. In the same Apology after the midst of
the council.
How can it be that he is a Priest? or by whom is he ordered? was this done by
Coluthus? surely nothing else can be answered: but that Coluthus died in the
simple degree of Priest, and that all the imposition of hands exercised by him
were anulled, and that all those, who were ordered by him, were reduced to the
rank of Lay-persons, and under the name, and title of Lay persons were
admitted to the holy communion, it is a thing so evident to all the world, that
no man does think it to be doubted of.

What those holy Fathers, and most renowned Pastors thorough the whole
Christian world (I mean those of the first Council of Nice, for by them was
Coluthus, and his censured) would have said, or done to our new Ministers, who
do not so much as pretend to be ordered by Bishops, but do confess
themselves to receive their Ministry, from such, as were Priests only, (so
shamefully absurd are they) what I say they would have concluded against them,
if either they had lived now, or that these Ministers had lived then in their
days, I leave even to the partiallest Reader to judge.

5. But yet more evidently is this doctrine of the equality of Priests and
Bishops convinced of absurdity. For the Catholic Church above 1200. years
ago has branded the author thereof, who was called Aerius, with the note of
heresy even for this point. Of whom S. Epiphanius says thus. Here Is. 75.
His words were more furious, then humane, saying: what difference is there
betwixt a Priest, and a Bishop? the one differs nothing from the other: it is
one and the selfsame order, one and the same honor, one and the same
dignity. The Bishop does impose hands, and so does the Priest, the Bishop
baptiseth, and so does the Priest, the Bishop does consecrate the Mysteries of
divine worship, and so does the Priest, the Bishop sits in the throne, so
does the Priest. And with these words he seduced many, who esteemed him as
their guide. And a little after. But all this is foolish, as is manifest to any
of understanding. For how is it possible to say, that the Bishop and Priest are
equal? because the Episcopal order is the begetter of Fathers, for as much as
it begeteth fathers to the Church: whereas the order of Priesthood having not
power to beget fathers: by the lauer of regeneration does beget children to the
church, but not Fathers, and Doctors. Thus far S. Epiphanius.

And Saint Augustine: Here Is. 53.
Aerians (says he) are named of a certain Aerius, (to wit as Caluinists of
Calvin, and Lutherans of Luther, an ancient mark of Heretics) who being
Priest, and greeuing (as some say) that he could not be made Bishop: falling
into the heresy of Aerius, added thereunto diverse doctrines of his own,
saying, that the Priest and Bishop, are by no difference distinguished the one
from the other. Hereby it is evident, that if these new Reforming Ministers had
lived 1200. years ago, they would have been condemned with Aerius, and put
in the rank of Heretics with him, for teaching that Priests may ordain
Priests, as he did. Their calling therefore that is grounded upon this
doctrine, is evidently none.

Now in liew of these conuincing testimonies, I may justly exact of our
Adversaries, for maintenance of their doctrine in this point, and of their
calling grounded thereupon, so much proof at least, as either one instance of a
Priest ordained by a simple Priest, esteemed and received of the Church for a
lawful Priest, or some decree, or declaration either of the Apostles, or the
ancient Church, or at least of the Church, for the whole space of fifteen
hundred years after Christ, that Priests have power to ordain Priests: or if
they cannot bring any one of these proofs, (as I am assured they cannot) let
them cease for shame to maintain it any farther, and withal acknowledged
their Ministers so ordained, to be no more but mere Laymen.

6. M. Doctor Field labors much, in the defense of this doctrine, of the
equality of Priests, and Bishops, forsaking therein the ancient Orthodox
Fathers, even those of the Council of Nice, and adhering unto the condemned
heretic Aerius. But before I enter into any farther contestation with him, I
will advertise the Reader of a jolly slight, which he uses, to keep himself
free from the note of Aerianisme, though he maintain the same doctrine with
Aerius. D. Field.
In the nine and twenty chapter of his third book, being to justify himself
and his Protestant brethren, of that point of Aerius his heresy, wherein he
taught that Bishops, and Priests are equal, or else to acknowledge it for
true, he slightly puts it of to another place. D. Field does not only make
this word (Presbiter) to be English, of purpose to avoid the true English word
Priest which is a sacrificer but most rediculously or maliciously turns this
word sacerdos, a priest into minister turning these words of S. Hierome,
Ecclesia non est, quae non habet sacerdotem: in this sort: It can be no church,
that hoth no ministry. page 154. Lib. 3. cap. 39. sect these being etc. What
impertinencie can be greater then to allege the probable doctrine of some
deuins for a certain grownd of a matter in controversy. Supplement. quest. 40.
art. 5.
Saying of the difference between a Bishop and a Presbiter (mark how
fearful he is to use the true English word, Priest, least the very sound
thereof should give evidence against their heresy) I shall have fit occasion
to speak in examining the note of succession, and the exception of the
Romanists against us touching the same. Who would not think, but that he
intended to purge himself of this heresy? or if he did not, why does he not
here acknowledge it for good doctrine? yet when he comes to the place
appointed, does he not speak one word, for their justification in this point,
but directly maintayning the equality of Priests and Bishops, does (at least
indirectly) acknowledge, that they are in the same error with Aerius, which in
the 29. chapter before mentioned (where he should have answered directly to the
question) he rather made show to deny, then to grant. But let us see, what he
brings for the justification of this so long since condemned heresy.

His first argument is this. The best learned amongst the Romanists confess
that, that wherein a Bishops excels a presbyter, is not a distinct and higher
order, or power of order, but a kind of dignity, or office, and employment
only which they prove: because that a Bishop ordained per saltu^, or that never
had the ordination of a Presbyter, can neither consecrate, nor ordain, though
a Priest, that never was Deacon, may lawfully exercise the office of a Deacon,
because the higher order includes the lower. Hence (says he) it follows
that that, wherein a Bishop excels a Priest, is not a distinct power of
order, but an eminency yielded to one above the rest of the same rank for
orders sake, and to preserve the unity of the church.

He either does not or will not understand, the doctrine of these schoolmen,
to whose judgment if he would stand, he could not defend Aerius his error. For
though these whom he cites, with diverse others teach, that, that wherein a
Bishop does excel a Priest, is not a distinct order, or sacrament from
priesthood; yet none of them all deny, but that it is either a distinct power
of order, from that which is in a Priest, which power S. Thomas in the place by
him cited says, is a power in certain Hierarchicall actions (meaning the
power to ordain Priests and other church officers) in respect of the mystical
body of Christ, above that which is in a Priest? or at least the same power of
order extendded, not by external deputation, but by sacramental consecration:
not by the churches ordenance but by Christ's own institution: as S.
Bonauenture and Sotus. And if he cannot conceive, how it may be a distinct
power of order, and yet not a distinct order, let him understand that one, and
the same order, may have diverse powers; As for example, the order of Priesthood
has power, to consecrate the true natural body of our Savior Christ, and
also to absolve men, who are the members of his mystical body (the church)
from sin, so likewise the same order of priesthood may be extended by
Episcopal consecration, to have power in sundry Hierarchicall actions (as S.
Thomas speaks) without addition of any new order unto it, whereunto the simple
order of preisthood cannot reach. And this is the clear meaning of those
divines, that hold the order of a Bishop, not to be a distinct order, from that
of a Priest, which opinion is probable, but not certain, (for many most grave
and learned auctors teach the contrary) and therefore no sufficient ground, to
build so important a point of Christian religion upon, as is the true calling
of Gods ministers. Yea were it certain, yet does it nothing help his purpose.
Because a simple Priest has not the power of order, with the same extension or
ampliation which a Bishop has in those schoolemens opinions. And hence it is
manifest against D. Fields illation, that in the doctrine of these deuines,
that, wherein a Bishop does exceed a Priest, is not only an eminency given to
one above others of the same rank for orders sake, but a true power of order
given or at least extended by consecration, whereby the order of priesthood is
extended to those actions (to wit of ordering Priests, and other
Ecclesiastical officers, where unto without consecration it cannot reach. And
this also in their opinion is the reason, why a Bishop that is not a Priest (if
such an one could be) can neither consecrate the natural body of Christ in the
holy Eucharist, nor yet ordain Ecclesiastical ministers; though a Priest,
that never was Deacon, may do the functions of a Deacon. For all holy order
being measuted by the power it has in, or about the natural body of Christ in
the holy Eucharist, which power is perfected in priesthood: where that
wants, there can be no higher order, because this does essentially presuppose
the other, and where that is, there are also all inferior orders, because
these are referred, and ordained to the other, and are essentiallie included in
it.

7. Hence likewise is solued that vnscholerlike question, which he makes a few
lines after, saying. Who knows not, that all presbyters in cases of
necessity, may absolve, and reconcile penitents: a thing in ordinary course
appropriated to Bishops (which is false, unless he speak of public penitents)
and why not by the same reason ordain presbyters in cases of like necessity?
For as much as pertains to the circumstance of necessity, he shall be
satisfied by and by. And for the solution of his question here proposed I will
ask him another, to as good purpose, as his is: why a child of three years
old can speak and ea^e, but cannot beget another child, which a man of 20. o^
30. years old can? The solution of this question will solue also his: For as a
child: at 3. years has power to eat and speak, but not to beget a child:
which power not wi^hstanding will come unto him without addition of any
distinct nature, by the only extending of his own, by growth and strength; so
likewise a Priest has power by his simple priest hood to absolve from all sins
by these words: take thou the holy Ghost, whose sins thou forgiuest, are for
given: but he has not power to make Priests without an Episcopal
consecration, whereby his order of priesthood is extended to that power, without
adding any new or distinct order, speaking according to the opinion of the
deuines before mentioned.

His second argument may be thus framed, in case of necessity every simple
presbyter may baptize, confirm, absolve, and reconcile penitents, and do all
those other acts, which regularly are appropriated to the Bishop alone:
therefore in case of necessity, namely all Bishops being dead, or become
heretics, they may in like manner ordain presbyters. I grant that in time
of necessity, a simple Priest may do all that, which is reserved to the Bishop
by Ecclesiastical, or positive laws. But deny that the ordayning of Priests
(or yet the ministering of the sacrament of confirmation) is such: for that is a
power of order, which is as necessarily required to this action, as the power
of priesthood is to the other, and therefore in no case of necessity can this
action of ordayning Priests without this power be performed. And if M. D. Field
ask of me, what is to be done then for conservation of the church, in case
that all Bishops should be taken away by death, or become heretics. I answer
him, that the same thing is to be done in that case, that were to be done in
case, that all Priests were dead or become heretics, or that were to be done
for the conservation of mankind, in case that all men were dead, which cases
are as possible, or probable, as is his case.

But he obiecteth farther and says, lib. 11. go Armenors. cap. 7. Hales part.
4. g. 9. memb. 5. art. 1.
that the best learned in the church of Rome, in former times durst not
pronounce all ordinations of this nature (to wit done by simple Priests in the
former case of necessity) to be void. For Armachanus says, It seems that if
all Bishops were dead, inferior Priests might ordain Bishops. And Alexander of
Hales says, that some are of opinion, that by delegation of the Pope, one that
has holy orders, may give the same to others.

8. A weak and feeble ground to build the foundation of Christian religion
upon. Cap. 39. initio.
I say the foundation of Christian religion; the question in hand importing no
less. For where there are no true Pastors, there can be no true church, as M.
Field confesses with SS. Hierome and Ciprian, and cannot be denied by any: But
where there is no true church, there can be no true faith or religion, as all
men confess, therefore where there are no true Pastors, there can be no true
religion. To ground therefore this maine point of Christian religion ( who are
true Pastors) upon the doubtful speculatiue opinion of two schoolmen, is
either to want all judgment, or to want all other better grounds for the same;
verily I am ashamed in M. Field^ behalf, to see his little judgment, or
sincerity in this point: but much more do I grieve to see the world so
palpably blind, as upon the vain pretense of reformation, to leave the
ancient and trodden way of salvation, and to follow by paths of men's
yesterdaies invention. Especially seying the masters of this reformation,
rejecting as insufficient all other proof of Catholic doctrine, but the
pure, and express written word, not withstanding when they come to make proof
of their own doctrine, or grounds of their faith, are forced to use the
doubtful speculation, of one or two schoolmen. Whereas the certain, and
constant opinion of all the schoolmen togiather, makes but a theological,
and not a certain probation of any verity: I say doubtful, for that the one
speaks doubtfully, saying only (it seems) the other less to the purpose,
speaking only of other men's opinions, of whom he makes so little account, that
he vouch safeth not to name them, but under the uncertain term of ( quidam,
certain) and they speaking also with that condition, which makes more against
our adversaries, to wit, upon condition of the Popes delegation. But let us now
say a word of the necessity, which M. Field pretends to have enforced them
to seek their new ministry, where there was never any found before.

9. He says, that this necessity is only in two cases, to wit all Bishops
being dead, or else fallen into heresy, now he must suppose this second to be
their case: wherein (for the strengthening of his purpose) I will suppose with
him (against the truth) that all those, that opposed themselves against their
pretended reformation, were heretics; and yet for all that, shall he not be
able to maintain their ministry to be lawfully ordered. For whereas one only
Bishop had been sufficient to have peopled a greater part of the world, with
lawful ministers (supposing fit men were found) then yet has of their
gospel, it is known that there were diverse Bishops (I speak it with grief)
in diverse provinces, that apostating from the Catholic Roman faith, joined
themselves with the pretended reformers, whereof Monsieur du Pl^ssis does brag,
saying. Our furst ministers had the same calling, Treatise of the church: cap.
11. sect. It therefore. No word here of Calvin the fownder of y French and
Gonenean churches who was not so much as Priest.
and succession, which they (Catholics) do so much brag of. For Wickliffe,
Husse (mark how he begins their pedigree with heretics that did differ from
them in most points) Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Martyr,
were Priests, Curates, Doctors of divinity: I omit Archbishops, Cardinals in
Germany, England, France, and Italy, in whose calling there wanted as little, as
in that our adversaries do approve, and magnify in theirs. Seeing therefore
there were Archbishops, and Bishops in these province one only whereof might
have sufficed, what necessity can they pretend, that their second ministers
should be ordained by simple Priests only? Here has not M. Field, nor Monsieur
du Plessis (who maintain the same doctrine) any starting hole, but they must
needs confess, if not an absolute nullitie in their ministry, (which to all
men of indifferent judgment is clear) yet at lest must they acknowledge even
in their own doctrine, a culpable presumption, and over great boldness, as M.
Field says page 159. in perverting the ancient, and ever observed order,
established from the beginning in the church: which note cannot stand with the
true spirit of reformation, (which is the spirit of peace and order) but is an
evident mark of his spirit, that confounds all order. And thus much for D.
Fields case of pretended necessity, but he adds.

Neither should it seem strange to our adversaries, that presbyters should
sometimes ordain, seeing their Chorepiscopi, suffragans, and tituler Bishops,
that according to the old course of discipline are no Bishops, do daily in the
Roman church give orders. I cannot think his ignorance to be so great, as to
make this objection: whence then it proceeds, let others judge: for he cannot
be ignorant, that none may give the order of priesthood in the Roman church,
but he that has the consecration, and character of a Bishop: or if he think
the contrary, let him bring but one instance in the whole space of 150.
years, This distinction of suffragans he may learn of M. Mason. pa. 128.
and he shall gain his cause. Neither do I think that he is so ignorant, as
not to know, that the Corepiscopi, of which the ancient canons speak, which
he cites, were not indeed consecrated Bishops (as the suffragans in these
days are) but were only simple Priests, assisting the Bishop in diverse things
pertaining to his charge, as now vicars general do, and therefore no marvel,
though they could give no holy orders: and so has he made an argument
evidently against himself. But after all this, he comes to make a show, as if
he would answer that, which is objected by the Catholics against this
doctrine, and says.

10. All that may be alleged out of the Fathers, for proof of the contrary,
may be reduced to two heads. For first whereas they make all such ordinations
void, as are made by presbyters, it is to be understood, according to the
strictnes of the canons in use in those days, and not absolutely in the nature
of the thing. Synod. Calced. can. 6. Con Laodiceu^. can. 12. Con. Antiochenum.
can. 13.
Which appears in that they make all ordinations sine titulo void, all
ordinations of Bishops by fewer then three Bishops with the Metropolitan; all
ordinations by Bishops out of their own churches without special leave.
Whereas I am well assured, the Romanists will not say any of these to be void.
Secondly, their sayings are to be understood regularly, not without exception
of some special cases that may fall out.

M. D. Field is either fowly ouerseene in this answer, or else would wittinglie
deceive his reader therewith. For the Fathers do not make void the ordinations
of Priests made by Priests, by any positive canon, as they do the ordinations
he mentions, but do declare them none, absolutely, and in the nature of the
thing it self (to use his own manner of speaking). And this is clear, first
by the Fathers own words: S. Epiphanius says expressly, that Priests have not
power to beget Fathers to the church, but children only, where it is manifest,
that he speaks of the nature of the thing, for such Priests as are subject to
the canons by M. Field cited have not power, (that is, have not lawful use of
the power) to beget children to the church by Baptism. Farther the council of
Alexandria before cited, urging how Ischyras (ordained by Coluthus a true
Priest, but a counterfaite Bishop) could be Priest, and by whom he was ordered?
must needs understand, that he wanted not only lawful ordination, but true and
sufficient ordination. For if he had had true ordination, and only a canonical
impediment suspending the use thereof, the Arians enemies unto S. Athanasius,
would quickly have absolved him from that impediment. Again S. Hierome and S.
Chrysostom expressly denying only the power of ordayning to Priests, cannot be
understood otherwise, then of the nature of the thing, and not by the rigor of
any canon, for in that sort, they must have denied many other things unto them,
which (by M. Fields own confession) are at least for orders sake reserved to
Bishops. Moreover how could S. Epiphanius, and S. Augustine esteem Aerius an
heretic, for teaching that Priests might ordain Priests, if this were
forbidden them by the rigor of positive canon only, and not of the nature of
the thing? These Fathers were neither so ignorant, nor so light of judgment to
condemn one of heresy, for contradicting a positive canon, or at lest would
they not have omitted to specify the canon.

11. Secondly the Fathers declaring void the ordinatio^s made by only Priests
(as M. Field confesses) and that not by the force of any canon, for there was
no such canon, (at lest before the council of Nice, where as we see by S.
Athanasius all the ordinations made by the counterfeite Bishop Coluthus though
a true Priest, were declared to be none) this judgment (which by the confession
of our adversaries is of most weighty authority) must needs be grounded in the
nature of the ordination, as not proceeding from sufficient power, and not from
any canon or constitution, no such canon being then made. For I suppose no man
wilbee so absurdly impertinent, as to say that a precedent action auailable of
it self may be anulled and made void (for the time when it was done) by a
following or latter constitution, though there were any such, which I know not,
whether there be or no. And hence it is manifest, that M. D. Field his answer
to the Fathers authorities, is but a mere evasion, or color of an answer.
But that all may understand the great difference between the Fathers
declaration, of the nullitie of the ordinations made by Priests only: and the
intent of the canons by M. Field alleged, which make void future ordinations
without title, and the rest specified by him.

It is to be observed, that the fathers alleged for the former case, do not
make any canon, or constitution for future actions, but give their definitive
sentence and judgment of an action past, declaring it to be of no value, whereas
the canons alleged for the second case, are constitutions made for future
facts, prohibiting the whole use of the orders so given, and punishing as well
the giver, as the receiver, but not anullating the order it self, (for that is
not in the power of the church, as all Catholic men do believe) and in this
respect these constitutions are like unto those civil laws, that make wards
or pupils, for these laws do not take away from him, that is ward or pupil
the dominion, which he has in his inheritance, but only suspend the use
thereof, during his minority, and therefore makes void all contracts, which he
shall make, during that estate of wardship. And as he at the time prefixed by
the law, certain circumstances observed, comes to the full and perfect use
of his lands, without any new purchase or gift, so in like manner those, that
having been debarred, or suspended from the use of their orders received
against the ordinance of the canons, having given just satisfaction to the
church for their fault committed, are admitted to the free, and lawful use of
their orders, without any new ordinatio^, as is manifest by the continual
practice of the church. So that the difference betwixt the declaring an
ordination to be none, and the suspending the use thereof, is very great, as
every one may see.

M. Field his second answer, as it is but his own assertion withot any ground
either of reason, authority, or insta^ce in practice, as has been hitherto
showed, is as easily by us denied, and with better reason, then by him affirmed.

He concludes his discourse with this vain brag. Thus then we see that
objection which our adversaries took to be unanswerable, i^ abundantly
answered out of their own schoolmen, the opinion of many singulerly well
learned amongst them, and their own daily practice in that, Chorepiscopi and
Suffragans (being no Bishops but only Presbyters forbidden by old canons to
meddle with ordination) do with good allowance daily ordain Presbyters.

What want of modesty, honesty, or judgment these words show, I had rather the
reader should see, then I should tell him. First has he brought nothing out of
the schoolmen in favor of his Aerian heresy, as I think will appear by
that, which has bin said in that point. Secondly it is as evidently false, as
it is true that the sun is up at noone-tide that any meddle with giving
orders of Priesthood, in the Roman church, but such as are truly consecrated
Bishops. And what these Chorepiscopi were which were forbidden in the ancient
church to meddle with ordinations, is showed before, and M. Field cannot be
ignorant of the difference betwixt them, but he would deceive his Reader, by
the bare sound of the word Chorepiscopi, who are forbidden in ancient canons to
ordain, because they were not consecrated Bishops, as is noted before.

12. Monsieur du Plessis (to end this Chapter with him) having objected to
himself in the behalf of the Catholic doctrine, Page 379.
the authorities of S. Epiphanius, S. Hierome, and S. Chrysostom, all expressly
teaching, that Bishops have the power of ordination above Priests, as we have
seen before, forms thereunto no other answer then this: In epist. ad Titum
cap. 1.
But let them (Catholics) not conceal then that which S. Hierome says: that
it is by the custom of the Church, and not by the truth of divine ordinance,
fraudulently applying these words of S. Hierome to the question now in hand, of
the power of ordering Priests, (against S. Hieromes express words, and
meaning, in his 85. Epistle to Euagrius) he speaking in the place here cited by
Monsieur du Plessis, manifestly of the power of jurisdiction or argument,
wherein also he says, that the pre-eminence of Bishops above Priests, is as
ancient as that (ego Pauli, ego Apollo.) Whereby it is evident even by S.
Hieromes testimony, that not only in order, but also in jurisdiction Bishops
excel Priests from the Apostles times, which is also clear by his words when
he says. Epi. ad Euagrium in fine.
That we may know the Apostolic traditions to be taken from the old Testament;
what Aaron, and his Sons, and the Levites were in the Temple, the same do
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons challenge to themselves in the church. But Aaron,
his Sons, and the Levites were one above another, both in order, power, and
dignity; by Gods own appointment therefore also are in like manner Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons even from the Apostles time in S. Hieromes opinion.

13. Observe good Reader, that I have treated here only of that defect of
calling, which proceeds from the want of order, or power in the party that
ordayneth. Whereas there are diverse other nullities, or defects, making void
the new ministry of the pretended reformed Churches, which hereafter we shall
have fitter occasion to speak of.

The eight Chapter. The defects found in the callings to the Ministry hitherto
refuted cannot be supplied by any extraordinary calling, nor is there now in
the Church of Christ, any extraordinary calling to the ministry of Gods word
and Sacraments.
1. THIS is the last question, that I have to dispute with the Protestants in
general; which though it might easily be decided by that, which has hitherto
bin said, yet I thought it not amiss to make it a distinct question, and to
handle it a part; as well for that some may imagine, that though in all the
sundry sorts of calling hitherto refuted, there are capital defects, and such
as evidently make them none, yet peradventure they may be supplied by some
extraordinary manner of calling: as also for that a great and principal part
of the pretended churches, namely that of France, and all those that argree
with it, do not acknowledge any other calling of their first Pastors, but
merely extraordinary. For disdayning, and abhorring to receive their calling
from the Catholic Roman Pastors, as from Idolaters, and ministers of
Antichrist, and having no other way to receive any ordinary calling, they are
driven, to bethink themselves, of an extraordinary means. Illirie. Catalog.
testiu^ page 370. 371. Osiand. epit. Hist. cont. 9. 10. 11. See Fox page 29.
209. Hierom. con. Lucifer.
Being in this point as absurd as VValdo, who of a merchant of Lions, made
himself, a Preacher of a new Ghospel, and framing his doctrine to his calling
(as these men also do) taught that lay persons, might consecrate, and preach,
more absurd then he, that S. Hierome speaks of; (that being but a Deacon, and
teacher of a new heresy, could leave no pedigree after him) saying: The sect
died together with the man, because he being but Deacon could leave no clarke
behind him; but that is no church, that has no Priest. For in those days
extraordinary callings were not heard of, the world being yet not come to so
great want of sense, as to think of such absurdities.

Because this question is like to be somewhat long, Order of this Chapter.
and therefore requires to be handled with some order: I will first show, that
the French Churches, and others that accord with them, do teach, this
extraordinary vocation, least any one seeing the absurdity thereof may think I
impose it wrongfully upon them. Secondly, I will set down their grounds and
proofs for the same, and withal refute them; and if in the third place I
bring any proofs of the contrary, that is of supererogation. For the proofs in
this question belong to our adversaries, and not to us; they maintayning the
affirmative, and we the negative.

2. The French Churches therefore falsely pretending reformation, do not only
teach the extraordinary calling of their first Ministers, or Pastors, but do
publish it to the world as an article of their belief, professing thus in
their confession. Confession of faith of the French church article 31.
We believe that no man ought to intrude himself, into the government of the
Church: but that this ought to be done by election, as much as is possible, and
God permits. Which exception we purposly add for that it has been
necessary sometimes, and specially in these our days (when the state of the
Church was interrupted) that God should raise men by an extraordinary fashion,
to rectify, or repair his church anew, which was in ruin, and desolation.

Secondly, this is also manifest by their practice. For albeit they had some
Bishops Apostates from the Catholic faith, as we have seen before out of
Monsieur du Plessis, and is yet fresh in memory, yet were they not used for
the consecrating or ordering their ministers, as is manifest.

Thirdly, they farther use this practice, that if any one, Card. du Peron in
his reply sect. speak freely fo. 92. impression 1605.
having been ordered in the Catholic church, revolt unto them, they do not
permit him to exercise the ministry, unless he be first ordained again after
their new form: testifying thereby to the world, that they acknowledge no
other vocation, then extraordinary. For albeit they pretend that such, as are
now called to the ministry have an ordinary calling, yet do they willingly
confess, that their first Reformers, who are not yet on hundred years old,
have no other then an extraordinary calling. And de facto, Calvin who was the
founder of their new Church was never Priest, nor ever had other calling then
that he took to himself.

Fourthly, this doctrine of extraordinary vocation, is ordinary even in
England, at least amongst the refined and purer spirits. For M. Fulke one of
the lights of Cambrige, is so earnest in this point, that he rejects with
much vehemency all order, or calling taken from the Catholics, without
which, they must of necessity recurre to their extraordinary calling. His words
are these: Answer to a counterfeit Catholic page 50. Retentiue page 67. Con.
Duraeu^ l. 9. p. 821.
you are highly deceived if you think, we esteem your offices of Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons any better then Laymen, and you presume to much to
think, that we receive your ordering to be lawful. And in another place.
With all our hearts we defy, abhor, detest, and spit at your stinking,
greasy, Antichristian orders. And M Whitaker another light of the Gospel has
the like, and if it were needful, many more both testimonies, and arguments
might be brought for proof hereof, but in a matter so plain, we have been
too long already.

3. Of this so extraordinary doctrine, and practice, we may by very good right
exact of them at least ordinary proof; As Well because the matter it self is
of principal moment, touching the very foundation, Cap. 7. n. 8.
and ground of C^ristian doctrine, as is plainly deducted before; as also for
that they are so r^gorus in exacting proofs of every point of our doctrine,
that they will admit none, Cap. 5. from the n. 2. forward.
but plain words of Scripture. All this notwithstanding I dare affirm, that
they are not able to make any better proof of this their extraordinary
vocation, then the vilest, vainest, and most detestable heretics, that either
are, or ever were, may make, or might have made for there vocation, to preach
their heresies. I will neither except Marcion, Valentinian, Manes, or
Manichoeus, Aerius, Nestorius, Pelagius, nor our new Anabaptists, Familians, or
Libertines. If this be true, as in the process of this question, it will
appear m^st true, who is it, that can say, that they have any proof at all of
their vocation? They will say that they have the truth of doctrine, which none
of the above named heretics had, and therefore have they better proof of
their calling then the other had? This single-soled shift is effectually
refuted above, by authority of holy Scripture Fathers, and evident reason: And
for the present I say, that they stick ever in the same mire. For what other
proofs do they bring, for the truth of their doctrine, which all the
aforenamed heretics did not bring. They bring Scriptures: and did not the
other so also? yea and in as great abundance, and with as great bragges as
these do. But they are condemned by lawful judgment to be heretics, and
their doctrine heresy: true, and the very same judge has condemned them of
the same crime. What difference is there then betwixt them? Surely, none at all
But let us see, what proofs they bring for their new kind of calling. And as
they are proposed, good Reader, I beseech thee take notice of every one in
particular, and thou shall find, they will serve as well, to prove the calling
of all the aforenamed heretics to be good, as of these in whose behalf they
are brought, which one observation does answer them all, before they be
proposed.

And that thou may know, that they are their own; and the best they have, I
will tell thee here, before thou go any farther, where I find them, that thou
may see, that I play above board.

4. About the year 1596. a Gentleman of base Normandy, called Monsieur du S.
Vast, with a friend of his (both of the new religion) having great doubts, of
the lawfulness of the vocation of their Pastors, and Ministers, and
consequently of the truth of their religion, proposed them unto the said
ministers by writing, desiring resolution. The ministers (knowing the axe to be
laid to the maine post of their new building) with as much industry, as they
could, framed answer, but with so little satisfaction of the parties, that they
both quit their sect, and rendered themselves obedient children of the
Catholic Roman church. Out of the writing of these ministers, which is extant
in the Bishop of Euereux his reply to the same, and never since answered nor
ever will: do I bring their arguments, for their extraordinary vocation,
without leaving out any word of theirs, pertaining to the matter in hand.

The first is: Where there is true doctrine, there may be true vocation, which
is an order prescribed by the same doctrine. But we have the true doctrine as
we will ever maintain, and hitherto have we not been convinced of the
contrary. Therefore may we also have the lawful calling, though we receive it
not from others.

We call that properly true, and lawful calling which is conformable to the
rules given us in the scripture, and which has been kept from the Apostles
times, until this present in all true churches: which we have at this day
amongst us, and therefore we call it truly ordinary, and received by succession
from the Apostles; acknowledging no other, that may deserve thi^ name, though
it have continued for some time.



But forasmuch as they (Catholics) understand by this word ordinary voc^^ion,
a perpetual, and not interrupted succession from the Apostles times, we
answer them upon this point, that this is not the definition of true vocation.

that was received by succession from the Apostles, and retained till this day,
and that none other deserved that name: and now with the same breath, they deny
succession to pertain, to the definition of true calling. Let us see farther,
peradventure they will make these two ends meet together: they add;

There cannot any thing be gathered to this purpose (to wit, that succession
pertayneth to lawful calling) out of any passage of Scripture, no not there,
where there is express mention made of this charge: and in brief there is not
any promise of this in the whole Scripture.

that we properly call true, and lawful calling, which is conformable to the
Scripture: and which has been kept from the Apostles times, in all true
Churches till this time. But it booteth little, to stand upon the
contradictions of men, that maintain an ill cause: for they will say, and
unsay upon every occasion. But let us see, whether they will remember
themselves, and accord their own sayings.

If they allege unto us these promises of Christ: that he will be with his
Disciples till the consummation of the world: and that the gates of hell shall
not prevail against the church: we deny that this pertayneth to any succession
of persons, which is to be in such sort perpetual, that it is never to be
interrupted, until the second coming of Christ.

Behold (says our Savior Christ to his Apostles, Maih. 28.20
and in them to all, that shall succeed them, in the charge, or government of
his church) I am with you all days to the consummation of the world. Which
promise they most impudently deny, to appertain to a succession of persons,
not to be interrupted until the second coming of Christ. For our Savior
speaking there to his Apostles as Preachers, and Pastors of his church, as is
evident by the words immediately going before. All power is given me in heaven,
and in earth: Going therefore teach ye all Nations, baptizing them etc. and
testifying, that he will be with them all days to the end of the world. How
can any man, not wholly void of common sense deny, that here is express
mention of a personal succession of Pastors, to continue without
interruption, until the second coming of Christ? S. Paul testifies the same
in these express words. And he gave other some Pastors, and Doctors, Ephgs.
4.12.
to the consummation of the Saints, to the work of the Ministry, until we
all meet in the unity of faith. So that those that will believe the holy
scripture cannot doubt of the continual succession, of Pastors in the Church
so clearly set down in the same.

But we say with S. Augustine, that this is to be understood, of the church of
the elect.

Augustine did ever dream, of the separation of the church of the elected,
from that of the called (for as much as apperteineth to the profession of faith,
participation of the sacraments, and subjection to their Pastors) and therefore
what he says of the church of the elect, which he terms to be not only in
the house, Lib 7. de baptismo con. Donatistas.
but of the house, does nothing help them. Note that they cite not S.
Augustines words, nor the place, for so they should have more evidently been
taken with the lie,

Which God himself can conserve, without ordinary means, yea without Pastors
for a time.

The French Reformers in their Cathechisme teach expressly that Pastors are
necessary for the conservation of Gods Church. Sunday 45.
without the incarnation, and passion of his only son. But if we speak of
his power, ruled and determined by the decree, and ordinance of his will, he
that says, that God will conserve his church without Pastors does evidently
contradict S. Paul saying, that he has ordained Pastors, for the consummation
of the Saints, and that we be not like children, carried away with every wind
of doctrine. Is not the conclusion drawn from these principles like to be
solid? and the calling of Pastors that is forced to seek such proofs to be
very sound?

Ephesians. 4.12.
As it has happened diverse times, in the church of the Jews, and specially
during the captivity of Babylon, for the space of seventy years.



And before that in the time of Elias as he complayneth thereof to God.

Achab King of Israel, and his most wicked wife Iesabel, of which time these
men speak, the Church of God did greatly flourish in Judah, 3. Reg. 22. 2.
Paralip. 17.
and Jerusalem (the metropolitan city of that people) under the religious, and
good king Iosophat. So that the church of the Jews failed no more, neither in
succession of Pastors, nor exercise of the true religion at that time (though
the king and kingdom of Israel did persecute it) then the church of Rome did
fail in the world, in Q. Elizabeth's time, though she did persecute the same in
her kingdom of England, and did her endeavor to extinquish it there.

And after wards under many kings of Israel and Judah, as Azarias the Priest
testified unto king Aza: saying, that many days had passed in Isra^ll, without
the true God, without Priest, without Doctor, and without law.

Achab, of whose persecution ^lias complained, 3. Reg. 16. 2. Paralipom. 15.
began his reign over Israel the 38. year of Asa king of Judah. And Azarias
spoke these words (whereof these men make mention) the 15. year of the reign
of Asa. How then could this saying of Azarias, follow that complaint of Elias,
being many years before it? And yet to make the contradiction mare apparent,
they put in the lives of many kings, which also should go betwixt these two.
Secondly, how can it be that this default of the church should have been under
many kings of Judah, and Israel, as they say, in the time of Asa? Seying he was
only the third king of Judah, after the separation of the ten tribes: during the
reign of which kings, the sacred story of the ki^gs, and chronicles make it
planie, that there was no such fail of Pastors, and Doctors, as Azarias
mentions. Thirdly, they make Azarias to speak of a thing past, 2. Paralip.
13.10.11.
not only contrary to the verity of the vulgar translation, which says not:
many days have past: but that: many days shall pass: but also contrary to
the planie, 2. Paralip. 15.3.5.8.
and necessary meaning of the Holy Ghost, who brings in Azarias there,
speaking as a Prophet of things to come, and not as one rehearsing things past,
as is evident, as well by the words of the text it self, as by the
circumstances of the thing foretold. Fourthly, they manifestly corrupt the
text, to make it seem more to favor their purpose. For Azarias says only,
that many days shall pass in Israel without Priest, and Doctor: foretelling
the apostacy of the kingdom of Israel under Achab, from the true religion,
and worship of God; and they impudentlie, and without all conscience, thrust in
also (Jude.) Fifthly they going about to prove by this authority, that the
church may be without Priests, and Pastors, may prove by the same, that it may
be also without the true God, and without law. For Azarias foretells these
things, as well as the other: yet do I not think they dare say, that the true
church may be without the true God, and without law. Let them therefore
consider, how little this scripture helps them; and judge thou also good
Reader, whether these men do handle the holy scripture either sincerlie, or
learnedlie, that in so few words, do multiply so many gross absurdities, and
falsities?

We say the same of the Christian church, in the which are noted many
confusions, and interruptions, and notoriously under the Arians, a little after
Constantine the great; and in the time of his sonns Constans, Constantius, and
Constantinus: all the Bishops being revolted, excepting two Liberius, and
Athanasius.

Constans, Constantius, and Constantinus (say they) all Bishops revolted,
excepting two. Fie upon such shameless impudency, seying the falsitie is so
apparent, that it cannot be excused by ignorance. In whose time (I would ask
of these men) was kept the council of Sardis, where there were Some hundreths
of Catholic Prelates? was it not in Constans, and Constantius time? Ruffin.
lib. 1. c. 28.
That of Alexandria under Athanasius, the first year of Julian the Apostata,
was it not immediately after the death of Constantius, which though it was no
general council, yet was it of great renown, for the merit of the Prelates
there met together? To say nothing of those great lights of Gods church, S.
Hillary in France, S. Dennis of Milane, S. Eusebius of Vercels, with many more
of less note, whereof the Ecclesiastical histories of those times make
mention: but these men care not, what they affirm, so they may delude their
readers.

Of whom it is not read, that others came to take their vocation, for the
reestablishing of the church: but that God raised from the Arians themselves,
men to restore the true doctrine.

lib. 1 c. 27. 28 29.
in these troubled times Roffinus his history; where he says, that by the
council holden at Alexandria before mentioned, it was decreed, that such (the
heads excepted) as had any way consented to the Arians (abiuring their error)
should be received to the unity of the church. And they having had their
calling from the catholic church, did not, nor could not receive any new
calling, but only a reconciliation to the same, from which they had fallen,
either of error, or infirmity. In like manner as the Bishops in England, that
had lived either in schism, or heresy, in king Henry's or K. Edwards time,
were reconciled to the church again in Queen Mary's days. So that no default
of the succession of Pastors, does any way appear to have been in those times.

So many schisms, as have been in the church of Rome, do show, that they
cannot brag of this perpetual succession.

S. Peter's chair, and not obout the power, or jurisdiction of the sea
Apostolic. So that those, that did adheere to either party, in good
conscience, did not make any schism with the sea apostolic, from whence all
jurisdiction is derived, but only erred (as the one party must necessarily do)
about the person, who had the true right to the sea of S. Peter. Which error
could not hinder, or take away the true succession, of holy order in the
church, neither in respect of the sacrament it self, (as all Catholics must
say, who say that holy order is a sacrament, not depending in essence, and
nature of the jurisdiction in him that orders, but of his power of order, and
character) nor in respect of jurisdiction, which is required to the lawful
use, of the power of order, or sacramental character. For both parties did
suppose, and in their conscience believe, that they did receive this power from
the sea apostolic, though one of them did necessarily err in the person, by
means of whom he did receive it. Which error was excused through invincible
ignorance, and afterward was wholly remedied, by actual reuniting themselves,
to the true successor of S. Peter, when he was known. So that this argument of
our ministers, proceeds a non causa, pro causa, as the sophisters term such
fashion of arguing.

Above all in the time of the councels of Constance, and Basil, which deposing
the Antipopes long after their establishment chose others: which showed that
the deposed had no lawful calling, nor therefore could they give any, to the
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons created by them, and afterward
remaining in their church, of whom are also many others descended, who remain
till this day.

Basil so long as it was a lawful council, deposed none, what it did
afterward, it imports little, or nothing at all.

Above all in the time of Philip the fair, and when the church of France was
separated from that of Rome: where was then this personal, and local
succession? And notwithstanding they will not say, that in those days our
forefathers were pagans, and heretics.

that in the opinion of Catholics, their forefathers were neither Pagans, nor
heretics in those days. For be it so, what follows there upon, to prove
the succession of Ecclesiastical order, and calling to have been interrupted
in that time? yea does not the contrary rather evidently follow? For if their
forefathers were not then heretics, notwithstanding their separation from the
church by excommunication: does it not well follow, that the succession of the
church was not t^en interrupted? Malice has so blinded these ministers, that
they know not, when they speak for, or against themselves. But if they would
know, in what state their forefathers were at that time, I say, they were
members cut of, from the mystical body of Christ (supposing the sentence to
have been just, which belongs not to this place to examine) but were quickly
reconciled, and reunited to the head again, without any prejudice to the
succession of holy order, and calling of Pastors, even in the church of France
it self. For though by excommunication the lawful use of holy orders was
suspended, yet was not the order it self taken away; and therefore the sentence
of excommunication being removed, the power of holy order was restored to the
lawful use, without any new ordering, as I suppose these ministers do know,
though they show themselves to be most ignorant otherwise.

And which is more, it is impiety to prescribe unto God, the mean to execute
his promises without his word: and to say that he cannot accomplish them, if
the state of the church be not always flourishing, from Father to son, or
from Bishop to Bishop without interruption: and it is no less unlawful, when
it falls out otherwise, to say (a thing altogether execrable) that he is a
lier, and unfaithful in his promises.

Ephesians. 4.12.
Farther do they not in like manner condemn themselves of execrable blasphemy,
saying that God has falsified his word, and promise, in not keeping watchmen,
and Pastors in his church, unto the end of the world, which he has so expressly
promised in his holy word: but has permitted them so to fail, Esaias. 62.2.
Math. 28.20
that it is necessary to find out a new origin, and beginning of preachers,
and Pastors? Surely one of these two things must necessarily be true, either
that God has falsified his word, and promise to his church, specified in the
places cited in the margent, or that the doctrine of these men, teaching that
lawful Pastors, have failed in the church, is false. But seying the first is
execrable blasphemy, the second must needs be the self verity.

Seying therefore it appears not by the word of God, that these promises
aforesaid appertain to a perpetual, local, and visible succession. And that
experience teaches the contrary we conclude, that this is not necessary to
true vocation; and consequently, that the defect thereof does not hinder that
ours, that are called to that charge, according to the word of God, and
Apostolic traditions, are not the true successors of the Apostles, seying
they also use their vocation to the true end, which is, to teach purelie the
word of God, and to minister the sacraments.



11. For our first Pastors, of whom those that are now, Minister.
have their vocation successively from hand to hand truly ordinary, and
restored to the former purity, we say that their vocation was partly ordinary,
partly extraordinary: If for all that it may be said, that they had it of
them, who had it not themselves, at least pure, and by lawful means.

Chimericall. Moises and Aaron in the old law, and the Apostles in the new law,
had the extraordinary: the successors as well of the one, as of the other had
the ordinary: Elias and S. Paul had both perfectly together, but that there
were ever any, that had half the one, and half the other, was never yet heard
of, and certain it is, that God is not the author of such mingled, and party
colored calling. For all his works are perfect (as the scripture says.)
Deuteron. 32.4.
Whence therefore they have fetched this new commission, and ministry of
theirs, the Reader may easily judge.

First of all that there have been men in the church, that have had
extraordinary calling, and namely under the law of Moises cannot be denied.

Moises, there were two kinds of extraordinary vocation, the one fundamental,
as was that of Aaron, whereof the Apostle says: the priesthood being
translated, Hebr. 7.12.
the law must also necessarily be translated. So that though this vocation was
extraordinary in Aaron, yet was it the root, origin, or beginning of that
ordinary calling of priesthood, which was never to cease, nor to be
interrupted, till the law it self did cease, as S. Paul witnesses: the other
may be called collateral, because it did not impugn, nor take away the
ordinary priesthood, but uphold and strengthen it, admonishing the parties
then in charge, of their negligence, and carelesnes in their function,
reprehending their vices, as also those of the people. Of this sort was that of
the Prophets sent extraordinarily by God to cooperate with the Priests, who
had the ordinary calling, in the due government of Gods people. Neither of
these sorts of extraordinary calling can agree with those, of whom our
ministers here speak, to wit their first Pastors. For the fundamental calling
they cannot challenge unto themselves, without a new lawgiuer, as Moises was,
and our Savior Christ also. Nor yet do they content themselves with the
collateral calling. For they do not only reprehend the ordinary Pastors of
those faults, which they think are in them, as the Prophets did, but they
challenge unto themselves, to ^e the only true Pastors, and to begin a new
line, and succession of ordinary Pastors. Which without a new religion, and a
new founder of the same, cannot be imagined in the judgment of any sensible,
and understanding Christian. And therefore the extraordinary callings of the
old law, are so far from farthering the cause of our new Gospellers, that it
is clearly condemned by them.

We demand therefore of our adversaries, by what place of scripture they can
prove, that this may not happen in the church of Christ. Seying the same
reasons, that moved those of the Jews church, to put themselves forward,
driven there unto only by the interior calling of Gods spirit, are found also
in the Christian church, to wit the negligence, malice, and revolt of the
ordinary Pastors, and the corruption of the Ecclesiastical estate.

S Paul, Hebr 8 6. Math. 28.20.
that the church of Christ is established with better promises, then the other,
and that with the Pastors thereof, Christ has promised to be all days, to the
end of the world, and has said it not only to his Apostles, but also to all
Prelates, that shall suceede them by substitutiue ordination, Epist. ad Florent.
(as S. Ciprian witnesses) He that hears you, hears me. Again when they
shall have proved the like extraordinary calling in the Christian church,
which is acknowledged to have been in the Jewish church, (which they can never
do) what will it avail them seeing that calling is nothing like unto theirs, as
is already showed Farther the Prophets of the old law, did not put forth
themselves, moved only by an internal calling, or instinct of their
conscience, which these men use to call the mooving of the spirit, unless we
should speak of those ^rophe^s, of who^ God complains by the Prophet
Hieremie saying; I sent them not, nor spoke unto them, and yet they ran, Hier.
23.21.32.
and prophetized. But the Prophets sent by God, besides the clear revelation
either by vision, or other equivalent means of that, which they were sent
about, and also the evidence, that it was of God h^d ^lwaies the testimony
either of miracles, or miraculous predictions presently after to be fulfilled,
whereby they proved their mission to be from God. Neither of which conditions,
we find in our new Ministers first Fathers; De missa Angulari.
Luth^r indeed records himself a dialogue, which he had with the devil, for
the abrogating of private Mass, but of any conference he had with God, it
appears not in all his great volumes.

Hence it is manifest, that the extraordinary calling, which the Prophets had
in the old law, was a far different thing from that our new Reformers
challenge to themselves. That which they say of the reuol^ of the ordinary
Pastors, and corruption of the ecclesiastical estat as also of their desire
and endeavor to reform it is no more then a sheep skin clapped upon a wolves
back, fitting as well the Arians, and all other heretics, as our Caluinists.
Our Savior Christ his promises before mentioned, do warrant his Church, from
all such revolt, and universal corruption, as they maliciously feign to be in
it, and consequently do premonish us, not to harken to their false alarms, but
to esteem them as false Prophets, and Wolves in sheep clothing.

We say farther, that the beginnings of the Christian church having been
wholly extraordinary, the same may happen unto it, in the midst, or toward
the end thereof.

then from another course, beginning, or origin then from the Apostles, or our
Savior Christ, from whom the other was derived. As it happens in the race,
or pedigree of any family, the successiue line whereof being once interrupted,
it is no more esteemed to be the same race or family, with that which went
before, but another distinct, and descending from another stock, or root.
Whence it remains clear, that the extraordinary calling of these new
Reformers must necessarily come from some other origin or beginning, then our
Savior Christ or his Apostles.

Thus far we conclude at least the possibility, and contingency of
extraordinary vocation, until the contrary be showed us by the express word
of God.



But I say further, that though we should grant, that they have proved not only
the possibility, but also the true being, of an extraordinary vocation in the
church of Christ, (as they neither have done, nor ever shall do) yet should they
have done nothing, for the justification of their extraordinary calling, which
is already proved to be such, as never was either in the law of Moises, or of
our Savior Christ.

But yet we go farther, and prove by the text of Scripture, extraordinary
vocation, in the new testament. S. Paul has left us a most clear prophecy of
a general revolt under Antichrist, 2. These. c 2.
who shall sit in the temple of God, Compare this doctrine with M. Masons
succession, and see how thou destroys the other.
that is, he shall rule in the midst of the church. But our Savior shall
destroy him with the breath of his mouth, that is, by the preaching of his
word: And if there be Preachers against Antichrist, it follows, that they
shall have their calling from some other, then from him, or his train, who
notwithstanding shall have all authority then upon earth: or if at other times
they have had some calling from them, they shall execute it extraordinarily:
and instead of maintayning the abuse, and tyranny of Antichrist, they shall
restore the kingdom of Christ.

that ought to be so clear and easy, as should be the calling of Gods
ministers. But this is done of purpose to make those believe, that some thing
is said to the point, that do not understand, what is said. I will disperse a
little this mist, that the weaker eyes may see the sun, and discern how little
it makes for our Ministers purpose.

First it is doubtful, whether this revolt spoken of by the Apostles shall go
before Antichrist, or shall follow him as caused by him: Secondly, whether it
shall be a temporal revolt, or a revolt in religion: Thirdly, if it be a
revolt in religion whether it be a revolt only of Heretics, and the Apostles
meaning be, that till all the heretics, that are to revolt, be revolted, the
day of our Lord shall not come; or if it be an Apostacy of some part of the
church, which shall renounce the name of Christ, and adore Antichrist. Fourthly,
whether the temple here mentioned by the Apostle, be the temple of Jerusalem,
as the conference of the 9. chapter of Daniel, the 24. chapter of S. Matthew,
the 5. chapter of S. John, and the 11. of the Apocalips does show it to be: or
the society either whole or half that sometimes bare the name of the Church,
in which signification, the word temple without addition was never used before.
Fifthly, whether the spirit of our Saviors mouth, wherewith Antichrist is to be
destroyed, by the preaching of his word by the Pastors of the church, whereby
he shall be descried, and loose all credit and estimation: or the majesty, and
glory of the second coming of our Savior, and the sentence which he shall
pronounce against Antichrist, that is, whether it be the word of doctrine, or
of power and virtue, which shall destroy Antichrist. All which questions if
they be resolved according to the doctrine of the ancient church, are so far
from affording to our new Ministers, any proof of their extraordinary calling,
to preach against Antichrist, that they will prove them to be his manifest
forerunners, and potent agents to prepare his way. But being resolved
howsoever this authority of the Apostle, cannot furnish them with any
argument, to prove their extraordinary vocation. For if they will say that
Antichrist is to occupy the whole church, it will evidently follow in their
doctrine, that the Pope is not Antichrist, as they surmise: because there are
diverse Churches, which they esteem true churches and to have the succession of
ordinary calling, which notwithstanding are separated in communion from the
church of Rome, as the Ethiopians, Grecians, Armenians, Syrians, Russians, and
other. So that following this doctrine, they are convinced, that the Pope is
not Antichrist, and consequently that they are heretics for teaching him so
to be. If they say that Antichrist is to rule but over one part of the church
only, the other being free from his subjection, what necessity can there be to
feign an extraordinary calling of Pastors to preach against him, seeing that
part of the true church, which shall be free from his tyranie, has means to
furnish Pastors by the ordinary course and calling? and so are these men
evidently caught in the snare they set for others.

The same may be gathered, from those excellent Prophecies of the Apocalips,
where there is speech of two special, and particular witnesses sent by God to
prophecy against the beast; Confer this Paragraffe and that which goes
before, with the fifth following, and see how they agree together.
which clearly signifies an extraordinary vocation, which shall not receive
testimony from upon the earth, which is declared to follow wholly the beast. And
it is not to be thought, that Antichrist and those that are under him, will
authorize these witnesses in this work, and put into their hands a sword, to
cut their own throats with, no more then we are to expect, that the church of
Rome should reform her self.

S. Paul says: How shall they preach, unless th y be sent? showing thereby
that the mission, and commission of Preachers ought to be most manifest and
plain: and these men contrariwise, having no other means to prove their
mission, allege the testimony of that book, Romans 10.
which is most obscure, being full of figures and allegories, which as
themselves teach do not prove. And which is more, they allege it for the
proof of Luthers mission, who denies the book to be canonical, and
therefore does not afford sufficient proof of any point of controversy. But
letting all this pass; for of bad debtors cracked coin is not to be refused. I
would know of these men, whether they understand this place of the two
witnesses literally or allegorically: Apoc, 11.
if literally, how will they make it serve to prove their extraordinary
calling? seeing the Fathers for the most part understood these witnesses to be
Enoch, and Elias. If they say, that their meaning is only to prove by this
authority, an exttaordinary vocation, and afterward to accommodate it to then
first Pastors, they shall egregiously preuaricate. For first the Script^^^
restrayneth us precisely to two, and therefore leaves no means to extend it to
any more: and as well may they ground their extraordinary calling of that of the
Apostles, as upon this. Secondly, they cannot accommodate this extraordinary
calling to their first Pastors, unless the conditions, and circumstances
mentioned by the Scripture do also agree with them, which they no way do. For
these two witnesses shall work sundry great miracles as appears in the text,
which can no way be accommodated to our new Ministers.

But if they interpret this place of Scripture allegorically and understand by
these witnesses, the Preachers of Gods truth, contained in the new, and old
testament, whereby Antichrist shall be convinced, they shall as little help
themselves. For besides that it is their own doctrine, that nothing can be
proved by allegory, they are by this means to seek a new proof, that these
Preachers shall be destitute of ordinary calling. which proof they can never
find, holding these two points of their doctrine; to wit, that the Pope is
Antichrist, and that there are diverse true Churches separated from him, that
have continued the personal succession of ordinary calling till this day. And
howsoever they teach in these points, no sufficient proof does appear, that
the witnesses here spoken of (be they literally understood of Enoch and Elias,
as the Catholic opinion is: or allegorically of all Preachers of truth, as
others will) are not also to have ordinary calling, and to join with the
ordinary Pastors of those times, Gal. 2.9.
as Saint Paul did with the rest of the Apostles, which he found in the Church
before him. Yea Master Fulke understands, by these witnesses ordinary
Preachers, saying Christ shall have his two witnesses always, Apocal. 7. sect.
4.
in the hottest persecution of Antichrist, and therefore is there no need of
Enoch and Elias. This Scripture therefore does no way prove an extraordinary
calling to be in the church.

Thus far we have showed in general, that there may be an extraordinary
calling. Now we say that if there be any men to whom this calling belongs, it
is they that in the latter times by the sword of Gods word, Mark this
parenthesis against M. M^sons succession.
which is the spirit of his mouth have not only revealed, but also so impugned
Antichrist (which we maintain is the Pope of Rome and his followers) that we
hope he shall quickly be quite overthrown, such men will we maintain our
first Reformers to have been.



And if they demand miracles, for the confirmation of this extraordinary
calling, we answer first: that might be justly done, if they had published any
new doctrine, but seeing they brought no other doctrine then that, which is
recorded in the old and new Testament, other miracles were not necessary then
those, which were done from the beginning by the Prophets, and Apostles, for
the establishing of the same.

Ministers.
These men being asked of cheese, answer of chaulke. They are demanded for
miracles to prove their extraordinary mission or calling, and they answer the
doctrine is the same with that of the Prophets, and Apostles. If that were
true, and out of all controversy (as it is not) what were it to the purpose?
The Prophets of the old law had the same doctrine with Moises yet did they
never allege his miracles, for the confirmation of their extraordinary
calling, but proved it by miracles done by themselves, which was necessary for
the stopping the way to others, that pretending the same doctrine, which Moises
taught, might intrude themselves into that function without any calling, as
many did in those days, as well as now they do. The two witnesses mentioned
in the Apocalips, Cap. 11.
and alleged by these Ministers, in proof of their extraordinary calling,
shall doubtless teach the same doctrine with the Prophets, our Savior Christ,
and his Apostles, and yet nevertheless for proof that they are sent by God,
do they work great mirac^^^, (as the scripture there records) as to shut
Heaven that it rain not, to turn waters into blood, and to strike the earth
with plagues as often as they will. Wherefore that these Ministers may prove
the extraordinary calling of their first runners to be from God, they must
neither prove it to be the same with that of the Apostles, confirmed in them
by miracles, which without lineall succession they can never do, or else they
must prove it by new miracles, which hitherto they have not done, nor hereafter
can do. And therefore it is evident, that they are of the number of those,
that run not being sent, of whom God complayneth by the Prophet, Hiere. 23.
as is said before.

Again, all extraordinary vocation has not been confirmed by miracles as
appears by that of many Prophets.

I will raise them a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.18. and infra.
from the midst of their brethren like unto thee: and I will put my words in
his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all things, that I shall command him.
But he that will not hear the words, that he shall speak in my name, I will
revenge it upon him. And the Prophet that being depraved with arrogancy, will
speak in my name the things, If this rule were now observed there would not be
so many false Prophets and Preachers as there are.
that I did not command him to say, or in the name of strange Gods, shall be
slain: and if in thy secret cogitation thou answer, how shall I understand the
word that our Lord spoke not? This sign thou shall have: that which the same
Prophet foretells in the name of the Lord, and comes not to pass; that our
Lord has not spoken, but by the arrogance of his mind, the Prophet has
forged it: and thereof thou shall not fear him. Hence it is clear, that
before any man was bound to believe, that any Prophet spoke in the name of God,
or was truly sent by him, he ought to see some evident proof thereof, such as
God here speaks of. For seeing on the one side God threatens to punish
those that do not obey the Prophet speaking in his name, and on the other
commands him to be slain, that shall prophecy not being sent, it was
necessary, he should give them some means certain to know, who spoke in his
name, and who did not. Which could not be without miracle. And this verity is
farther confirmed by our savior Christ, when he says of himself (being
notwithstanding the son of God, and teaching also doctrine most conformable
to the holy scriptures) The works, which the Father has given me to perfect
them: Ioh. 5.36.
the very works themselves which I do, give testimony of me, that the Father
has sent me. Note that he makes proof of his mission, Ioh. 15.24.
and not of his doctrine. And yet more plainly he testifies the same, saying.
If I had not done among them works that no other man has done, they should
not have sinned. If the Jews should not have sinned, in not receiving our
Savior Christ, unless he had by doing such works, as no man ever did, proved
his Mission from his Father, though his doctrine was most conformable to the
holy Scripture, yea and he foretold in the same holy Scripture; who can say
that any other Prophet sent extraordinarily may and ought to be received,
believed, and obeyed without any other proof of his Mission, then the pretense
of the conformity of his doctrine with the holy Scriptures? especially the
conformity of the doctrine with the Scripture being no less in controversy
then the Mission it self, as it happens in the case of our adversaries.

16. And of S. John Baptist who wrought no miracle, as testifies the Gospel of
S. John, Minist.
and S. John Chrysostom has well observed.

Luther, which the scripture mentions to have been done for S. John Baptist,
they shall gain their cause: But seeing they cannot; does not this instance of
S. John convince them of rebellion and intrusion? Besides the prophesies of
Esaias, and Malachie applied by the holy Ghost to Saint John in the first of
Saint Luke, Esaias 40.3. Mal. 4.6. Luc. 1.
and first of Saint Mark; besides his miraculous conception, and enuntiation
by the Angel, the imposition of his name, the binding and loosing his Fathers
speech, the gift of Prophecy given to his Father and mother, in his nativity,
his salutation of our Savior, both of them being yet in their mothers wombes,
and such other miraculous signs, that made all the mountain country of Judah
to wonder, and to ask what a one he should be? besides I say all this, his
life, and example was such, Mark. 6.20.
that not only the Jews held him as Prophet, but Herod also had him in
special honor. All which testimonies are very far from suting with the
brutish lust, and dissolute life of Martin Luther.

And here I will advertise thee (good reader) that though these ministers have
been beholding to Monsieur du Plessis, Treatise of the church cap. 11. toward
the end.
for a great part of their discourse, yet are they ashamed of his miracles,
which he brings for proof of their calling, and therefore had they rather
stand to the trial of their extraordinary calling without miracles, then to
use the ridiculous miracles which he alleges, which are all like unto a
shipmans hoase, and fit as well the Anabaptists, and what other heretics
soever as either Lutherans, or Caluinists. For he says the greatest miracle of
all (or rather the miracle of miracles) is, that so great a miracle is wrought
without miracles, to wit the perverting of so many men, as we see follow their
new doctrine (we must take all their sects together to make number, for else
this great miracle would not be very illustrious:) but seying Martin Luther and
his issue preach the broad way to liberty, teaching that no sinner though
never so enormious can be damned, if he will believe, and thereby take away all
necessity of good works to salvation, and opens the gape to all
dissolution, and liberty, besides diverse other points of his doctrine tending
to the same, it is in any reasonable man's judgment, a greater miracle, and
argument of Gods special providence over men's souls, that he has no more
followers in this large and easy way, then that he has so many. For as one
says very well, it is as great a miracle, that many men follow this libertine
doctrine, as it is for a stone to fall down from high, where it was stayed
before. And therefore Monsieur du Plessis not satisfying himself with this
miracle of miracles, and seeing withal the necessity they have of some show of
miracles, to prove their extraordinary vocation, brings another able, as he
thinks, to have satisfied the very Pharisees themselves; who demanded signs
from heaven, and says that during the massacres through all France, Ibidem.
that new star appeared in heaven, of which the like has not been seen, but
when our Savior was borne, which cannot portend, or signify any other thing,
then the bearing again of our Savior upon earth, by the preaching of his
word. Hereby we may see how beggarly they are, that having greatest need of
some miracle, cannot afford one. If they had but the least of all those, that
have been done even in our own days, at our ladies of Sichem, and elsewhere,
in confirmation of the catholic religion, and confutation of their heresy,
what triumph would they make? But that the apperition of this star is most
idly, and impertinentlie alleged, as a miracle proouing either their religion,
or their extraordinary calling, it is evident by these considerations.

First it is so far from being certain, that it was a miraculous star;
that is, a star produced by supernatural virtue and operation, that it is
scarce probable. Secondly, supposing it was a miracle, there appears no
probable reason, that it had any respect, or relation to the pretended
religion, whereby it may be thought to be an approbation thereof. For neither was
it foretold, or forseene by any of their religion: neither was it obtained by
any of their prayers: neither was it accommodated, or applied to that end by
any external effect. How can it therefore be said to have appertained to that
purpose? Again it came too late to portend, or foreshew the bearing of Christ
again, through the preaching of his word by their first reformers. For Luther
began his Apostacy, which was the beginning of their Gospel, the year 1517.
and this star appeared the year 1572. that is 55 years after, whereas
signs, which foreshew any thing to come, must needs go before that, which they
do forshew. And that which Monsieur du Plessis alleges, that this star did
then appear, when the massacres were in France, is so far from helping his
cause, that it does quite overthrow it. For supposing h^t this star was a
miracle, and had any respect to the massacre, no man of judgment but will say,
that it did rather show the approbation, then the improbation thereof. Because
that God does not use to show his displeasance in any action, by making new
stars, but by thunder, tempests, earthquakes, fire, and the like. Again new
stars are no signs of Gods wrath, or anger, but of his good liking, and
pleasance, as appears by the star, which reueiled out Savior Christ to the
three kings. So that Monsieur du Plessis has brought a miracle (if it were a
miracle) not to prove, but to disprooue his religion, and his preachers
exttaordinarie calling. And here I will put the indifferent Reader in mind of
certain wonders whereof Osiander a Protestant-writer makes mention most
probably pertaining to this purpose, though in a contrary sense to that which
Monsieur du Plessis desires. Toward the end of the year 1523. (says he) at
Tribruge in Mi^nia was brought forth a calfe in form of a hooded monk:
Osiand. in epit. cent. centuria 16.
and at Hall in Saxony a sow pigged a pigge with the head of a Priest. Which
monsters seem evidently to have portended the brutish Apostacy of Martin
Luther, who being a religious man and a Priest: the year after these hideous
monsters appeared, Osiander ibidem.
to wit the year 1524. cast of his religious habit, and shortly after
married Katherine Bore and whereas he had lived chaste before (as he says) he
fell into such exorbitant lust that he himself testifies, that it was no more
in his power to be no man then to want the company of a woman, Sermo: de
matrimonio to. 5.
with many such like speeches, whereby it appears that of a chaste religious
Priest he was become a most lascivious beast. For if beasts could speak and
utter their sensual conceits they could not possible utter them in more
evident sort. Therefore whether those prodigious monsters mentioned by Osiander
(the circumstances of the time and place considered) did not portend Luthers
Apostacy and consequently condemn both his doctrine and calling to the
preaching thereof, let the indifferent Reader judge. But let us now go forward
with our ministers.

17. For as much as appertains to the ordinary calling of our first Pastors,
we say that if there were any at that time in the Papacy, it was on their
side, because they used it rightly, whereas others did abuse it. And if it be
replied, that they fell from their vocation, which they received of their
Bishops, because they taught other doctrine: the question then must be of
doctrine, and not of calling.

See their fifth paragraffe before this.
and now are they glad to challenge from him, their ordinary calling, and
power, to preach and minister sacraments. As though Antichrist did furnish
Christians, with any necessary power, for edification, and conservation of
Christ his church, and family. But let us (contrary to all right) allow these
miserable men, to take their power of ministry from him, whose power they
most bitterly blaspheme, and let us see, how they can save themselves from
evident sacrilege, and rebellion. They must of necessity allow the Pope and
church of Rome, to have a lawful or at least a sufficient calling: (For
otherwise it is impossible, so much as to imagine, that they could receive any
such from it.) Seying therefore in their doctrine, holy order is neither a
sacrament, not leaves in him that is ordained, any indeleble mark, character,
or spiritual power, by virtue whereof, all such actions which he does
pertaining to that order, are real and truly sacramental, and therefore not to
be reiterated (as the catholic doctrine teaches) but is only a mere moral
deputation, of such a person to the function, of ministering the word and
sacraments, which being lost, taken away, or suspended, all power to exercise
any such actions, as pertanie to that function is also lost, and taken away;
and consequently, if such an one shall attempt to exercise any such actions,
he shall do nothing, but committ sacrilege in attempting to do a holy action,
which is not in his power to perform. This doctrine of theirs admitted, how
can they pretend, to receive any calling from the Pope or Church of Rome, which
(as they say) long since lost all power, either to minister the sacraments
themselves, or to ordain others to that calling? Surely if their doctrine of
the sacrament of orders, and of the church of Rome her revolt from Christ,
should be true, it is as impossible for them to have any true calling to the
ministry, as it is for him to be kinght or judge, that has his order or
office from him, that being declared rebel to his sovereign, has lost all
power of ordaining such persons, though he had it before. And therefore as he,
that being made judge by such a one, should in virtue of that ordination
exercise that office, should be no less rebel to his sovereign, then he that
made him. So in like manner, our ne^ reforming ministers taking their calling
from them, whom they esteem rebels to Christ, and exercising it in virtue of
that ordination, can be no less rebels to Christ, then those, from w^om they
receive their calling. Neither will it avail them any thing to say, that they
use it well, which thothers did not. For the question is not herere of the use
of their calling, but of their calling it self, which is proved by their own
doctrine, to be none at all, and therefore cannot have any good use, but a mere
sacrilegious attempt, to do that where unto they have no power.

If they say, that in the Catholic doctrine, which teaches, that in holy
orders is imprinted an indeleble character, or mark in the soul of him, which
is ordained, (by virtue whereof, all such actions as pertanie to that order, are
made of force) they may have the same true calling, that the Catholics
believe to be in the church of Rome. I answer first, that there is no reason,
that they should receive any benefit, from the truth of the catholic doctrine,
which they impugn, and which they esteem to be false. Secondly, how can they
think their calling to be good, seying they cannot maintane it without such
grounds of doctrine, as they hold to be untrue? But let us grant them once more
to shrowde themselves under the truth of Catholic doctrine, so much impugned
by them; What will they gain thereby? No other thing then that, which o^r
Savior says, an old garment gets by a new patch set upon it, that is, to
make the rent greater. For either they must say, that in the Roman church
(from whence they now of necssitie are driven to take their calling) when
Luther was ordered Priest, remained the true, and lawful calling in Christ's
church, not only for as much as pertains to the sacramental power, or
character; but also for the lawful use thereof, and then must they necessarily
confess themselves to be heretics, and schismatiques, for having left the
unity of that church, where there is the lawful use of calling, and
consequently, the lawful administration of Gods word and sacraments, which
they acknowledge for the only true marks, of Gods true church: or they must
say, that albeit the sacramental power, or character always remained in the
church of Rome, yet had it not the lawful use thereof, being revolted from the
service of Christ. And in saying this, they do no less condemn themselves.
For if those that ordained Luther had not the lawful use of the sacramental
calling, where, of whom, or from whence could Luther have it? Surely he could
not otherways have it, but by sacrilegious usurpation. For to say, that he had
it extraordinarily, and immediately from God, is both impertinent, because
here we speak of ordinary calling, and is a desperate shift already refuted
by the authority of our Savior himself, testifying that if he had not done
those thing in proof of his mission, that never any other did, the Jews had
had no sin for not receiving him. Seeing Luther therefore never did any
extraordinary work, for proof of his extraordinary missio^, he is not to be
received, especially the son of God not challenging that privilege. Again
it is evident by the practice of the ancient church, ^n the councels of Nice
and Sardis, that such as are ordained by heretics, have no lawful use of the
sacramental calling, which they receive, Cap. 11 n 4.
as we shall see more at large here after. The Protestants therefore esteeming
the Roman church heretical, yea more then heretical, and notwithstanding
receiving their calling from it, cannot have any more lawful use thereof, then
the councels of Nice and Sardis, did judge those to have, that were ordained by
Miletius, and the Arri^n Bishops, which was none at all. So that these men are
like unto a bird in a net, that the more she strives to get out, the more she
intangleth her self, and the faster she is holden. Neither does the idle
pretense of necessity of reformation excuse them from their sacrilegious
usurpation, and rebellion. For besides that there were diverse true Churches (as
they say) separated from that of Rome, when Luther ran out, from whence he
might have had his calling, and therefore cannot with any color pretend
necessity to run without mission. Besides this (I say) our Savior himself,
might have pretended truer, and greater necessity, to preach reformation, then
Luther and his; and yet was he so far from it, that he proved his mission by
such means, as never any did, and witnesses that without such proof he had
not been receiuable. Shall we therefore be so deuoide of all sense, as to think
Luther, and his crew to be receauable for true reformers, without all proof of
his calling, and commission, upon a bare pretense of a feigned necessity?
Neither is the example that Monsieur du Plessis brings in their defense to
any purpose. He says thus. Fol. 375.
A Magistrate called to the government of the common wealth, finding the laws
corrupted by his predecessors, the place of justice full of injustice, offices
subject to sale and the like, takes in hand to reform all, and to reduce it
to the censure of the laws. Now would he not be worthy to be laughed at, that
should ask him by what right or title he does this? This example he thinks
to agree with their first Pastors, who having been ordered Priests in the
Roman Church, used their calling, as he pretended, to the reformation of
corruptions and abuses crept into the Church, by the negligence and malice of
their predecessors, and therefore cannot be rightly demanded, by what
authority they do it. Let us admit this example for good, and then ask of
Monsieur du Plessis, what answer he would give unto the Arians, and
Anabaptists, making this argument against the reformed Churches of Germany and
France. I suppose he would say, that their pretense of reformation is but a
vizard, and cloak, to enter into the Church, and afterward to disturb the
peace thereof, and to draw men into error. And that if every one pretending
reformation were to be hearkened unto, either in the ecclesiastical, or civil
estate, it would be impossible to keep any peace, or order in either. This
same answer will fit Monsieur du Plessis his example. Secondly this example
makes nothing to the purpose, unless these two things be proved. First, that
the Church may be so corrupt in doctrine, and manners, as that no Pastors
remain vncorrupt to reform it.

Secondly, that it was in that state, when Luther ran out of the Church. For
unless these be proved, what appearance of probability can there be in this
example? But it is as possible to prove these things, as it is to prove the
holy scripture to be false, or God to have failed in his promise, as has been
showed before.

Thirdly, Luther and his folowers do not pretend only to reform the
corruptions which they falsely imagine to be in the Church, but they would thrust
out of office the true and lawful Pastors, by whom they received their calling
of priesthood, and make themselves the sole rulers and governors, not of Gods
Church, but of a congregation of their own gathering. Which absurd abuse if
any seditiouse head should attempt in the temporal state, he would quickly be
recompensed with the hier due unto such a one. This example therefore of
Monsieur du Plessis being rightly applied does manifestly comdemne Luther and
all his Seditious brood.

18. Or if it be said, that the greater part amoungst them being only Priests
could not give calling to others, we send them to S. Hierome, who teaches,
that that power is common to Bishops and Priest, and S. Ambrose confirms the
same. It appears therefore, that in what sort soever they take it, they are
not without calling, and having it, they have power to give it to others, and
these exercising it faithfully have the true title, and possession of it.

S. Hierome is showed before, for he teaches the quite contrary saying what
other thing does a Bishop, Epist. to Euagrius.
that a Priest does not, except ordering or giving of orders? And as falsely
they cite S. Ambrose. So that it manifestly appears by that, which has
hitherto been answered, to all their slender proofs, of their party colored
calling, half ordinary, half extraordinary, that they have none at all; and
therefore are convinced to be thieves, John. 10.1.
and robbers, climing up another way, and not entering by the door: and such as
God complains of by the Prophet, that Prophecy in his name without sending,
Jeremy. 23.
and run without bidding.

The third part of this chapter.
19. And albeit it be abundantly sufficient, for the rejecting of this new
pretended ministry, to have so evidently refuted the proofs thereof (our
adversaries being appellants in this cause, and we only defendants) yet of
supererogation, and abundant declaration of triumphing truth, I will here
briefly show that there can be no true calling to the ministry of Gods word,
and sacraments in Christ his Church, but that which is given and received from
one to another from our Savior Christ, the true fountain, and source of all
lawful power even till this day, whereby it will clearelie appear, that the
pretended Churches of reformation in France, and all those that agree with
them, have no true calling at all. For they willingly confess as we have seen
before, that their calling is extraordinary, and therefore not received from
their predecessors (I speak of their first Pastors as they term them) but
immediately from God, as Moises, the Prophets, and Apostles did. And omitting
those two evident testimonies of our Savior Christ, Nath. 28.20 Ephesians. 4.12.
and S. Paul (before cited for the like purpose) proouing a continual, and not
interpreted succession of Pastors in the church, till the worlds end. I will
here only deduce the same tradition, or delivery of calling, from one to
another, first out of holy Scripture, so far as the story thereof reaches, and
then out of the doctrine of the ancient church, which our adversaries dare not
reject.

The holy scripture to show the weight and moment of this calling, does often,
and in most clear terms declare, that our Savior himself did not take upon
him this dignity, but by mission from his father, S. Paul saying, Heb. 5.5.
that he glorified not himself that he might be made high priest, but he that
said unto him, thou art my son, this day I have begotten thee. And in another
place: Thou art a Priest for ever. And again: This is my beloved son, hear
ye him; Math. 7.5. 2. Pet. 1.
with many other like testimonies of his calling to the function of Priesthood,
which he exercised according to his humanity. According to which having
received from his Father, Math. 28.18 19.
all power in heaven and in earth, he sent his Apostles to preach, and minister
the sacraments saying. All power is given me in heaven, and in earth, going
therefore teach ye all Nations, baptising them. And in another place: As my
Father sent me, so I send you. John 20.21.
The Apostles thus sent, sent others their disciples S. Paul saying to Timothy.
I admonish thee, that thou resuscitate the grace of God, Which is in thee, 2.
Tim. 1.6.
by the imposition of my hands. And those disciples sent others. For the same
Apostle says to Titus. For this cause I left thee in Creete, that thou
should reform those things that are wanting, and should ordain Priests
by cities, as I also appointed thee. So that we have in the holy Scripture, the
calling not only of the Apostles, and their disciples, but of their disciples
disciples, one being called by another, as the son by the father, even until
our savior Christ, the head and fountain of all calling and mission. And that
this self same line, and succession of calling has ever since continued it is
evident, both by the personal succession of Pastors in the sea Apostolic,
which is so evidently known, that M. Fulke says, we can count it on our
fingers ends, as also by the doctrinall testimonies of the most ancient
fathers, Answer to a counterfeit Catho. p. 27.
whereof some I will here set down, I say doctrinall testimonies, because they
are not only testimonies of the belief and practice of the church, in the time
wherein they lived, but also are rules for all times concerning that matter. S.
Ireneus Bishop of Lions, and martyr, disciple of the Apostles disciples says
thus. Lib. 4. c. 43.
We must obey those Priests, that are in the church, that have the succession
from the Apostles (as we have showed) that together with the succession of
Episcopal power, have according to the good pleasure of the Father received
the certain gift of truth. But others that are not of the orignall succession,
in what place soever they are assembled, to have suspected, either as
heretics and of bad doctrine, or as schismatiques and highminded, or as
hipochrites which do this for covetousness, either of gain, or vain glory.

Lib. de prescriptionibus cap. 32.
Tertullian not much after S. Ireneus says Let them (the Heretics) bring
forth the origin or beginning of their churches, let them look through the
order of their Bishops, so descending by succession from the beginning, that
their first Bishop have for his ordainer and predecessor, some of the Apostles
or Apostolical men, who yet have continued with the Apostles to the end. For
in this manner do the Apostolical churches verify their pedigree, as the
church of Smyrna produces Policarpe, placed there by S. John, and that of Rome
Clement ordained by S. Peter. Contr. Marcio: l. 4. c. 5.
And again: we have churches founded by John: For though Marcion reject his
Apocalips, yet the order of Bishops reckoned from the beginning will rest in
John as the author, and so is the nobility of other churches known. And lower:
He has also churches, but his are as much latter, as they are adulterous,
whose genenealogie if you seek, you shall rather find them Apostatique, then
Apostolic. Marcion or some of his troop being the founder.

S. Cyprian in the age following. These are they that of themselves without
commission from God, De vnitate ecclesiae.
do usurp Prelacy amongst certain auditors disorderly gathered together,
that make themselves Pastors without any lawful ordination, that take upon
them the title of Bishop, without that any man give them a Bishops place or
authority, at whom, the holy Ghost in the Psalms does point as sitting in the
chair of pestilence, being the plagues and ruins of true faith. And in
another place. Christ said to his Apostles, and consequently to all Prelates,
that by substitutiue ordination do succeed the Apostles, he that hears you
hears me. Epist. 69. to Florentius. Lib. 2. con. Parmenian.


Optatus Mileuitanus in the age after S. Cyprian, having reckoned up the
Bishops of Rome from S. Peter (whom he calls the head of all the Apostles)
until Siri^ius then Bishop. Give us (says he to Parmenian primate of the
Donatists) the beginning or origin of your chair, you that challenge unto you
the Church of God.

S Hierome says of a certain heretic one Hilarious: Dialog. con. Luciferianos
The sect perished together with the man, because he being but Deacon could not
ordain any Clergy to remain after him: but where there is no Priest, there is
no Church.

S. Augustine says to the Donatists. In the Psalm against the party of Donatus.
Number up the Priests from after S Peter, and see who in that line of Fathers
succeeded others: that is the rock, which the proud gates of hell shall not
overcome.

Now dare I appeal to the judicious Reader, be he friend or foe, Catholic or
Protestant, whether these Fathers delivering this doctrine, could so much as
dream of any extraordinary calling in the church, immediately from God, such as
our new Reformers, seeing themselves evidently without ordinary calling, are
forced to recurre unto. Surely if they had not presupposed as a most sure, and
infallible ground, that the calling, which our Savior Christ instituted, and
left in his Church, should ever continue, and descend from one to another by
not interrupted succession, they could not but have seen, and known, that
their arguments proposed, and urged against the heretics of their time, in
such sort as is before related, could have no force at all: their adversaries
having always most easy recourse, to their extraordinary and immediate
calling from God, which would have deluded all their arguments. But this shift
of maintayning heresy is so evidently absurd, that till our age it seems,
the devil could find none so senseles or shameless that would put it in
practice.

Monsieur du Plessis after all shifts posible used, for the maintayning of
their new Ministry, and seeing (as it is likely) that all he had, or could say
was not sufficient to make it good comes at last to say, that the question of
calling is superfluous, and nothing at all pertaining to the proof of the true
Church: which he goes about to show out of the conference of Carthage,
between the Catholics, and Donatists in this sort.

The question was between the Catholics and Donatists, Plessis of the Church
page* 369.
where the true Church might be: And to clear the same the conference of
Carthage was held by the authority of the Emperor Honorius, in the presence of
the tribune Marcellinus: S. Augustine who spoke for the Catholics, would
examine it by the Scriptures: Petilian who defended the cause of the Donati^^^,
by the calling of the Bishops, thinking to bring him to this point, to name
Cecilian Bishop of Africa for his ordinator, whom they pretended to have bur^^
the holy books, and thereby made incapable both of being Bishop, and ordayning
others: who art thou? (says Petilian to S. Augustine) and whence have thou thy
beginning? and who is thy father? (that is, who consecrated thee?) and where is
thy head and thy fountain, and if thou have none, art thou not then an
heretic? S. Austin who will always come to the ground, what answers he?
This question, says he, is but a cavil, and an evasion belonging no whit to
the cause of truth etc. I am (says he) in that church which Cecilian was in:
my communion began at these words. It behooued that Christ should suffer and
rise again the third day, and that remission of sins should be preached in
his name, beginning at Jerusalem, and from thence throughout all the world.
Cecilian was my brother, and not my Father, nor he that consecrated me. In
this case I acknowledge no S. Augustine has no such words.
father but God, no head but Christ: For although the Apostle say I have
begotten you, yet that thou may know, that the base or foundation of that
father-hood is not humane, he adds (by the Gospel of Christ) In a word (says
he) to omit these superfluous demands, I am a Christian, a faithful man, a
Catholic, I defend one church, the which, whatsoever I am, is a church: And
to resolve thee Megalius has ordained me Bishop let us come Falsification: no
such thing in S. Augustine.
to the matter, let us come to the scriptures.

The same we say with S. Augustine to our adversaries, you ask what the
calling was of the first Reformers? from whom our calling does descend? it was
the If the same why do they abjure it, and not only refine it?
same that yours is, faulty and corrupt in her forms, but rectified by us, by
calling it back to her first rules, and by bringing it back to her first
usage. So then there is no more question of the calling: we are quit one with
another for that point, let us come to the doctrine, and to the examining
thereof by the Scriptures.

This concleusion of Monsieur du Plessis does show, how gladly he would be quit
of this question of calling, knowing right well that they can never satisfy
therein, nor prove themselves true Pastors, the want whereof does necessarily
infer the want of the true church, true faith, and true religion. But let us
see how his authority alleged by him serves his turn in any point.

This conference was holden indeed, by the commandment of Honorius Emperor,
but at the instance, and request of the Catholic Bishops, Collat. 1. Carthag.
art. 4.
as appears by the Emperors own letters. For the desire of peace and love
(says the Emperor) we have willingly yielded to the request of the venerable
Bishops; who have desired that the Donatist Bishops may be assembled, and that
either part may make choice of certain Bishops, by whose conference, or
disputation, error may be confuted.

This reason of this request made to the Emperor, was the obstinacy, and
peruersity of the Donatists, who having been condemned before, both by
ecclesiastical, Ibid art. 54. Epist Catholicor. ad initium.
and imperial judgment, did still persist in their error. Which obstinacy
moved the Catholic Bishops, to seek the second time for the assistance of
the secular power, whereby they might be constrained to put in execution, the
sentence that should be given against them. This I thought good to note, least
the less skillful reader might think, that either Christian Emperors did
take upon them, the judgment of Ecclesiastical causes, or that Catholic
Bishops did seek unto them for the same any farther then for their assistance
for the execution of Ecclesiastical judgment. And I could wish, good Reader,
that for the better satisfaction, and fuller information, and knowledge of the
nature of heretics and schismatiques, thou would take the pains, to read
the whole conference it self, wherein thou shall find very many things for
the proof, and confirmation of the Catholic doctrine in the points
controuersed at this day, but no word against it, and see as it were in a
glass, the peruersity of the heretics of these our days set down, and
recorded 1200 years agone, it is printed together with Optatus Milenitanus: Ex
Bibliopolio Commeliniano anno 1599. my copy has no other address. But to
come to the objection it self, wherein Monsi. du Plessis uses his accustomed
falsity, adding of his own, and inuenting the sayings of his authors, as he
thinks most for his purpose.

The true state of the matter, for so much as appertains to this objection is
this.

The Donatists seeing themselves not able to sustain, and make their party
good against the manifest truth forciblie urged by the Catholics, sought all
occasions possible, to turn the dispute from the point in controversy, and to
spend the time in impertinent demands, that so they might (if it were possible)
avoid the condemning sentence, which they saw would fall upon them.

The maine question in controversy was, whether the fault or crime of
Cecilianus and his colleagues (supposing they were truly guilty of any crime)
might or ought to be so imputed to that church, whereof they were members, and
which communicated with them; that it was now no more the true Catholic
church, but a false and corrupt congregation of bad men, and therefore might
justly be so abandoned by the Donatists, that they might reject even the
sacrament of Baptism given in it as unlawful.

The second question was, whether Cecilianus and his colleagues were indeed
truly guilty of any crime worthy of condemnation, or censure. That these
were the maine questions in controversy, is evident by the mandate of the
Catholics, set down in the first days conference. The Catholics
maintained and evidently proved the negative in both these questions, Art. 54
45.
as appears in the whole conference, and also by the sentence given
accordingly in the end of all.

Collat. 3. Act. 226.
In the third days conference S. Augustine having said thus: Cecilians cause
having ever been accustomed, to be objected by the Donatists against the
church, if they will now object it no more, what will they object against it?
If they object nothing, why do they separate themselves from it? If they
object any thing else, let them propose it, let them show it. Art. 227. Pet.
Art. 228. Aug. Art. 229. Pet. Art. 230. Aug. Alters and memory of dead in S.
Augustine ^is days. Mark here the universality of the church. No man's faults
ought to seperat us from the unity of the church our mother.


Hereunto Petilian says: who art thou? art thou Cecilians son, or no? art
thou guilty of his crime, or no?

Mark good Reader how impertinentlie these questions are moved, in respect of
the matter in hand, and thou shall easily see, that the Catholic Bishops had
reason to say, that they were superfluous, and pertained not to the cause,
notwithstanding S. Augustine answers. I am in the church, in which Cecilian
was.

From whence have thou thy beginning? what father have thou? if thou condemn
thy father, do thou not profess thy self an heretic who will neither have
beginning, nor father?

We are in the church, wherein Cecilianus did bear episcopal authority, and
therein died. We recite his name at the Alter, we communicate with his memory,
as with the memory of our brother, not of our Father or mother. Thou demandest
of me, whence my communion has beginning. Our Lord Christ testifies the
beginning of my communion. It was necessary, that Christ should suffer, and
rise again from the dead the third day, and that penance and remission of
sins should be preached in his name, through all Nations beginning from
Jerusalem. From him nor from the Church my mother, no man's crime, nor no
calumny shall separate me. Art. 231. Pet. Art. 232. Aug. Art. 233. Pet. Art.
234. Aug.


Cecilian is he thy father, or mother as thou say?

Thou have already heard that he was my brother.

He is not a brother, that begets children.

Cecilian is not my Father, if he be good, he is my good brother: If he be bad,
he is my bad brother, yet because of the sacraments he is my brother whether
good or bad.

But if thou would have my opinion of him, Art. 235.
I think him innocent and fafly accused. If thou object his crimes against the
church, I defend as a brother, and show that they cannot belong to the Church,
nor to the cause thereof, nor cannot hurt it. And so I show, that thou object
nothing against the Church, although the crimes of Cecilian should be true,
which thou can no ways prove. Which if thou can not in like manner
prove, thou see where thou art; and what thou ought to embrace truth, and
charity with us, leaving thy obstinate error.

Let them say plainly at last, whether they have Cecilian instead of their
father, from whom this issue is descended. Art. 236. Pet.
For nothing can be borne without some that begets it, nor begin without a
head, nor grow without a root. Behold they often profess to have no
beginning. If therefore he have no beginning, is not he rather an heretic,
who has no father, or who condemns the father he has?

I have a head, but it is Christ. Art. 237. Aug. Art. 238. Pet. Art. 342. A^g.
Art. 243. Pet. Art. 244. Fortuna.


Who made thee Bishop?

I have a head but it is Christ, whose Apostle says, all things are yours, but
you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. And he afterward shows at large out of
the scriptures, how we have but one father to salvation, or that saves us, and
yet how we have diverse fathers for other respects.

How is he called that ordained him? let him tell who gave him orders.

We do not well conceive, what it imports to the cause of truth (that now
is in hand) who ordered every Bishop, it is showed by divine testimony, that
God is our father. Art. 245. Pet. Art. 246. Alipuis: Art. 247. Adeodatus. Art.
248. Possidius. Art. 249. Aug.


Let him declare who ordered him.

Ordered whom? we are many present. Let the adverse part speak* whose
ordination he asks of, and why, that we may see, whether he be worthy of
an^wer.

Augustine spoke, let him tell who ordered him.

We have not taken upon us to defend Augustins cause whatsoever it be.

I see superfluous things are demanded by our brethren of the contrary part,
and yet I refuse not to answer to these superfluous demands, the churches cause
whereunto nothing can be answered, being in safety. I whose ordination th^^
requirest, am a Christian, a faithful believer (which I speak God being my
witness) a Catholic. I defend that Church, which, whatsoever I am, ^s a
church. I see whereat thou aymest; thou seek to calumniate, those things
which you use bragging to say, are not hidden to us. Megalius ordered me, the
Primate of the Catholic church of Numidia, at that time when he had power to
do it. Behold I have answered thee. Go forward, propose that which thou have
prepared, and thou shall be found a calumniator. I have told thee my ordainer,
now utter the calumniations.

Thus far lasted this contestation, about S. Austins ordination and here it
ended. I have set it down at large word for word for the better clearing of
the objection made out of it, which in truth is as impertinently urged by
Monsieur du Plessis, against the Catholics inquiring of the Protestants
vocation, as it was used by the Donatists, against their Catholic
adversaries. S. Augustine, and his Catholiqe partakers do rightly reject this
demand of his ordination, as impertinent to the matter in hand. For had he
been ordered by Cecilian (as doubtless diverse Catholic Bishops were) yet
before the Donatists could infer any thing thereupon for their purpose, they
were first to prove, that Cecilians faults were to be imputed, to the church,
which communicated with him, which was the chief question in controversy.
Secondly, that Cecilian was truly guilty of the crimes objected against him,
which they were so far from proouing, that the contrary was manifestly
proved by the Catholic party. Who does not therefore see, that the question
moved of S. Augustines ordination, was altogether impertinent to the matter,
and therefore worthily rejected by the Catholic Bishops as such.

Now if Monsieur du Plessis can show us any such impertinency, in our demands
of their ordination, or vocation, we will cease from molesting them any farther
in that kind. But we are warranted therein, by the testimonies of holy
scripture, and ancient Fathers, Above n. 20.
and namly S. Augustine himself, even against the Donatists, as is before
showed: therefore must they not think to fobbe us off with such fables, and
make us give over our poursuit, till they either satisfy our demands, which
they can never do: or yield to the evident truth, and return to the unity,
and charity of Gods holy Church, which I pray God they may soon do.

The mith Chapter. Not all external ordination, or consecration by such as
bear the name, and pretend to be Bishops is a sufficient and true calling to
the ministry of Gods word and sacraments.
1. HAVING in the precedent chapters refuted diverse sorts of callings, which
either are maintained by some Protestants, or may any ways be imagined to be
probable, it remains to clear the question here proposed, concerning the
lawfulnes of the calling of the protestant clergy of Ingland. Where first it
is to be observed, that (by the confession of those adversaries, with whom we
have here to dispute) the ordinations made by the Bishops of the Roman Church,
are sufficient for the true constitution of ecclesiastical ministers. To which
acknowledgment they are constrained by necessity, not having any other
possible means, to maintain that ordinary calling, which they pretend to
have. The question therefore is not here, whether the ordinations made by the
Bishops of the Roman Church be sufficient or no, this being confessed, and
without controversy. But whether the ordination^ made by other Bishops, from
the communion of the Roman Church, and namely by those of England, be such or
no.

Secondly it is to be observed, that though hitherto has been sufficiently
impugned the ministry of the pretended reformation of France, and such other
falsely named Churches, as agree with it in the extraordinary calling of their
ministers, as that of Scotland, and Geneua, with whom aggree our Inglish
puritanes yet because there are other Protestant Churches, which challenge to
themselves another kind of calling, then that of France: therefore to impugn
directly, and effectually the same, it is necessary, to enter into a
particular dispute with them. And because the Protestants in England have most
show of an ordinary calling, and bear themselves more boldly there upon (as M.
Mason in his epistle declares in these words.) VVheras other reformed churches
were constrained by necessity, to admit extraordinary Fathers, that is to
receive ordination from presbyters, which are but inferior ministers, rather
then to suffer the fabric of our Lord Ies^^ to be dissolved: the church of
England had always Bishops to confer sacred orders, according to the
ordinary, and most warrantable custom of the church of Christ. Therefore
hereafter I will dispute with them. And if by force of argument it be made
apparent, that they also want all lawful calling, there can no doubt remain
of all the rest of the Protestants Churches, of what reformation soever they
may brag. The meaning of the present question.
The meaning therefore of the question here proposed is, whether those that
bear the names of Bishops in England, be true Bishops and have any true power
to consecrate, or ordain the lawful ministers of Gods church, or no. And to
prove that they have, Monsieur Mason has published a large volume, which I
intend not to refute by way of answer, but by possitiue argument to impugn
that which he would maintain. For thou art to observe (Judicious reader) that
M. Masons grounds (for maintenante of their calling) are but answers, to such
arguments and objections, as he himself frames against it (as is already
noted in the preface:) If therefore any one of all those arguments, be
maintained good against him (as not only one, but many, God willing, shall be)
he will find his dawbing like unto that, whereof the Prophet speaks; Dic
illis, Ezech. 11.13.
qui liniut absque temperatura, quod casurus sit. Tell them that dawbe without
tempering, that it will fall. But to come to the matter it self.

This deduction he makes pa. 10. and is the sole grownd of all his book.
2. All that Monsieur Mason says in his great book in sum is this. The
Bishops that new are in England were ordained, by other Bishops their
predecessors, and those by others, until we come to Thomas Cranmer, who was
ordained by Bishops of the Roman Church. Therefore the Bishops now in Englang
are true Bishops, and consequently have true power, to ord^ine lawful
ministers of Gods word, and sacraments. If this were as surely and solidly
proved, or maintained, as it is easily said, M. Mason would deserve immortal
praise, with equal thanks, for having delivered his Fathers Bishops, and
brethren ministers, from that difficulty of the proof of their calling,
wherein they are so far from satisfying their adversaries, that they
themselves rest not satisfied therein. For it is not ten years since one of
their Bishops, in private conference with others of his own rank, and
confident friends is known to have confessed this. The french ministers have
no means at all, to prove their calling, and we in England can hardly prove
ours. Therefore if M. Mason perform this tascke that he has undertaken,
dexterously, he shall doubtless deserve well of them all. And because
ordination, or conferring of holy orders, (whereby true, and lawful calling is
given) may be defective three manner of ways, to wit, either of the part of
him that does ordain, or of him that is ordained, or of the ordination it
self, it belongs to M. Mason to prove, or at least maintain that the
ordinations of the Bishops in England, from Archbishop Cranmer, be not
defective in any one of these respects, for if they fail in one of them, they
cannot be true Bishops, and much less if they fail in them all, as I think
they will be found to do. But before we enter into the particular examination of
M. Masons doctrine in this point, I will wish thee, good Reader, to observe two
or three things, supposing in the mean while these ordinations to be good, in
all the three respects now mentioned.

3. First, that if the ordinations of our supposed English Bishops be not
otherwise canonical, but only by reason of the succession they pretend to
have, Note.
from Archbishop Cranmer it must necessarily follow, that all other pretended
Churches, as that of France, Germany, Geneua, Scotland, and the rest that have
no such succession, have no lawful ministry. For if the ordination of our
English Bishops be good, only because it is derived by succession from Cranmer
who was a true Bishop, those Churches, that have no such succession, can have
no such ordination, and consequently no lawful ministers or Pastors. Whence
farther it also follows, that they can have no lawful Church, which cannot
be without lawful Pastors, as is confessed as well by Protestants as
Catholics. And yet farther that of all the reformed Churches, there is no one
true, but only that of England, and therefore the Church of Christ, which should
be Catholic or universal, as M. Mason him self proves by this clear
profecie: I will give the heathen for thin inheritance, and the vtternost ports
of the earth for thy possession must needs be drawn within the compass of
England, which is more ridiculously absurd then the condemned doctrine of the
Donatists, who affoorded the church a for larger compass. Which absurdity
will be more apparent, if we consider the small number of the English themselves,
that hold the calling of their ministers to be canonical. For separating first
the Catholics, who esteem the Protestants ordinations, but an apish
imitation of the Catholic consecrations, and then the Puritans, Brownists,
and the rest that condemn the same as papisticall, there will remain no great
number, to make up the glorious kingdom of the son of God, who has the
whole world given him by his father for his inheritance. as M. Mason
acknowledges.

Psalm. 2.8.
4. This evident deduction cannot be possibly avoided, but by one of these two
ways: to wit, either that the ordinations of the other reformed Churches, are
all one with them of the Church of England; or else that there are diverse sorts
of canonical ordinations of Pastors in the Church of Christ. And yet both
these are evidently false. For to begin with the latter, where is it read in
holy scripture, or other authentical record, that either our Savior Christ
ordained, or his Apostles practiced diverse sorts, or fashions of ordinations in
his Church? Surely no where. And seeing this is a point of principal moment,
as being the first thing required in the building of Gods house, nothing ought
to be affirmed therein without evident warrant, especially by our newly reformed
masters, who pretend to reduce all things, to the square of the written word it
self. But yet we will deal more liberally with them, then to ty them so
strictly to the scriptures, and will be content to take for good satisfaction,
one only instance of practice, not with in the first five hundred years after
Christ, as they exact of us in other points, but within the whole fifteen
hundred years, one allowed and approved instance I say, of any other sort of
ordination of Pastors in the Church, but by the visible and sensible imposition
of hands by Bishops, Which notwithstanding they are not able to produce. False
therefore and absurd it is to imagine, that there are diverse sorts, of ordinary
callings of Pastors (for of ordinary calling we speak here) having already
sufficiently refuted all pretense of extraordinary.

5. Neither is the first evasion (to wit that the ordinations of the church of
England, and of France are all one) less false. For where there is not one and
the same formal cause, there cannot be the same effect: but in the ordinations
of Pastors in the English, and French Churches, there is not the same formal
cause, for in the English it is the power of a Bishop (at least as is
pretended) which is not in the French church; therefore cannot the effect, or
ordinance be all one. For to say that the power of Priests, and Bishops is all
one in respect of ordination, is an heresy condemned 1200. years ago in
Aerius, as is already showed. And though some of our new masters would infer,
Doct. Morton and D. Field.
that Priests have the same power to ordain, that Bishops have, upon the
opinion of some schoolmen, teaching that the character of Priests, and Bishops
are all one: yet are they evidently convinced, either not to understand the
schoolmen, or guilfully to dissemble their doctrine. For those schoolmen that
teach, that the character of priesthood, and Bishophood to be all one, do also
teach, that the same character is extended in Bishops, by their consecrations
to certain actions, and namely to the giving of priesthood, whereunto it is not
extended in Priests, and this not by any positive decree, or ordinance of the
church, but by Christ's own institution. Wherefore it is most manifest, that if
the whole doctrine of these schoolmen be expressed, (as it must be, if any one
will infer any thing of their opinion) it makes directly against this
heresy, of the equality of Priests and Bishops, in respect of ordination of
Pastors: but of this matter is spoken largly above cap. 7. n. 6.

6. Again though this equality of Priests and Bishops were (against the
truth) granted, yet would it nothing help them in the question now in hand,
to wit, whether the ordinations of the English, and French Churches be all one:
it being clear, that the French Churches do not receive, or admit of the
ordinations made by Priests; but if any Priests run out of the Catholic
Church to them, they ordeyne them a new (if they think them worthy of their
ministry) so far are they from receiving ordinations made by Priests. For
which reason doubtless do our English Puritans esteem so vily of ordinations
made by Bishops, as we shall by and by hear out of M. Whitaker and M. Fulke.
Yea Calvin the first founder of the French Churches, (and therefore are they not
very ancient) was himself no Priest, yet did he ordain ministers, not in
virtue of any priesthood (which he had not, and which his scholars
blasphemously term the mark of the beast,) but as having power, not only to
preach, but also to ordain ministers immediately from God, and not by any
succession of ordination derived unto him, by the imposition of hands of
priesthood.

From all which I conclude thus. The Church of England has a different
ordination of Pastors, from the churches of France, and all other churches,
that have not their ministers ordained by Bishops: therefore has it also a
different ministry: of a different ministry follows necessarily a
different Church (which is nothing but the people united with their Pastors,
Epist. ad Flore^tium.
as S. Cyprian defines it) but of two different Churches, the one at least
must needs be the Synagogue of Satan, (for Christ has but one Church) I say at
least one; for they may well be both so: truth in every thing being but one,
whereas falsitie mey be infinite. Whence M. Mason may see how ill he deserves
his name: For laboring to make up the breach in their church, by proouing the
calling of their Bishops by succession from the church of Rome, he has made it
much greater, by separating their Church from all their hitherto pretended
sister Churches, and thereby making it to stand alone, without communion with
any other Church in the whole world (the evident brand of a schismatic
conuenticle.) For the communion, which is required to the unity of the church,
is not the sole agreement in some points of Christian belief, for so all
Christians, be they Anabaptists, Arrians, or other heretics whatsoever,
should be all of one Church (which notwithstanding no man of common sense will
say,) but the agreement must be in all points of faith, and principally in the
lawful calling* and co^stitution of Pastors, which is as it were the root,
and foundation of all communion, S. Paul saying. How can they preach, Romans 10.
See the doctrine of the French ministers of this matter cap. 8. n. 13. and 14.
unless they be sent? and therefore every difference or diversity therein,
makes a greather difference in the whole building.

Secondly it is to be observed, that those that hold the Pope to be that
special Antichrist foretold in the holy scriptures, and therefore believe the
Bishops of the Roman Church, to be promoters for Antichrist, and not Pastors
of Christ's flock, must necessarily also hold, that Cranmer ordained by them
was no lawful Bishop. For that great Antichrist being by the uniform consent
of all Christians, the most opposite enemy of Christ that can be imagined, Du
Plessis and the French ministers mentioned above grownd their extraordinary
vocation here upon.
it cannot enter into any sensible man's understanding, that he can or will
minister any power so necessary, and so directly serving for the glory of
Christ, as the true ordination of Pastors does. And much less can it be
imagined, that our Savior Christ, the wisdom of his Father, should leave the
power of ordayning necessary Pastors of his flock (so dearly purchased by
him) in the hands of his enemy in such sort, as the true ministers of his
Gospel should be forced to go to him, or his proctors, for their warrant and
commission to preach his truth, and minister his sacraments to the people
redeemed with his most precious blood. What calling therefore could Cranmer
receive of the Bishops of the Roman Church, in the opinion of these men, who
notwithstanding think themselves to have the spirit of God? Surely no true
calling, or commission to preach the Gospel of Christ, and minister his
sacraments, but rather the mark of the beast to destroy his Church and
kingdom.

And for this reason, do the Churches of the pretended reformation in France,
and elsewhere, absolutely disclaim from all calling, received from the Bishops
of the Roman Church: deriuing their vocation from themselves, without all
succession to any predecessors, conformable to the rest of their doctrine: The
Caluinists in France in the profession of their faith, Confess. artic. ^. 1.
testifying their calling to be extraordinary, confirming the same by their
practice, by ordayning anew such Priests, as revolt from the Catholic Church
to their congregation, yea (and which is more) making them to abjure their
orders received before, as the very mark of Antichrist. The Sacramentaries of
Basil upon the same ground, styled their first peruerter Oecolampadius, their
first Bishop. And M. Whitaker to the same purpose says. I would not have you
think we make such reckening of your orders, as to hold our own vocation
unlawful without them, and therefore keep them to your selves. Con Dureu^ page
821.
And M. Fulke more plainly: You are highly deceived, if you think we esteem
your offices of Bishops, answer to a counterfaite Catholic page 50. Page 67.
Cap. 11. page 365. 366.
Priests, and Deacons better then lay men. And in his retentiue. With all our
heart we defy, abhor, detest, and spit at your stinking, greasy,
Antichristian orders. And if Monsieur du Plessis with M. Mason contrariwise
derive their ministers, from the Roman Church, saying, that they have the same
calling and succession, which they (Catholics) so much bragg of and that their
first Pastors were Priests, Curates, and Doctors of divinity. This
contradiction amongst them yea of Monsieur du Plessis with him self is not so
much to be marueiled at, the difficulty of this matter whereof they can never
find any sufficient solution, forcing them to turn, and wind up and down, now
affirming, now denying one and the same thing, as the present occasion
requires, that they may by so many windings, if it be possible, loose their
adversary, or at lest so dazzle the eyes of the unwary reader, that he shall
not easily see the absurdities they are driven unto, in defending their
heresies. This doaling is evidently seen in du Plessis and the French
ministers before citet.
For being pressed from whence they come, and who sent them: least they should
be discovered to come without sending (the evident mark of thieves, and false
Prophets) they answer, we come from the same stock and fountain, that the
Bishops of the Roman Church do come, for our first Pastors were ordained
Priests by them: And being urged with the impossibility, of receiving any
lawful calling from the Pope, whom they believe to be Antichrist, or from the
Bishops of the Roman Church, who they teach to be Antichrists proctors: they
answer, that they receive no calling from him or them, but extraordinarily
and immediately from God, so that one while they will receive their calling
from the Roman Church, and other while they will have none from thence, but
detest, abhor, and spit at all their ordinations as Antichristian.

Which second resolution if we follow, (as it is the doctrine of the far
greater part of the Churches falsely called reformed) every one sees, how
little it avails to lawful calling, to have been ordered by the Bishops of
the Roman Church, and to be descinded by succession from them. So that though
M. Mason should prove, that their Bishops succeed ours, yet shall he be
farther from the proof of their lawful calling (even by the judgment of his
own reformed brethren) then he was before, and therefore whilst he laboreth to
proone their descent from our Bishops, he labors quite against himself,
unless he will leave, and disclaim from the society of his reformed brethren,
who yet esteem themselves better Christians then he.

8. And if M. Mason will say, that these men exceed in this point, and that
therefore their doctrine in this particular is not receiuable, I will admit it
for an answer, not intending to make their Apology, though I know it will
little content, and less satisfy them. But let them dispute thereupon one
against another, till they either drive out all light of reason from both their
understandings, and so become blind Atheists, toward which downfall they are
far slidden already, or else till they have vomited out all their malice,
against the Catholic Church, whereby they are become so blind, as they can
neither see the clear burning lamp set upon the candle-sticke, nor the city
mounted upon the height of hills. Let them I say dispute together upon this
point of their calling, or manner of deriuing it from the Apostles, to
themselves, whilst I touch a little nearer M. Masons own doctrine: to which
purpose.

9. It is thirdly to be observed, that M. Mason holding the Pope to be
Antichrist at least in that general sense, If the Pope be not Antichrist, they
are heretics that teach him so to be: therefore they that communicate with them
as our English Protestants do, are at least fellows of heretics. Math.
5.14.15. Esaias 2.2.
and understanding, that all heretics are Antichrists, and consequently, the
Bishops of the Roman churches communicating with the Pope to be also
heretics, cannot with any probability hold, that Cranmer receiving his
calling and ordination from them, could by virtue thereof be a lawful Bishop.
Which that it may appear evidently to every one: It is to be understood, that
for the giving of lawful calling or ordination, two things are required in him
that does ordain (omitting for the present that, which is required in him that
is ordained, and in the ordination it self) The one is the sacramental power
of Episcopal order, which in the true and Catholic doctrine, is an indeleble
and incorruptible character, and mark imprinted in his soul, when he was
ordained. by virtue of the like character in his soul, that did ordain him:
The other is the lawful authority, to use and exercise the same power of
orders. So that without these two things, no man can give to another lawful
calling or ordination. Yet is there a great difference betwe^ne them. For the
first is so absolutely necessary, that unless the ordayner have it, he gives
nothing at all to him, whom he should ordain, who therefore remains still a
mere Layman, as he was before: both of them committing sacrilege, by their
presumptuous attempt in that behalf. The second is not necessary, that the
ordained may receive the character, or sacramental, power of order, but only
that he may together with the order, receive the lawful use and exercise
thereof, so that he that should be ordained by one that wants the first,
must be ordained again, ere he can be Priest or Bishop, whereas being ordained
by one wanting only the second, is not to be reordayned, but only to receive
that he wants, which is the lawful exercise of the order received.

10. Let not (judicious Reader) these words charecter or Sacramental power
breed any scruple in thee, as though the doctrine here delivered were so
builded thereupon, as without them it could not stand. For though it be true,
that holy order is a sacrament, and that also it leaves in the soul of the
ordained an indeleble character, yet does not this otherwise import to the
question here in hand, then only to show, that a certain power is required in
him, that ordayneth another in the degree of Priest or Bishop, without which
the ordained should receive nothing (which power whether it be a sacrament, or
leave in the ordained any character, or no, imports nothing to this present
question.) And this doctrine is necessarily received of all parts. For it is
impossible, that one should receive any thing of another, unless the other
have power to give it. Yea the Catholic doctrine teaching an indeleble
character, given in Holy Orders, does much more advantage my adversary, in
the question now in hand, then does the contrary, as will appear by and by.

For if we should suppose with the Protestants, that holy order leaves no
permanent power in him that is ordained, by virtue whereof, the actions which
he does in his function, are made of more force and valor, then the same
actions done by one, that never was ordered, it is vnposible to conceive, how
an heretical Bishop should give lawful calling because according to this
doctrine, he himself can have no more authority to ordain another, then he
that never was ordained at all. But of this we shall have occasion to speak
more hereafter. In the mean while for the more advantage of mine adversary, I
will suppose the Catholic doctrine in this point. And say notwithstanding
that M. Mason holding the Pope, and all the Bishops of the Roman Church to be
heretics, cannot with any probability hold the ordination, and calling of
Cranmer received from them, to be good or canonical.

11. For though he received of them the episcopal character necessarily
required to lawful calling, yet if his ordayners were heretics (as in Master
Masons opinion they were) he could not receive of them, the lawful use of the
same character, and Episcopal power (they themselves not having it) which
notwithstanding is also necessary to lawful calling, as is already said. This
will necessarily follow in Master Masons doctrine, upon the proof of these two
points. First, that to the delivery of lawful calling, is required in him that
ordayneth, not only the power of order, but also the lawful use and exercise
thereof. Secondly, that the lawful use and exercise of this power is lost, or
taken away by heresy. These two things being proved, it will necessarily
follow I say that Cranmer had no lawful calling in Master Masons opinion, who
esteems the Pope, and all the Bishops of the Roman church to be heretics.

12. The first of these two points is proved, by the practice of our Savior
himself, who gave his Apostles the power of order, before he gave them
authority to use it which does show, that these two powers are distinct the one
from the other, and also that they are both necessary to lawful calling. At
his last supper he gave them power, to celebrate the holy mysteries (I do not
say to sacrifice his true body, though this also be true, because I will not
here inuolue that controversy being not necessary to this question) saying:
Luc. 22.19.
Do ye this for commemoration of me: and after his resurrection, adjoined
hereunto the power to remit sins, saying unto them. Io. 20.22.23
Receive yea the Holy Ghost, whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven:
Yet did he not give them Commission to use this power, at least every where,
till immediately before his Ascension when he said thus unto them. Math.
20.18* 19.20.
All power is given to me in Heaven, and in Earth, goeing therefore teach yea
all Nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. And again: Going into the whole world, preach the Gospel to all
creatures. Marc. 16.15.
Hereby it is evident, that the power of order, and the power of the lawful
use thereof, which usually is called the power of jurisdiction, are two
distinct things, in such sort, as that the first may be without the latter,
which is also proved by the expostulation which the disciples had with S.
Peter, Act. 11.3.
for preaching and baptizing the Gentiles; which (till they understood by him
the warrant he had from God) they thought he had no commission to do, though
they well knew his Apostleship.

The same verity is also confirmed by the commission, which the Apostles had to
preach amongst the Jews before our Saviors Passion, Math. 10.5.6.7. Marc.
6.7.8. Luc. 9.1.
and prohibition to preach to others, showing that albeit the power of order be
always one and the same, yet the lawful use thereof, and power of
jurisdiction may be restrained, or amplified, suspended or quite taken away, as
pleases him. that is the author thereof.

14. The example that may be taken from civil government does make this yet
more plain. For the King when he makes Magistrates and Officers of the
Kingdom, as for example Judges, he gives them his letters patents, whereby
they are created judges. Yet for all that can they not use, or exercise this
office over the Kings subjects, without a special warrant, or commission
enabling them thereunto. Which commission if either it expire, or be taken from
them, or be suspended, they may still remain judges having their patent, but
they cannot use or exercise the office. And for this reason both the power of
order, which is given by consecration, or ordination, and the indicatory power
given by patent, may fitly be called after the fashion of Schoolmen, potestas
in actu primo (that is) a power fit or able (when the use and exercise thereof
is granted) to do such and such actions, and not otherways. Nature also it
self affords examples explayning this truth. For though the fire have power
and actiuity to heat, yea and burn, yet can it do neither unless it be
applied to that, which it should heat or burn.

From all which it is evidently concluded, that the sole power of order in any
Bishop, without the lawful authority to use it, is not sufficient to give
lawful calling. And therefore though it be confess, that the ordainers of
Cranmer had the true power of order, yet is not that sufficient to prove, that
they gave him lawful calling, which without the lawful power to use their
orders, they could not give. Wherefore it now remains, that we examine the
second point proposed, whether the orderers of Cranmer had together with the
power of order the lawful use thereof. And certain it is, that in M. Masons
opinion they had it not. For in his opinion they were heretics, and
consequently had lost all power of jurisdiction, and lawful use of their
orders, as is plainly the doctrine and practice of the Catholic Church above
1200. years agone, as appears by most irreproouable testimonies.

15. First the Arians accusing the Catholic Bishops of heresy, in like
manner as the Protestants now do the Bishops of the Catholic Roman Church,
notwithstanding that their first Bishops were ordained by them, as also the
first Protestant Bishops were, are urged by S. Athanasius in this sort. In
epist. de concilijs Arim. and Seleuc. Quae autem Seleuciae: post medium. Apol.
2. epist. Iulij. De Synodis con. Arianos, ad finem.
By what right can they be Bishops, if they received their ordination from
heretics, as they them selves accuse them to be? And in another place,
speaking in the person of Julius Pope, he says. It is impossible that the
ordinations made by Secundus being an Arian could have any force in the
Catholic church. S. Hilarie argues in the like manner and says. What will
become of us, that bring the matter to this pass, that because they (his
predecessors) were not Bishops, we also are not, for we are ordained by them,
and are their successors. Let us renounce our Episcopat, because we received
it of excommunicate persons. This he says to certain Bishops that indirectlie
objected heresy to the Catholic Bishops of the council of Nice their
predecessors S. Hierome also protests, that there are now (speaking of his
own time) no Bishops in all the world, Con. Luciferian.
but those that were ordained by the council of Nice, understanding those that
did communicate with the fathers of that council. Whereby it is evident, that
he esteemed the heretics no Bishops, though they had been ordained by the
Catholic Bishops.

Secondly heretics publicly known, and declared to be such, are
excommunicate, and cut of from all union, and communion with the Church, S.
Paul giving sentence against them, saying: A man that is an heretic, after
the first, Tit. 3.10.
and second admonition avoid. And our Savior him self: he that will not hear
the Church (of which sort are all heretics) let him be to thee as a publican
and heathen, but he that is excommunicate, and cut of from the body of the
Church, can have no lawful power to minister in the Church, as is evident of
it self. And Tertullian deduceth it in this sort. Mat. 18.17. de
praescriptione. Of heretics and gentiles we are to^ speak in the same
fashion: Hiero. contra Luciferia: ad initium.
If they be heretics, they cannot be Christians, if not Christians, they can
have no right to the scriptures of Christians: the same may be said of the
power to ordain others in the Church. So that by the judgment of the ancient
Church, of S. Paul yea and our Savior him self it is evident, that heretics
can have no lawful power, to ordain ministers of Christ's word and sacraments.
Whence is necessarily deduced, that Cranmer in M. Masons doctrine could be no
lawful Bishop or minister, because he was ordained by none, but such as he
esteems heretics. When M. Mason shall plaster up this breach (standing in
his own doctrine) I shall esteem him a master in his art and that he daubeth
clenly in deed.

16. But M. Mason has yet one shift more, before he receive the check mate.
For he will say, that albeit Cranmer was ordained by Bishops of the Roman
Church, who, as he thinks, were heretics, and therefore could not receive
any lawful power, to derive his orders or calling unto others, as is already
showed; yet having by their ordination received the power of order, as before
is confessed; he might without any great difficulty recover also the lawful
power, to use the same, by being admitted to the communion of other Bishops
lawfully ordained, as is manifest by the practice of the Church, both ancient
and modern in absoluing from excommunication, and reconciling to the unity of
the Church, such as were before excommunicate and separated from the same. But
this shift does not avoid, the conclusion made against him. For first this
evasion in M. Masons doctrine, who admits no character left in the soul of
him that is ordained, (for example in him that ordained M. Cranmer) has no
show of probability at all. For if the ordination once past, nothing do
remain in the ordained, if by excommunication he loose the right and power,
which he received, how can it be imagined, that he may receive the same power
without a new ordination? But as I said before, I will give M. Mason leave to
help himself out of this mire, by the hold he may take of the Catholic
doctrine in this point. In which it is nothing hard to conceive, how a Bishop,
or Priest excommunicate, may be restored to his former orders, or rather to the
lawful use of them, without any new ordination. The Catholic doctrine
teaches, that holy order leaves an incorruptible mark in the ordained, which
remaining, the power of order does ever remain, and therefore nothing
appertaining to that function can be wanting in him, but only the right,
authority and power lawfully to use it, which may easily be recovered without
any reordination, by the sole remouall of the impediment, whereby he is hindered
from the communion of the Church. But all this helps nothing M. Mason, so
desperate is his case. For Cranmer wanting true calling, by reason of that
defect of heresy found in his ordainers (as M. Mason will) it is impossible
for him to find a suplie of this defect, and therefore must he necessarily
remain, without true calling for ever. And the reason hereof is evident,
because this defect cannot be taken away, but by the reunion, and
reconciliation of Cranmer to the body of the true Church, and the true
Catholic Bishops. But this was absolutely impossible, because besides the
Church of Rome, and the Catholic Roman Bishops, there were none in the whole
world, of whom he could receive this reconciliation. For to say, that there
were other Protestant Churches already founded before Cranmers reuoult, to
which he might be reunited and reconciled, is too too idle to be alleged, the
case of those Churches being the same with that of England, and worse, as is
before showed: wherefore to recurre unto them for help in this point, is like
as if a lame cripple should crave help over a style, of another that is both
blind, and lame. There were indeed other Churches separated from that of Rome,
long before Luthers apostacy, as that of the Ethiopians, Grecians, Russians,
and others; but to none of all these did our new reformers unite themselves,
differing as far from them, as they do from the Catholic Roman: and
therefore does there remain no mean of their reconciliation to any church,
whereby they might recover that, which they wanted of lawful calling.

17. Having thus evidently showed (as I think) that albeit it should be
granted, that our now English superintendents have their calling from the
Catholic Bishops, that went before them, yet they cannot in their own
doctrine be esteemed to have true calling. And farther though they should be
granted to have true calling, by reason of their pretended succession, yet
would this rather destroy, then edify their Church, because it does evidently
separate them from all other Churches, and therefore does constitute them, a
manifest schismatic conuenticle, and depriueth them of all appearance of a
true Church: having, I say, sufficiently showed this, I would here make an end
of my dispute with Monsieur Mason, as having already frustrated the whole
drift of his book (which is to make good their vocation, and thereby to clear
their Church, from a principal defect ever objected against it) were it not,
that he, to wind himself out of the difficulty last mentioned, labors to
show, how their calling may be good and canonical, though it be derived from
that of the Roman Church, which in his opinion is Antichristian, and wicked,
and thereby provoke me to proceed yet farther with him, in this same argument.
And because our contestation is like to be somewhat prolixe* that it may not be
over irksome or tedious to the reader, I will separate it from that, which is
already said of that matter, and handle it under this title.

The tenth Chapter. The calling of the now English superintendents cannot be
lawful, supposing, that of the Bishops of the Roman church, from which it is
taken, to be unlawful.
1. THIS in substance is the title of the 12. chapter of M. Masons fifth book,
who puts down his discourse by way of a Dialogue between Philodox bearing
the person of a Roman Catholic, and Orthodox representing (as M. Mason will
have it) an English Protestant. I will not quarrel with him for miscalling
himself, but I will leave it to Didimus a third interlocutor, to convince him
of theft, (if it be theft to take that, which is another man's without his
consent.) Philodox therefore and Orthodox shall speak, as Master Mason will
have them, but Didimus as truth shall teach him.

Well I perceive one thing, Philodox.
that howsoever you speak against Popish Priests calling them sacrilegious,
and abominable, yet when your own calling is put to the trial, you are glad
to derive it from such Bishops, as were Popish Priests, which you so
disdainfully call sacrilegious, and abominable.

And I perceive another thing, that howsoever you exclaim against Cranmer as a
schismatique, and burned him for an heretic: Orthodox.
yet when the glorious succession of your Bishops in Queen Mary's time is put
to trial, you are forced to derive it from him, who^ you scornfully call a
schismatique, and heretic.

No verily Orthodox, Didimus.
you cannot infer any such thing against Philodox, as he urges against you,
the case being nothing like. For Philodox does not esteem the Priesthood, or
Bishop-hood of Cranmer to be sacrilegious and abominable, but good, holy, and
the same Catholic order, that is in their Bishops, and therefore no
inconvenience follows against him, though their Bishops in Queen Mary's time
derive their succession from Cranmer, or (truer) by Cranmer. And though Cranmer
falling into heresy lost the power, and authority to use lawfully his orders,
and therefore could not give lawful calling, which includes not only the
power of order, but also the lawful use thereof: yet might this defect be
easily supplied in these, whom he ordained after the Catholic rite (of whom
only I speak here, for the ordained by him in King Edwards time, there is a
great difference as we shall see in due place) by their reconciliation to the
Catholic church, and absolution from all ecclesiastical censure or other
impediment: which was done in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, Mason p.
79. S. Hierome contra Lucifer: satis ante finem. Theod. l. 1. c. 9. hist.
Cencilium Ni^eu. 1. can. 8. Tharasius in Nice. 2 act. 1.
as you your self relate out of Sanders. I suppose you are too Well read in
antiquity, to doubt of the truth of this doctrine, and practice in the ancient
church yet least you should have any scruple therein, I wish you should take
the pains to see the places quoted in the margent.

Now you (Orthodox) cannot say this in justification of yur calling. For first
you esteem the Priesthood of the Roman church whence you would derive your
calling, sacrilegious, idolatrous, Antichristian, and abominable, and therefore
must of necessity make your own which you say is derived from it as bad.
Secondly, you had no Catholic church going before you, and extant, when your
first Postors ran out, by reconciliation whereunto, Cranmer and the rest might
receive that, which they must of necessity want in their calling (if the
Bishops who ordered them were heretics) but are truly such, as S. John
speaks of, saying they went out from us, an evident mark, or band of
heretics. So that you see two great differences, 1. Ioh. 2.19.
for which you cannot retort upon Philodox, that which he urges against you,
and therefore if you have nothing else to answer, you must be constrained to
bear that, which he charge you with.

Orthodox.
But if our forefathers derived their orders from such Bishops, as were Popish
Priests, what inconvenience will follow?

Didimus.
Why do you speak with iffs, Orthodox, seeing it is the whole ground of all
your proofs? But let Philodox speak.

Philodox.
Then either confess your calling to be unlawful, or acknowledge ours to be
lawful, from whence you derive it. You cannot gather figs of thorns, or
grapes of thistles: neither is it possible for a Rose, to spring out of a
nettle.

Orthodox.
2. But a garden of roses may be ouergrowne with nettles. For the ministry
pl^^ted by Christ was a sweet rose without any nettle, and so it continued in
the Church for certain ages: but when Antichrist began to reveal him self in
the temple of God, as though he were God, the Romish Priest ho^^ became a
monstrous birth, strangely compounded, half rose, and half nettle: the church
of England, in the beginning of reformation, did borrow from the church of Rome
the rose, Didimus.
but left the nettle.

Fie, fie, Orthod^x, I am ashamed on your behalf, did ever man hear so
sensles a discourse, in so serious a subject? Do you not mark, that this very
point is of such moment, that unless it be thoroughly cleared by authority,
either of holy scripture, or received antiquity, all that, which you have said
in your whole 5. books, is but mere wind, a blast of words without al true
force? If you see this, why do you reason so idly? or if you do not see it,
permit me to show it you, that thereby you may also see, how far you are from
concluding your purpose. Is not your intent, to maintain the calling of your
Bishops in England to be canonical? and your mean or medium to do this, is it
not to maintain their succession from the Catholic Bishops? whence rises the
objection proposed by Philodox, to wit, how your Bishops calling can be good,
being derived by succession from that, which you esteem sacrilegious, and
abominable? which unless you solue solidly, you will be so far from proving your
calling good and canonical, that you will leave it proved, eue^ by your own
principles, sacrilegius, and abominable. For answer to this main objection, you
tell a tale, not of a tub indeed, but (less to the purpose) of a monstrus
birth, of a thing half nettle, and half rose. Surely you were not in your wits
I think, when you bestowed so much labor, to bring the matter to such a point
as that neither you must confess your superinte^dents to be sacrilegious
Priests, (as you term them) or else mere laiemen For I dare undertake to show
this dream, of the nettle and the rose, to be as idle a fancy, as ever entered
into any man's imagination; which being performed, one of the aforeme^tioned
members, to wit, that your superinte^de^ts are either sacrilegius priests (I
speak in your opinion) or mere lay men, must necessarily follow, unless you
can bring some better reason for the contrary the^ hitherto is showed. But to
perform that which I have promised.

3. First, it is evident by the consent of all men, that an argument, or proof
drawn from a simile, or comparison (as this of the composition of the Roman
Priesthood is) is the most weak, and feeble kind of argument of all other.
Secondly, a simile drawn from, a natural thing may sometimes, when it is
fitly applied, help us to conceive supernatural, which for the height, and
eminency it has above our capacity, cannot otherwise be conceived of us, but
in that case, a simile proves nothing at all. Thirdly, all similes (that
they may be of any use in our discourses) must be taken from things either
truly being, or at least in possibility by nature to be. For he that would
prove one thing, by a simile taken from another, which is impossible, shall
not only not prove that he would, but shall evidently disprove the same. For
example, if one would prove you Orthodox to be so composed, as that you should
be half a man, and half an ass. (patience Orthodox, you shall see I intend
you no wrong) by this same example of a birth half nettle, and half rose
which you use, and should say, that though you were borne a perfect man, and
so continued for some years, yet since you went to the University, you are
become a monstrous birth strangely compounded, half man and half ass, would
you not say (and truly in mine opinion) that he was not half, but a perfect
ass, that should make such an argument? and that he is so far from proving
that he purposed, that he concludes manifestly the contrary? All these
defects being in your discourse Orthodox, I leave to your self to judge, how
sound your answer is to Philodox his objection. Forthly, seeing the force of
your answer depends, upon the truth of that strange composition of the Roman
Priesthood, which you mention, you should have not supposed it (though it had
bin more probable, or possible then it is) but you should have proved it, if
not by holy Scripture (which kind of proof you rigorously exact of your
adversaries) yet by received antiquity, or some sound natural reason, or at
least by some true example in nature, and not by a mere Chymericall, and
impossible composition, which nature never intended, or thought of* But will
you, that I tell you the truth? this comparison suteth well with the calling of
your ministry, which is as truly lawful as your monstrous birth half rose,
and half nettle is in nature possible.

Page 264.
4. Fifthly, though, as I imagine, you are not so Orthodox as to hold, that holy
orders is a sacrament, yet you acknowledge a certain form of words, necessary
for conferring of orders. which being supposed, I ask of you, whether these
words may not so be altered, by adding of others unto them, that they remain
no more the true form of holy orders? If you say no: you must also say
(contrary to all authority,) that this form of baptism is good, I baptize
thee in the name of the Father greater, and of the Son lesser, and of the
holy Ghost, the least. If you say, yea, then would I know of you, why the
additions, which you say the Papists have added to the true form of order
(being greater then that, which is mentioned in the form of baptism) do not
make the order none? Again, you know, as I suppose, that every addition made
to the essence, or nature of any thing does change it into another essence, or
nature, as every addition put to a number, makes it a distinct number from
that it was before, for the nature or essence of every thing, in good
Philosophy is like a number, which consisting indivisible, is altered by
every addition put thereunto. The Papists therefore adding (as you say) to the
nature, and essence of the form of holy orders, that which appertains not
thereunto, but makes it idolatrous, they must needs corrupt the whole, and
make all nettle, and consequently leave no rose, for your Superintendents to
pluck after them: who therefore must of necessity seek their calling,
elsewhere, then from the Papists, who are proved out of your doctrine (mark
that I say out of your doctrine Orthodox) to have none at all. And thus you
see, that Philodox his objection stands, in full force against you: and that
you must either acknowledge the Roman priesthood to be good and lawful, or
confess that yours is either none at all, or at least unlawful; seeing you
have none other but that, which you take from them. Again, seeing you confess,
that the ministry planted by Christ was a sweet rose, and continued so for
certain ages: why do you not note the time, and place, and persons; when,
where, and by whom this monstrous birth was brought forth? If you can bring but
reasonable proof, of any one of these three circumstances of this monstrous
change you speak of, I will take it for a satisfying answer, to all that
which has hitherto been objected against you, so that you shall not need to
labor in any thing else. If you cannot do this (as I know you cannot) cease for
shame to object, against your mother the Catholic church, such profane, and
adulterous behavior. But let us now hear Philodox. Philodox.


What will you make of us? are we ministers, or lay men? if we be ministers,
then so acknowledge us. If we be lay men, then I pray you, what was Cranmer,
who had no consecration, but in our church? what were all the Bishops in king
Edwards time, which were consecrated by Cranmer? what was Matthew Parker,
Grindall, Sands, Horn, which were all ordained Priests in our church? were
they all lay men? what are all the ministers in England at this day, which
derive their orders from the former? are they all lay men?

5. Your popish Priests are neither the true ministers of the Gospel, Orthodox.
nor merely lay men. For your ordination consists of two parts: the former in
these words, take thou power to offer sacrifice, and to celebrate mass for the
quick, and the dead, which you account the principal function of Christian
priesthood* but in truth it makes you not the ministers of Christ, but of
Antichrist: the latter in these words, receive the holy Ghost, whose sins thou
forgiuest, they are forgiven, and whose sins thou retainest, they are retained,
in which Evangelical words, there is delivered a ghostly ministerial power
to forgive sins, which, according to the true meaning of Christ, is performed
by the ministry of reconciliation. Therefore whosoever has received this
power, has withal received the ministry of reconciliation, consisting, as
was before declared, in the due administration of the word, and sacraments.

Didimus.
You do greatly abuse your terms Orthodox, in saying that the ordination of
the Popish Priests consists of two parts* (if by ordination you understand
the order received, as you do in the paragraffe following.) For as the soul of
man is but one indivisible substance, having diverse distinct powers; so
likewise the order of priesthood is but one indivisible power, residing in the
soul of the ordained, and having also diverse distinct faculties. And therefore
your conceit of two parts of their preisthood, is but a gross error of your
own, which you seem to correct in the words following, calling that a
function (like a scholar) which before you called a part, like a man ignorant
in his terms. Now seeing the whole force of your solution to the objection
made, depends upon this error of two parts in the Popish priesthood, you
cannot be so blind but see, that it is nothing to the purpose. For if it be but
one simple power with diverse faculties, but without parts, you must either take
it all, and be sacrilegious with the Papists, or leave it all, and be but mere
lay men. And albeit the diverse faculties, or functions of Preisthood be given
at diverse times, and by diverse words, as you say, yet is not preisthood thereby
proved to have diverse parts, more then the soul of man is proved, to be
also compounded of diverse parts, by that it first gives life and growth, then
sense, and last of all understanding, and reason.

Of the chief function of priesthood, which is to ofter sacrifice for the
quick and the dead, we shall have fitter opportunity to speak hereafter. In
the mean while, I cannot omit to tell you Orthodox, that I much marvel at
your rachnes in affirming, without all testimony either of scripture, or
antiquity, that the power of sacrificing is the ministry of Antichrist,
especially seeing you are accustomed to demand of your adversaries so
rigorously express scripture, for the proof of their religion, and hold it
as an article of your belief, that nothing is to be believed, which is not
proved by scripture. Surely Orthodox, there is no equal dealing in this
course of yours, and therefore for your credit sake do I require some testimony
of scripture, or at least of antiquity, proouing this position of yours: to
wit, that the power of sacrificing makes the Priests of the Roman church, to
be the ministers of Antichrist. For if this power be not disprooued, your
ministry, which wants it, is clearelie disprooued: and seeing the disproofe
of it belongs unto you, as necessary for the justifying of your ministry,
you foullie forget your self, in leaving it without all other proof, but your
own bare assertion.

For your doctrine of the latter part of their priesthood (I speak in your
own terms Orthodox, for your better understanding) those, that you call
Papists in England, are greatly beholding to you: for you deliver them from
the foul imputation of treason, whereof diverse have been accused, condemned,
and executed for reconciling men to god, by the power of reconciliation, given
them by Christ himself, as you confess. Surely if in the Popish priesthood
(as you term it) be included the lawful power of reconciliation, as you say,
and your adversaries do not deny, the statute made against the practice of that
power, in the 23. year of Q. Elizabeth, and confirmed by King James must needs
be unjust, as directly against the power given by Christ to his lawful
ministers. And if for fear of incurring the severe penalty of the same
statute, you will say, that they abuse the lawful power of reconciliation, and
therefore are, or may be traitors. I answer in their behalf, that if by abuse
you understand, that they use it not, but by the means of sacramental
confession, I acknowledge that they use it not otherways, but I deny this to
be any abuse. Again though it were an abuse, yet can it have no appearance of
treason, But I see you ready to reply, that they reconcile men to the church,
and to the obedience of the sea of Rome, which is treason; whereunto I am as
ready to answer, that their intent, and practice is only, to reconcile
sinners to God, through remission of their sins by that power, which you
confess them to have, and if it follow hereupon, that they are reconciled to
the Catholic Roman church, as to the spouse of Christ, who ordained this
power of reconciliation, and thereby are made sheep of that fold, whereof the
Pope (being Christ's vicar upon earth) is chief Pastor, this cannot justly be
imputed unto them for treason, no more then it can be to you, to have baptized
one, whereupon follows necessarily the self same reconciliation to the
Catholic church, and to the visible Pastor thereof.

Philodox.
If it be so, then you must confess, that the priesthood of the church of Rome
has the ministerial function, because these words are used in our ordination.

Orthodox.
Though these words as they were spoken by Christ, practiced in the primitive
church, and are used at this day in the church of England, imply the substance
of this holy function, yet as you abuse them in the church of Rome, to
maintain Popish shrift, the gold is covered with dross, and the sweet flower
is ouershadowed with noisome weeds. Wherefore if we consider your priesthood,
as it is a totum aggregatu^ consisting of sacrificing, and absoluing, it is
unlawful, and contrary to the scripture: if we come to the parts thereof, Why
is not this scripture cited? because it is not to be found.
your massing, and sacrificing is simply abominable; the other part, so far
as it relieth upon the words of Christ, taken in their true sense and meaning,
is holy, and implies a ministerial power, which notwithstanding by your
construction and practice is greatly depraved.

Didimus.
I am weary Orthodox of those empty, and idle discourses, where so many things
are said, and not one proved. In steed of sound arguments to prove the Roman
priesthood to be sacrilegious, and your ministry (though derived from it) to
be good, you bring nothing but imaginary similes of births half nettle, and
half rose, and impertinent Metaphores of Gold and flowers, dross and weeds,
fictions of a tot^m aggregatum, where there is but one simple power having
diverse functions, as is aforesaid, I never heard such a drossie discourse. If
this be sufficient to overthrow the Roman priesthood, and establish your
ministry, what will you say to the Puritanes and Anabaptists, who will afford
you the like, yea and better arguments against you?

Mark, I pray you, this saying of that great pillar of Gods church S.
Athanasius writing against the Arrians, who bragged as much of the error of
their Catholic predecessors, as you do of that of the Papists, Epist. de
concilijs Arimin. and Seleue. sect. quis igitur. See a notable saying of
Tertullian to the same purpose, cap. 4. n. 4.
of whom he says thus: What will they teach the people whom they instruct?
will they say, that their predecessors erred? and how shall they be esteemed of
their disciplies true saiers, whom they persuade that they are not to give
credit to their masters? Is not this the true reason, for which since Luthers
reuoult from the Catholic Church, you are divided into so many sects and
reformations, that it is not easy to reckon them? you say, the Papists erred,
and their priesthood is sacrilegious: do not the Puritans say the same of you,
and the Anabaptists of them? And rightly. For whilst you say, that your
fathers erred, you teach your successors and scholars to say the same of you,
and theirs of them, till you end in plain Atheism. In one word if you will
say any thing to the purpose, in the matter you have in hand, you must first
prove by holy Scripture, the Roman Priest hood to be sacrilegious, or at
least you must show when, and by whom it began to be corrupted, seeing you
confess it was once pure and good, and then are you to prove, that it is also
diuisible in such sort, as that one part or piece remains good, though the
other be corrupted, and lastly that you have the second part. These three
things when you have well proved (as I know you can never prove one of them)
then may you brag, that your calling and ministry is lawful, though it be
taken from that of the Roman church, which you esteem unlawful, till then
your Superintendents must be content, either to be Popish Priests, from whom
you pretend they be descended, (but this they neither are, nor would be) or
else to be sacrilegious usurpers of an holy vocation, which though they would
not be, yet are they: for true Bishops, which they would be, they are not, as
henceforth shall be proved.

6. Hitherto has it been proved against Master Mason, that though the
pretended Bishop of England did truly, and verily receive their calling, from
the Catholic Bishops, yet can this be none at all according to their own
doctrine, in which the Bishops of the Roman church are heretics and
consequently unable to give any lawful calling, as is before showed.

Secondly, that though the former impediment were not, yet, seeing they
disclaim from the whole, and perfect order of the Catholic Roman Bishops, as
being sacrilegious and abominable, they are for another reason concluded to
have none at all. For the order of the Roman Priesthood is not diuisible in
diverse parts, but is one and an indivisible power, having diverse functions not
unlike our souls, as is before showed, and therefore is either all wholly
given, or nothing at all. All which has been said not to disprooue, or
disallow the Priesthood, and calling of the Roman church, which is most holy
and canonical, but only to show the miserable blindness, and peruersity of
the Protestants, that being forced to challenge their calling from those, who,
if they were such, as by them they are esteemed, can give them none, are
therefore constrained either to condemn themselves, of sacrilegious
usurpation, and intrusion, as having no calling, or to justify them whom they
blindlie abhor, as wicked, and abominable.

Henceforth we will examine the calling that our English intendents pretend to
have, according to the three heads before mentioned. To wit, whether their
calling, which they pretend to receive from Cranmer, be good and canonical, as
well in respect of the callers as of the called, and calling it self,
supposing (as confessed of either part) the calling of the Catholic Roman
Bishops to be good, and canonical, or at least so sufficient, as lawful
calling may be derived from it.

And because there are four diverse sorts or degrees of persons, all pretending
to be true bishops, of whose true calling, there is question for diverse
difficulties therein appearing, they shall be examined all apart, as they also
are by M. Masons, beginning first with Cranmer, proceeding afterward to Barlow,
Scorie, Couerdall and others made in King Edwards days then descending to
Matthew Parker with his fellows, made in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
reign, and last of all to those that have ever since succeeded until this
day. For though there be canonical impediments in all and every one of these,
yet are they not the same in every one, and therefore can they not be handled
together, but must be spoken of a part. I mention not here those, that were
either made, or continued in Queen Mary's time, because there is no
controversy, but they were ordered after the Catholic manner of the Roman
church. And though some of them were in the schism of King Henry the eight,
yet being the whole Realm reconciled, to the unity of the Catholic church,
Stow in Q. Marie.
the second year of Queen Marie, they could have no firmed by Cardinal Poole
Legate, as M. Mason alleges out of Saunders l. 2. 260. Lib. 2. cap. 9. page
79.


The eleventh Chapter. Cranmer continued not lawful Bishop till his death.
1. I Suppose that Cranmer was canonically ordained Bishop, as well in respect
of his ordayners, of his ordination, and also of himself ordained, and
therefore propose the question only of his continuation, in his lawful
ordination and calling. Neither is the question, The sense of the question.
whether the power of order continued with him till his death. For no
Catholic author ever either denied, or doubted, but that holy order once
received (notwithstanding what censure soever incurred, yea degradation it
self, or crime committed) does ever remain, because it is immortal, or
incorruptible, as baptism is. And therefore M. Mason fights against his own
shadow, when he labors to prove this (which no man denies) as he does at
large in his 2. book and 9^. chapter. But the question is, whether during his
life he lost the lawful authority to use, and exercise the power of his
order, or no; which is a question far different from the other, Cap 9. n. 11.
and forward.
as has been already proved, and may briefly be declared by this example.
He that has the kings patent of chief iusticeship, is truly chief justice,
yet if the king suspend him from the execution of his office, either in whole
or in part, he has not the lawful use thereof: The distinction of the power of
order, and the lawful use thereof M. Mason allows, as is manifest by his
Words cited in the proof of the conclusion following.
and if during that suspension he attempt any thing in the execution of his
office, his fact shall be unlawful, not for default of power, which he is
supposed to have by the kings patent, but for default of authority, to use the
power he has. In like manner he that has the order, or character of a Bishop,
is truly Bishop, but if the use and exercise of his order, be suspended (as it
may many ways be without prejudice of his order) whatsoever he shall attempt
in the exercise of it, during the suspension, shall be unlawful. This example is
brought only to show, that the power of order remaining, the lawful use
thereof may be lost, or taken away, which it does sufficiently show, though
there be in other respects disparitie in the two cases, a thing ordinary in
all examples, which do not run upon four feet, as the saying is. The
question therefore being this, the resolution is.

Conclusion.
That Cranmer before his death lost the lawful use, and exercise of his Bishops
power, or order; and therefore lost also the power to give true and lawful
calling to those, whom he ordained. The second part of this conclusion will
necessarily follow upon the proof of the first. For the power to g^ue true
calling includes necessarily the lawful use of order, as well in him that
calls, as in him that is called, no man being called but to use the power,
which he receives by his calling, and he only is said to use a thing, that
lawfully uses it. The first part therefore I prove thus. By schism and
heresy is lost the lawful use of the power of Episcopal order: But Cranmer
before he died, fell into schism and heresy: Therefore before he died, he
lost the lawful use of the power of Episcopal order. This argument concludes
directly, and infalliblie, if the premises be made good. The first whereof M.
Ma^on denie^h not, yea directly grants, Page 61.
saying that such as observe the substance of institution being themselves in
schism or heresy, do minister legitimum, but not legitime, and those that
receive it from them have a lawful baptism, but not lawfully; though he
specify here baptism only yet is his doctrine, and the Catholic also the
same of holy orders. And he teaches the same more plainly in these words:
Page 82.
If by indel^ble cbaracter be meant only a gracious gift never to be
reiterated, then we may safely confess, that in baptism, and holy orders,
there is imprinted an indeleble character. For a man rightly baptized,
becoming a Turk or Jew, and returning to the faith, is in no case to be
rebaptised: likewise when a Priest lawfully ordained, becoming a schismatique,
or heretic, is justly censured for his crimes, and after is reclaymed, he may
in no case be reordayned, but may perform his function, by virtue of his
orders formerly received* Hence it follows manifestly, that in M. Masons
doctrine, schism and heresy takes away, the lawful use of holy order. For
seeing it takes not away the order it self, as M. Mason for his own
advantage says (though not concordablie with the rest of his doctrine of holy
order) and yet makes the ordination given by it, to be unlawfully given, as
he confesses in his former words, it must necessarily take away the lawful
use thereof. But least M. Mason seeing himself Pressed with his own doctrine,
should recall it, or at least others his brethren should deny it, I will
prove it by more weighty authority, then M. Masons. For which purpose I will
first prove, that schism, and heresy take not away, the power of order
received, which though I might suppose as not only granted, but also proved
by M. Mason, yet because my purpose is, Page 83.
not only to refute M. Mason, but to prove against all our English
Protestants, that their Bishops have no true calling at all, I will leave
nothing unproven, that may be doubted of by any one. But to the purpose.

3. S. Leo the great receives Donatus Salicinensis, Epist. 22. ad Episcopos
Afric. n. 3.
and his people, or flock converted from the heresy of Nouatus to the
Catholic church, and leaves him in his charge.

And of one Maximus he says thus. If Maximus be no more a Donatist, but free
from schism, though ordered not without fault, we do not depose him from his
episcopal dignity.

Secondly, the seventh general council, which was holden at Nice, and is
called the 2. Nicene council, defines according to the doctrine of the former
general councels, and fathers, that not only such Bishops, and others of the
clergy, Synod. 7. actio. r. per tot.
as having been heretics, and afterward are converted to the Catholic
faith, but also such as were ordained by heretics, being likewise converted,
are to be received not only to the unity of the church, but also to the use
of their order, and that council received ten Bishops, whereof some confessed
themselves to have been borne in heresy, and so ever continued until that
time, when they did abjure their error.

Thirdly S. Augustine says, that holy order does so remain, De bono
coniugali cap. 24.
that albeit any one be for his fault removed from his office, yet the
sacrament once given is never lost, though it remain to the condemnation of
him, that has it. And again. Both are sacraments, and given by a certain
consecration, Lib. 2. con. epist, Parm^nian cap. 13.
that, when one is Baptized, this, when one is ordered, and therefore in the
Catholic church, it is not lawful, that either of them be reiterated. And
this shall suffice for the proof of this point, which is most clear both in
the grounds of Christian doctrine, and also in the practice of the whole
church, which (as S. Augustine says in the words even now cited) never allowed
reordination, yea did absolutely forbid it in the council of Capu^ in S.
Ambrose his time, This canon is cited in the 3. council of carthag cap. 37.
Bin. to* 1. page 545. Concili: Nice cau. 19. Bin. to, 1. page 3, 10.
which is to be understood of ordination truly given. For the council of Nice
did decree, that the Paulianists should be ordered again by Catholic
Bishops, but that was because they had no true orders before, no nor yet true
baptism. If therefore reordination have ever been practiced by any, it was upon
conjecture, or presumption of some essential defect in the former ordination,
but how probably this was done, it neither belongs to this place to examine,
neither does it any way pertain to the question in hand. And therefore M.
Mason, if it had not been either to make his book swell, or that the good man
was loath to loose such an occasion, to tax some Pope of error, though but in
a matter of fact, wherein no man does think them infallible, well might have
omitted that, Page 85. and sequentib.
which he inserteth of this matter impertinentlie, showing therein more of the
spirit of graceles Cham, that published his Fathers nakedness, then of his other
brethren, that covered the same.

Now albeit it be clear, that heresy does not take away the power of order,
or character once received, yet is it no less manifest, that it makes the
ordinations by heretics to be unlawful, and not canonical. And because this
cannot be, but by depriving them of the lawful use and exercise of the power
of order, which they have, therefore it is plain, that heretics have not the
lawful use of their orders received: which is that I am here to prove.

4. That ordinations made by heretics have ever been esteemed unlawful,
there is nothing more manifest in all antiquity, as appears.

Synod, 7. act. 1.
First by the long dispute had in the second council of Nice, about the
receiving of those that were ordained by heretics.

Secondly, the first Nicen council decreed, that such as had been ordained by
Meletius an heretic should, upon their conversion be received with their
orders, being confirmed with more holy prayers, Sacratioribus suffragijs
confirmatos. l. 1. c. 9.
or suffrages as Theodoret testifies. Meletius himself being deprived of all
power to ordain any more.

Thirdly, the council of Sardis declared, that not only Gregorius of
Alexandria, Basilius of Ancyra, and Quintianus of Gaza heretics, Theod. l. 2.
c. 8 post medium,
and intruded into other men's see as, but also Theodorus of Heraclea, Narcissus
of Neroniadis, See a notable testimony of the council of sardy to the same
purpose hereafter cap. 15. n 3. Apol 2. epist. Iulij ab initio satis. Epist ad
Nycopolitas cited in the 7. general council act. 1, ad finem. Page 7^. Page
87.
with diverse others, convicted of Arrius, his heresy, to be no Bishops, not
because they had not the power of episcopal order, but because they had lost
the lawful use thereof by heresy.

Fourthlie S. Athanasius in the person of Julius Pope of Rome says, that it is
impossible, the ordination of Priests made by Secundus an Arrian Bishop should
have any place in the Catholic church.

And S. Basil. I know him not for Bishop, nor number them amongst the Priests
of Christ, which have been promoted to any dignity, by defiled hands, to the
destruction of faith.

The same teach Innocentius the first, and Nicholaus the first, with diverse
others cited by M. Mason, who either not understanding, or dissembling their
meaning, makes doubt, how they may be reconciled with the Catholic doctrine,
forbidding reordination. I marvel that so small a thing does truble him,
especially considering his own doctrine, wherein he evidently distenguisheth,
as is already noted, between the power of order, and the lawful use thereof,
whereby are easily reconciled all the diferences, which seem to appear in the
words of the ancient Fathers or councels in this point, they sometimes
acknowledging, and receiving the ordinations by heretics for sufficient,
sometimes rejecting them as if they were none at all. For receiving them, they
acknowledge the po^er of order, or character given by heretics (supposing
they use true form, and substance of ordination) and add thereunto the lawful
use, which the ordained had not by their ordination, but recover it by their
reconciliation to the church. When they reject them, they deny not the power of
order, but the lawful use thereof, which the ordained cannot have, so long as
they remain in heresy, and separation from the church. For the lawful use of
the power of order necessarily supposes the union, or communion with the
Catholic church. True calling does not only include the power of order, but
also the lawful use of the same.
And this is it that Innocentius and others fathers say, that heretics cannot
give to those they ordain, because they have it not themselves: and not
having, this, and wanting thereby the l^wfull use of their orders, they are said
to have nothing, because he that has any thing ordained to a certain use, and
yet cannot make that use thereof, is in the same case, as if he had it not at
all. So that the great difficulty M. Mason did apprehend in reconciling
Innocentius, and Nicholaus with the rest of the fathers and councels, rejecting
reordination, is easily overcome.

5. And that the communion with the true church (whersoeuer it be) is
necessarily required to the lawful use of the power of holy order, and
consequently to the delivery of lawful calling, our adversaries cannot deny.
For I would know of them, whether they think, that the Arrians had either true
calling themselves being in heresy, or true power to call others? and whether
by their ordinations, they did give true calling to the ordained? If they say
yea, then must they necessarily condemn the whole Catholic church of
error, and injustice, for condemning them in the council of Sardis, even now
cited and declaring them to be no Bishops. If they say no (as I think they
will) then must they necessarily confess, that besides the power of order
which they had, was necessary also the union with the Catholic church, that
they might either have true calling themselves, or deliver it to others, no
other reason why they should not have true calling, being to be assigned. If
therefore it be proved, that Cranmer was an heretic, and therbie separated
from the union of the Catholic church, it will also follow, that
notwithstanding he was canonicallie ordained (as all or most of the first
Arrian Bishops were) that he lost the lawful use of his orders, and therefore
neither continued in true calling himself, nor could truly call others.

And to make it yet more plain, that the actual union, or communion with the
body of Christ (which is his church) is necessary, that any one may have, or
give true calling (and consequently that no heretics can either have it, or
give it, they being by the Apostles own mouth separated from the community of
the faithful) it is to be considered, Tit. 3.10.
that no man is either called himself, or calls others to any
Ecclesiastical function or office, to exercise the same in his own name; by
his own power, or to his own behalf, or benefit alone: but in the power and
honor first of Christ, and then in the name, and for the benefit of his
church, whose minister he is; if therefore he be wilfully separated from
Christ, and his church (as all heretics are) he cannot do any thing in their
name or power, or in their honor or edification, for neither has he their
concurrence or commission, being separated from them, nor has he the will and
intention thereunto, but to the contrary: Whatsoever therefore he does or
attempteth to do in that kind, he does it in his own name and power, and to
the benefit of that body, whereof he is either head, or member, to wit, of that
sect of heresy, whereof he makes profession, and consequently unlawfully.
And in steed of making him, whom he ordains, a minister of Christ, and of his
church, he makes him partaker of his own heresy, and rebellion, and a
minister thereof.

6. And in this respect there is a great difference, between the sacrament of
baptism, and holy order, though in some other things they be like. For though
the power of order, or character be truly given by heretics (supposing
always the true matter and form be used by a true Bishop) as is that of
baptism; yet because the power of order is an active power, ordained to
minister other sacraments, and exercise other functions in the church, whereas
the character of baptism is only a passive power, in respect of other
sacraments, which it makes us capable to receive, but not to minister:
therefore does the sacrament of orders to the lawful ministering thereof, require
besides the power of order, the lawful use of the same, which those, who are
excommunicate, and separated from the unity of Gods church (as all heretics
are) cannot have. And thus far have we proved, that heretic Bishops,
though canonicallie ordered, have no lawful power to use their episcopal
order, and consequently cannot give any lawful calling to tothers, which was
the first of the premises of that argument, wherewith our conclusion was
proved. Now it remains to prove the second, which is, that Cranmer before
he died, fell into heresy.

Though I need not stand much upon the proof of this, but might make good the
conclusion before set down by this argument. Either Cranmer, after his revolt
from the Catholic church or those that ordered him, were heretics: but
whether he or they were so, he could not have the lawful use, and exercise of
his Bishops power, or order; therefore Cranmer, whether he was heretic or no,
could not have the lawful use of his Bishops order. This argument, supposing
the doctrine of all antiquity to be true (that heretics are not lawful
Bishops) is unanswerable. And though, I say, I might make use thereof, to prove
mine intent without any Farther labor, yet will I for thy greater contentment
(good reader) prove M. Cranmer an heretic, and purge his orderers from that
note, which I will do.

7. First, by his own confession, which M. Fox Sets down at large thus,
Acts page 1710* editionis 1610.
I Thomas Cranmer late Archbishop of Canterbury, do renounce, abhor and
detest, all manner of heresies, and errors of Luther and Zuinglius, and all
other teachings, which be contrary to sound and true doctrines. And I believe
most constantly in mine heart, and with my mo^th I confess one only and
Catholic church visible, without the which there is no salvation, and thereof
I acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be supreme head in earth, whom I
acknowledge to be the highest Bishop, and Pope, and Christ's vicar, unto whom
all Christian people ought to be subject. And after the confession of many
other articles of the Catholic faith he concludes thus. And God is my
witness, that I have not done this for favor, or fear of any person, but
willingly and of mine own mind as well to the discharge of mine own
conscience, as to the instruction of other. In rigor of law this one argument
would suffice to prove Cranmer to have been an heretic, not for this
abiuration, which here he makes, but for that he perfidiously returned to the
errors here abiured, and therein died, as also he had lived in them before.

8. Secondly, the doctrine, which he professed after his separation from the
Roman church, was authentically condemned by the same authority and judgment,
that Arranianisme, and all other heresies have been condemned since the
Apostles time to wit, by the judgment of the same Catholic church, assembled
in a lawful general council at Trent. Where I would have thee (judicious
reader) to observe, that as on the one side nothing can be said in defense, or
favor of this heresy, condemned in the general council of Trent, which the
Arrians might not have said in defense of their heresy condemned in the holy
general council of Nice, the Arrians alleging scripture, and the error of
the Catholic church in defense of their heresy, as well as the Protestants
do for theirs: so on the other side there can be no kind of argument produced
for the proof of the doctrine defined, set down or declared in the Nicene
council, and for the dispoofe of the heresy therein condemned, which may not
in like manner be produced, for the proof of the doctrine of the Tridentine
council, and in disproofe of the heresy, which is in it condemned. For as the
Catholics alleged against the Arians, the authority of scriptures, fathers,
consent and judgment of the church both ancient and modern, so do they also
against the Protestants. Therefore as Arrianisme is a condemned heresy, and the
professors thereof heretics, so likewise is Protestantisme a condemned heresy
and those that profess it be heretics, whereof Cranmer was one.

Thirdly, Cranmer went out, and separated himself from the church, wherein he
was baptized, and ordered, which therefore was before him, and which neither he,
nor any one for him can show to have gone out, or separated it self from any
other church more ancient then ^t, since the Apostles times. But whosoever
goes out of that church, or congregation wherein he is baptized, unless he can
show, that it went out of another more ancient, is an heretic, therefore was
Cranmer an heretic.

Fourtly, Cranmer going out from the Roman church joined himself to that
company, whose first founders or beginners went also out of the same church,
and which cannot derive their Christianity from the Apostles, but by the
descent, and succession of the Roman church, which notwithstanding they left,
and afterward impugned. But he that cannot derive the Cristianitie of that
company, whereunto he has joined himself, from the Apostles, but by the
descent, or succession of that church, which he has forsaken and impugneth, is
an heretic. Therefore was Cranmer an heretic. This shall suffice for the
proof of the second proposition of the argument, whereby was proved the
conclusion before set down. And that M. Mason shall see, that I use no hard
measure of partiality toward Cranmer, I do offer and promise, that if he can
retort or apply, but any one of these four arguments to the orderers of
Cranmer, I will esteem them to have been heretics. It remains therefore
fully proved, that Cranmer through heresy lost the lawful use, and exercise
of his episcopal power and order; and consequently, that he also lost the
power to give true calling to those, whom he ordained in the state of heresy.

9. But here M. Mason out of his love toward the Catholic Roman church,
charitablie warns, that we take heed, least while we go about to put out
their eyes, L. 2. c. 9. n. 3.
we pull out our own. For (says he) if your allegations be sound, what will
become of Bonner, Heath, and Turlby, who were consecrated at such time, when in
your judgment, both the consecrators and consecrated were stained with schism,
and heresy? Did all these receive nothing, because their consecrators had
nothing to give? If they were no Bishops, then what becomes of the Bishops in
Q. Mary's time, whom these did consecrate?

This great difficulty, least we should not be able to solue; M. Mason solueth
for us saying whithin a few lines after, that Cardinal Poole the Popes legate
absolved them from schism and heresy, and so they were confirmed for lawful
Bishops. Can. 8.
The same thing that the council of Nice practiced with the Nouatians, as also
S. Leo with the same, and with the Donatists, the 7. general council with
other heretics (as has been showed before) and which has ever been used in
the church, as occasion occurred. So that M. Mason is not, as I suppose, so
blind, but that he sees well; that in all this, there is no danger of putting
out our eyes: let him look therefore, how he can keep his own, and his
fellows safe; which, unless he can show the like confirmation, and
reconciliation of Cranmer, and the rest descended from him, to the unity of
the Catholic church, which he confesses of Bonner, and the rest objected by
him, they must necessarily remain in the same state, that the Arrians, and
Nouatians were in, whilst they, continued in their heresy, and therefore can
be no lawful Bishops. For they, by the grauest judgment of the whole world
were declared to be no Bishops, as we have seen before out of Theodoretus. And
how impossible it is for M. Mason to show any such reconciliation, Lib. 2 ca. 8.
it is easily understood, seeing there were no Bishops in the whole world, by
whom, or to whom, Cranmer might be reconciled, but those from whom he wilfully
separated himself. For if he think to answer, that Cranmer leaving the
unity of the Roman church, was received into the true church reformed by
Luther, and Zuinglius (who were both his masters, though opposite the one to
the other) he is already prevented in that evasion. For besides that they were no
Bishops, and therefore neither had the true calling of Pastors, nor could give
it to others: there is the same difficulty of their reconciliation, that there
is of Cranmers, they having also gone out of the same Roman church not long
before him, and therefore must either necessarily show some church, whereunto
they were united, after their separation from the Roman, or else must confess
themselves the fou^ders, and beginners of a church never heard of before, or at
least not extant, when they reuoulted, which is as much as any man of judgment
will require, to prove them renegates and heretics.

To conclude therefore this point; it is apparent by that, which has hitherto
been proved, were there no other defect, in the calling of the superintendents
of the now English church, then that which they draw from Cranmer* that they
have no true, and lawful calling at all, no more the^ the Arrians, Nouatians,
and other condemned heretics had: ^ut we shall yet find other matter. And
thus much of Cranmers c^lling, of whose lewd life and deserved death, thou
may good reader, (if thou be disposed) see much in a few lines in that
learned, and unanswerable book, called A prudentiall balance page 234.

The twelueth Chapter. That the Bishops made in King Edwards days were no
true, or lawful Bishops.
1. Having showed in the precedent chapter, that Cranmer after his fall into
heresy (for in King Edwards time he was first a Lutheran, and afterward a
Zuinglian) he was no more lawful Bishop, by the judgment of the most entire
and flourishing church of Christ, in the counsels of Nice, and Sardis, it
follows by necessary consequence, that those that were ordered by him, and
communicated with him in the same heresy, and continued therein, were for the
same reason no Bishops, though they had had no other defect, or impediment at
all. Yet because the Bishops ordained in King Edwards time from whom those of
Queen Elizabeth pretend to derive their Succession are deemed, to have a more
essential defect, then that of heresy either (...) themselves, or in their
ordainers: for the more clear proof of the mere secularitie* and pure
nullitie of the pretended clergy of England, as well as of other falsely
reformed churches: I will here examine the ordination of them, who are
confessed to have been made in the reign of K. Edward, that so we may by
degrees descend to thothers ordained since. These were, a M. Mason says, Lib
2. cap. 11
Nicholas Ridley, Robert Ferrar, John Hoope, John Poynet, John Scory, and miles
Couerdall, whose calling is not only defective, in respect of heresy both in
their callers (which we have seen in the former chapter) and in themselves
(they being confessed to have been Lutherans or Zuinglians) but also in respect
of their calling it self, which is much more essential then the other, this
being oy no means to be repaired without a new ordination, whereas the other
requires only a confirmation, or reconciliation, as we have said before. So
that touching these men, the question is not whether their callers were lawful
Bishops or no, but whether the manner of their calling it self was
substantial, and sufficient or no.

2. M. Mason, who has travailed more painfully, in the maintainaunce of the
calling of the present English clergy, then any other that I know,
confesses, yea evidently proves, that the manner of consecrating Bishops in
K. Edwards time was altered from that, which had been in King Henry's time,
Lib. 2. cap. 11. n. 2* page 94.
and ever before, bringing for this purpose a statute made in the third year
of his reign: which because he fails truly to relate, (whether of purpose,
or of negligence I know not) I will set it down, as it is recorded by M.
Poulton in these words.

Kallend an. 3. Ed. 6. cap. 12. Mason: page 94.
Such form of making and consecrating of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, and other ministers of the church, shall be used and none other, as by
Six Prelates, and Six other men, learned in Gods law (to be appointed by the
king) or the most number of them, shall be devised, and set forth under the
great seal, before the first day of April next. According to this act was
there a form, or manner of making Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
set forth the fifth and Sixth year of king Edward, which, (as M Mason says) was
recalled the first of Q. Mhrie, but reestablished the first of Q. Blizabeth,
and confirmed the eight year of her reign. So that (...) the ministers of
England are ordered according to that book, concerning which I would know
(says he) wherein it transgresses the ecclesiastical manner.

3. Where if M. Mason had opened his mind so far, as to have told what he
means by ecclesiastical manner, it would not be hard to show him that which
he demands. For if he understand by ecclesiastical manner, those words and
actions only, which are expressed in holy scripture: his puritan brethren will
save us a labor: for they will show him, that it transgresses the
ecclesiastical manner in many things. For example, the Litanies, the himne
come holieghost, the oath of supremacy, all the set prayers prescribed in the
rituall, none of all which have any warrant in the scripture. And which is
more: the forms of words used together with the imposition of hands as well in
ordering Deacons, as Priests, and Bishops, are without all warrant of holy
scripture. For where are these words used in making Deaco^s, found in all the
whole Bible? Take thou authority to execute the office of a Deacon, in the
church of God committed unto thee: In the name of the father, and of the son,
and of the holy Ghost: or that the Bishop delivering unto him the new
testament should say: Take thou authority to read the Gospel in the church of
God, and to preach the same, if thou be thereunto ordinarily commanded. Or
where is it recorded, that the Apostles in ordering of Priests either used, or
appointed these words to be used? Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins thou
do forgive* All this is in their rituall, or manner of making Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons printed at London 1607
they are forgiven, and who^e sins thou do retain, they are retained, and be
thou a faithful dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy sacraments, In
the name of the father and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. Or where the
Apostles delivered them the Bible with these words. Take thou authority to
preach the word of God, and to minister the holy sacraments in this
congregation, where thou shall be so appointed. Where is to be noted an absurd
repetition of the same authority, of ministering sacraments given before; which
repetition in matter of sacraments, is sacrilegious, except in case of doubt of
the validity of the former, by some accident extraordinarily occurring. And
in the consecration of Bishops, where are these words prescribed by holy
scripture? Take the holy Ghost: and remember that thou stir up the grace of
God, which is in thee by imposition of hands, for God has not given us the
spirit of fear, but of power, and love, and sobernes.

If M. Mason think to answer, that most of these words are the words of the
holy scripture, and seem to be fitly applied to this purpose: he shall
nothing satisfy. For besides that infinite other words of holy scripture
might be as fitly, and more fitly applied to the same purpose, then many of
these, which notwitstanding, I suppose M. Mason will not say, are any
sufficient form of holy order, unless he will admit many forms of the same
thing: (a proposition never heard of either in Divinity, or Philosophy)
besides this I say, it being manifest, that by holy order (whether it be a
Sacrament or no) is given power to exercise certain ecclesiastical and
Spiritual actions, which have their effect in our souls, and in Gods
Sacraments: which power cannot be given by any man or any other means, but
such as-our savior Christ the author thereof has ordained for that purpose. M.
Mason must either show these words, and actions now repeated to have been
instituted by our Savior Christ, as the lawful means of giving holy order,
or else must he necessarily confess them, to be evidently sacrilegious and
superstitious: Sacrilegious, as an irreuerent abuse of holy things:
Superstitious as applying or ascribing an holy power to a thing that has none
at all And seeing it is manifest, that M. Mason cannot show by holy scripture,
that our Sauiout Christ has instituted these forms of holy orders, and that
in all other points of faith and religion, he rejects the authority of
traditions (and therefore cannot with any show of honesty recurre unto them in
this particular, though they favored him never so much) my wit, I confess,
is too short or shallow to conceive, how M. Mason can justify this their
form, and manner of making Bishops, Priests, and Deacons from evident
sacrilege and superstition or at least mere human inuentious even by his own
judgment deliuerered upon the same matter in these words: Do you mean that
the oil, wherewith the head (of the Bishop) is anointed with these words, be
thy head anointed and consecrated with celestial benediction: or the ring
blessed with prayer and holy water, and put upon his fingar with these words*
receive the ring, the seal of faith: Or the crosier delivered with these words:
receive the staff of the pastoral office: do you mean that these or the like
belong to the offense of episcopal consecration? If you do: you must give us
leave to reject them, because they are only huma^ inventions. The matter of
ordination as you say is certain and determined of God: now where shall we
find the determination of God but in the book of God.

When you can demonstre your rings and crosiers out of the book of God we will
accept them, in the mean while we cannot admit them as essential matter of
ordination* thus fare are his own words page 95.

If we showld now pay him with his own coin, how cowld he possibly justify
their new ordinations? by no means can he do it. But as in other points
hertofore, we have dealt liberally with M. Mason and his fellow reformists
permitting them to recurre to the fortres of Catholic doctrine, when they
could find no refuge in their own: So likewise in this particular will I give
him leave to have recourse to traditions, and to seek refuge there, for the
justification of their orders.

If therefore he say, that he means by ecclesiastical manner that, which has
been used in the church from the beginning, and is brought down from the
Apostles to us, by a not interrupted tradition; his meaning is good, and such
as it should be in this point. But it is so evident, that their manner of
making Bishops, and priests is so different, from the ecclesiastical manner
according to this meaning that I much marvel at M. Masons either boldness, or
blindness, when he says, I would know, wherein it transgresses the
ecclesiastical manner. If M. Mason would but conferr their manner of ordering
Bishops, and Priests, with that of the Roman church, (which because he cannot
show to have begun since the Apostles times, he may safely with S.
Augustine believe it to come from them) he will find it to trangresse the
ecclesiastical manner in so many things, that it does not agree therewith in
any one, unless peradventure in a small shadow, or semblance of words not the
same, but diverse. This needs no other proof then the confronting of their
rituall, with that of the Roman church, which I will leave to M. Maso^ to do,
if he make doubt thereof, and will expect his disproofe therim. Or if he think
not good to compare their manner of ordination with that of the Roman church,
let him bring forth some other if he can, more ancient then it, wherewith
theirs does aggree, and he shall satisfy.

Secondly the words of the statute before rehearsed, if he had not over looked
them, would easily have instructed him in this his demand. For if the new
church hatched in king Edwards time, had approved the ecclesiastical manner
of making Bishops and priests, it had been needles, and very superfluous, to
have employed the prelates and learned in Gods law, to devise (mark I pray you
this word devise, which is the very word of the statute, if M. Poulton relate
it truly) a new form and manner. Hereby M. Mason may see, and all others that
have eyes and will see, that their newly devised manner of consecrating
Bishops and priests (which he confesses to be observed till this day, and
that all their ministers are no otherwise ordered) is a mere humane devise and
invention, Page 95. fine.
(and therefore by his own judgment to be rejected) but of yesterdaies standing
neither authorized by scripture, nor approved by ecclesiastical tradition, a
mere shadow without substance, indented by giddie heads, and unquiet Spirits
greedy of novelty, authorized first by the temporal power of a child in
noneage, and after confirmed by the like authority of a woman, contrary to
the practice of the whose Christian world present, and without instance or
example in any age for above fifteen hundred years. And therefore does M
Mason discover to much his blind affection, when he says, I would know wherein
it transgresses the ecclesiastical manner. 6 M. Mason to his former words
adds. Sanders says, that King Edward took away the ceremony. What
ceremony? If he mean the ceremony of imposition of hands, he slaundreth King
Edward: If he mean their blessings, offerings, and crosiers; the gravity of
that sacred action may well spare them: as for the solemn unction, your selves
confess it to be accidental, other of your ceremonies being partly
superfluous, partly superstitious: the wisdom of our church has discretlie
and religiously pared them away, establishing (mark this) such a form, as is
holy and acceptable in Gods sight.

Sanders does not speak of taking away any ceremonies, but says directly,
that altogether a new form of ordering was prescribed by parliament, in King
Edwards days, which appearing to be true by the same form yet observed, as M.
Mason confesses, Saunders does not slander King Edward, but M. Mason either
slaudereth or corrupts Saunders. But why does he not here set down, by what
authority the wisdom of their church does shave, and pare away such large
portions of those holy rites, which the wisdom of the universal church of
Christ has so long observed, that the beginning thereof cannot be found, and in
their steed has established a new form of their own invention, that is not
so old as themselves, and they little older then King Edward the sixth. Can any
man of judgment think, that these men have any spark of Christian religion
in them? or the least reverence to the mysteries of Gods holy church? who make
no scruple to cut and pare, chop and change in the holiest actions, whatsoever
their fancy disliketh? these men I say, that breath nothing but scripture:
Psalm. 4.3.
O ye Sons of men how long will you love vanity and seek after lies?

M. Mason for all this in the two pages following earnestly contendeth, Page
95. and 96.
that the church of England (notwithstanding the alteration made in the manner
of ordination) still retains the essential matter of Episcopal order: to
wit, imposition of hands: and likewise the essential form of the same order,
consisting (as he says) in these words: Receive thou the holy ghost: whence
it will necessarily fallow, that they are true Bishops. But he neither
proves that these two things here mentoined belong to the essential matter,
and form of Episcopal order, nor yet that nothing else belongs thereunto. And
yet the verity of both these points does so much import, to the trial of the
question in hand, that if either of them should be found false, our English
superintendents will evidently be proved no lawful Bishops, and
consequently M. Mason shall fall far short of his purpose here aimed at.
Wherefore it behooued him to have made some better proof of them, then his own
bare assertion. And seeing the proof of these thing belongs evidently to
him, as maintaining the affirmative, and that therefore no man can justly
exact, or expect any more of me in this particular then that which pertains
to the defendant, which is only to answer the arguments of mine adversary.
Yet notwithstanding in assurance that the clear truth stands on my side, I
will willingly, heerin make my self actor, and prove against him the
negative of his assertion: which for more distinct, and clare manner of
proceeding, and to avoid the tediousnes of long chapters, I will handle apart
under this title.

The thirteenth Chapter. The whole essential matter, and form of Episcopal
order consist not in imposition of hands, and these words, receive thou the
holy ghost.
1. FOr the more easy explication of this question, it is first to be
observed, that the precise matter and form of no one Sacrament is so clearlie
expressed in holy scripture, but that without the authority of the church,
and tradition, there may be doubt, and question made thereof. This is evident
even in Baptism it self. For this form N. I baptize thee in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost which is used in all the west
church: Or this form, Be the servant of Christ baptized in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, which is used in the east
church, is no where in these terms expressed in the holy scripture. The same
I say of the matter, which all men hold to be elementall, or natural water,
and no other, which notwithstanding is no where expreslie prescribed in holy
scripture. The precise matter and form likewise of the holy Eucharist, are not
so expressly set down in holy scripture but (were it not fore the churches
authority) there might, as also there have been questions thereof. And here by
the way it may be noted, how necessary the authority of the church and
tradition is, for the supporte of the very grounds of Christian faith and
doctrine: and that therefore not without cause S. Paul styles the church the
pillar: and ground of truth.

1. Timoth. 3.15.
2. Secondly it is to be observed, that the precise matter, and form of diverse
Sacraments, and amongst others of holy orders (which according to Catholic
doctrine I suppose to be a Sacrament, because this does neither advantage me,
nor disadvantage mine adversary in the present question) are not so expressed
either in any Council, or the ancient fathers, but that there are diverse
probable opinions in the same, according to the probable grounds that are
found, either in reason or authority. For the holy counsels and fathers not
making ritualls, nor explicating at large the whole order, or manner of
ministering all Sacraments, but delivering to their posterity the practice of
that manner, which they received from their Predecessors, do not prescribe in
what precise things, actions, or words the matter and form of all Sacraments
de consist, nor of this in particular, which now is in question. Hence it
comes, that those Catholic Doctors, that have had occasion to treat of
this matter, finding no precise rule prescribed unto them, neither in the
scriptures, Counsels, nor Fathers, have delivered their judgment thereupon
diversely, according to the diverse grounds which every one thinks most
probable. And therefore if any showld say that the essential matter of
Episcopal order is the only imposition of hands (which notwithstanding I find
not affirmed by any but one only auctor) others will join thereunto the unction
used in that action, and also the delivery of those things which are exhibited
in consecration, as the book of Gospels, the Pastoral staff, and ring:
Others excluding the imposition of hands from the order of priesthood, as not
pertaining to the essence thereof and therefore seem also to exclude it from the
essential mattet of episcopal order: none of these opinions touching the
matter showld be certainly false, nor yet any of them certainly true. And
because the common judgment of the form of holy order is, that it consists
in those words, which declare the power of the order given, and are uttered
when the matter is delivered, the form likewise of episcopal order comes to
be in such sort uncertain, as it is not certainly known in which words
preciselie it does consist.

Neither does the church of God suffer any detriment hereby being assured,
that she has the true matter and form, which the Apostles delivered her from
our savior Christ, though it be not known in what words, or actions
preciselie they do consist: as it happens in like uncertainty, and
diversity of opinions, about the precise matter and form of matrimony, some
saying the matter thereof to be the mutual consent of the party, expressed by
words of the present tense, Ca^. de locis l. 8. cap. 5. Palud. in 4. di. 26.
qu. 4. Adrian. qu. 1. de matri.
and form to be the words of the priest joining the^ together: others, that
the persons co^tracting are the matter, and the words expressing their
co^se^ts, the form* others that the words of the persons co^tracting are both
matter and form in such sort, as the words of that party, that last
expresses his consent, are the form, and thothers that went before, In 4. di.
26. q. 2. ar. 1. qu. 245. de Sacramentis. In caput. tua nos. extra de
sponsalibus. Manuale ca. 22. n. 20.
the matter, so S. Thomas, and victoria: others, that the matter is the
mutual, and inward consent of the parties contracting the form, the words of
the same parties expressing the same consent, so the Canonists commonly and
Navarre: all which diversity of opinions in this precise point, does bring no
inconvenience at all to the church, or Christian common wealth, so long as
nothing is omitted, that by any opinion belongs to the true matter, and
form. But if any one should be so peremptory in his private opinion, as to
exclude all other but that, which he thinks the true matter, and form, he
should make all marriages doubtful, which must needs bring great inconvenience
to the whole Christian world, as all men evidently see: And this is true
whether matrimony be a Sacrement or no: for that does neither help nor hinder
in this present question. The like or greater inconvenience does necessarily
follow in-the whole church, if all her pastors, and ministers should be ordered
with such matter, and form, as in some men's opinion only is true, and not in
others. For if it should prove, that their opinion should be true, that hold
imposition of hands, and these words Receive the holy Ghost; are not the true
matter and form of this order, then would it necessarily follow, that such as
should be ordained therewith are no true Bishops. He cites Sal meron
Incarnatus, Navarre, Soto, for the contrary opinion, and might have added
others: citing only Bellarmin for this own, and him falsely, page 95.
Conclusion.
Seeing therefore M. Mason is not ignorant of this variety of opinions in this
present question (which he relates in part) and himself brings no better,
not yet so good ground of his opinion, as others do of theirs, it is marvel
unto me, that he should so pere^ptorilie say, that their Bishops are ordered
with the true matter, and form. But he does well to be bold in affirminge, for
a good face sometimes helps out an ill game.

3. My conclusion is, that the sole imposition of hands with these words,
Receive the holy Ghost, is not the whole, true, and essential matter and
form of Episcopal order, and consequently, that those, that are ordained
with them alone, as our English superintendents are confessed to be, are not
truly ordained, nor are any true Bishops. This conclusion I prove first by
this negative argument. Neither scriptures, Counsels, Fathers, nor Divines one
only escepted do teach, that the sole impositio^ of hands, and these words
Receive the holy ghost, are the whole essential matter, and form of
Episcopal order: therefore is it affirmed without ground. Bellarnime does
prove in the place alleged by M. Mason, De Sacrame^tis ordinis lib. 1. c. 9.
that imposition of hands does belong to the essential matter of preesthood,
but he joins therewith as more principal the delivery of the chalice, with
the paten and host, and of the matter of Episcopal order, he says nothing.
And M. Maton brings four other Catholic authors, that exclude imposition
of hands, from the essential matter of holy order, which shows that it is
but probable at the most, that imposition of hands pertameth, to the essential
matter of holy order: but that it should be the whole and sole essential
matter, is no way probable. Neither do I think M. Mason would say it were
probable, but that he is forced unto it, not having other means to maintain
for good, the newly devised manner of ordination of their Bishops, whereupon I
appeal to his own judgment, whether that manner of ordination, devised by the
six Prelates, and other six learned in the law of God, appointed by King Edward
for that purpose, is more like to be that manner of ordination, which the
Apostles themselves used, and left unto their successors, then that which was
over and is still used through the whole Christian church.

4. Again whether this new form of ordination was established by parliament,
upon any grounded persuasion, that it was conformable to the manner used by
the Apostles: or rather as a mean both to leave the Catholic manner, and yet
to retain some external semblance of ordination, the world being not yet
ready to receive the refined reformation, which we see smee to have crept in
amongst those, that have apostated from the union of the Catholic Roman
church, and by which is rejected as superstitious, not only this parlementarie
fashion of ordination but the very order of Bishops it self it is not very
doubtful. And that this second was the drift at least of him, that first put
into men's hearts the revolt, and separation from the unity of the Catholic
church, it is plain enough by the book called; the form and manner of
ordination, and admission of Pastors to their church, according to the manner
of the reformed churches: Printed at Middelberrough by Richard S. Hilders 1602.
which prescribes quite another fashion of ordinatio^, the^ that of the
pa^leme^t of king Edward, and makes a new Hierarchy of the church to wit, of
Elders, Deacons, and ministers, Bishops, being esteemed by them, as all the
world knows, Antichristian instruments. Whose senseles and absurd heresies I
see not, but M. Mason and his fellows must accept of, and acknowledge for
necessary reformations, by the same rule, that they pretend to have reformed
the Catholic Roman church. But I will proceed in the proof of my conclusion.

5. Secondly the uniform doctrine of those that have written of holy order
tracteth, that the matter thereof consists in the delivery of the
instruments proper to every order, as of Deaconship the book of the Gospells;
of priesthood the chalice, and paten with the host, and so in the other orders:
And that the form consists in those words, which are uttered together with
the delivery of the matter, and express the authority given by the same,
which in deaconship are these. Take power to read the Gospel in the church of
God, as well for the living as for the dead, in the name of our lord Amen. In
preisthood they are these. Take power to off her sacrifice to God, and to
celebrate mass as well for the living as for the dead, in the name of our
lord. Amen. And the like in the rest of holy orders. Therefore Episcopal order
ought in all reason, to have like matter and form, which cannot be imposition
of hands, and these words Receive the holy Ghost, because neither the one, nor
the other apart, nor yet both together do express the power given in that
order: but they rather express the giving of the holy Ghost, whereby the
consecrated is disposed or made fit, to exercise well, and worthily the power
and authority given by that order.

Thirdly seeing there want not in Episcopal consecration, the like sensible
matter, and signifying form, which are of all deuines confessed to be the
essential matter and form of other orders. As for example, the anointing of
the head of him that is consecrated with holy chrisme, with these words Be thy
head anointed, and consecrated with heavenly blessing in Episcopal order:
Besides are delivered him the pastoral staff, the ring, the book of Gospels,
all with several words aptly expressing the power given by that order, it is
most probable that they pertain to the essential matter, and form of this
order, I say most probable, because we have nothing clearlie certain in this
point, neither by scripture^, Counsels, nor Fathers, as is before noted.

And this doctrine for as much as concerns the anointing of the Bishops head,
which seems to some least probable, is confirmed by the testimony of most
ancient Fathers. For S* Clement Pope and disciple of the Apostles says, Epist.
3 ad vniuersos.
that every Bishop anointed with holy chrisme, placed in the city, and learned
in holy scriptures, ought to be dear, and honored of all men. And Pacianus of
equal antiquity with S. Ambrose, whence (says he) can your people have the
holy Ghost, whom an anointed Priest has not confirmed? Whereby this holy Father
seems to ascribe the giving of the holy Ghost in confirmation, Epist. 3. ad
S^mpronian: The fame may we say to our English superintendents.
to the unction of the Bishop that gives it; and therefore must of necessity
esteem it to be essential to be Episcopal order.

I know that a certain schooleman of these days holds for probable that the
imposition of hands, and these words accipe Spiritum Sanctu^ are the true
matter and form of Episcopal order. His grounds are these. First that at the
least three Bishops are by divine ordinance necessary to Episcopal
consecration. Secondly. that it is necessary that the true minister of holy
order apply the matter of order unto the ordered, and therefore if one only
Bishop apply the matter of Episcopal order it is not sufficient, because one
Bishop alone (without commission given him for that purpose) is not the true
minister of that order. Thirdly that only that action of imposing hands is
performed by all the three Bishops. Whereupon he infers that that action is
the true matter, and the words pronounced together with the same, are the form
of Episcopal consecration. How true or probable his discourse is, I mean not
here to dispute, but (be the grounds thereof what they will) I will for M Masons
advantage suppose the conclusion to be probable, which is as much as he can
expect, and more then he can exact. Now what will he infer heervpo^ for his
purpose.

6. If he say, that his opinion concerning the matter and form of Episcopal
order being probable, it will follow, that their Bishops are at least probably
Bishops: I will answer him: First, that though it be probable, that imposition
of hands, and these words Receive the holy Ghost appertain to the essential
matter, and form of Episcopal order, yet is it not probable, that they are
the whole essential matter and form thereof, because there is no probable
ground of this, as is showed in the first argument against this opinion, and
therefore are not their intendents so much as probable Bishops.

Secondly, be it probable (for the auctority of that one modern writer now
mentioned) that the whole essential matter, and form of Episcopal order
consist in the imposition of hands, and these words Receive the holy Ghost: and
consequently, that their superintendents are probably Bishops; yet will it not
thence follow, that it is so much as probable, that they have the lawful
calling of Bishops, because the lawful calling of the Pastors of Gods church
does not hang upon probabilities, but requires infallible certainties, for so
much at least as appertains to their essential ordination, without including
matter of fact: for otherways all their actions (as they are Bishops and
Pastors) should be but probably canonical, and therefore uncertain, whence
would necessarily rise an irremediable confusion in the church, which
notwithstanding is called in the scripture an army well ordered. Cant. 6.3.
Therefore he that in ministering, or receiving holy order, leaves the known,
certain, and received matter and form, and uses that which is only probable,
does not only commit sacrilege by his temeritie, but is also bound to renew
the same action, by the accustomed matter and form, at least under condition
or else to supply that which was omitted. For though in human and moral
actions, which have no other rule but humane reason, and prudence (which for
the most part in matters of difficulty is but probable) it is sufficient, to
excuse us from sinning in them, that we work according to a probable opinion,
yet is it otherways in sacramental actions, which have not for rule any
humane reason, but divine institution, and ordination, made known unto us, by
the infallible testimony either of the holy scripture, or of the doctrine and
practice of the church of Christ, which (as is noted before) is the pillar and
ground of truth. 1. Timoth. 3


M. Mason will peradventure yet farther object, that there is no mention made
in the holy scriptures, of any other thing appertaining to the essential
matter, and form of holy order, but only of imposition of hands, and these
words Receive the holy Ghost and therefore are all other things to be rejected
as man's inventions, and not divine ordinations. But first if he will be so
rigorous, as to accept of nothing as pertaining to the essential matter, and
form of holy order, but that which is expressed in holy scripture as
appertaining thereunto, without all respect to the authority of the church and
ecclesiastical tradition, then must he reject the matter, and form prescribed
in their ordinall not only of Deacons, and Priests, which are not expressed in
holy scripture, but even those wherein he would the essential matter, and form
of episcopal order to consist. For though these words Receive the holy Ghost
are in holy scripture, John 21.
and that there is often mention made of imposition of hands, yet are these two
never joined together in holy scripture, nor prescribed as the matter and form
of Episcopal order. In their doctrine. Whence it follows, that if M. Mason
will either have Deacons, Priests, or Bishops in their church, he must be
forced to give so much credit to the authority of the church and tradition, as
to receive from them, the essential matter, and form of these orders. which
being so, he will farther evidently find, that their superintendents having
not been consecrated with that matter and form, which the church from ancient
times used cannot be any true Bishops.

Again, the scripture with imposition of hands joins always prayer in the
ordination of Deacons, Priests, or Bishops, as appears in the places cited in
the margent, and therefore does the scripture mention something usual in holy
orders, besides imposition of hands, and these words Receive the holy Ghost.
Acts 6.6. and cap. 13.1
Now what these prayers were, seeing the scripture does not specify them, how
can we better know, then by the church, which received them of the Apostles?
And that they were not these words only, which M. Mason will have the only
essential form of holy order, is manifest by S. Ambrose, saying. In 1.
Timoth. 4.
The imposition of hands is mystical words, wherewith the elect is confirmed,
and made apt to his function, receiving authority (his conscience bearing
witness) that he may be bold in our lords steed to offer sacrifice to God. And
S. Hierome. The imposition of hands is the ordering of clearkes, which is done
by prayer of the voice, and imposition of the hand. From all which I infer,
In Esay^ cap. 58.
that although it be not certain, what words or actions preciselie are the
essential matter, and form of episcopal order, as is before noted, yet is it
evident, that the matter and form assigned by M. Mason, is not sufficient to
the true ordination of Bishops, being more then doubtful, not to be the whole
true matter and form, and consequently, the ordinations of their
superintendents made thereby to be esteemed none at all. And that this is the
judgment of all those both Catholics and Protestants, who ought to have
known best the manner of their ordination, I will prove by two or three
clear arguments.

First M. Fox speaking of the degredation of Ridley (one of those that were
made Bishops in King Edwards days, Acts page 1604.
and consecrated after this new manner as M. Mason supposes) says, that
Doctor Brook, Bishop of Gloucester delegated for that action of degredation
told him, that they were to degrade him only of Priesthood, for that they did
not take him for a Bishop. But if he had been truly ordered, they could not
have denied him to have been a true Bishop, no more then Cranmer, whom they
degraded as Archbishop. To this proposition of the Bishop of Gloucester, Ridley
replied not one word, nor pleaded any thing to the contrary, but by his silence
showed, that he consented thereunto, according to the received maxim. Qui
tacet, consentire videtur. In which case he would not doubtless have been so
mute (seeing he wanted not words in other occasions of far less moment) had
he not known himself to have been not true Bishop nor truly consecrated.
Where it is to be observed, that M. Mason brings this very objection of D.
Brooks words to Ridley, Pap 92.
against the consecration of those, that were ordered in K. Edwards time, and
confirms it greatly, for that he answers it not otherways, but by this
impertinent question: what was not he, and all the rest of them consecrated by
a competent number? As though the question had been of the number of their
consecrators, and not of the matter and form of their consecration it self.

Acts page 1711.
Secondly M. Fox says, because that Ridley, Hooper, and Ferrare were not able
to make even with Bishop Firsher, it seemed that Cranmer should be joined to
them to fill up the equality. But if they had been in M. Foxes opinion true
Bishops as well as Cranmer, surely their deaths would in his conceit have
equalled Bishop Fishers, or else Cranmers would not do it, in whom there was
nothing more, then there was in them, excepting the true consecration of a
Bishop. So that it appears even by M. Foxes judgment, that Ridley, and his
fellows were not esteemed true Bishops, as Cranmer was, and that not for any
other defect, then for want of true consecration. And what judgment the whole
realm made of the ordinations in king Edwa^^s reign is evident by this
article of Qeene Marie recorded by Fox. Item touching such persons as were
heertofore promoted to any orders after the new sort and fashion of orders:
considering they were not ordered in very deed: Acts and monu. page 1295.
the Bishop of the diocese, finding otherwise sufficiency and ability in
these men, may supply that thing which wanted in them before, and then
according to his discretion admit them to minister. For albeit M. Mason would
gather out of these words: (may supply that thing which wanted in them before)
that they had some part or piece of order by their new manner of ordination.
Yet neither does this serve him to any purpose for the justification of their
calling, nor yet can it stand with these plain words of the article:
considering they were not ordered in very deed: for the plain meaning of the
article is that those who had no orders, but such as they had received by the
new fashion, should (being found fit) be ordered: but such as had received some
orders before as of Subdeacon or Deacon, and the rest only after the new
fashion should have that they wanted, supplied by their Catholic ordinary.

Thirdly it is recorded in books of law cases, that the leases made by the
Bishops consec^^ted in king Edwards time, though confirmed by the Deane an^
chapter, were not esteemed auailable, and the reason is given, because those
Bishops were never truly consecrated, and consequently never true Bishops. The
judges words are these. Dicitur, Brooks nou^ll cases Placito 463. fol. 101
printed the year 1604. by Tho: wight with privilege.
que Euesques in tempore Ed. 6. ne fueront sacres and ideo ne fueront Euesques,
and ideo lease pur ans, per tiels and conferinde per le Deane and Chapter, ne
liera le successeur, car tiels ne vnques fueront Euesques contra de Euesques
deprive que fuit Euesques in fait tempore dimissionis, and confirmation fait.
viz: per le Deanne and chapter: which in English word for word is this. It is
said that Bishops in K. Edward the sixth his days were not consecrated, and
therefore were not Bishops, and therefore a lease for years made by them, and
confirmed by the Deane and Chapter, shall not bind the successor, for such
were never Bishops. Contrariwise of a Bishop deprived which was Bishop in fact
at the time of the letting and confirmation made by the Deane, and Chapter. And
in the margent. Leas per Euesques nient sacres and per Euesques depriues
diversity. That is; Diversity of leases made by Bishops not consecrated, and
Bishops deprived. So that it appears by the judgment as well of the civil, as
Ecclesiastical Magistrates, that the superintendents of King Edwards time were
no true Bishops for want of true consecration yea M. Ridley himself (pretended
Bishop of London) sueing unto Q. Marie (as Fox relates) that the leases made
by him, during the time of his usurpation of that see, might stand good, does
evidently show, that he either esteemed himself, or at least know that others
esteemed him not true, or lawful Bishop. For otherwise he would not have
supplicated for that as a grace and favor, but would have demanded it as a
thing due by right and justice. Before I proceed any farther, I will advertise
thee (heedfull reader) that albeit the arguments following are directly against
the consecration of the Bishops in Q. Elizabeth's time, yet have they the same
force against those of King Edwards time, for they were al ordered after the
same manner, as is evident by the statute of the 8. of Elizabeth, which shall be
set down by and by, which I would have to be borne in mind, that it may not be
needful to repeat the same things hereafter, when we shall come to speak of
the Bishops made in herre time.

8. My fourth argument therefore, proouing all these pretended Bishops to have
been no true and lawful Bishops, even by the judgment of the Protestants
themselves is drawn from that notorious, and public case of Bishop Bo^ner,
which was this.

Bishop Bonner being prisoner in the Marshalsae was conuented by M. Horn,
called then Bishop of Winchester, and lodging at that time in Winchester house
by the clinke, who tendered to him the oath of supremacy, which Bishop Bonner
refusing, his refusal was certified to the Kings bench, and thereupon an
indictment was drawn against him upon the statute. He was called for, and
appeared before the judges of the Kings bench. The indictment being read he
denied not the fact, but desired to have council assigned him, Judge Catline
chief Justice granted his request, and assigned him M. Plowdon, M. Wray, and
M. Louelaise, who at the pleading of the case excepted against the indictment.
First, because he was indicted by the name of Edmond Bonner without the title of
Bishop, he being at that present lawful Bishop of London, and therefore the
inditment insufficient. Secondly, because the oath was said to have been
tendered unto him by Robert Horn Bishop of Winchester, who was by no law
Bishop, and therefore had no authority to tender him the oath. These points
were first argued at the bar by the Bishops council, and after by all the
judges at Sargeants Inn in Fleetstreete, in Judge Catline, the chief Justice
his chamber, where, after much debate as Judge Pyer reports it was resolved
by all the judges, Abrigment of Diers reports 7. Eliza. 234.
that Bishop Bonner his plea upon this issue; that he was not culpable because
Horn was no Bishop when he tendered him the oath, should be received: and that
the jury should try it: now what the trial was, appears by that he was not
condemned nor ever troubled any farther for that case: thaugh he was a man
specially shot at. Hereupon in the next parliament, which was holden the year
following to wit the 8. year of Elizabeth (and this may be another argument,
for proof of the nullitie of these new superintendents) this act was made.

9. Such form and order, for the consecrting of Archbishops, Bishops, Poulton
in his calendar page 141. n. 5.
Priests etc. as was set forth in the time of King Edward the sixth shall
stand, and be in full force and effect, and all acts and things hertofore had,
made, or done by any person, or persons in or about any consecration,
confirmation, or inuesting of any person, or persons, elected to the office or
dignity of Archbishop, Bishop, -- by virtue of the Queens letters patents, or
commission, sithence, the beginning of her reign, be and shall be by authority
of this parliament declared and judged -- good and perfect in all respects, and
purposes: any matter or thing that can or may be objected to the contrary
thereof in any wise, notwithstanding. And all persons that have been or shall be
made, ordered or, consecrated Archbishops, Bishops, Priests after the form and
order prescribed, in the same form and order, be in very deed and also by
authority hereof declared, and enacted to be, and shall be Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests etc. and rightly made, ordered and consecrated any Statute, Law, Canon,
or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding 8. Eliza. 1. Poulton ibidem.
This statute does argue that the former statute of the 8, of Eliza. did not
wholly warrant these new Bishops for if it hadd, this would have been
superfluous.


In the 39. year of Elizabeth, there were also two other statutes made, the
one for the ratifying, and making good in law the depositions, and deprivations
of Archbishops, Bishops, and Deanes, from the beginning of her reign till the
tenth day of November in the 4. year of the same: and the other for the
ratifying, and making good in law the placing of other Archbishops, Bishops,
and Deanes, in the rooms of the deposed with in the compass of the same time,
no ambiguitie or question either hertofore made, or hereaftet to be made, to
the contrary notwithstanding.

By all which it is manifest, that the Bishops ordained as well in King Edwards
time, as in Q. Elizabeth's, were not otherways Bishops, but by act of
parliament, for before these acts, they were judged by the fathers of the law to
be no Bishops, as we have already seen.

10. M. Mason peradventure will vnty us this knot, let us hear what he says.
Lib. 3 de schismate Mason page 121.
He makes to himself this objection out of Sanders. They (Matthew Parker with
his fellows) being destitute of all lawful ordination, when they were
commonly said, and proved by the laws of England to be no Bishops, they were
constrained to crave the assistance of the secular power that they might
receive the confirmation of the lay Magistrate in the next parliament, by
authority whereof if any thing were done amiss, and not according to the
prescript of the law, or omitted and left undone in the former inauguration, it
might be pardoned them: And that, after they had enioied the Episcopal office,
and chair certain years without any Episcopal consecration. Hence it was
that they were called Parliament Bishops. Hereunto M. Mason frames this answer.

Page 122.
The Parliament mentioned was in the 8. year of Q. ^lizabeth, wherein first they
reprove the overmuch boldness of some, which slandered the estate of the
clergy, by calling into question, whether their making, and consecrating were
according to the law.

Well then their consecration was questionable, and doubtful, and therefore
(though there had been no other cause) to be rejected. For what wisdom could
it be after 1500. years to bring into the world, a new manner of ordination of
Pastors, and that doubtful whether it be sufficient or no, and to leave of
that, which no man ever doubted of? But farther it was not only called into
question, but as it appears before, proved to be none at all.

Mason ibidem.
Secondly, they touch such laws as concern the point, declaring that every
thing requisite and material, was done as precisely in her Majesty's time, as
ever before.

But what laws were these? Certainly they could be none other the^ those made
in Ed. the 6. his reign. For if any other be meant, both the parliament, and M.
Mason should avouch a manifest untruth, saying, that every thing requisite and
material, was done as precisely in her majesty's time, as ever before: seeing
there was nothing observed of the ancient form, and manner, which before K.
Edwards time was not altered. The laws therefore here mentioned must
necessarily be those of K. Edward. But the question in the parliament of the 8.
of Elizabeth being, as yet it is, of the validity, and sufficie^cy of that
form of ordinatio^ devised in K. Edwards time, it does no way appear, how
either the parliament the^ did, or M. Maso^ now does show it to be sufficient,
but only by force of that act, whereof we now speak: which notwithstanding (as
M. Mason supposes) gives no force, nor valor to their consecration, nor
makes it good, but supposes it to be good of it self; so that betwixt both
these acts of parliament, I mean that of K. Edward, and the other of Q. Elizabeth,
their new manner of consecration remains as sufficient as ever.

Thirdly, they confirm again the book of common prayer, ^ Mason.
with the for^^^ thereunto annexed, enacting that all persons, that then had
been, or hereafter should be made, ordered, or consecrated Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests etc. after the form and order herein prescribed, were by
authority thereof declared, and enacted to be Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests
etc. rightly made, ordered, and consecrated, any Statute, Law, Canon, or
other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Whereby it is evident, that the
parliament did not make them Bishops, but being in rerie deed true Bishops by
lawful consecration, that honorable court did declare, and enact them so to
be. But what say the Papists to all this? when they cannot infringe their
consecration, for a poor revenge they call our religion parliament religion,
and our Bishops parliament Bishops.

If they had been in very deed true Bishops by lawful consecration, this act
of parliament (being only to declare that to be good and lawful, which in it
self was such, and which the prince, and parliament had power to maintain as
such, by ordinary course of law without any new act) should have been wholly
superfluous (a thing not to be admitted in acts of parliament) for no act was
ever made only to declare that good and lawful, which was known or holden to
be so before by the learned council of the land.

Secondly these words of the statute. All persons that have been, or shall be
made, ordered, or consecrated Archbishops, Bishops etc, after the form
prescribed in the said order (of Edward the 6.) be in very deed, and also by
authority hereof declared, and enacted to be, and shall be Archbishops, Bishops
etc. and rightly made, ordered, and consecrated, any Statute, Law, Canon, or
other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. These words, I say, do clearelie
show, that this act does not only declare these ordinations to be good (which
yet is more then it can do, being but the decree of a temporal court) but does
enact, and if it could) make them good, and that so peremptorily, that no law
neither divine nor humane (for so much do importe these words, Statute, Law,
Canon, or other thing) can withstand it. A peereles power I wisse, and such as
was never heard o^ before in any Christian common wealth: yet such an one, as
is altogether necessary to make the aforesaid ordinations good. For if the
power of the parliament be not above the power both of the whole church, and of
God himself, these ordinations warranted neither by Gods word, nor the
practice of the church for 1500. Years and more, must necessarily be none at
all; and therefore with very good reason are their Bishops called parliament
Bishops, seeing their manner of ordination was first instituted by act of
parliament and since the ordination it self, has received the force of true
ordination, by act of parliament, which it had not before. For if we should take
away the statute of the 5. and 6. year of Edward the 6. establishing the new
form of ordering Bishops, devised by the six prelates, and other six learned
in Gods law, as we have seen before; and this statute of the 8. of Elizabeth,
I marvel whence M. Mason would derive their ordination, and by what
authority he would maintain it to be good and Canonical. Certainly by none
either in heaven, or in earth. Yea if their own Judges, professors of their
own new religion, supported by the countenance and favor of the Queen her
self, and whole state, could not by law maintain their new ordination from
nullitie in their own courts, but that it was euicted against them, as
appears by the case of B. Bonner set down before (whereupon was made this
peremptory, and beyond all measure presumptuous all of the 8. of Elizabeth)
who can deny, but if we take away this act, their ordination will remain
none, and consequently their Bishops no Bishops, and therefore if they now be
Bishops, they must necessarily be parliament Bishops.

11. M. Mason not finding any colorable answer hereunto, notwithstanding the
flant of words, which we have seen before, would willingly retort the same
inconvenience upon Catholics in this wise. Might not we say as well that in
Queen Mary's time, you had a parliament mass, and a parliament Pope? But I
appeal to his own judgment (though I know him blindlie partial in his own
cause) whether there be the like comparison between the Mass, or the Popes
authority, and the parliament in Q. Mary's time, that there is between the
form, or manner of consecrating Bishops, devised and authorized (I use the
words of the statute) in K. Edw. and Q. Elizab. time? If he say yea, he shall
forfaict his judgment for ever. For who knows not, that the Mass, and the
Popes authority were not only in England, but all the world over, many
hundredth years before Q. Mary's reign? which cannot be said of their new
form of ordaining Bishops. For (...) Q. Marie did not enact by parliament, that
the Mass should be a true Mass, and the Popes authority a true authority,
what law, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding, as this act of Q
Elizabeth says of the new superintendents and of their manner of consecration:
But her act was to authorize the free use, and frequentatio^ of the Mass, with
the acknowledgment of the Popes authority in her kingdom, which all her
royal progenitors, and predecessors had frequented, and acknowledged, since
Ethelbert the first Christian king of our country together with all other
kings, and Princes in the Christian world. So that neither the Mass, nor the
Popes authority depend otherways of the parliament, then that it may be free
for every subject of the king of England, to acknowledge both the one and
the other, without incurring the penalty of the temporal laws. And therefore
though the free use of them may be taken away, by unjust and unlawful act of
parliament, as we see practiced, yet can neither the one nor the other be made none
by act of parliament, as it would fall out with their superintendents, add the
manner of their consecration, if those acts were taken away, whereby they are
devised and authorized. And the reason hereof is manifest. For neither the
Mass, nor the Popes authority have their beginning and institution by act of
parliament, as the ordinations of our new superintendents have, and therefore can
they not be made frustrate, and of no value by any power of the same, as these
may be. Whence it is manifest that by very good reason, the pretended Bishops
of England are called parliament Bishops, and consequently no Bishops at all,
because the parliament cannot have any power to make Bishops: and that without
all reason, or show of reason, the Mass is said to be a parliament mase. But
let us go for word. 12. Sixtlie, the nullitie of this new manner of
consecration is proved by an objection, which M* Mason brings against
himself, and answeareth it not. The objection he proposes thus.

If their consecrations were found (he speaks of D. Parker and his fellows
consecrated in the 2. and 3. year of Q. Elizabeth as he says) Why did the
Queen in her letters patents, Page 132.
directed for the consecrating of them use diverse general words and sentences,
whereby she dispensed with all causes, or doubts of any imperfection, or
dishabilitie, that could or might be objected in any wise against the same, as
may appear by an 8. Eliz. ca. 1^
act of parliament, referring us to the said letters patents remaining upon
record.

M. Mason finding no sufficient answer to this objection (though not pressed
so far, as if he had set down these letters pate^ts, peradventure he might
be) recurreth to the depth of her Majesty's designs, and hides himself there,
as in a Sanctuary: Whither he thinks no man dares aproach to give him the
pursuit, and thence as from a sure hold he delivers his conjecture in these
words.

She might entertain some reason in her Royal breast, which you and I, and
such shallow heads are not able to conceive: But if I might presume to give my
conjecture, I suppose she did it ad maiorem cautelam: for there wanted not
malicious Papists, which would pry into the state of the clergy, and observe
the least imperfection that could be, whereupon to prevent their slanders, and
to stopp the mouths of malice, that gracious Queen was not only careful,
that every thing requisite, and material, should be made, and done as
preciselie as ever before, but also to the end that all men might be satisfied,
that all doubt, scruple, and ambiguitie might be taken away, and that there
should not the least spot of suspicion cleave unto her clergy, it pleased her
majesty (if peradventure quick sighted malice could find any quick, or
quidditie against them, by color of any Canon or Statute) graciously to
dispense with it: which does not argue any unsoundness in their consecrations,
but the Godly care, and providence of a religious prince.

But M. Masons conjecture comes far short, of the difficulty contained in
the objection. For either there was some true, and real defect in these men's
consecrations, or no. If none it was very impertinentlie, and imprudently
done (which, in public acts of princes, and parlements is not to be admitted)
to dispense with all causes, or doubts of any imperfection, or dishability,
This power of dispenseng with all caus^s etc. does not aggree with their
doctrine of the only external coercitiue jurisdiction of the Prince over the
church: see the last cap.
that could, or might be objected against the same. For the Prince and
parliament having more then sufficient power, to depend and maintain that which
is well decreed, from all frivolous surmises of any adversaries, especially
their subjects all dispensations in such cases, are not only superfluous, but
also pernicious, as opening the way to all cauils against every decree of the
Prince, and parliament. If there were any true, and real defect in their
consecrations (as the former argument evidently concludes) the Queen having
no power to dispense therewith, it must necessarily still remain, and
consequently their consecration shall always be defective, and insufficient.
Or if it be pretended, that the Queen had any such power, Let some ground
thereof be produced, if not out of scripture (which yet we might justly exact,
seeing they protest to believe nothing but that, which is proved by scripture)
yet out of some council, ancient father, or at least the president of some
one approved fact, within the compass of 1500. years. But if no such ground
of this power can be produced, as most certainly it cannot, what man of sense
can think this dispensation to be of any force? M. Mason with the rest of his
brethren think it overmuch to grant this power to the successor of S. Peter,
to whom our Savior said: whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, Math. 16.
shall be loosed in heaven; and all Catholic Divines deny him to have any such
power, in the case we here speak of, which is, of the matter, and form of
holy order. How therefore can they think if due to the Queen of England, who
if she would have been a Christian, must have been a sheep of his fold, to
whom the Savior of all our souls gave the charge of feeding his sheep? This
dispensation therefore is so far from satisfying all men, Ioh. 21.
or taking away all doubt, scruple, or ambiguitie in these new consecrations,
that it makes the matter more doubtful. For no man that doubted either of the
power of King Edward to devise, and institute a new form, and manner of
consecrating Bishops, and Priests, never known before in the church of Christ,
or of the valor, and goodness of the form it self, but must necessarily
doubt of the power of Queen Elizabeth, by any dispensation to ratify, and
make good the same. Neither was it only the malicious Papists (as it pleases
M. Mason to term them) that observed this imperfection in these new
superintendents, but the Protestant judges of the realm (as we have seen
before) which whilst the new statists labored to cover by act of parliament
(for they could not be of so weak judgment, as to think by that means to
take it away) it is made more evident to all the world, no man being so deuoide
of sense or understanding, as to dream only, that the Queen could by any
power she had, make those ordinations good and sufficient, which of themselves
were not such.

Page, 133.
13. M. Mason seeing this to be ouercleare to be denied, labors to shadow it
at least in some sort, saying: that the Quee^^ did but dispense with the
trespasses againg her own laws, not in essential points of ordination, but
only in accidental: not in substance, but in circumstance. Neither did she
give leave to make any voluntary violation of the law, but only dispensed, with
such omission, as temporis ratione, and rerum neccssitate id postulante.
necessity it self should require, as may appear by the letters Patents. And
it pleased the almighty so to dispose, that all things were performed in most
exquisite manner: yet the Papists (such was their hatred against the clergy)
did blaze abroad the contrary. Whereupon the high court of Parliament, assembled
in the 8. year of that famous Queen, having deeply considered and pondered
all things, pronounced, that their speeches were slanderous, not grounded upon
any just matter, or cause. For Gods name be blessed, all things were done
honestly and in order, even from her first coming to the crown.

What any man could say more in this matter I see not, and therefore in mine
opinion M. Mason deserves well his fee. Yet all he says serves to little
purpose, for the justification of these new superintendents, as will appear in
the particulers. The Queen (says he) dispensed with the trespasses against
her own laws. He should have specified the laws that it might appear, he
played not voluntary, and without ground, willing only to shuffle of the matter.
But there appear no such laws made by her (before this dispense was granted,
which was in the second year of her reign) with the transgressions whereof she
might dispense, and therefore must she be thought to have intended, to dispense
with the trespasses of other laws either of God, or his church, or both,
wherewith she could no more dispense then any of her subjects can dispense with
her laws* For all parliament laws, which might make against this new
promotion, she repealed in her first parliament, and therefore could not dispense
therewith. She dispensed (says he) not in essential points of ordination, but
only in accidental: not in substance. but in circumstance.

Fopperie, mere fopperie; these words of the latters patents clearelie convince
the contrary: we dispense with all causes or doubts, of any imperfection or
disability, that can or may be objected in any wise against the same.

Secondly M. Mason saying, that the wisdom of their church discreetly, and
religiously pared away all superfluous, Pap. 11. and 94.
and superstitious ceremonies in ordination; there appears no need of any
dispensation in the accidental circumstances. For it is not to be thought,
that the Queen would dispense with those, which the wisdom of their church
retains as good, and lawful.

That which he adds: the Queen gave not loaue to make any voluntary
violation of the law: but only dispensed with such omission, as necessity it
self would require: is neither warily, nor truly said. For no dispensation is
a leave to violate the law, but a suspension of the obligation thereof, that it
cannot be violated by doing of that, which the law forbids. It is also
unwarily said of him. For what necessity could drive them to omit any thing
requisite, to the accustomed manner of ordination, excepting only the want of
true Bishops, that would consecrate the newly designed and elected
Superintendents? Surely no probable appearaunce of other necessity can be
alleged, and therefore M. Mason laboring to justify this dispensation unwarily
discovers an essential defect in the same, and in steed of making up the
breach, which appears in their vocation, does (contrary to his name) make it
greater. But of this point of the want of true Bishops, that might consecrate
these new men, we shall speak of D. Parkers ordination. But before I come to
that point: I will here add one other argument more to prove the nullitie of
this new ministry.

14. In this sort. M. Jewel one of the first promoted (or truer) intruded
Intendents in Q. Elizabeth's time, the most forward, and peradventure the best
able of all the troop to maintain his own and his fellows ordination did
not, nor durst not in his life time deny the nullitie thereof, but by his silent
dissimulation of his adversaries more pressing arguments, did rather grant the
same. Therefore it is more then probable in any prudent man's judgment, that
their calling is not justifiable in it self and that for want of true
consecration. But that the reader may make a more perfect judgment, of the
force of this argument, I will here set down the dispute between D. Harding
and M. Jewel upon this point.

Doctor Harding expostulateth with M. Jewel, and demands of him, how he
came to be Bishop in this sort. Therefore to go from your succession which
Harding co^futation of the Apology fol 57. 58. M. Jewel could not prove
their succession: how therefore is it like M. Mason can do it. Mark well these
demands, and the answer thereunto.
ye cannot prove and to come to your vocation, how say you sir? You bear your
self, as though you were Bishop of Salisbury. But how can you prove your
vocation? By what authori^y usurp you the administration of doctrine, and
sacraments? what can you allege for the right and proof of your ministry?
who has laid hands on you? By what example has he done it? how and by whom
are you consecrated? who has sent you? who has committed to you the office
you take upon you? Be you a Priest, or be you not? If you be not how dare you
usurp the name, and office of a Bishop? If you be, tell us who gave you
orders? The institution of a Priest was never yet but in the power of a Bishop.
Bishops have always after the Apoctles time, according to the Ecclesiastical
Canons, been consecrated by three other Bishops, with the consent of the
Metropolitan, and confirmation of the Bishop of Rome. Thus unity has hither
to been kept, Lib. 1. epist. 6
thus schisms have been staid, and this S. Ciprian calls legitimam
ordinationem, for lack of which he denied Nouatian to be a Bishop, or to have
any authority, or power in the church. Hereto neither you, nor your fellows,
who have unlawfully invaded the administration of the sacraments, can make any
just, ad right answer I am sure.

Athanas. Apolog. 2.
What, do ye not remember, what judgment Athanasius, and the Bishops of Egypt,
Thebais, Libia, and Pentapoli were of concerning Is^hyras the Arian? And why
may not all good Catholic men judge the like of you? Again, what say you to
Epiphanius, who writes against one Za^cheus of his time, for that being but a
lay man, with wicked presumption took upon him, to handle the holy mysteries,
and rashly to do the office of a Priest.

To these pressing and urging demands, M. Jewel makes a very slight and sly
answer, wherein though all that which he says were true, yet it is far short
of the mark, which he should have touched; but being utterly false, as will
appear by D. Hardings reply, does evidently show his calling not to be
justifiable: his answer is this.

Jewel.
VVheras it farther pleases you, to call for my letters of orders, and to
demand of me, as by some authority, whether I be Priest, or no? Jewel defenc^
of the Apology page 129. printed 1611
what hands were laid over me: and by what order I was made? I answer you, I
am a Priest made long sithence, by the same order and ordinance, and I think
also by the same man, and the same hands, that you M. Harding were made Priest
by, in the late time of that most virtuous Prince K. Edward the sixth. Therefore
ye cannot well doubt of my Priesthood, without the doubting of your own.

Harding.
Doctor Harding hereunto replieth in this sort. Detection of sundry foul
errors etc* fol. 129.
Neither by the same ordinance M. Jewel, nor by the same man, nor by the same
hands, nor in the time of the said late king. Howbeit you tell not half my
tale, I laid for my foundation out of S. Hierome these words: Ecclesia non est,
quae non habet sacerdotem: Church is there none, which has not a Priest, or
Bishop, and such a Priest be there describes, as may consecrate the sacrament
of the altar, that is to say, that may offer external sacrifice, and such a
Bishop be describes, who may order Priests. For sacerdos as you know does
signify both a Priest, and Bishop. Now S. Hierome there disputed against
Hilarious a Deacon, who being alone in his new sect, and not being able to offer
sa^rifice, nor to make Priests, it behooued needs to leave his congregation
without Priest. I ask then as well of your Bishoply vocation, and of your
sending, as of your Priesthood. Give me leave, I pray you, here to put you in
mind of my words once again. Thus I said, and yet you have not answered me.
Therefore to go from your succession which you cannot prove, and to come to
your vocation and so forth word by word, as is related before out of his first
book, called the confutation of Apology, and there unto adds in the place
last quoted. These being my questions M. Jewel, you answer, neither by what
example hands were laid on you, Detection fol. 230.
nor who sent you, but only you say, he made you Priest, that made me in king
Edwards time. Verily I never had any name, or title of Preisthood given to me,
during the reign of K. Edward: I only took the order of Deaconship, as it was
then ministered, farther I went not) So that if you have no other Preisthood,
then I had in K. Edwards time, you are yet but a Deacon, and that also not
after the Catholic manner, but in schismatic sort. Truly after I had well
considered with my self those questions, which in my confutation I moved unto
you, I took my self neither for Priest, nor yet for lawful Deacon in all
respects, by those orders which were taken in K. Edwards days, being well
assured that those, who took upon them to give orders, were altogether out of
order themselves, and ministered them not, according to the rite, and manner of
the Catholic church, as who had forsaken the whole succession of Bishops in
all Christendom, end had erected a new congregation of their own planting,
the form whereof was imagined only in their own brains, and had not been
seen nor practiced in the world before. Note.


D. Harding having replied this, and much more upon M. Jewels slight answer
to his former demands: how does M. Jewel reioine unto him think you? Marie
with profound silence, deeply dissembling this whole reply, as though it had
been never written, albeit he would have the world believe, that he has fully
answered in substance at least the whole book, wherein these things are
contained. Now whether the true reason of this dissembling silence be not the
want of all probable means, to answer with satisfaction, let the discreet
reader judge. But seeing he is so mute in this point, let us see, what he
answers to the rest of D. Hardings demands before related.

Jewel.
Jewel page 129. He gives chalk sorcheefe, he was asked of his consecration,
and he answers of his election, and that with an heap of untruths. Harding
detection fol. 232.
Further, as if you were my Metropolitan, you demand of me, whether I be a
Bishop, or no? I answer you, I am a Bishop, and that by the free, accustomed,
and canonical election of the whole chapter of Salisbury, assembled solemnly
together for that purpose, of which company you M. Harding were then one, and
as I was informed, being present there in your own person, amongst your
brethren, gave free and open consent unto the election. If you deny this, take
heed your own breath blow not against you.

Harding.
It was no free election M. Jewel, when the chapter, which chose you, saw,
that except it chose you; it self should be in danger of the Law, and of the
Princes displeasure, It was no canonical election, when he was chosen, whom
the old Canons have judged unable for that vocation.

For how can he be chosen Bishop, that is to say high Priest, who teaches that
there is not at all any external Pristhood in the church? how can he be chosen
Bishop, that is to say high Priest, who teaches with the old condemned
heretic Aerius, that by Gods Law there is no difference between a Bishop, and
a Priest? How can he be chosen lawful Bishop in Salisbury according to the old
Canons, who teaches all the old Canons to be superstitious, wherein from the
Apostles time prayers for the dead were commanded, and prescribed? what Canon
can allow his election, who breaks the unity of the church, and deuideth
himself and his flock, from all their unity and brotherbood, who made any
Canons in any council from the Apostles time till this day? Is he to be chosen
canonically, who with Constantius the Arian, teaches Bishops being the
successors of the Apostles, Anathas. apoloq. 2.
to be at the placing, and remoouing of Secular Officers, setting Caesar before
Peter in Gods house, and earth before heaven? When were the Canons made, that
allowed such an election? And yet you were made a Bishop by canonical election
forsooth. If the Canons were duly executed, they of that chapter ought rather
to loose their voices, and otherwise to be punished, for that they were so
dissolute, as to choose such a Prelate, who by the Canons is for many respects
condemned.

Was there ever any man more impudent, then you are M. Jewel? what would you
do if I were dead, since you fear not to burden me being yet alive, with that
thing which I never did, ne minded to do? Of that chapter I was one at that
time I confess, as being then prebendary, and treasurer of that church, as yet
I am in right. But of the company of them, that gave their voices, and
consented to the election of you M. Jewel, I was none. You were informed you
say, that I was present, and gave free and open consent unto the election.
Surely here you inform your reader of a false lie, as you have of many more.
You were informed of the contrary. To be short I came not, ne was not made
privy, when they went about the pretensed election.

If my no be not sufficient against your yea, let the registers book be vewed,
for the trial between us both. For I trow, that book (being never so great a
falsifier otherways) you cannot well falsify, Let M. George Carew Chaunter of
the same church, and Deane of the Queens chapel, let M. Richard Channler
prebendary there, and Archdeacon of Sarisbury, Let your own frind, and
faithfellow M. Parry Chancellor of that church be demanded, whether I was
present at your election, and gave free, and open consent unto it, or no. You
knew it, you knew it right well M. Jewel, that both I and M. Dominicke, that
reverend and virtuous Priest; prebendary also there (whom in your visitation
for the Queens highness ye appointed to be a prisoner, as also my self in mine
house at Salisbury) utterly, and with express words refused, to give our
voices and consent to your pretended election, Truly we counted it no less
crime to have chosen you Bishop of Sarisbury, then to have chosen Arius,
Eunomius, Nestorius, Eutiches, Aerius, Pelagius, or any other like heretic.
Wherfooe revoke so many untruths, as you have here uttered with one breath,
your election was neither free, nor canonical, the whole chapter was not
present, I was not one of that company, I gave not my consent, Now that you
have so impudently affirmed all this, notwithstanding take heed (that I may
use your own words) your own breath blow not against you.

To all this M. Jewel answers with silence as before, having nothing to
reply with show of truth: but to the rest of D. Hardings demands he answers
in this sort.

Jewel.
As for the impertinent tales of Ischyras and Zaccheus, they touch us nothing:
Page 129.
they were none of ours: we know them not: our Bishops are made in form and
order, as they have been ever by free election of the chapter: by consecration
of the Archbishops, and other three Bishops, and by the admission of the Prince.

Harding.
Detection fol. 234.
These true histories, not tales M. Jewel touch you in this behalf, because
Priests are not so consecrated with you, that they may stand to offer the
sacrifice of the altar, as it was reported of Ischyras, that he had done.

Moreover Epiphanius writes of Zaccheus, ludenter Sancta mysteria
contrectabat, and sacrificia cum laicus esset, impude^ter tractabat: He lewdly
handled the holy mysteries, and whereas he was a lay man, he impudently handled
the sacrifices. What sacrifices (I pray you) has your religion, which a lay
man may not handle, as well as a Priest? But because you have abandoned all
external sacrifice, and Priesthood, therefore you judge, the example of
Zaccheus belongs nothing unto you. Certainly by those examples it is
proved, that ye are no Bishops, and so far they be not impertinent.

Your Bishops are made (you say) [in form and order] what form and order
mean you? mean you the old, which was used in the first five hundredth years,
or the new? In the old form after the election, notice was given to the Bishop
of Rome, and to all the Bishops of the church, that such a man was lawfully
chosen Bishop with in the church, and not schismatically; and so all the other
Bishops knew by the communicatory letters, to whom they should send, or of whom
they should receive such letters. But so ye were not made Bishops: If ye were,
show us to what Bishops out of England ye wrote any such letters. After that,
the custom of those letters becaine to be out of use, the only Bishop of Rome
his confirmation was in steed of the said notice, and by him surely you were
not confirmed: And yet seeing he is a Bishop, if you will not grant him the
confirmation, ye ought at the least to put him to knowledge of your election,
that he may know you to be men, with whom he may communicate. But for as much
as you wrote not to him in that matter, you show that ye be no Catholic
Bishops. For never was there any Catholic Bishop in the church, which did not
one way, or other, show himself to communicate with S. Peter's successor, from
the beginning till this day.

But ye were made, you say, by the consecration of the Archbishops, and other
three Bishops. And how I pray was your Archbishops himself consecrated? what
three Bishops in the Realm were there to lay hands upon him? you have now
uttered a worse case for your selves, then was by me before named. For your
Metropolitan, who should give authority to all your consecrations, himself had
no lawful consecration. M. Parker not consecrated.
If you had been consecrated after the form, and order which has ever been
used, ye might have had Bishops out of France, to have consecrated you, in
case there had lacked in England. But now there were ancient Bishops enough in
England, who either were not required, or refused to consecrate you, which is
an evident sign, that ye sought not such a consecration, as had been ever
used, but such an one, whereof all the former Bishops were ashamed.

15. All this sharp reply affirming so directly M. Parker not to have been
consecrated, whereby the consecrations of all the rest are necessarily proved
to be none, M. Jewel (finding nothing to answer thereunto) dissembleth, as he
does the former, excepting these words only. In the old form after the
election, notice was given to the Bishop of Rome, and to all the Bishops in the
church, that such a man was lawfully chosen in the church, and not
schimastically etc. But so ye were not made Bishops. If ye were show us, to
what Bishops out of England ye wrote any such letters. Whereunto though his
answer be as impertinent, as his dissembling the rest is evident: yet because
it pertains not much to our present purpose speaking here of consecration
only, and not of those things, which go before, or follow the same, I will
not abuse so far (good reader) thy patience, as to stand either to refute, or
relate it, but will in brief give thee to understand, the twofold reason, for
which I have set down here at large this dispute betwixt M. Jewel, and M.
Harding.

First, that the heedfull reader, be he Catholic, or Protestant may clearelie
see, how M. Jewel himself, (the cheeftaine of all our new masters in England,
and haueing part in the matter being one of the Bishops about whose
consecration the controversy is, and therefore knew well how it was performed,
and neither wanting wit, nor will to maintain it, if it had been to be
maintained) is by strength of argument forced to yield the bucklers to his
adversary, and to confess the nullitie of his own and his fellows
consecration, not by express acknowledgment of the truth, for that his
heretical pride, and obstinate error would not permit him to do, but by his
deep dissembling of his adversaries arguments, whereunto because he could not
answer, he let them pass in silence, as if they had not been objected against
him at all, And this is specially to be observed, in the objection of M.
Parkers consecration, whereupon the consecrations of all the rest do
necessarily depend, whom doubtless he either knew, not to be consecrated at all
(unless it were done at the nagges head, after the manner that is and has
hitherto been very credibly reported) or else in such other sort as being
specified would have given his adversary (whom he knew was not altogether
ignorant how that matter passed) greater advantage against him. For thou may
be well assured (good reader) that M. Jewel undertaking to answer this book
of D. Hardings, if he could have shaped but any shifting answer, to those
pressing points of his own, and his fellows calling M. Harding should have
heard from him on both ears. Judge thou therefore of what creditt M. Masons
records are, seeing that M. Jewel who was Bishop himself, and (without doing
M. Mason any jot of wrong) better able to have maintained his calling, and
consecration then he, and being urged unto it in such sort, as we have seen,
is driven into such an absolute non plus about the same, that he has not one
wise word to say in his own justification. Surely it must needs be, that
either these records were not then coined, or if they were, yet were they of
small force, for the justification of the new manner of ordination. For no man
of ordinary sense can think, that either M. Jewel knew them not at all, or
knowing them did not understand, of what force they were, for the justifying of
his own calling, supposing they were of any at all.

Secondly, I have related this dispute at large, that the reader, who has not
the means to read Harding, in his own books, but only as M. Jewel
relates his words, may see, how easily he may be deceived therein. For as in
this particular point, so in all others he leaves out that, which does most
press; and relates only those things, whereunto he thinks he may make some
such shufling answer, that he may be by the more ignorant sort esteemed, to
have satisfied his adversary. And this I would all men, that read him, should
take notice of, whether they be Protestants, or otherways: For hardlies hall a
man find a more coloring, and less solid or substantial adversary of
Catholic religion, then is M. Jewel, being read with attention.

16. And to conclude this chapter it is farther to be observed, that nor D.
Harding only, but all or most of the Catholic writers of our own country
(to say nothing of strangers) having in express words, objected to the new
superintendents, intruded into Bishoprics in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's
reign, the nullitie of their calling, and consecration, did never by any
either of themselves, who should best have known the records, or by any other
in their behalf, hear of any such records, or registers, M. Mason now after
50. years would obtrude upon us, as authentical testimonies of their
Canonical consecration. What therefore can any man of indifferent judgment
think in this case, but that either these records, which M. Mason now
produces, From the page 126. to the page 142.
were not then extant, or if they were, that they are not such as can make any
probable, much less authentical proof of these men's Canonical consecration.
For if they had been in those days, and also were such, as might have made
sufficient proof of the matter in question, how is it possible, that they
should not be produced before now? the parties themselves, whom it specially
beh^^ued to make proof of their own Canonical calling being so often, and
earnestly urged thereunto by their adversaries, triumphing over them for want
of due proof thereof.

Page 8.
M. Mason relates some of the sayings of our Catholic writers, that object
the nullity of the English new ministry, which I will here set down, and add
one or two more unto them; that the reader may thereby judge, how improbable it
is, that M. Masons new found records should bear any creditt for the proof of
that, for which he produces them.

Motive 21.
Consider (says D. Bristow) what church that is, whose ministers are but very
lay men, unsent, uncalled, unconsecrated, holding therefore amongst us, when
they repent and return, no other place but of lay men, in no case admitted, no
nor looking to minister in any office, unless they take orders, which before
they had not?

D. Sanders: The new clergy in England is composed partly of our Apostataes,
De Schismate lib. 3. page 299.
partly of mere laymen. And in the dedication of his rock of the church, he
stilleth M. Parker, to whom he dedicateth that book, no otherways then M. D.
Parker bearing the name of Archbishop of Canterbury.

that either all, or the most part of the ministers in England, be merely
laymen, and no priests, and consequently have no authority in these things it
is evident.

Rhoms testament Romans 10.15.
All your new Evangelists, which have intruded themselves into church and
pulpit, be every one from the highest to the lowest false prophets, running and
usurping, being never lawfully called.

Note that M. Fulke, who was ignorant of nothing in this point, that M. Mason
can know, answering both Bristowes Motives, and the notes upon the new
testament, to satisfy their objections of want of calling in the new
ministry, denies ordinary calling to be always necessary, which desperate
shift he would never have used, if he had been provided of so easy, and
sufficient an answer, as M. Masons records would have afforded him, if they
had been authentical, and without flawe.

Caluino turcis: lib. 4. cap. 15.
M. Reinolds: there is no heardman in all Turkey, which does not undertake the
government of his heard upon better reason, and greater right, order, and
authority, then these your magnificent Apostles, and Evangelists can show, for
this divine and high office of governing souls, reforming churches etc.

D. Stapleton in his counterblast printed welneere fifty years ago, against
M. Horn, the^ usurping the Bishops see of Winchester has these urging
speeches. Counterblast fol. 7.
To say truly you are no lord Winchester nor elsewhere, but only M. Robert
Horn. Is Ibid. fol. 9.
it not notorious, that ye and your Colleagues were not ordained according to
the prescripe, I will not say of the church, but even of the very statutes? How
then can you challenge to your self, the name of the lord Bishop of Winchester?

You are without any consecration at all of your metropolitan, Fol. 301.
himself poor man being no Bishop neither.

These speeches (which are no where answered) I do not relate, for that I
intend to conclude any other thing out of them, then that in the judgment of
any sensible person, it cannot be probable, that when these things were
written, there were extant any such records, as being produced might make any
thing for the justification of our new superintendentes Canonical
consecration. For if there had been any such, doubtless they could not have been
unknown to M. Parker, who should have been the author of them, as bearing the
name of metropolitan: not to M. Horn, and M. Jewel (to omit the rest) who
should have subscribed thereunto, as the parties whose consecrations were
recorded: and being not unknown, there is less probability, that they should
be so concealed by them, that notwithstanding the nullity of consecration, so
often objected against the^, by their Catholic adversaries, they should not
once mention hem.

It is also to be observed that M. Maso^s registers disagree with those that M.
Goodwin used in his catalogue of Bishops some time in the day, some time in the
month, and some time in the year, as is manifest in the co^secratio^s of
Doynet, Ridley, Couerdall, Grindall, Horn, Gueast, Piers: Which necessarily
proves falsity in the one at least, with suspicion of forgery in both.

Again M. Mason, M. Sutcliffe, and M. Butler, all speaking of M. Parkers
consecration do all differ one from another in naming his co^secrators. For M.
Mason says it was done by Barlow. Scorie, Couerdall and Hodgekins. M.
Sutcliffe says besides the tree first named by M. Mason there were two
suffragans as the act of consecration yet to be seen (says he) mentions.
Page 127. Suit: against kell: page 5. But: defense of their mission.
M. Butler says the suffragan of Dover was one of the consecrators, who
notwithstanding is not so much as named in the Queens pate^ts, whereby
commission was given to the named therein to consecrate M. Parker. So that these
men seem to have had three diverse and disagreeing registers of one and the
same actio^ and therefore the credit of every one of them is made at least
doubtful.

The fourteenth Chapter. That M. Parker bearing some time the name of
Archbishops of Canterbury, was not true and lawful Bishops.
1. ALl the defects, and inhabilities either of heresy, or want of true
consecration, which in the precedent chapters are showed to have been in
Cranmer, and the Bishops as well of K Edwards as Q. Elizabeth time, being
without all controversy in M. Parker, it shall not be needful to say any
more of them; yet because the succession of the present English ministry is
derived from him, as from the fountain, I think it not amiss, to note some
particular circumstances of his consecration, which to any indifferent
judgment may show the nullity thereof, and consequently of all those that are
derived from it. For the fountain being infected, the streams, that flow
from it, unless they be purged, must necessarily be impure and noisome.

These circumstances, which I intend to note, are for the most part taken out
of M. Masons own relations, and therefore must needs be free, from all
suspicion of sinister, or partial dealing in me.

First therefore M. Mason relates out of the life of M. Parker this Singular
privilege, Page 131.
or (as it is termed) felicity; that being the 70. Archbishop after Augustine,
yet of all that number he was the only man, and the first of all that received
consecration without the Popes bulls, and superfluo^^ Aaronicall ornaments, as
Gloves, Rings, Sandals, Slippers, Miter, Pall, and such like trifles, making an
happy beginning (more rightly, and more agreeable to the simplicity, and parity
of the Gospel) with prayer, Mark that the Protestant ministtry began but in
M. Parker, and therefore was not before.
invocation of the holy Ghost, imposition of hands, and religious promises.

What in any sober judgment can he said more directly, for the reproof and
disallowance of any man's ordination? M. Parker is confessed to be the first man
of threescore and ten, that descending, and succeding one to another in the sea
of Canterbury, for the space almost of a thousand years, that was consecrated
without the Popes bulls etc. Who therefore would not say, that he was the first
man that was intruded into that see without all order, or Canonical
consecration? He is also confessed to be the first, that began the new order of
consecration, who can therefore doubt, but that his consecration is not of
Christ's institution, descending unto him by succession from the Apostles, but a
new invention of man never heard of before?

If M. Parker were not consecrated Archbishop, after the same manner that S.
Austin was, who brought unto our nation, now a thousand years ago the
doctrine of Christ (as co^fessedly he was not) what man of sense and reason
will say, that his consecration is good, and canonical?

Surely there is no more reason to say this, then to say that he should be
rightly Baptized, that should receive another manner of baptism, then that
which S. Augustine brought unto us, and practiced. If therefore we retain the
baptism which he brought unto us, as the only true baptism instituted by
Christ, and preached by his Apostles through the whole world; why should not we
also retain the orders, and manner of consecration of priests, and Bishops
taught by him?

Who has eyes and sees not, that to reject the one, is but a step to cast the
other away also, and so by certain degrees to return to our former paganism,
from which God converted us, by the ministry, and cooperation of that holy
man, and servant of his S. Augustine.

2. I know that some have been so furious and frantique, Harrison in his
description of Britannie, Ascha^, Bale, and others have the like.
as to write that S. Augustine, in steed of converting us from Paganism to
Christianity, brought us from one superstition to another. But these men being
possessed with his Spirit, that enuieth our conversion, and therefore would draw
us back to out former errors, and infidelity, speak not but as they have
learned of him; who, if they could be heard in this point, would quickly say
as much of the Apostles, yea and of our savior Christ himself. For that is
the end aimed at by them, or at least by their master, which because he is out
of all hope to bring men unto at the first iumpe, he labors to win them unto
it by degrees. And surely he has much prevailed already in his purpose, seeing
he has found such instruments, as dare preach that he that converted us first
to Christ, brought us into error: oh senseles wretches!

Page 131.
M. Mason says: that M. Parker with the rest was made Bishop with imposition of
hands, which is the only ceremony of ordination mentioned in the scripture: and
which Bellarnime thinks to be the matter essential. And for other ceremonies
which are but inventions of man, they cannot be enforced upon us, Farther then
the wisdom of our church hold it convenient.

Acts. 13.3.
It is false that the scripture mentions only imposition of hands in
ordination: for it mentions also both fasting and prayer; which are the one or
both out of use with our new ministry. Neither is the imposition of hands
mentioned in the scripture, a bare laying on of hands, without an express
form of words, as is before showed out of S. Ambrose saying, that imposition
of hands is mystical words, Upon the acts, Cap. 13.
wherewith the elect is confirmed to this work, receiving authority (his
conscience bearing witness) that he may be bold in our lords steed to offer
sacrifice to God. But in the new form of ordination there is no such words
used, as may give authority to the ordained, to exercise any power of order.
For these words. Receive thou the holy ghost, which they only use, are not such
as is before showed.

And although Bellarmine say, that imposition of hands pertains to the
essential matter of ordination, yet others doubt thereof, (as is before
mentioned out of M. Mason himself) in whose opinion (which cannot be denied
but to be probable) our new ministry must needs want all essential matter of
ordination: But be it true, that imposition of hands pertains to the
essential matter of ordination, as Bellarmine thinks, and that most
probably, yet does neither he, nor any other Catholic author one escepted
say, that it is the only or whole essential matter of ordination, De Sacram.
ordinis Ca. 9.
yea he teached expressly the contrary, in the place cited by M. Mason, and
therefore his doctrine serves nothing at all, for the justification of M.
Parkers ordination by sole imposition of hands.

And albeit the Catholic church does not command (as necessary to the
Sacrament) any ceremonies not pertaining to the substance of holy order, yet
does she justly condemn the rashness, and presumption of those, that of set
purpose, or contempt do omit in ordination, any of those holy rites, which she
has received from her first Pastors, and has religiously conserved unto our
days, commanding us to use the same: And Farther because amongst diverse
words, and actions which she has always used in ordination, it is not
declared in which of them precisely, the substance, or essence of holy order
consists, especially that of Episcopal order, therefore does she upon good
reason, reject that ordination as none at all; wherein are omitted either all,
or the greatest part of those solemn words, and actions, which are known to
have ever been used, of which kind it is evident, and confessed here, M.
Parkers ordination to have been. And therefore it is a notorious untruth, that
it was performed in such form, Page 121.
as is required by the ancient Canons, as M. Mason affirms, unless by ancient
Canons he understand the statutes, made of this matter in Edward the sixth his
days.

4. Secondly I gather out of M. Mason, that of the four consecrators of M.
Parker, there was never one of them true Bishop, unless peradventure it were
Hodgekins the suffragan of Bedford: who (suppose he was truly consecrated
himself, which is not certain) yet could he not (even in M. Masons doctrine)
consecrate the other, Two Bb. present the party to be consecrate^ (...) the
Archbishops or some for ^him pronounteth the blessing as principal
co^secrator. Says M. Mason pa. 39. Page 127. Esdrae. 2. cap. 7.64.
being only assistent in that action, and not he that did consecrate, which (as
M. Mason says) was done by Barlow; who was never consecrated Bishop himself,
as appears by that his consecration is no where registered, and therefore is he
no more to be numbered in the rank of Bishops, then they were in the number of
priests, who could not find themselves recorded in their lineage.

M. Mason brings diverse conjectures of M. Barlowes consecration, but not one
haft proof. He discharged (says he) all things belonging to the order of a
Bishop, even Episcepall consecration: therefore doubtless was he consecrated. But
by the like form of argument might he be proved to have been a lawful
husband, because he had a Woman, and diverse children. Which kind of proof how
current soever it may be in M. Masons logic, yet in it self it is ridiculous,
as evidently supposing that for a truth, which is in question, and thereby
begging that which he should prove. For unless he first suppose, that M Barlow
was consecrated himself, which is the thing in question, to say that he did
help to consecrate others, does prove nothing, unless he could farther prove,
or that it were granted him, that M. Barlow never did any thing in that kind,
but that he might lawfully do, which I suppose M. Mason will not easily
undertake to prove.

Secondly, he was (says he) generally acknowledged, and obeyed as a Bishop. So
I think he will not deny, but. Ridley, Hooper, Farrer, and the rest of their
creation were, during the time they held the rooms of Bishops, and yet were
they judged, both by the Spiritual, and temporal court, as we have seen
before, not to have been consecrated, therefore this argument proves nothing
to the purpose but a popular error, grounded upon the unjust possession of a
Bishopric. And much less does that prove any thing, which he adds, saying
that Bucanan called him Bishop of S. David's. For it is no strange thing, that
he that has a Bishopric, should be called Bishop especially by a stranger,
to whose testimony M. Mason recurring in this matter, does show that he is hard
set for proofs.

These are M. Masons conjectures of M. Barlowes consecration, which, if the
case should be brought into any indifferent court, would not I dare say suffice
to prove his consecration. For seeing that no simple priest ca^ be believed,
that he is a Priest, without the letters of his ordination (especially where
there is doubt of his priesthood) much less ought a Bishop to be believed to
be a Bishop, without authentical records of his ordination.

And is there not therefore in all Bishops, and Archbishops sees, an office of
register, where all the ordinations are recorded, to the end that every one
truly ordained may have at all times authentical constat^^, of his orders
received? So that unless the records perish by fire, or other extraordinary
accident (which cannot be said in M. Barlowes case) no man can fail of proof
of his orders, which in Bishops is by so much more certain, by how much more
diligence there is used therein, by reason of the great inconvenience which
would ensue, if any such default should happen. Seeing therefore the records of
M. Barlowes consecration do not appear, (in so much that M. Mason is forced to
prove it by conjecture, as we have seen: Whereas he cites the registers of
the consecrations of all the rest but his) nor yet have miscarried by any
extraordinary accident happening to the metropolitanes registers, how can he be
judged to have been truly consecrated? Especially seeing (as M. Mason says)
the registers of Cranmer bear record of his (I mean M. Barlowes) preferment
to the priory of Bishame, of his election to the Bishopric of S. Asaph, Page
127.
and of the confirmation of the same; how is it therefore possible, that his
consecration (if ever it had been) should not be found likewise recorded?

Farther if M. Barlow had been truly consecrated, and consequently a true
Bishop, he should not doubtless have been put after Antony Kitchen Bishop of
Landaffe, in the Queens letters directed unto them, and the rest for
consecration of M. Parker, Page 126.
of which letters M. Mason repeateth a piece (saying that they are not only
recorded in the registers of M. Parker; but in the chauncery it self) in these
words. Elizabeth Dei gratia etc. Reuerendis in Christo patribus, Anthonio
Landauensi. Will? Barlowe quondam Bath: nunc Cicestrensi electo, Ioh: Scory
etc. Whereas Barlow if he had been consecrated Bishop, should have been first in
the rank, as being most ancient by 4. years at the least, as is evident by
M. Masons own Chronology, putting Arth: Buckley his consecration (whereat he
says assisted as Bishop M. Barlow) an: 1541. and Anth. Kitchins consecration
an. 1545. For it is evident that those Bishops, who have not precedence by
reason of their sees (as none have in England, excepting the two Archbishops,
and two or three more whereof Landaffe is none) have their place and rank,
according to their antiquity in consecration, which is always necessarily
observed in such public and solemn acts (as is the consecration of an
Archbishop) for avoiding of scandal, which should necessarily follow, by
inuercing and confounding of men's ranks and places. And doubtless if M. Barlow
had known himself as truly a Bishop, as h^ esteemed M. Kitchen to be, he
would have disdained to have been his second in that honorable action, seeing
he should have been so much his senior Bishop, if he had been Bishop indeed.

And what I pray you was the reason, that M. Kitchen Bishop of Landaffe having
that honorable place assigned him; in that action by the Queens patents, to be
the consecrator of the new Archbishop, thaugh he was Junior Bishop to M. Barlow
by four years as is already noted, was not for all that one of the
co^secrators, seeing he was present? Marie because he would not committ such a
sacrilege; nor incurr the censures belonging thereunto though (fearing the
Queens and counsels indignation) he pretended darkness of sight to be the
reason: upon his refusal (which was not expected) they were forced to have
recourse to others, who made no scruple of any thing. But because this
particular touches directly the matter in question, I will here set down how
the whole action of the consecration of all the first Bishops made in the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign (whereof M. Parker was one) passed, by the
relation of such as were present thereat. At the nagges head in Cheapside by
accorded appointment met all those that were nominated to Bishoprics vacant
either by death, as was that of Canterbury only, or by unjust deposition, as
were all the rest: their names are set down in the chapter following. Thither
came also the old Bishop of Landaffe to make them Bishops, which thing being
known to D. Bonner Bishop of London then prisoner, he sent unto the Bishop of
Landaffe, forbidding him under pain of excommunication to exercise any such
power within his Diocese, as to order those men, wherewith the old Bishop being
terrified, and otherwise also moved in his own conscience refused to proceed
in that action, alleging chiefly for reason of his forbearance his want of
sight as is before said: which excuse they interpreting to be but an evasion
were much moved against the poor old man, and whereas hitherto they had used
him with all courtesy and respect, they then turned their copy, reuiling and
calling him doting fool, and the like some of them saying. This old fool
thinks we cannot be Bishops unless we be greased, to the disgrace as well of
him, as of the Catholic manner of episcopal consecration. Being
notwithstanding thus deceived of their expectation, and having no other mean
to come to their desire, they resolved to use M. Scories help, who having
borne the name of Bishop in king Edwards time, was though to have sufficient
power to perform that office, especially in such a streate necessity. He
having cast of together with his religious habit (for he had been a religious
man) all scruple of conscience willingly went about the matter, which he
performed in this sort, having the Bible in his hand, and they all kneeling
before him, he laid it upon every one of their heads or shoulders saying, Take
thou authority to preach the word of God sincerely. And so they rose up Bishops.

This whole narration without adding or detracting any word pertaining to the
substance of the matter, I have heard oftener then once of M. Thomas Bluet a
grave, learned, and judicious priest. He having received it of M. Neale a man
of good sort and reputation, sometimes reader of the Hebrew or Greek Lecture
(I remember not whether) in Oxford: But when this matter passed, was belonging
to Bishop Bonner, and sent by him to deliver the message before mentioned to
the Bishop of Landaffe, and withal to attend there to see the end of the
business. Again M. Bluet had other good means to be informed of this matter
being long time prisoner together with D. Watson Bishop of Lincoln, and diverse
other men of mark of the ancient clergy, in whose time and in whose sight,
as a man may say, this matter was done. Of this narration there are (I thieke)
as many witnesses yet living as there are priests remaining alive, that have
been prisoners together with M. Bluet in Wisbich castle, where I also heard it
of him.

M. What law does he mean that they should have incurred danger of.
Mason in the appendix to his book having related this same thing out of Sacro
Bosco (who had heard it from the same party for he was also prisoner sometime
in Wisbich castle) for answer says. No man of reason can imagine that they
would go to consecrate one another in a tavern, and so incur the danger of
the law, after they had according to their hearts desire an Archbishop of their
own religion, quietly possessed of his church and chair.

But this is nothing to the purpose. For he supposes M. Parker to have been
consecrated, and already installed in his church and chair before this solemn
meeting at the nagges head, whereas the objection whereunto he answers says
the contrary, and includes M. Parker with the rest, as one of the number to
be consecrated there, and therefore is his answer very frivolous. Peradventure
he thinks that he that already proved M. Parkers consecration so fully by
producing the registers, that it cannot be denied, and therefore supposes it in
this his answer as clear. But seeing his registers are found so full of
crakes and flawes, that they need to be made good by other proofs then yet
appear, they cannot in any indifferent man's judgment be holden for good
proofs of that which is here in question; when he says, that they having
quiet possession of churches it cannot be probable that they would go to a
tavern to be consecrated: he speaks with more show of reason then in any
thing he has said of this matter in his whole book before, and yet this is
also easily and truly answered, for it is not said that they went to the
tavern to be consecrated, because they had not the liberty of churches, but
the reason was because they being out of all hope or expectation to draw the
old Bishop of Landaffe (by whom they thouhgt they should be consecrated) to
their church with them, they made no difficulty or scruple to resort to such a
place, as he would be content to come unto, and so it came to pass that their
meeting was at the nags head, as is said before.

Not only Catholics, who by our adversaries may be suspected of partiality,
are witnesses in this matter, but John Stow a Protestant has testified the
same, not in writing, for that he durst not, though he had diligently sought
out all particulers thereof, but in words to some persons that are yet living,
and of most entire credit and fidelity, who notwithstanding being no less
fearful to witness this of him though now dead, then he himself was to write
it being alive, cannot here be named. But that this is true I can give this
most probable argument, if it be no more then probable, Stow in his Chronicle
makes no more mention of the consecration of these new prelates, or any thing
belonging thereunto, then if there never had been any such matter, no not so
much as of M. Parkers consecration or enstalling, which silence, all
circumstances considered, could not proceed from any other reason, then from
fear of offending by saying the truth. For first it is evident that he is
careful to set down all occurrents worthy of any memory, (especially
happening about London) though of far less moment then this. Secondly he
professes special love, and respect to M. Parker, and therefore sets down
many particulers of him, of much less moment, then is his consecration or
enstalling. Thirdly not only he, but all other Chronographers take diligent
care not to omit any innovation, or change of old customs or fashions into
new, especially in a matter of such moment as this is. Fourthlie he sets
down the consecration, enstalling receiving the pall, yea and the first mass
of Cardinal Pole, M. Parkers immediate predecessor. All which were but
ordinary occurrents in other Archbishops, much less therefore could he forget
to set down the consecration of M. Parker, which was so new and
extraordinary, as M. Mason himself says, it was singular and unlike to all
those that went before since S. Austin the first Archbishop of that see, and
might as truly have said since Christ his time.

Fifthly, besides many other things pertaining to the change of religion, set
down by him in that year 1559. of far less consideration then is the
institution of a new clergy: he puts down the deprivation (so he calls
it) of the old Bishops in the month of July, which could not permit him to
forget the creation of the new ones, especially he having joined together
before in Q. Mary's time, the restitution of Bishop Bonner, Page 1036.
and the rest of the Catholic Bishops displaced by K. Edward, and the
removing of the others intruded in their place, some reason therefore must there
necessarily be of his affected silence in this particular.

Sixthly speaking of Henry the 2. King of France his obsequies sole^nized in
Paul's this same year 1559. says, that the 9. of September (to wit three
months and more before M. Parkers consecration according to M. Masons
registers) was a sermon preached by D. Scory, in place of D. Grindall Bishop of
London. Page 1083.
Now seeing he calls him Bishop absolutely without adding of elect or other
like restriction, it seems that he had then some consecration; which could
not be that which M. Masons registers speak of, for this was three months
after and more as is already note^, and therefore most like to be that at the
nags head. I see well that Stow some lines before calls D. Parker Archbishop
of Canterbury elect. But this takes not away the difficulty. For he might
for all that be consecrated Bishop as well as D. Barlow, whom he calls in the
same place Bishop of Chichester elect, and D. Scory whom he calls Bishop of
Hereford elect, which two notwithstanding are supposed to have been consecrated
long before that time. And surely if D. Parker had not been consecrated at
least after their manner, he could not have had pl^ce in that solemn action of
the Kings obsequies, before D. Barlow and D. Scory if they were consecrated, as
they are supposed by M. Mason to have been. For Archbishops only elect cannot
have place before consecrated Bishops in the offices of the church.

M. Maso^ will not have priests thaugh cardinals to sit before Bishops page 27.
much less therefore priests nominated onl^ Archbishops.
Therefore when Stow calls him Archbishop of Canterbury elect, he doubtless
speaks in the same sense of him, that he does when he calls D. Barlow
Bishop of Chichester elect, and D. Scory Bishop of Hereford elect, which he
does not because they were not consecrated Bishops after their manner, but
because they were not as yet enstalled in those sees, as D. Parker also was not
as yet in that of Canterbury. And that this is true, it appears by the
different style he gives to D. Parker and D. Grindall, tearming the one
absolutely Bishop of London without all restriction, because he was already
enstalled and in possession of his Brishopricke, and the other only Archbishop
elect for want of the same circumstance. If therefore D. Parker and D. Grindall
were Bishops in the month of September the year 1559. as by the testimony of
Stowe they appear to have been, what verity can there be in M. Masons
registers, that make M. Parker to be consecrated only the 17. of December in
the same year, and D. Grindall after him.

Sanders de schismate lib. 3.
It is also to be understood, that at the same time, when there was question of
consecrating these new Bishops, there was prisoner in the tower of London an
Archbishop of Ireland, who was offered his liberty and diverse other rewards,
if he would have consecrated the newly elected Bishops, which doubtless argues
the want of others, that were (even by themselves) esteemed true Bishops, for
if such had been at hand, they would not have recurred to him, with danger to
receive a disgraceful denial as they did. But now I will return to my former
purpose.

6. The rest of M. Parkers consecrators, according to M. Masons accoumpt to wit
M. Scory and M Couerdall were of the new consecration, devised in K. Edward the
6. his time, and therefore found even by the judges of the Realm, to be no
Bishops, as is before showed. Page 93.
And is evidently proved out of M. Masons own records and testimonies. For
they were consecrated, as M. Mason says the 30. of August 1551. to wit five
months before the new form of consecrations was se forth or allowed, which
was done in the parliament holden the 5. and 6. year of Edward the 6. as
appears both by the statute it self, which is the first of that parliament,
as also by the first statute of the 8. of Elizabeth: but this parliament of the
5. and 6. of Edw. the 6. began the 13. of January 1551. that is four months
and more after the consecration of Scorie and Couerdall. For by the coumpt of
England the year begins in March, and not in January as all men know.
Evident therefore it is that they could not be consecrated by the new form: and
no less evident it is, that they were not consecrated by the old form; Page 94.
for that (as M. Mason confesses) was abrogated in the parliament of the third
and fourth of Ed. the 6. and appears also by the 12. statute of that
parliament. So that it is clear that these two consecrators of M. Parker were
never consecrated at all neither by one form or other. And therefore had there
been none other defect in M. Parkers consecration (as diverse others have been
already proved) but only this, that his consecrators were not consecrated, and
therefore no true Bishops, it is more then sufficient to prove his want of
consecration, and consequently his want of all true calling.

Notwithstanding all which so blind is M. Mason, either through his affection
to new falsehood, or hatred to ancient truth, that he blusheth not to write in
this sort. Thus have we examined the place, the persons, the matter, the form
of his (M. Parker) consecration, and find nothing but agreeable to the laws of
the land, the Canons of the church, and the practice of reverend antiquity. Do
not think (good Reader) that I exceeded in saying, that M. Mason was blinded
by affection when he wrote these words for he himself does evidently prove it,
not seeing what he wrote, but only ten or twelve lines before in these words.
This was his singuller felicity, that being the 70. Archbishop after Austin yet
was the first of all, which received consecration without the Popes bulls etc.
For if he were the first, that was consecrated in this manner, how does his
consecration agree, either with the laws of the land which were extant before
this new manner of consecration was devised many ages; and much less is it
agreeable with the Canons of the church, and venerable antiquity? Wherefore to
make this speech of his agree as well with that, which he said before, as also
with the truth it self, he must wipe out this little word (but) and so shall
his saying be most true in it self, and conformable to his former words. Yet
does he show himself more senseles in that which follows, adding; wherein how
circumspectly the Queen proceeded, may further appear by this, that her
letters patenet were sent* to diverse learned professors of the law, that they
might freely give their judgment, and all of them jointly confessed, that both
the Queens majesty might lawfully authorize, the persons to the effect
specified (which was to consecrate M. Parker) and the said persons also might
lawfully exercise the act of confirming, and consecrating in the same to them
committed* whose names subscribed with their own hands remain in record, Ex
Registro Math. Parker fol. 3.
as follows. William May, Robert weston, Edward Leeds-Henry Haruy. Thomas
Yale. Nicolas Bullingha^. Is not this beyond measure ridiculous? For, suppose
that these men had been as great divines as S Augustine: as absolute lawiers as
Barthold, as constant and vncorrupt as Curious Dentatus, and withal, not
subject to her that demanded their resolution, and thereby more like ad to
deliver their opinions with indifferency. of what moment should their judgment
be, in comparison of that of the whole Christian world from the Apostles time,
till the reign of King Edward the 6. For if in all this compass either of
time or place, including also the Apostles themselves, M. Mason can bring one
instance, or example of a Bishop ordered in this sort, that M. Parker was, he
shall gain his cause. To bring therefore the approbation of half a dozen very
ordinary lawiers, no divines, of no extraordinary reputation for their
integrity, and no more then ordinary for their courage, and constancy,
subjects to her that demanded their opinions, a princess peremptory in her
proceedings, and already absolutely resolved in her determination, whatsoever
their resolution should be: demanding their opinions (which she knew before
hand would be according to her will) only for a slender mask, or pretense of
some color of law; to bring six such men's judgment (I say) against the
judgment, and practice of the whole Christian world (for nor only Catholics,
whom they ttulie esteem enemies to their heresy, though not to their persons,
but all their own brethren of the pretended reformation in France, Geneua,
Germany, Poland, Hungary, Holland, Scotland, yea and in England it self, for
the greater or at least for the more Zealous part, do all condemn, and
disauowe their parliament Bishops, and clergy) is not this I say most perfect
senslesnes? Surely such an argument is most fit to conclude, and shut up in
all security, the ordination of the first Metropolitan of so new a clergy.
Yet this default I do not so much ascribe to the want of judgment in M. Mason,
as to the want of truth in the matter he would maintain, which must needs be
very miserable standing in need of such beggarly support.

After all this M. Mason fills eight pages in deriuing the descent of their
new clergy from M. Parker, who being the first of that race (as M. Mason
willingly professes) and yet not of full fifty years antiquity, their
church whereof he was the first Pastor, cannot possibly be the church of
Christ, yet M. Mason confidentlie adds. See his own words in the beginning
of this chapter. M. Parkers consecration is disproued, and consequently the
consecrations of all the rest depending thereupon.
The records alleged are of such high credit and reputation, that they cannot
pessibly be infringed. As for the maine point whereupon all the rest depends,
that is, the consecration of Archbishop Parker, as it was solemnly performed
in a great assembly, so it was published in print in his own time, when all
things were in fresh memory. And though some of his spiteful and bitter
enemies did then scornfully comment upon his life, yet the truth of this fact
they never called in question.

What high credit or reputation his records are of, I leave to the impartial
reader to judge by that which has been hitherto said thereof. And for the new
proof which he adds here of M. Parkers consecration saying it was published
in print in his own time without being called in question, it is a manifest
untruth. For both D. Harding, D. Saunders, and D. Stapleton besides others (as
is evident by their own words before cited toward the end of the chapter
before this) even in his own time, and some of them to himself did not only
(without any touch of his life) call his consecration in question but
absolutely denied it, and that without any reply or disproofe made either by
himself, or any other in his behalf as is before showed. Therefore if there
were any such thing published in print, as M. Mason speaks of, it went belike
either in private amongst friends only who were willing to believe that which
they desired to be true, or else was it esteemed to be of small weight or
authority, seeing neither M. Parker himself, nor M. Jewel, nor M. Horn,
though earnestly called upon for some proof of their consecration, did never
so much as once mention it; And thus much of M. Parkers consecration, the
disproof whereof, is the disproof of the consecrations of all the rest of our
English superintendents which as M. Mason says depend thereupon.

The fifteenth Chapter. That M. Grindall, M. Horn with the rest preferred to
Bishoprics in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign were not true, and lawful
Bishops
1. ALl the defects and inhabilities proved either in Cranmer, the Bishops
ordained in K. Edward the 6. his reign, or in M. Parker, are manifestly found
in these, of whom there is now question: and therefore if the proofs already
produced against thothers hold good, it is a clear case, that these men can
neither be true, nor lawful Bishops. Wherefore leaving them marked with these
notes (of no Bishops) till they purge themselves, we will in this chapter
examine, whether they had not yet some other inhability, which thothers had not.

And first it is evident, that when M. Grindall, M. Horn, and the rest (whose
names I will by and by express out of M. Mason) were appointed to be Bishops,
all the sees, whereunto they were nominated, were full, being possessed by true,
and lawful pastors. Therefore it is clear, that these newly preferred must
necessarily be violent intruders, and usurpers, and no lawful Bishops.

That the sees, whereunto these intendents were nominated, were full and not
vacant, it is evident by this table set down by M. Mason.

Soes Displaced Placed Provinces Cant. London. Winchester. Ely. Lincoln. Cou:
and Lichfield. Bath and wells. Exon. Worcester. Peterborrowe. Asaph. York.
Durham. Carlill. Chester.
York.
Bonner. Grindall. Page 134.
White. Horn. Thurlby. Core. Watson. Bullingham. Bane. Bentham. Bourne.
Barkly. Turberuille. Ally. Pates. Sands. Poole. Scambler. Gouldwell. Dauis.
Heath. Young. Tunstall. Pilkinton. Oglethorpe Best. Scot. Downhame.

And that the displaced were lawful Bishops, it is no less evident, neither
their consecration, or any thing belonging thereunto, being at any time called
in question by any of their adversaries even until this day. It is therefore
evident, that these new placed were intruders, and not lawful Bishops.

2. This consequence, (supposing the displaced to have been lawful Bishops,
and not lawfully deposed, the first of which points is not denied, and the
second shall be proved in due place) is both evident in it self, and proved by
infinite testimonies of antiquity. Whereof I will only bring one as out of the
council of Sardis, whereof I make choice as well for that it is most direct for
this purpose, and of irrefragable authority, as for that by the same labor I
mean to show, how impertinently it is alleged by M. Mason, in the behalf of
those, that in K. Edward time being thrust into Bishops sees, fled always in Q.
Mary's time. In whose favor to prove, that they were lawful Bishops of those
sees, even in the time of their absence he says thus.

Page 129.
3. Although the Arian faction prevailing, the council of Tire deposed
Athanasius, yea and the council of Antioch, in the presence and with the
consent of the Emperor, Sozo. li. 2. c, 24. Socra li. 2. c. 5.
did institute Gregory in his place, yet the council of Sardica pronounced
Athanasius (as also Marcellus, Asclepas, and other Catholic exiled Bishops)
to be pure and innocent: And denyet that Gregory the usurper of Alexandria,
Bafill of Ancyra, Quintianus of Gaza (which had entered like wolves upon the
churches of these men) should be called Bishops. So the council judged the
churches to belong to the (Catholic) Bishops, even at such time as they were
exiled, Note this words Catholic.
and the Arians in possession: And accordingly they deposed Gregory with such
like, and restored Athanasius and the rest with honor. Which act they
signified in a synodicall epistle to the church of Alexandria, in this manner.
Heretics make not Bishops lawfully. Binnius to 1. Page 444.
We would have you to know, that Gregory being made Bishop unlawfully by
heretics, and brought by them unto your city, is deposed from his Bishopric
by the whole synod, although in very deed he was never Bishop, therefore
farewell, and receive your Bishop Athanasius. Thus you see that though
Athanasius fled away in time of persecution, though he were deposed by a
council, and another chosen in his place, with the consent of the Emperor:
yet for all this he is judged to be the true Bishop of Alexandria, and Gregory
never to have been Bishop thereof. The like is to be said of Marcellus Bishop of
Ancyra, Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, and others,
who were persecuted for the Catholic faith, as well as Athanasius. Whersore
if you will conform your judgment to the council of Sardica, They were not
lawfully possessed, no more then Gregory was, whole is declared never to have
been Bishop.
you must confess that such as in K. Edwards time were lawfully possessed of
Bishoprics (though in Q. Mary's time being persecuted in one city they fled
into another) did still retain the titles of true Bishops, and that those that
invaded their churches were intruders, and usurpers. Thus therefore it
appears, that as Athanasius and the rest returning from exile, might ordain,
and do all such things as belonged to their episcopal office, even so Bishop
Barlow, Bishop Couerdall, and the rest returning from exile, might likewise
ordain, and justify their proceedings in their episcopal function.

If M. Mason can apply this rightly to that purpose, for which he brings it,
he shall no doubt gain his cause. For the authority he uses is authentical.
But he does in this as one, that having stolen another man's evidence, and
records, produces them against the right owner, thinking thereby to disposesse
him of his inheritance, but in fine the matter being brough to light he is
overthrown by the same proofs, which he alleges for himself. So no doubt
will it fall out with M. Mason in this allegation. For I do not think, that
any man could have brought any thing more direct, either against those in whose
behalf he brings it, or for them of whom the question is here to wit Bishop
Heath, Thurlby Bonner, and the rest of their fellow confessors deposed by
Queen Elyzabeth, whose case in all respects like unto that of S. Athanasius,
Marcellus, Asclepas, and their Catholic consorts. And contrariwise the case
of Young, Grindall, Horn, with the rest of their crewe, whereof I count Barlow,
Couerdall, and the rest of K. Edw. Bishops, because their ordination is the
same with thothers like to that of Gregory, Bafil, Quintianus and the others
intruded by the Arian Emperor Constantius. Yet this disparity there is betwixt
the fact of Constantius, displacing Athanasius with the other Catholic
Bishops, and intruding Gregory and his fellows into their sees: and the fact
of Q. Elizabeth dispossessing Bishop Heath and Bonner with the rest, and
thrusting into their places M. Young, Grindall, and others: that Constantius
seemed to proceed canonically in this fact, having the color, and show of the
sentence of two Synodes, to wit of Tire and Antioch, though both heretical
assemblies, for the displacing of S. Athanasius; whereas Q. Elizabeth made no
difficulty, nor had any scruple to thrust Catholic Bishops out of their sees,
and intrude others into their rooms, without all show, or color of canonical
judgment. So that the Arian Emperor Constantius, and the Arian Bishops were
much more religious in appearance then Q. Elizabeth, and the Bishops of her
creation, seeing they made scruple to commit so unjust and sacrilegious a fact,
as to depose Catholic Bishops, and thrust others in their rooms, without
show at least of some Ecclesiastical and canonical judgment, whereof these
made no difficulty. And if in defense of Q. Elizabeth's fact it be replied, that
she being the head of the church of England, might do that she did of her
absolute power, without the judgment, or sentence of any Synod, what shall we
say of Constantius his fact? For if Q Elizabeth was head of the church of
England, he must necessarily be head of the church of the Empire, and therefore
if her fact were justifiable for that reason, his was justifiable for the same,
which notwithstanding was condemned by the council. But it is evident, if any
thing that is past be evident, that neither Constantius though an heretic,
nor any other Emperor, King, or Prince, before Henry the 8. of England, Father
to Q. Elizabeth, did ever challenge, or pretend to be head of the church, or to
have any jurisdiction in spiritual causes and matters, Farther then the power
to putt in execution, the decrees and ordinances of the church. And this very
case of the deposition of Athanasius does sufficiently show thus much of
Constantius, who did no more, the^ putt in execution the unjust decrees, of the
two heretical assemblies before mentioned, which decrees he would not have
expected for the deposition of S. Athanasius, had he esteemed himself head of
the church. Farther had he been head of the church, what power could there have
remained in the church, to reuerse his sentence, which notwithstanding we see
done in the council of Sardis.

4. M. Mason, or some other in his behalf will demand the reasons, why this
decree of the council of Sardis for the restitution of S. Athanasius, and the
deposition of Gregory the intruder, may not be as fitly applied to prove the
restitution of Barlow, Couerdall, and others, together with the creation of
Young, Grindall, and their fellows by Q. Elizabeth, and the deposition of
Heath, Bonner, and the rest to be, lawful? as we say it may be applied, to
prove the deposition of Heath and Bonner, with their fellows, and the
intrusion of Young, Grindall, and their company to be unlawful? I answer that
the reason hereof is evident. For this decree of the council of Sardis being
made, (as M. Mason truly notes) in the behalf of the Catholic Bishops
extruded by the heretical party, who entered as wolves, and were not Bishops,
as the council declared, cannot in any show of reason be applied, or wrested,
to favor the heretical party in prejudice of the Catholic. True, will M.
Mason say: But why should the Bishops putt out of their seas by Q. Elizabeth,
be esteemed Catholics, rather then those that she putt into their places?
Marry for the self same reason, for which S. Athanasius and his fellows were
esteemed, and were indeed true Catholic Bishops, and their adversaries
heretics. And if M. Mason ask what that reason was: I answer, that it was
because S. Athanasius, and the rest restored by the council of Sardis, did
communicate both in faith and Sacraments, with the whole Catholic church,
both present and precedent, as also the Bishops, thrust out of their sees by Q.
Elizabeth, are known to have done: whereas their adversaries, to wit, the
Arians, made a sect apart not heard of, before Arius revolted from the
Catholic church, breaking communion therewith both in faith and Sacraments; as
in like sort, the Bishops intruded by Q. Elizabeth, who separated themselves
from the unity of the Catholic church, and made a sect apart, never heard of
in the world before Luthers revolt, and apostasy. And if M. Mason or any other
can bring any thing to prove Barlowe. Young, Grindall, with the rest of their
confession to be Catholics, which the Arrian Bihops Gregory, Basil and
Quinrianus deposed, and condemned by the council of Sardis, could not with as
much, or more show of truth, have brought for themselves; or contrariewise if
he can allege any one thing to prove, that S. Athanasius was a Catholic,
which may with the same truth be alleged for Bishop Heath, and his fellows,
he shall gain his cause in this point. And therefore do I conclude with M.
Masons own words against himself in this sort. Wherefore if you will conform
your judgment to the council of Sardis, Page 129.
you must confess that the Bishops deposed by Q. Elizabeth, were the true
Bishops of their sees, and those that invaded rheir churches, were intruders
and usurpers.

5. And this is Farther proved, by the continual practice of the whole
church, even from the Apostles themselves, wherein is not to be found one
example of so many Bishops deposed, and thrust out of their sees, without the
judgment and sentence of a council. It is true that some princes upon unjust
indignation, have forced diverse holy Bishops to leave their sees, and transport
themselves into other countries, as (not going any Farther for examples)
William Rufus did by S. Anselme and H^nry the 2. by S. Thomas, yet did they
forbear to put any others into their places, so long as their cause was not
judged by ecclesiastical sentence. And if any be found to have proceeded
further, to the iniust intrusion of some one, into the place of another
unjustly deposed, without a synodicall sentence yet none was ever found, to
have proceeded in that sort against all the Bishops of a whole realm, but Q.
Elizabeth, the first woman head of the church, that ever was in the world. And
therefore no doubt, but if the case of the deposed should be examined, by a
Synod of lawful Bishops (to whom the hearing, and determining thereof does only
pertain) they would be judged to have been the true Bishops of those sees, and
thothers to be intruders, and vsurpres, not entering into the fold of Christ by
the door of canonical election, and consecration, but climing up an other way
by the power, and force of the secular Prince, and therefore could not be true
pastors, but thieves and robbers, as our savior himself testifies of them.
Ioh. 10.1.


6. M. Mason, notwithstanding to justify these men M. Young, Grindall, and the
rest of intrusion, inditeth the deposed (after so many years that they are in
the other world) of three things, whereof their greatest adversaries never
accused them, in their life time, when they might have answered for themselves:
So pious he is toward the departed, of whom (according to the common saying)
we ought to say nothing but well. How well (says he) they Bishop Bonner, Page
101.
White, and the rest before mentioned) deserved at the Queens hands, may
appear by their behavior in three points; concerning the coronation,
disputation, and excommunication. In the two first, they refused to be actors,
and for the third, they consulted whether they should excommunicate the
Quueene, or no.

Of these three things M. Mason (thinking to find therein some colorable matter
to justify the unjust deposition of those venerable Pastors, and the intrusion
of the new intendents, makes a large dispute, which I intend not here to
repeare, but will make in brief this answer. First none of all these three
points was objected against them as any cause, or occasion of their deposition,
which doubtless would not have been omitted by their adversaries, if they had
been thought material for that purpose. Secondly it is false, that all the
deposed were culpable of these things (supposing they were faults) Owen
Oglethorpe Bishop of Carlill, neither consenting to excommunicate the Queen,
not yet refusing to crown her, for as M. Mason says and all men know he set
the crown upon her head, whom notwithstanding she deposed, for continuing in
his Catholic religion, and refusing the oath of supremacy, as M. Mason
himself testifies in express words, Page 125.
which indeed was the only cause of all their deposition, as we shall see by
and by.

Thirdly suppose, that all M. Mason says concerning these points were true,
Ambro. li. 2. epist. 13. Ruffinus li. 2 hist.
(as it is not) yet should they not therefore have deserved deposition. For
neither S. Ambrose, nor Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople were yet ever so
censured by any, though the first, both refused disputation with the Arrians
for the like reasons, Theodor. Anagnostes li. 2. coll histor. acclesiastic.
for which those Catholic Bishops did refuse to proceed in the disputations
appointed with such unequal conditions as were prescribed and also did
excommunicate the Emperor Theodosius indeed, and not only in consultation.
And the second refused to acknowledge Anastasius for Emperor, but called him
heretic, and unworthy to rule over Christians, till he gave him a
protestation in writing to embrace the doctrine of the council of Calcedon.

Fourthly, the only true cause of their deposition, being the profession of the
Catholic Roman faith, and their refusal to swear that the Queen was
supreme head of the church, Page 1082. impression 1605.
as not only Sanders, but also Stow affirms, yea and M. Mason himself
confesses both in Bishop Oglethorpe, as we have already seen, and in all the
rest, in this title. Page 113.
Of the oath of the princes supremacy, for denying whereof the old Bishops were
deprived, he does ignorantly and impertinently multiply so many words in these
other points, which appertain nothing to the purpose he goes about: which is
to justify the deposition of Bishop Heath, Bonner, and the rest, that thereby
he may make way, for the lawful entry of the intruded.

7. This controversy therefore stands in this only point, whether the Queen
and her council, could lawfully depose those Bishops for refusing to swear,
that she was head of the church or no? For if they were not lawfully deposed;
it will necessarily follow that those, who were putt into their sees, were
manifest intruders, and therefore no lawful Bishop, and that they were not
lawfully deposed, belongs to me to prove against M. Mason, in proof whereof
I will use this only argument.

No judicial action is of validity where the agent has no austority With M.
Mason pa. 107.
No sentence or judgment can be lawful, but where the judge has lawful and
competent power, both over the cause and persons judged. But the Queen, and
her council (whether they be taken jointly or severally) had no lawful and
competent power over these Bishops, and the cause for which they were judged by
them. Therefore their sentence and judgment of deposition pronounced against
them could not be lawful.

In this whole argument there is nothing that needs proof, but only the
second proposition, which I will make good both by divine, and humane
authority, supposing first, that which is evident and cannot be denied, to wit,
that the parties judged were Bishops, the cause a point, or article of faith
and religion, and that the judges were lay, or seculer persons. This being
presupposed I say thus.

Those, who are appointed, and authorized by God, to teach unto others all
matters of faith, and religion, cannot in the same matters of faith and
religion be subject to their judgment, who are bound to hear and learn the
same of them: for otherways the scholar should be above his master even in
that, wherein he is his master, contrary both to the light of reason, and the
express doctrine of our Savior Christ. But the Bishops, and Pastors of Gods
church are appointed, Math. 10.24
and authorized by him, to teach all temporal men, as well the highest
Princes, as the meanest people, all matters of faith, and religion. Terfore the
Bishops, and Pastors of Gods church cannot be subject to temporal men's
judgment, (though they be princes) in matters of faith, and religion: And
consequently temporal Princes cannot have authority, or power to judge them
therein. Whence it is evidently concluded, that the Qeeene and her council,
being seculer, or lay persons had not, nor could have any lawful and competent
power, over these Bishops in the cause judged by them. I add of purpose these
words (in matters of faith and religion) because I will not enter here into
that other question, whether ecclesiastical persons are exempted in all
causes, from the judgment of the secular court, or tribunal, because this
question is nothing necessary for the determination of the controversy here
proposed.

The first proposition of this argument, being of it self clear to all men of
any understanding, and the conclusion following directly of the premises,
there remains only the second proposition, which may seem to have need of
proof. Notwithstanding in proouing this, will I also prove the other, for the
fuller satisfaction of those, that may have any doubt thereof. That Bishops
therefore and Pastors are authorized by God, to teach all men their faith, and
belief, which is the proposition cheeflie to be proved, it is evident by the
testimony of our Savior himself, saying: All power is given me in heaven,
Math. 28, 19.20.
and in earth; Going thefore teach ye all nations: teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: And behold I am with you all days
even to the consummation of the world. Which last words do show, that this
power to teach all men all matters necessary for their salvation, was not
meant to the Apostles only, to whom our Savior then spoke (because they were
not to continue till the worlds end) but also to all such, as should succeed
them in the function of Pastors, as Bishops do.

The same proposition together with the other, that Bishops cannot be judged in
matters of religion by seculer persons, is as evidently proved by the
testimony likewise of our Savior himself, saying to those whom he sent to
preach. He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises
me. Luke 10.16.
He therefore (may we say in the person of Christ) that judges you, judges
me; which is true at least in matters of faith and religion, wherein he has
ordained them preachers and teachers.

The same is yet more clearelie convinced out of the doctrine of S. Paul,
saying. Obey your prelates, and be subject unto them. Hebr. 13.17.
For they watch as being to render account for your souls. For it is evident,
that our prelates, and pastors cannot be subject to us, and to our power in
those things, wherein we are by Gods ordinance subject unto them, and they have
charge over us (no more then the sun being above the moon can also be under
it) but we are subject to our prelates, in matters pertaining to our souls, in
such sort, as they are to give an account thereof, as S. Paul testifies; And
therefore they cannot be subject unto us, not judged by us therein.

Act. 20.
Farther, God has appointed Bishops to govern his church, which he purchased
with his blood, as witnesses S. Paul, how therefore can they be commanded, or
judged by them, who are or ought to be members of the same church, whereof they
have the government by Gods own appointment?

To these few but firm testimonies of divine authority, I will according to
my promise add one or two humane, not to add force to the former, but to
declare, what has been the sense of the greatest judgments, of former ages in
this point.

Constantine the great, the glory of our country, worthily honored for many
memorable deeds, and sayings, who had as great right to all power pertaining to
temporal princes, as any other whatsoever, was so far from chalenging
jurisdiction over Bishops, in matters of faith and religion, that he disclaimed
from all power, to judge of their private complaints made one against another,
Buff. l. 1. ca. 2
saying; God has made you priests, and has given you power to judge us, and
therefore are we rightly judged by you. But you cannot be judged by men,
wherefore expect the judgment of God only, and reser^^ your complaints to his
divine examination. For you are given to us by God as Gods, and it is not
convenient that man judge Gods, but he alone of whom it is written, God stood
in the Synagogue of Gods.

Sozomon. l. 6 c. 7. Epist. ad synod. Ephesin. Bui. to. 1. page 732
And Valentinian the first. It is not granted to me being a lay man to
attribute unto my self these judgments.

Theodosius also the younger together with Valentinian. It is not lawful for
him that is no Bishop, to meddle with the decision, or judgment of
ecclesiastical matters.

These great Monarchs, who knew as well as any others, what pertained to their
right, were far from judging their prelates, and pastors in matters of
religion; and much farther from chale^ging unto themselves, the headship of
Gods church. But seeing they disclaim from this power, let us see whether
peradventure the pastors of the church in those times did attribute it unto
them. Epist. ad Co^stantium apud Athanas. Epis. ad ^oli. vit. ag. Epist. ad
solit. vit. agentes. Ibidem.
Certes no such thing, but quite the contrary. It is not lawful for us (says
the great Hosius of Corduba to Co^stantius Emperor) to hold the Empire upon
earth, nor for you to take into your hands the censer, and usurp authority in
religion. And S. Athanasius the glory of pastors. When was it heard from the
memory of man, that Ecclesiastical judgment? had their force from the
Emperor? And again The question is not of the affairs of the Roman
commonwealth, where you have power as Emperor. But the question is of a
Bishop. And yet again. Ibid.
Who seeing the Emperor president, in counsel of Ecclesiastical matters,
will not judge, that it is the abomination of desolation foretold by Daniell?
S. Gregory Nazianzen some what behind them in time, but of equal authority.
Orat adciues rim perculsos and princip. irasconte^.
Will you hear (O President) a free speech? the law of Christ has made you
subject to my jurisdiction, and to my tribunal; for we have also an Empire,
yea a greater, and more perfect then that of yours, unless it be fit to
subject the soul to the body and heavenly things to earthly. And S. Ambrose
the most ancient of the four doctors of the west church. Epist. 13. ad
Valenti. Iuniorem.
Who will deny if we look either into the holy scripture, or antiquity, but
that Bishops are accustomed to judge Christian Emperors in matters of faith
and not Emperors to judge Bishops? Again. Your father said it appertains not
to me to judge between Bishops, and your clemency says, I ought to judge. And
yet again: when did you ever hear most gracious Emperor that in matters of
faith lay men judged Bishops? And his Majesty our dread sovereign does
testify the same truth in these express words. It is true, In his declaration
against Cardi. du Perron page 70. impressio^ of Paris.
that the Emperors did never auow themselves to be sovereign judges, in
matter of faith and doctrine. And a little after. I confess that it is a point
of divinity, to judge how far the power of the keys reaches: and that clergy
may, and ought to use their censures against those princes, that make war
against Jesus Christ, without making the laity judges thereof.

Thus we see it most clear, both by divine and humane, Ecclesiastical,
Imperial, and Regal authority, that seculer persons, be they princes or
others, can have no jurisdiction, or power over Bishops, in matters of faith
and religion. Neither is the contrary maintained by any of the pretended
reformation, our parliament prelates only excepted: who as the have no other
origin, or beginning, but the temporal power of the prince, so can they expect
no other uphold but from the same. And therefore do they, not for the princes
right, but for their own interest, labor to maintain that Paradox of the
supreme authority of temporal princes, in spiritual or Ecclesiastical
causes, which is odious and contemned, even by their own reformed brethren, as
appears by Calvin himself, who calls it blaspemy and sacrilege. Amos 7.13.
And the Centurists say of the civil Magistrates. Praefat. centur. 7. page 11
ante medium. Epist. ad electorem Bra^deburg.
Non sunt capita ecelesiae quia ipsis non competit iste primatu^: that is, they
are not heads of the church, for this primacy belongs not to them. And
Chemnitius says of Q. Elizabeth. Famineo and a saeculis ina^dito fastu, se
Papissam and caput ecclesiae fecit. She made her self Pope, and head of the
church, by a womanish and unheard of pride.

6. Now for the preventing, and satisfying of all such arguments, as usually
are brought either against this evident truth, or for proof of the contrary,
I would have thee (judicious reader) diligently to observe, that temporal
princes have power to make laws for the conservation, and increase of
Catholic religion, and for the suppression, and extirpation of all sort of
infidelity, whether it be heresy, Iudaisme, or Paganism yea this is their
greatest honor, and the chiefest reason, for which they are endewed with the
sovereign power of the sword, Esaias 49.23.
and for this are they called in the holy scripture nourishers, or nurses of
the church. But, what is truth in all points of faith and religion, wherein
question may be moved, they are to learn of their Pastors, and Prelates, to
whom God has given commission, and authority to teach all men all things
necessary for their salvation; Math. 28.20
I say they are to learn this of them, and not to teach it unto them: yet
having learned it, the are bound not only to believe it themselves, but also to
maintain, and defend it by the power of their scepter, against all invasions
of heresy, or other falsitie whatsoever. By which only observation are
answered all the arguments drawn, either from the facts of Kings, as well in
the Jewish, as Christian church, interposing their authority in
Ecclesiastical, or spiritual matters (I speak only of approved facts) or
from the councels, and fathers soliciting, or moving them thereunto. For no
King either of the one, or other church has (with approbation and allowance)
ever attempted any thing in matter of religion, contrary and repugnant to the
judgment of the Pastors, and Prelates of the universal church then militant
upon earth, which is the only faithful keeper, and infallable interpreter of
Gods law, in matters pertaining to men's salvation; and therefore is called by S.
Paul the house of the living God, 1. ad Timoth.
the pillar and ground of truth. And that temporal Princes have no other
power, or jurisdiction, in matters of religion then this, M. Mason is forced to
grant.

Page 113.
7. For having alleged for the proof of the Princes supremacy in spiritual
causes: that Gratian the Emperor made a law against the Arrians, commanding
them like wild beasts, to be driven from the churches, and the places to be
restored to good Pastors, comitting the execution thereof to Sapor as captain:
and inferring thereupon, that Q. Elizabeth might with more reason do the like,
because of the necessity, and want of good Bishops, whereof there were plenty
in his time. He obiecteth to himself: that Gratian having the determination of
synodes, condemning the Arrians, he might lawfully make such a law, and commit
the execution thereof to his captain.

To which objection what answer makes he, think you? Marie that Q Elizabeth
had also for her supremacy, the determination of a Synod of Bishops whereof
Bishop Fisher was one, which synod gave to K. Henry the title of supreme
head, of the church of England, which was renewed in another Synod two years
after. And two years after that, the two universities delivered their
judgment. That the Pope had no more to do in England by the law of God, then
any other Bishop.

In which answer is first to be noted, the grant of that, which the objection
intends, to wit, that the Queen without the determination of a Synod, could
not make any law concerning matter of religion: whence it evidently follows,
that all the laws made in her reign, in prejudice of the Catholic Roman
faith, are unjust, as not proceeding from true, and lawful authority, no
Synod having determined any such laws to be either good or lawful.

Secondly, for as much as concerns this particular point of supremacy,
whereof the present question is: the Synodes whereof he speaks, are not extant,
but the one in a manuscript as he says, and the other (...) where. But let it be,
that there was such a synodicall determi^^^^on, as he speaks of, of what
authority could it be? Surely of none at all. For first the same parties, that
consented to that determination in King Henry's time, recalled and disauowed
their own fact in Q. Mary's reign, as M. Mason himself confesses: yea
Bishop Fisher, (whom he fraudulently here names as not dissenting from that
decree) is known to all the world, to have died for the defense of the
contrary. And though he never consented to the new title of the Kings
supremacy, yet having once said, Saunders d^ schismate li. ^
that he would grant it so far, as it was agreeable with holy scriptures,
did penance all his life after, for that fearful speech, knowing and
confessing that he being a Bishop, and therefore bound to instruct others, as
having charge over their souls, should not have spoken in that doubtful
manner, but should have said, that it was wholly repugnant to holy scriptures,
that others might thereby have been kept from error.

Farthermore, what authority can a synod of the Bishops of one only nation
have, being assembled by the commandment of their own King within his own
dominions, in a matter most earnestly affected, and pursued by him: what
authority I say, can such a synod have against the judgment of all the whole
world besides? First this synod if it be to be called so, was no lawful or
general council, as the weight and moment of that matter would have required.
Secondly, it was no free council, as appears as well by the circumstances
already mentioned, as by the changing of their opinions afterward, which only
consideration (of want of freedom) is sufficient to make it of none
authority, as it did that great council of Arriminum, which after the
threats of the Arrian Emperor Constantius, was never holden to be free
council, nor the decrees therefore of any force. Therefore (to apply all that
which has hitherto been said to the matter now in question) if there had been
any just cause of deposition probably suspected in Bishop Heath, and the rest,
why was not their cause committed to the examination of the rest of the Bishops
of the church, as the custom grounded upon manifest reason, and equity has
ever been, in cases of difference between Bishops and their own Prince? In
which case if they had been found culpable, their deposition had been
justifiable to all the world. But they were well known to be without all fault
worthy of deposition, nor could in any equal, or cempetent judgment, have
been found guilty of any crime deserving it: Therefore their deposition being
already decreed, to make room for those that were to be intruded, it was
necessary they should be judged by such, as would assuredly find them
guilty, though they were never so innocent.

The case of these venerable Prelates being thus, as has been mentioned, Let
any indifferent man judge, whether their deposition was just, or no, and
consequently, whether those, that were thrust into their rooms, were
lawfully invested therein.

M. Mason from the page 106. to the page 113. labors to justify the
deposition of these Bishops by the example of Abiather deposed by Solomon. His
argument in brief is this. Solomon deposed Abiather high Priest, and put
another in his place.

Therefore Queen Elizabeth might do the like by the Bishops of her kingdom. I
answer that though we should suppose, 3. Reg. 2.26.
first that the fact of Solomon was just and lawful which is not evident.
Secondly that he did depose Abiather as King and not as a Prophet, by special
revelation or warrant which is vncertame. Thirdly, that the Priests and
Priesthood of the old and new law are of equal dignity and privilege, which
with all true Christians is evidently false. Though (I say) we should suppose
all these things, yet is this argument altogether impertinent for M. Masons
purpose. For Abiathers case was altogether different from that of the
Catholic Bishops, of whom the question is here: his case being meerelie
temporal, to wit the conspiring against Solomon in behalf of his brother
Adonias, which had it not been in the person of a Priest, should without all
controversy have belonged to the trial of the temporal tribunal, whereas
theirs was a case of faith and religion, which though it had not been in the
persons of Priests, yet could it not have been judged by the temporal
Magistrate, as is already showed both by divine and humane, Ecclesiastical
and temporal, imperial and regal authority. Most impertinentlie therefore is
this fact of Solomon deposing Abiather, alleged for the justification of that
of Queen Elizabeth deposing the Catholic Bishops.

After this argument of Abiathers deposition, M. Mason puts great force, he
sweateth hard in justifying the oath of supremacy, for refusal whereof he
confesses the old Bishops to have been deposed. And for answer (besides that
which has been already said in this chapter for proof of the contrary) I
will remit the reader to the last chapter of this treatise, where he shall find
how opposite the oath of supremacy is to the Protestants own doctrine, and
therefore needs no other refutation by the Catholic party.

The sixteenth Chapter. Of the oath of the Princes supremacy, for denying
whereof the old Bishops were deprived.
1. THIS is the title of the third chapter of M. Masons; book. Where first is
to be noted, the true cause of the deprivation of the Bishops to have been the
refusal to swear, that the Queen was supreme had of the church of England
in spiritual causes. And therefore the; other points objected against them by
M. Mason, and already rejected, are mere impertinencies of his own.
Secondly, that here I am only to answer the arguments, that M. Mason brings
for the proof of this supremacy, and not to prove the contrary, which is
already performed in the precedent chapter. To come therefore to the point, M.
Mason having in the beginning of this chapter alleged, for the proof of the
Queens supremacy in spiritual causes, that Marcian, Justinian, Theodosius,
and Gratian Emperors made laws pertaining to Ecclesiastical affairs, and
frustrated the same allegation by saying, that these Princes followed therein
the determination of Synodes, which he would have to be true also in Q.
Elizabeth, as we have seen and refuted before. Apol. cap. 1.
he comes to cite these word out of Card. Alen. was there ever any King or
Queen, Christian or heathen, Catholic or heretic in all the world beside,
before our age, that did practice, challenge, or accept of the title of
supremacy? Whereunto he makes this answer Look into the godly Kings of Judah;
Page 114.
look into the proceedings of Christian Emperors, Constantine, Gratian,
Theodosius, and such like, look into the laws of Charles, and Lodowike: and
you shall see, that they practiced as much, as ever we ascribed to the Queen
in this oath.

But first M. Maso^ brings no one fact of any one of all these, proouing the
practice of this supremacy, which was very necessary he should have done.
Secondly, by this answer, if he will stand thereunto, it will be very easy to
convince him either of treason, against the Queen if she were liuemg and her
laws, or of manifest falsi y. For if he say, that by the oath of supremacy, he
ascribes to the Queen no other power then that, which these Emperors
practiced, he shall by the laws of England be guilty of high treason; they
having never practiced any other power in ecclesiastical affairs, then that
which stands well with the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, which M. Mason is
bound by the laws of England, In the oath of supremacy and the statute made
for the resusull of the same anno. 1. Eli.
under the pain of high treason to abjure. If he ascribe unto her by the oath,
any other power then that may stand with the Popes supremacy, then is that
false, which he here affirms, to wit, that by the oath of supremacy, they
ascribe no other power to the Queen, then these Emperors practiced. The
testimonies before alleged out of Constantine, and Theodosius own mouths, as
they are faithfully related by authentical authors, do prove for their parts,
that they never practiced any power, which did not stand well with the Popes
supremacy. And as for Gratian, M. Mason himself confesses, that in making
laws pertaining to ecclesiastical matters, he followed the determination of
Synodes, and therefore did not take upon him supreme judgment therein. Charles
the great is so far from the practice of supreme power of the church, that
he alleges and approoueth the examples, and sayings of Constantine, and of
Valentinian Emperors for the contrary, saying. Capitulari^^ Caroli Mag. l. 6.
cap. 301.
Constantine answered that it was not lawful for him, to judge the causes of
Bishops. Again. Valentinian (says he) answered, your cause is above us, and
therefore judge your causes amongst your selves, for you are above us. Now if M.
Mason do give to Bishops this power above the Queen, that these Emperors do,
he shall be a traitor by the laws of England, which give to the Queen, supreme
power in all causes. If he do not, then is it false to say, that he ascribes
no other power to Queen Elizabeth, then these Emperors practiced: Let him
take whether part he will. But he goes on;

2. When the Council of Ephesus, by the packing of Dioscorus had allowed the
cursed opinion of Eutiches, and deposed Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople,
Pope Leo upon this occasion wrote thus unto the Emperor Theodosius. Behold
most Christian and reverend Emperor, I, with the rest of my fellow Bishops
make supplication unto you, that all things may stand in the same state, in
which they were before these judgments, until a greater number of Bishops may
be gathered out of the whole world. Who made this supplication? Pope Leo an
holy, and learned Pope. To whom? To the Emperor Theodosius. For what? that all
things might stand in their former state. What things means he? The highest
mysteries of religion, concerning the natures and person of Christ. But what is
it to stand in the former state? That is might be lawful for all men, so to
judge and speak of these holy mysteries, as they did before the springing up
of the Eutichian heresy: for then they held the truth according to the
Apostolic faith. And this he beseeches the Emperor to command,
notwithstanding the contrary determination of the council of Ephesus.

Here is a great deal of Cry, but to little purpose S. Leo entreats the
Emperor Theodosius, that notwithstanding the violent judgment, of the
heretical assembly holden at Ephesus, whereby the Catholic faith was
evidently impugned, and the Eutichian heresy approved, he would command that
all things should remain in the same state, they were before that wicked
judgment. Therefore (infers M. Mason) has the Emperor authority to command
what to judge: and speak in the highest mysteries of religion, concerning the
person and natures of Christ. A strange illation. If Clement the seventh had
written in the same terms to Henry the 8. concerning the title of supreme
head of the church, given him by the Synod of Bishops mentioned before by M.
Mason (as doubtless he would have done, if he had had the like occasion to hope,
that he would have hearkened to his request, as S. Leo had of Theodosius) M.
Mason would not for all that (I suppose) infer thereupon, that Pope Clement
esteemed King Henry to have authority to command, what should be judged, and
spoken of that matter. Certes S. Leo his words import no more, but that the
Emperor would not in any sort favor, or strengthen the wicked decree of
Dioscorus and his accomplices, and thereby make himself partaker of their sin
(as he says) knowing right well (as none of common sense can be ignorant) how
much force the favor of the Prince has, for maintaining either of the
Catholic truth, or for the bolstering of the contrary, though he have not any
deciding power therein. And that S. Leo did not ascribe unto the Emperor any
decisiue, much less supreme power in that matter, it is manifest by the same
epistle. For first he requesteth a suspension, of the decree of the false
Ephesine council, only until a greater number of Bishops through the whole
church, should be called together in council, that might determine that
controversy: whereby it is more then manifest, that S. Leo attributed the power
to judge that matter, to the pastors of the church, and not to the Emperor.

Secondly Flauianus who was wrongfully deposed by the packing of Lioscorus (as
M. Mason well says) appealing from that sentence, delivered his appeal into
the hands of the Popes Legates, as to the Lieutenants of his supreme judge,
and did not address himself to the Emperor, which he would not have omitted,
if he had esteemed him supreme judge in his cause.

Thirdly Theodosius himself disclaimeth not only from supreme power in
Ecclesiastical matters, but from all power therein, saying: It is not lawful
for me being no Bishop, to meddle with the decisio^, Epist. ad Synod. Ephesin.
or judgment of Ecclesiastical matters.

And here I will put M. Mason in mind of one thing, which he notes well
against his own heresy, which is, that as before the springing up of the
Eutichian heresy, all men held the truth of ou^ Saviors two distinct natures
in one person, so also before the springing up of the Lutheran heresy, all men
held the truth in all those points, wherein he and his differs from the same:
and consequently as Euthices was to be called back to that faith, which was in
the church before his heresy sprang up, so are likewise the Lutherans, and all
their progeny. But he proves by another epistle of S. Leo to Marcian the
Emperors supremacy. S. Leo says thus.

3. The second council of Ephesus, which apparently subverted the faith. Leo
epist. 43.
cannot rightly be called a council, which your highness for love to the truth,
will make void by your decree to the contrary, most glorious Emperor. I
therefore earnestly request, and beseech your majesty by our lord Jesus Christ,
Mark here the auctority of traditions fathers, and councels.
the founder and guider of your kingdom: that in this council (of Chalcedon)
which is presently to be kept, you will not suffer the faith to be called in
question, which our blessed Fathers preached, being delivered unto them from
the Apostles, neither permit such things, as have been long since condemned by
them, to be freshly revived again, but that you will rather command, that the
constitutions of the ancient council of Nice may stand in force, the
interpretation of heretics being removed. Thus far S. Leo, as M. Mason
relates his words. Whereupon he says. Here the Pope ascribes to the Emperor
power to ratify, and establish those counsels, that they call not the truth of
God in question. Which the Emperor Marcians preactised, entering the council
of Chalcedon in his own person, and forbidding the Bishops to avouch any
thing, concerning the birth of our Savior, otherwise then was contained in the
Nicene creed. Moreover when the council of Chalcedon was concluded, Leo epist.
59.
Pope Leo wrote thus again to the Emperor. Because I must by all means obey
your piety, and most religious will, I have willingly given my consenting
sentence to these Synodicall constitutions, which concerning the confirmation
of the Catholic faith, and condemnation of heretics pleased me very well.
The Emperor required the Pope to subscribe, and he did so cheerfully,
protesting that for his part, he must by all means obey the Princes will in
these cases. Now tell me, whether the Pope did not acknowledge the Emperor,
and the Emperor show himself to be supreme Governor over all persons, even
in causes ecclesiastical?

Neither the one nor the other can be probably gathered, much less clearly proved
out of these testimonies. For the first is only a fatherly, or pastorlie
admonition to the Emperor, exhorting him in sweet manner to maintain the
decreese, of the pastors of Gods church, which as a Catholic Prince he was
bound to do, and which he practiced precisely, according to the Popes
direction, and not as having supreme power therein, forbidding that any thing
should be affirmed, of the birth of our Savior Christ, otherwise then was
contained in the Nicene council, and in the epistle of the most holy Bishop of
Rome S. Leo unto Flauianus: Council. Chalcedon. apud Bin. to. 2. page 4.
which latter words M. Mason malitiouslie leaves out, least the reader should
see, what respect the Emperor bare unto the Bishop of Rome, proposing his
doctrine to the council, as a rule of truth.

The second allegatio^ is as little to the purpose: for these words because I
must by all means obey your piety, and religious will (wherein consists the
force of M. Masons illation) do not import any bo^d, or obligation of duty,
which the Pope had to the Emperor in that matter, as an inferior to his
superior, but a prompt and ready fulfilling of his reasonable, and religious
request, as evidently appears by the Epistle following, written at the same
time, and of the same matter to Pulcheria the Empress, where the Pope writes
thus. And for as much as the most Godly Emperor would, that I should write to
all the Bishops, that were present in the council of Chalcedon, whereby I might
confirm the things, that were defined there touching the rule of faith, I
willingly performed it: least the crafty dissimulation of some should make my
judgment doubtful. Where M. Mason may see, that the Emperor did not desire
the Pope, to subscribe to the council, as other Bishops had done, but to
confirm that, which they had decreed, neither did he command him to do it,
but willed him only, as a thing profitable, and convenient, to make clear his
opinion in those points, which some craftily would have called into doubt, as
the Pope himself in the former words declares. Whereby it evidently appears,
of what force the judgment of the sea Apostolic was then, for the deciding of
controversies in faith.

But if M. Mason stand yet in doubt of S. Leo his judgment in this point of
supremacy, let him take the pains to read (amongst others of his epistles
written in the cause of Eutiches) his 7. epistle to Theodosius Emperor, where
he shall see, that he esteems himself, (as Bishop of the sea Apostolic) to
be supreme judge in matters pertaining to faith, and religion, which he also
shows plainly in the epistle immediately following.

4. As the Emporour Marcian (says M Mason) did practice this supremacy, so the
Emperor Basil did challenge the title, Council. 8. act. 1. Bin. to. 3. Page 880.
when he said in the council of Constantinople: that the government of the
universal Ecclesiasticallship, was committed unto him by the divine providence.

But because Surius reads this sentence in the person of Basil, thus: When
the divine, and most benign providence had committed unto us the government of
the universal ship. And Binnius thus: The divine and gracious providence of
God, committing unto you (the Bishops) the government of the ecclesiastical
ship: out of neither of which readings he cannot draw any argument for his
purpose, he says, that neither of them read it truly: the one leaving out the
word (ecclesiastical) and the other putting in (you) for (us) so that he would
have it read thus. The divine providence of God having committed unto us, the
government of the universal ecclesiastical ship. VVherby (says he) it is
evident, that the Emperor Basil did challenge the government of the
vniuersallship, both ecclesiastical and civil, and that in a general
council, no man resisting him. What does this differ from supreme governor,
as it is used in the church of England?

But first who would not rather think, that M. Mason corrupts the reading,
either putting in the word (ecclesiastical) or changing the word (you) into
(us) seeing he cites no copy, or author for this reading, whereas either of the
other readings has at least one grave author. He brings some conjectures for
the proof of his reading, which prove nothing at all. But because I will not
bestow many words in this matter, I will give him that which he cannot prove,
and will suppose his reading to be true: and yet if he dare stand to the
judgment of the Emperor Basil, will euicte my cause against him, or else I
will be content to loose it for ever. Neither will I repeat all he says to this
purpose in the whole 8. general council, for that would be over tedious, I
will therefore relate only a few periods of his speech, made in the end of the
council. Where first he avouches in express words, Binn. to. 3. Page 861.
that to lay men it is not granted by the rule of the church, to speak any
thing at all (in council or by way of judgment) in ecclesiastical matters,
which (says he) is the work of Bishops, and priests. And after his speech to
the Bishops, he says thus to the nobility, with the rest of the laity.

But as concerning you, that are of the late sort, as well you that bear
offices, as private persons, I have no more to say, but that it is not lawful
for you by any means, to move talk of ecclesiastical matters, neither to
resist in any point the integrity of the church or the universal Synod. For
to search and seek out these matters, belongs to Patriarchs, Bishops, and
Priests, which are governors by office: who have power to sanctify, to bind,
and to loose: who have the keys of heaven, and of the church. It belongs not
unto us, who ought to be fedd, who have need to be sanctified, to be bound,
and to be loosed from bonds. For of whatsoever religion, or wisdom the lay man
be, yea though indewed with all internal virtues, so long as he is a lay man,
he shall not cease to be called a sheep. Again a Bishop howsoever vnuenerable
he be, and naked of all virtue, so long as he is a Bishop, and preaches duly
the word of truth, he suffers not the loss of his Pastoral vocation, and
dignity. What then have we to do being yet sheep? The Pastors have power to
discuss the subtilty of words, and to seek and find out such things as are
above us. We must therefore in fear, and sincere faith harken unto them, and
reverence their contenances, as being the ministers of almighty God, and
bearing his form: and not seek any more then that, which belongs to our
degree and vocation. Thus far the Emperor Basil.

And now dare I remitt the matter to M. Masons own judgment, whether this
Emperor challenged unto himself, the supremacy in ecclesiastical causes, as he
would have him, upon an argument patched together of diverse pieces, as we have
seen before. But peradventure he was persuaded to use this argument, by the
authority of Tortura Torti, to whom in the margent he refers the reader with
this note: vide Torturam Torti page 349. Where indeed he has it, but with how
small reason, may appear by that, which is already said.

5. As Basil (says M. Mason) did challenge this government, no man resisting
him, so sundry Synods have given the like to Princes refusing it. There was a
council holden at Mentz ie Germany, the year 814. in the time of the Emperor
Charles the great, and Pope Leo the third, the Synodicall acts whereof Bennius
professes to have compared with a manuscript sent him out of the Emperors
library at Vienna. Now the Bishops assembled in this Synod began thus: In the
name of the Father, of the son, and of the holy ghost. To the most glorious
and most Christian Emperor, Carolus Augustus governor of the true religion,
and defender of the holy church of God etc. And a little after. We give thanks
to God the Father almighty, because he has granted to his holy church, a
governor so Godly etc. And again. About all these points we greatly need your
aid, and sound doctrine, which may both admonish us continually, and instruct
vt courteously, so far, that such things, which we have briefly touched beneath
in a few chapters, may receive strength from your authority, if so be, that
your piety shall so judge it worthy, whatsoever is found in them worthy to be
amended, let your magnificent, and imperial dignity command it to be amended.

In the years 847. there was holden another Synod at Mentz, Binn to. 3. Page
631.
in the time of Leo the 4. and Lotharius the Emperor, where the Bishops in
like manner. Binn. tom. 2. Page 1183.
To our most gracious Lord and Christian King Lodowike, the most puissant
governor of true religion. The like was ascribed to King Recesuinthus, in a
council holden at Emerita in Portugale, about the year 705. in these words.
Whose vigilance does govern both secular things with greatest piety, and
Ecclesiastical by his wisdom plentifully given him by God. So they
acknowledged him governor both in causes secular, and Ecclesiastical. Garsias
in notis in Conciliu^ Emerita^
This council of Emerita received much strength, and authority from Pope
Innocent the 3. in his epistle to Peter Archb: of Compostella, as witnesses
Garsias Thus you see most famous Bishops assembled in Synodes have given unto
Pri^es, such titles as are equivalent to the style annexed, to the Imperial
crown of his kingdom.

It is more then false, that ever any Synod gave to any temporal Prince, any
title equivalent to supreme head, or governor of the church, in all causes
as well Spiritual or ecclesiastical, as temporal. Which is now unlawfully,
and sacrilegiously annexed to the crown of England Neither do these
authorities alleged import any such thing.

For omitting that these Synodes here alleged were neither general, nor with
in the first Four, Five, or Six hundredth years after Christ (which conditions
the Protestants exact in our proofs, and therefore by the law of equity ought
to be tied thereunto themselves) they give unto the Emperors no other titles,
then rectors of religion, which with due proportion may be given unto men of
far meaner condition, and degree, as to Church wardens, Officialls, and the
like, who may be called rectors of religion, (that is of matters pertaining to
religion) in their degree. Emperors and Princes are in very deed governors of
religion in the highest degree, that any secular or lay persons can be, that
is, to command that the decrees, and ordinances of their pastors, and prelates
be observed, and to punish the transgressors thereof, and the like, but that
they have any power, or authority to determine, judge, or decide any thing in
ecclesiastical matters of themselves, without the sentence of the
ecclesiastical judges, to wit the Bishops, and prelates of Gods church, is a
mere paradox, nouelty, and heresy, never taught, or practiced in the
Christian world before Henry the 8. of England. And this is irreproouably
convinced by the testimonies, both of holy scripture, Fathers, and Emperors,
of the first Four, and Five hundredth years before alleged, which M. Mason
wittingly dissembleth, because they can receive no answer, as his Majesty's
words before related evidently show: yea these very councels of Mentz, which
seem most to favor his purpose* do expreslie teach the contrary, not in the
epistle or preface to the Emperor, where a precise form of words is not
always observed, but in the Canon it self, whence the sense of all councels
is to be taken. The first Maguntine council here cited by M. Mason has this
Canon. Can. 8,
We will that Bishops have power to provide, rule, govern and dispose of
Ecclesiastical things, according to the authority of Canons: and that the
laity in their offices obey the Bishops, to the government of the churches,
defense of widows, and orphans: and that they be obedient unto them, to the
conservation of their Christianity. Which Canon is repeated word by word, in
the second council of Mentz here cited, but there it is in the seventh place.

Now let M. Mason himself judge, whether these councels gave, or intended to
give to the Emperor, the title of supreme head, or governor of the church in
Ecclesiastical causes.

That which he brings of the council of Emerita, is altogether impertinent.
For it is not denied, that Kings may govern Ecclesiastical affairs, in their
rank and order, that is under their Pastors, and Prelates, and by their
direction (as persons of meaner quality do) for which this King is commended
by the council. But it is denied, that Kings have supreme power, and
government in Ecclesiastical causes. And this does the same council teach in
these words. Council. Emerit. can. 17. Bin. tom. 2. Page 1182.
Because Episcopal power is by Gods divine grace ordained, in his holy church,
it is seeming that as he is chief in honor, and bounty in his life time, so
after his death he be not wronged by detraction. And because M. Mason for the
strengthening of his purpose does add, that this council received great force,
by the epistle of Innocentius the 3. (to show him that all his arguments to
this purpose are like unto the sting of a Scorpion, which though most
poisonfull, yet never hurreth where the Scorpion her self is bruised upon the
place) I will relate here the beginning of that epistle, that M. Mason may see,
that if this apistle be of any force with him, as it is most worthy to be* his
doctrine of the supremacy is most false: thus therefore writes that learnep
Pope.

Although the body of the church, whereof Christ is head be one, and all the
faithful are members, yet he which of Christ the rock is called a Peter (that
is a rock) and of Christ the head, is called the head, he being witness that
said, thou shall be called Cephas, which according to one interpretation is
expoundod the head: because as the fulness of the sense abounds in the head,
and some part of that fulness is derived to the rest of the members: so the rest
(of the Apostles) are called to part of the care. Only Peter is assumed to the
fulness of power, to whom as to the head, the more weighty causes of the church
are worthily remitted, not so much by constitution of Canons, as by divine
ordination. Let M. Mason, or any other though more partial, judge, what force
or strength this epistle gives, to the supremacy of temporal Princes in
Ecclesiastical causes.

Ad Scapula^. Con. Parmen, l. 5.
6. We might (says M. Mason) add herunto the judgment of other fathers.
Tertullian: we reverence the Emperor as a man next unto God, and inferior
only to God. Optatus: Above the Emperor is none but only God, who made the
Emperor. So S. Chrysostom says, that the Emperor has no peer upon eath,
and calls him the head, and crown of men upon earth. If he be next unto God,
and inferior only to God, if none be above him but God only: if he have no
peer upon earth, as being the head, and crown of all men upon earth, then
must he needs be supreme head, and governor upon earth, according to the
judgment of the fathers.

True Sir, so he is in matters meerelie pertaining to civil, and politic
government, which properly are earthly, or upon the earth: But what is this
to your purpose, to prove him supreme head, judge, and governor of
spiritual matters which are from heaven, and above the earth? and whither his
power reaches not, as not having received the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
which our Savior left to S. Peter, and not unto Caesar. Therefore all these
words of yours are but wind, and quite besides the question: as also are those
that follow in this sort.

4. This is agreeable to the scripture, which testifies that most godly Kings
commanded both Priests, and high Priests, even in cases of religion, as was
before declared.

You bring not one instance of any good King, commanding by his Kingly power
any thing pertaining to religion, which was new, doubtful, or in controversy,
but only to execute such things, as were evident by the law, according to the
interpretation and practice of the church in those times; As for example, that
the Priests and Leuits should instruct the people, offer sacrifice, sing in the
church, purge the temple of things pertaining, to the worship of false Gods,
and the like: which, or the like things are practiced by Christian Kings, not
only without blame, but with greatest praise. But what is this to the purpose?
is this to judge, or determine in matters of faith, and religion, as supreme
head thereof? and not rather evidently to follow the judgment of the church,
and her Pastors in these things? If you do not know, that the government of the
church in matters of faith, and religion, did not appertain to the Kings, but
to the Priests, even in the old law of the Jews, you may learn both of the
Prophet Malachie, saying: Malachie 2.
the lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge, and from his mouth shall thou
take the law, for be is the Angel, or messenger of the God of hosts: and also
of the law it self commanding, that in all difficult cases, even in civil
matters, and therefore much more in matters of religion, men should recurre to
the judgment of the Priests. If thou perceive (says God by Moses) that the
judgment with thee be hard and doubtful between blood and blood, cause and
cause, leprosy and leprosy: and that thou see that the words of the judges
within thy gates (that is the particular judges) do vary: Denteron. 17.8 etc.
arise and go up to the place, which thy Lord thy God shall choose. And thou
shall come to the Priests of the Leuiticall stock, and to the judge, that
shall be at that time, and thou shall ask of them: who shall show thee the truth
of the judgment. And thou shall do, whatsoever they, that are presidents of the
place, which our Lord shall choose, shall say, and teach thee according to his
law: and thou shall follow their sentence: Neither shall thou decline to the
right hand, nor to the left hand. But he that shall be proud, refusing to abay
the commandment of the Priest, which at that time ministers to our Lord thy
God, and decree of the judge, that man shall dye.

8. Neither is this authority (says M. Mason) taken away in the new testament,
but continues the very same: as may appear by S. Paul, M. Mason.
whu lifts up his voice like a trumpet, proclaiming: Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, which words (every soul) comprehend all persons
both Ecclesiastical, and temporal, yea though they were Evangelists,
Prophets, or Apostles, as S. Chrysostom does truly expound them. If every
soul be subject unto higher powers, then the Prince is superior to all, and
consequently supreme within his own dominions.

I will not ascribe it to want of judgment in M. Mason, that he brings
always arguments against himself: but to the nature of the cause he
maintains, which being naught, can have no good grounds to be sustained by He
brings and with good reason S. Paul's commandment, for the subjection of all
men to higher power.

But what will he infer hereupon for the Princes supremacy? Marie that the
Prince is supreme superior within his own dominions. But what in spiritual
causes? Surely he must mean so, or else his argument concludes nothing
against any one, unless it be against some of his holy, and hot spirited
brotherhood, that hold themselves to be made free by Christ, from all such
subjection as S. Paul speaks of here. But he disputes not here against them,
but against Catholics, who, as he knows, teach obedience, and subjection to
temporal Princes, in all civil and temporal causes: therefore must he needs
mean superiority in spiritual causes. In which sense it is evidently
concluded, out of this authority of S. Paul, that temporal Princes are not
supreme heads, or governors of the church, by this argument.

The Princes, whom S. Paul commands the Christians of his time to obey, had
the same, or as great authority over their Christian subjects, as Christian
Princes now have over their subjects, considered only as they are temporal
Princes: But those Princes being Pagans had no authority over their Christian
subjects, in matter of faith, and religion. Therefore Christian Princes now, for
so much only as they are temporal Princes, have no such authority over their
subjects.

What M. Mason. will say to this argument, whereof he himself furnished the
matter, I know not; but well I wot that he will not easily shape any probable
answer to it. Which difficulty besides many others, he either did not, or
would not see, when he concluded his paragraffe in this brauing manner.

But why do I stay so long upon this point, which has been of late so
learnedly, and plentifully handled, that to say any more, were to cast water
into the sea, or to light a candle at noone day.

Where, or by whom this point has been either more largely, or learnedlie
handled, then by M. Horn sometime pretended Bishop of Winchester; I know not:
who notwithstanding was so encountered by D. Stapleton in his counterblast, that
neither he himself, nor any other for him, that I know, have since appeared in
maintenance of that quarrel, but have left the field to their conquering
adversary. And if any one since have said any thing in this point, it has not
been by way of reply, but a repetition of some of these arguments, which were
before answer, upon assurance that the book being printed welnigh 50. years
agone, and neither there publicly sold, but as other Catholic books in the
vulgar tongue are, is long since laid out of men's hands, and now either not
known, or not found. And therefore M. Mason thinking himself in this dispute
to be sailing at maine seas, when he is but wading in a brook not ankle deep,
is no less deceived then he was, that coming in the night time out of a dark
lane into Cheapside, where he saw the moon shine bright, thought he had been
near upon Thames, and called hard, oars, oars.

9. Having thus far brought such proofs, for the temporal Princes
supremacy, as he thinks to add any more thereunto, should be to cast water
into the sea: (all which notwithstanding do either make against him, or nothing
for him, as appears by the answers thereunto) he begins to answer such
objections, as he makes against himself, Page 117.
wherein he shows no less the weakness of his cause, then he did in arguing
for it. For he neither brings the most pressing arguments, which make for the
Catholic doctrine in this point, (some part whereof have been touched before)
neither does he propose those he brings, to their most advantage, neither
does he (which is worst of all) satisfy them as they are proposed. The first
objection he makes thus.

If the Prince be supreme governor in causes spiritual, he may command what
religion he list, and we must obey him.

This argument should be thus proposed. If the temporal Prince be supreme
governor in spiritual causes, his subjects are bound to obey his
commandments therein, for every subject is bound to obey his superior in
that, wherein he is his superior according to S. Paul: Let every soul be
subject to superior powers. But he may command that, which is false and
pernicious, as many temporal Princes are known to have done, and no marvel
for all men of themselves are subject to error, as the scripture testifies,
saying that all men are liars, unless they be freed from that defect, Psalm.
115.11. Romans 3.4:
by the special assistance of the holy Ghost, which in the government of
spiritual causes, is no where promised to temporal Princes. Therefore if the
Prince be supreme governor in spiritual causes, his subjects may be bound to
do that, which is false and pernicious. Which notwithstanding is most absurd.
To this argument thus proposed, I do not see what probable answer M. Mason
would frame, but let us see how he answers it, as he himself proposes it.

Not so (says he) for he is supreme governor in causes temporal, yet in may
not comaund a man to bear false witness, or to condemn the innocent (...)
Iesabell did: or if he should, we must rather obey God then man: so in cases of
religion: Nabuchodonozor had no warrant to erect his image, not Jeroboam to set
up his golden calves. For the King as King, is supreme under God, not against
God; to command for truth, not against truth. And if he shall command ungodly
things, we may not perform obedience, but submit our selves to his punishment
with patience.

Yeu do not satisfy M. Mason. For you give no rule, nor can you give any, how
to know, when the King in matter of doubt, and controversy commands for
God, or for the truth, and when he commands against God, and the truth. For
example, the King of England forbids in his kingdom the Mass, and all
other rites and articles of religion, wherein the Protestants differ from the
Catholics: the King of France commands, and allows them all in his
kingdom. I would now understand of you M. Mason, how either English or French
men may in your doctrine know, whether of these two Kings commands for God
and the truth, and whether of them commands against God and the truth. For
seeing they command contrary things, the one of them at least must necessarily
command against God or how he knows that K. Henry the 8. commands against
God and there truth in commanding the observance of the six articles. So
directly opposite to their religion: but for the truth when he commanded
himself to be called supreme head of the church contrary to all Catholic
doctrine. You will I doubt not according to your accustomed manner, recurre to
the written word and say, that he that commands according to the word,
commands for God and the truth. But this is but loss of time, for we are no
nearer to know the truth then before; the question and doubt yet remaining,
whether of these Kings command according to the written word, which how to
know I would Learn some rule of you. For seeing that in your doctrine, they
are both supreme governors in these matters, within their own dominions, and
both of them prentend to command according to Gods word, it seems to me,
that in your doctrine both their subjects are bound to obey them, and yet this
is manifestly absurd, seeing that the one of them at the least commands
against God and his truth. I will attend your satisfaction M. Mason in this
point, which until you give, I shall promise you to esteem your doctrine, of
the supremacy of temporal Princes in spiritual matters, not only an heresy
in matter of faith, but an absurd Paradox even in politic principles, as
dividing Princes one from the other in religion, wherein they ought most to agree,
and tying their subjects either to obey them in matters hurtful to their
souls, or for fear of that to disobay them, in matters pertaining to their
duty: And to give them power to judge when their Prince commands for God or
against God and thereby to open the door to all rebellion and sedition.

10. The second objection M. Mason proposes in this sort. If the supreme
government in spiritual causes be due to the imperial crown, it skilleth
not, whether the Prince be man or woman, woman or child, nor of what religion.
For the princely power was no less in Traiane, then in Theodosius, in King
Henry, then Q. Mary, in Queen Mary the enemy of the new Gospellers, then in Q.
Elizabeth their protectrix: Yea it was no less in King Lucius before he was
baptized, then after. And consequently the Emperor of the Turks may be called
supreme governor, in causes Ecclesiastical within his own dominions.

The force of this argument would more evidently appear, if M. Mason had thus
proposed it If it belong to the Imperial crown, to be supreme governor of
the church of Christ, even in spiritual causes, it will necessarily follow,
that Turkish and Pagan princes are so also. But this is very false and absurd.
For no man can be head of that body, whereof he is not a member: But Turks and
Pagans are not members of Christ his church, as is evident; they therefore
cannot be heads, nor supreme governors thereof in these cause, which, as it is
Christ's church, does appertain unto it. But let us see his answer to it, as
it is proposed by himself.

Here are two things (says he) to be considered, First, the princely power
and authority: Secondly the hability, rightly to exercise the same. The
princely power is given immediately from God, both unto Christian Princes, and
also unto Ethnikes, which are guided only by the light, and law of nature, and
by constitutions thence deduced by the wit of man. For this is true in all: by
me Kings reign. And Daniel said unto Nabuchodonosor. O King thou art a King of
Kings, Proverb* 8.15. Dan. 2.37.
for the God of heaven has given unto thee a kingdom and power, and strength,
and glory. But the hability rightly to use and exercise this authority, by
referring it unto the true end, that is the glory of God, (for all our rivers
ought to run into that Ocean) and the eternal good of the subjects, is
communicated from the Lord only to such, as know him in Christ Jesus, and are
guided by his grace.

Note diligent reader, that M. Mason puts here a distinction between the
princely power, and the ability rightly to use it: and therefore cannot deny
the same distinction in Episcopal power, whereupon it follows that a man may
be a true Bishop, and yet cannot make a lawful Bishop, because he wants
ability to exercise his power, as it happens in heretics, schismatiques,
and excommunicate persons. Which distinction observed, will show the Bishop^
now in England to be no lawful Bishops, (though they did descend from Cranmer
by true consecration as they do not) for want of ability in him, that did
consecrate them, to exercise rightly that power, as is before mentioned. Romans
13.1. De ciuit. l. 5. c. 21. So the domination and power that man's reasons has
over his senses and gifts either of nature or fortune is of nature, but the
right use thereof is from ground. But what then? will follow hereupo^ that
human has supreme power in matters of faith and religion? Isay. 45.2.3.
Epist. 50. Epist. 50.


The fountain therefore of all power is God himself: as the Apostle witnesses,
saying: there is no power but of God, To which purpose it is well said of S.
Austin. He that gave it to Mark, gave it to Caesar, he that gave it to
Augustus, gave it to Nero: he that gave it to Vespasian father, or his son
most sweet Emperors, gave it also to Domitian the most cruel. And that I may
not reckon up the rest in particular, he that gave it to Constantine the
Christian, gave it also to Julian the Apostata. But though domination, and
power were from the law of nature, yet the right use of it is not from nature,
but from grace. A Prince as a Prince be he good or bad, in respect of princely
calling has sufficient power, and authority to govern his people, according
to the will of God. And it is his duty so to do. The Lord said unto Cyrus. I
will go before thee, and make the crooked straight. I will break the brazen
doors, and burst the iron bars. And I will give thee treasures of darkness,
and the things hid in secret places, that thou may know that I am the Lord.
Upon which words S. Hierome no^eth, that God gives kingdoms unto wicked men,
not that they should abuse them, but as for other reasons, so for this, that
being invited by his bounty they should be converted from their sins. So it is
their duty to serve God, not only as they are men, but as they are Kings. And
Kings (says S. Austin) do in this serve God as Kings, when they do those
things to serve him, which none but Kings can do. But what is that? It may
appear by these words. Let the Kings of the earth serve Christ, even by making
laws for Christ. For though the immediate end of humane societies be peace,
and prosperity, yet the last end of all, So the last end of all human actions
as Gods glory. But what will follow hereupo^ for the supremacy. 1. ad Timoth.
22, So every artificer in that he is such an one, has power to serve God as
such an one yet for the due execution of it, grace is required and yet by his
art is not he suprea^ head of the church I hope which notwithstand would follow
in M. Maso^s doctrine.
and west principally to be respected is the glory of God, and eternal
happiness. For which purpose it is the duty of all subjects, to pray for their
Prince, though he be a pagan, that under him they may live a Godly, and
peaceable life, in all Godliness and honesty. But though every Prince, in that
he is a Prince, has authority to serve God as a Prince, yet for the due
execution of it, there is required grace. Authority is in a Pagan: the due
execution requires a Christian. The King of Niniue had authority long before,
to proclaim a fast: Nabuchodonosor had authori^y to command, that all nations
should worship the God of Daniell: but they put it not in execution, till God
touched their hearts: and when they put it in execution, it was not by any new
authority, but by virtue of their former Princely power hertofore abused, but
now used rightly by direction of Gods spirit and assistaunce of his grace.

I confess it was very irksome unto me, to make relation of all this long and
loose discourse, containing nothing to the purpose for the matter in hand. For
the most that is here said, is that Kings as Kings, have power to make laws
for the service of Christ, which is not denied (supposing they do it according
to the judgment, of the pastors of Gods church.) But this is Far from that,
which M. Mason has here to show, which is to prove that Kings as Kings, and
therefore as well Pagan and infidel, as Christian Kings, have supreme and
sovereign authority, in ecclesiastical and Spiritual matters and causes. A
proposition, which (as I think) has no author but M Mason, nor any other
ground but his fancy, straitened by the force of the objection, made against
his doctrine of the supremacy of temporal Princes, which he, finding no other
mean to maintain, is forced to set abroach this palpable absurdity. When M.
Mason shall have proved this paradox, of the sovereign power of Pagan Princes
over Christ's church, by some other ground then his own senseles assertion, we
will dispute with him, whether the distinction of the power it self, and the
means to exercise it, be appliable to that purpose, for which he uses it, or
no.

In the mean while I will let him see, how dangerous this his doctrine, and
distinction is to all estates, and how it opens the way to all sedition. For
by it may he, or any other, maintain himself to be King of England, or any
other Kingdom, Saying that as he is the son of his Father (be he whom he
will (he has power from God to govern the Kingdom, and wants only hability
to exercise that power, and to rule as King, and therefore if he should now
begin to reign, he should not do it by virtue of any new power granted him,
but by virtue of the same power he had before. If he, or any man else should
argue in this sort, he would (I doubt not) be quickly lodged in the place
appointed for cracked wits, till he should grow more wise. The fault that M.
Mason would find in this discourse will let him see the like in his own, that
he may me^d it, if he will.

And seeing he gives us no kind of proof of this new paradoxe: that Pagan
Princes have sovereign authority over Christ's church, in Spiritual matters,
and want only means to execute it, but will have us to believe it upon his
bare word, though he exact of us, we build not our says upon Popes, councels,
nor Fathers, but only upon the sacred Word of God registered in the writings of
the Apostles and Prophets says he pa. 101. Cap 15. n. 7. 1. Cor. 5.12.
for proof of whatsoever we affirm, express scripture, and thinks he is
not well dealt with, if we give him the testimonies of Fathers, and councels,
of which unequal dealing I more often, and willingly putt him in mind, because
I see it often used both by himself, and his reforming brethren. Seeing (I say)
he will give us no proof for this his assertion, I will (to the proofs of the
contrary before alleged, as well out of scripture, antiquity, and reason) add
one other deduced out of the doctrine of S. Paul, who says expressly, that he
has no power to judge of those, that are without (that is) that are not any
way within the church, which is the house of God, and body of Christ. Whereupon
it follows and by greater reason, that those that are without the church, as
all Pagans evidently are, have no power to judge, either those persons or
causes, that are within the church. But M. Mason to make his new doctrine more
current explicateth the same in this sort. Mala. 2.7. How he argues against
him self? For if God has made priests the mese^gers of his truth he, has not
given the same auctority to Princes.


The truth of this answer, that thou may see in another glass, let us a
little remove our speech from the Prince to the priest: I demand therefore if
the Priests, the sons of Aaron were not the messengers of the Lord of hastes.
Yes verily as says Malachy. But he may be a false prophet, an idolater, an
Apostata, he may turn Pagan, or Atheist. Is such a Priest the messenger of the
Lord of hosts? A priest as a priest, be he good or bad, in respect of his
priestly calling, and authority, is the messenger of the Lord of hosts: he
ought to leave his impieties in seducing the people, and to serve God in
teaching the truth. In that he is a priest, God has armed him with a calling
to deliver his message, for performance whereof, he needs no new calling, but
grace to use that well, which before he abused. Apply this to the present
point, and it will satisfy.

Good God, how blind and perverse is heresy, which being to maintain it self
without the grounds of Catholic doctrine, does notwithstanding obstinately
impugn the same? This I say because, unless M. Mason suppose as true, the
Catholic doctrine of an indeleble character in Christian preiesthood, whereby
the power of order once received does always remain, this his discourse is
altogether vain and idle (I speak here of Christian preiesthood, and not of
that of Aaron, which descended by the line of generation.) For without some
such means to conserve the power of order, it is not possible to conceive how
the lawfull^y thereof being lost by excommunication, heresy, apostasy, or the
like, it can any ways be renewed or repaired without a new ordination, which
M. Mason approoueth not. And therefore this example of priesthood, unless he
suppose the Catholic doctrine, does make nothing for his purpose, which is to
show how temporal Princes may have supreme power, in Spiritual affairs,
though they have not the true or lawful use thereof.

Secondly, though M. It is a different thing to say, that te^porall Princes are
suorea^ heads in all Spiritual causes and things: and to say that they ought
to referr all their Princely actions to Gods glory the first is that M. Maso^
should prove the later noe man denies, Mason.
Mason should be permitted to make use for his own advantage of the Catholic
doctrine in this particular, yet will it not any way help him, unless he ca^
first show, that temporal Princes, eo ipso, that they are Princes, have
sovereign power in Spiritual causes, and then that they have some character,
or some other thing, by means whereof the same power is conserved in them,
though they have not the lawful use thereof. But how M. Mason can make any
probable proof of either of these points, it surpasses my small capacity to
conceive He does therefore in this whole loose discourse of his, miserably and
unlearnedly beg the grant of that, which is in question: to wit, that
temporal Princes have from God supreme authority in Spiritual things: Which
unless it be granted him (and yet it is that whereupon we dispute) all these
words of his are but wind, and may serve him as a glass, to see the
impertinency of his former answerein.

The third objection M. Mason sets down thus. To make the Prince supreme
head, or governor of the church is unnatural, for s^^l the sheep feed the
flock? he would have said I think the shepherd at least so he should have
said) or the son guide the Father? His answer is this.

Psalm. 78.70.
As the Priest is Father, and shepherd in respect of the Prince, so the Prince
is a shepherd and Father, in respect of the priest. The Lord chose David his
servant, and took him from the sheepfoldes, to seed his people in Jacob, and
his inheritance in Israel. So he fed them in the simplicity of his heart, and
guided them by the discretion of his hands And Ezechias called the priests his
sons: 2. Chron. 29.11.
If the Prince be their shepherd, then he must feed them, if he be their
Father, then he must guide them, this is natural.

The force of truth is great, and always victorious M. Mason after all his
wra^gling, is at last constrained to confess that Princes are sheep, and
children in respect of priests, and therefore by the very order of nature, to be
fedd and guided by them: not in temporal matters (for in those he says the
Princes are their shepherds, and Fathers) therefore in Spiritual things, unless
he will that one and the same person may be sheep, and shepherd, superior
and subject to another, in respect of one and the same matter, which no man of
common sense will think. Is it not therefore even by his own conclusion most
clear, that by the course of nature Princes are to be fedd, and guided by the
priests in Spiritual things? and consequently, that Princes are not, nor can
be supreme governors, or heads of the church in the same.

12. Hitherto have I deferred to answer that maine argument of M. Masons, in
urging whereof he emploieth Six, or seven whole pages of his book in folio,
thinking it of principal force, for the concluding of his purpose, which is to
prove the deposition, of the Catholic Bishops by Q. Elizabeah to have been
just and lawful. I have (I say) hitherto differed to answer it, because
though it appear to M. Mason of great force, yet is it indeed altogether
impertinent to his purpose, as shall appear by the answer.

3. Reg. 2.27.
The argument in brief is this. King Solomon deposed Abiather being high
priest, and put another in his place. Therefore Q. Elizabeth might do the like
by the Bishops of her kingdom.

Whereunto I answer, that though it should be granted, that Solomon as King
only and not as a prophet and therefore by special revelation deposed
Abiather: and Farther that his fact was just, and lawful (which two things M.
Mason cannot easily prove) yet does not this argument conclude any thing for
M. Masons purpose. For though it were also granted, that the priests of the
old law were subject, in all temporal causes to the judgment of their Kings,
yet it does not follow thereupon, that the priest of the new law are in like
manner subject to their Kings. For noe true Christian can deny, but that the
preiesthood of the new law, is both different, and also more perfect, then
that of the old, whereas the power of the Kings is the same in both. And this
is more then sufficient, to hinder the necessary sequel of the argument
proposed, in the judgment of any one that has any judgment.

But yet Farther, be it that the priests of the new, and old law are equal in
this respect, (which M. Mason will never be able to prove) yet does M. Masons
argument conclude nothing at all for his purpose. For Abiathers case was far
different from that of our Catholic Bishops his cause being merely
temporal, to wit his conspiring against Solomon in favor of his brother
Adonias, which cause had it not been in the person of a priest, should without
all question have belonged to the te^porall tribunal to be judged. But theirs
was a matter of faith, and religion, which though it had not been in the person
of priests, yet could it not have been judged by a temporal judge. And so M.
Masons maine argument is showed to be most impertinent for his purpose, yea it
may be retorted against him in this sort. Neither Solomon, nor any other good
King ever judged, the priests of the old law in matters of faith and religion,
but were subject to their judgment therein, as is manifest by the example of
Saul and Ozias: therefore much less can temporal Kings judge, the priests of
the new law in the like matters. Aand this whole matter I will prove by the
inevitable testimony of his Majesty, to whose authority M. Mason, I suppose,
will readily submitt his judgment: thus therefore his Majesty writes.

13. I confess, In his declaration against Cardinal de peron page 70.
impr^ssio^ of paru.
that when a Prince commands any thing directly against the word of God, and
which tends to the subversion of religion, that the clergy in this case ought
not only to dispense with his subjects in their obedience to him, but ought
expressly to forbid them to obey him, because we ought rather to obey God, then
men.

And because there may be difficulty to know when the Prince commands any
thing directly against Gods word, and to the subversion of religion, no Prince
being so maliciously wicked, as to command any thing that he knows, and
confesses to be such, his Majesty declares how this may be known, and who
ought to judge thereof, denying first that this judgment pertains to Princes
in these words.

It is true, that the Emperors never vaunted themselves to be sovereign
judges in points of says, and doctrine. And then he tells who are co^petent
judges in these matters, saying. I confess that it is a point of divinity to
judge, how far the keys does reach, and that the clergy may, and ought give
their ce^sures against Princes, that contrary to their oath make war against
Jesus Christ, without making lay men judges thereof,

By all which it is plain, that in his Majesty's judgment, the clergy has
sovereign power over Princes, in points of faith, doctrine, and divinity, and
that they may judge and censure them therein indepe^dentlie of the laity: even
so far as expressly to forbid their subjects to obaie the^, in case they
command any thing contrary to Gods word, and to the subversion of religion,
which, when it happens, belongs unto the clergy to judge, as a matter of
faith, and doctrine, and not to the temporal Princes, who are not judges in
those points. How the oath of supremacy does aggree with the protesta^tes
doctrine see the last capt of this treatise.
Whereby M. Mason may see, how far he differs from his Majesty, in this
point of temporal Princes supremacy, in Spiritual matters, and causes.

Therefore to conclude this point, I say that the oath of supremacy, whereby the
title of supreme head, or governor of the church in all Spiritual causes,
and things is given to temporal Princes, being Sacrilegious and wicked, as
contrary to holy Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, and the practice of all
Christian Princes, since the first foundation of Christianity, as has been
already showed, and therefore such (as his majesty says) as being commanded by
the Prince may and ought to be expressly forbidden by the clergy, who in that
case is to be obaied by all the Princes subjects, the refusal thereof by the
Catholic Bishops could not be any act of disloialty, nor any just cause of
their depositio^, or depriuatio^, and co^seque^tly they who upon this only
cause were thrust into their places could not be lawfully invested therein, but
must necessarily be unlawful usurpers, and intruders, and therefore no lawful
Bishops.

The seventeenth Chapter. Those that succeeded M. Parker, and the rest in the
places of Bishops, down to this present day, neither were nor are true, and
lawful Bishops.
I Comprehend all those that succeeded M. Parker, and the rest that were first
intruded into the places of the Catholic Bishops, even till this day in one
question, because their case is not different. Wherein it is clear, that the
same defects, which have been found in any of their predecessors since M.
Cranmer (except that of intrusion specified in the chapter going before) are
also in the same degree in these, of whom the present question is proposed: and
therefore the difficulty here is not of those defects: but whether there be not
some other in these, which was not in thothers.

1. The resolution is, that they have a defect so essential, or material
(more then thothers had) that it alone is sufficient to make them no Bishops.
And this is that they were not, or are not priests. So that their calling is
defective, not only in respect of the callers, and calling; as that of the
others was, but also in respect of the persons.

That preiesthood is necessarily, No man can be Bishop, that is high priest
unless he be priest.
and essentially presupposed to episcopal order, and power in such sort, as he
that is not priest cannot be Bishop, I find it not doubted of by any of our
adversaries, neither can there be any doubt thereof. For it is no where found
either in holy scripture, or ecclesiastical history, that any one was Bishop,
that was not also priest, and therefore Bishops are ordinarily called priests,
because all Bishops are indeed priests; though all priests be not Bishops, as
has been showed before.

The Catholic council of Sardis does admire and withal condemn the
impudency of the Arrians, accusors of S. Athanasius, for using the testimony
of one as a Bishop, who was not so much as a priest. They gave to him (says
the council) the title of Bishop, Athanas. Apol. 2. in epi. council. Sardic.
ante med. Theod. l. 2. cap 8. ante med. D. Field of the church l. 3. c. 39.
ante med.
that was not so much as priest. And again, They brought forth him for witness
as Bishop, which was not priest. And yet again. They named him Bishop, which
was not as yet made priest. This is so certain with M. Field, that herupon he
would prove every priest, or presbyter (as he calls them, to avoid the
consequence which the very word infers) to have the same authority with
Bishops, and that only for orders sake, the distinction is made betwixt them,
which doctrine although false in it self, as has been showed before, yet does
it manifestly suppose, that preiesthood is so necessarily required to
episcopal order, or power, that none can be Bishop unless he be Priest.

The state of the question.
This ground therefore being agreed upon by all parties: the present controversy
rests in this only point: Whether the preiesthood of the new law does include
in it the power to offer sacrifice unto God, not only of prayer, praise, or
trankesgiuing. but a true, proper, and external sacrifice, as the priests of
the old law, or rather as our savior Christ offered to his Father, or no. If
it be proved, that the priesthood of the new law essentially includes in it
such a power, it will inuincibly follow, first, that the new ministry of the
pretended reformation, as well in England, as elsw^ere, (disclayming from all
such power, as from Antichristian idolatry) has no true priesthood: and thence
will it as evidently follow that they have no true Bishops and pastors, which
is that I intend here to prove.

That this disputation may proceed with some order, I will first prove by
the testimony of holy scriptures, interpreted by the Fathers of the first five
hundredth years, that there is in the church of Christ a sacrificing
priesthood, or a power to offer external, and sensible sacrifice to God, no
less truly and properly, then in the law of Moises. Secondly, I will answer
the chiefest objections against the same. Thirdly, I will infer thereupon
that, which is chiefly intended in this dispute. In the first point I will not
multiply many testimonies of holy scriptures, but will bring only two, or
three at the most, with the ancient Fathers interpretations, which shall be
sufficient to persuade any understanding not wilfullid tied to his own
error, of which Kind of persons it was said long since, and most truly, S
Hierom. contra Luciferianos in fine. Luke 22.19. 1. Corinthians. 11.25.
that they may be overcome, but they can never be persuaded.

2. The first testimony shall be our Savior Christ his own fact, and
institution recorded by S. Luke, and S. Paul in these words. This is my body
which is given for you. Do this for a commemoration of me. This chalice is the
new testament in my blood: this do ye as often as ye shall drink: for the
commemoration of me. Here our Savior gave unto his Apostles, (and to all
those that succeed them in the office of priesthood) charge, and withal
authority, and power to do the same thing that he then did, as is manifest by
these words do ye this. And thrrfore (to prove, that he instituted, and
ordained in his church a sacrificing power of priesthood) it remains only to
prove, that he did then offer sacrifice himself. Which I prove in this sort.
Our Savior Christ was Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, Psalm.
109.4. Hebre. 5.6.
God himself having sworn so: and therefore was he at some time to offer
sacrifice (the proper action of priesthood) in the same form and rite, that
Melchisedech offered in, for otherways he neither could have been said, or
known to have been so particularly a Priest of that order. But unless he
sacrificed in his last supper, when he gave his body and blood to his
disciples, under the form of bread and wine, he never sacrificed in that form
and rite, that Melchisedech sacrificed in, (for his sacrifice was in bread, and
wine) Therefore is it necessary that he then did truly sacrifice. The whole
difficulty of this argument is reduced to this point; whether Melchisedech
offered in bread and wine, as the peculier offering of his order and
priesthood, or no: for this being proved, the rest is clear.

And that the proper, and peculiar offering of Melchisedech his pristhood, was
in bread and wine: no man that believes the holy scriptures, interpreted by
vncorrupt antiquity, can make doubt. Genesis 14.18.
The scripture says thus But Melchisedech bringing forth bread and wine, for
he was Priest of God most high. Whereupon the most ancient fathers do teach
without controllment, or contradiction, that Melchisedech being the Priest of
God, did there offer sacrifice of bread and wine, in figure of that, which our
Savior in his last supper offered.

Epist. 63. ad Cecilianum.
Item in sacerdote Melchisedech sacrificij Dominici sacramentum praefiguratum
videmus, secundum quod scriptura diuina testatur and dicit: Et Melchisedech rex
Salem protulit panem and vinum. Fuit autem sacerdos Dei summi and benedixit
Abraham. Quod autem Melchisedech typum Christi portaret: declarat in Psalmis
Spiritus Sanctus expersona Patris ad Filium dicens: Ante Luciferum genui te: tu
es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Qui ordo vtique hic est
de sacrificio illo veniens and inde descendens; quod Melchisedech sacerdos Dei
summi fuit, quod panem and vinum obtulit, quod Abraham benedixit. Nam quis
magis sacerdos Dei summi, quam Dominus noster Jesus Christus? qui sacrificium
Deo Patri obtulit, and obtulit hoc idem quod Melchisedech obtulerat, id est
panem and vinum, suum scilicet corpus, and sanguinem.

Vt ergo in Genesi per Melchisedech sacerdotem benedictio circa Abraham posset
rite celebrari, praecedit ante imago sacrificij Christi in pane and vino
scilicet constituta, quam rem perficiens and adimplens Dominus panem and
Calicem mixtum vino obtulit, and qui est plenitudo, veritatem praefiguratae
imaginis adimplenit.

S. Cipria^ that holy Bishop and martyr, who lived in the third hundredth year
after Christ that is above thirteen hundredth years ago, says thus. We see
the mystery of our Lords sacrifice, prefigured by Melchisedech the priest, as
the holy scripture witnesses, and says. And Melchisedech the King of Salem
brught forth bread and wine, for he was priest of God most high, and blessed
Abraham. And that Melchisedech bare the figure of Christ, the holy Ghost
declares in the Psalms, saying in the person of the father to the son: I
have begot thee before the day star: Our Lord has sworn and it shall not
repent him: Thou art a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech:
which order doubtless has it beginning from that sactifice, and thence
descended, that Melchisedech was the priest of the most high God, that he
offered bread and wine, that he blessed Abraham. For who is rather the priest
of God most high, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered sacrifice to God the
father? and offered the same that Melchisedech had offered, that is bread and
wine, to wit his body and blood. Ibidem.
And he adds. Therefore as the figure of the sacrifice in bread, and wine went
before in Genesis, that the blessing of Abraham might be rightly performed by
Melchisedech the priest, which thing our Lord perfecting, and fulfilling
offered bread, and the Chalice mixed with wine, and he who is the fulness, and
perfection, fulfilled the truth of the prefigured sign or image.

What can our new masters say to this? Surely nothing but that S. Ciprian
was a papist, teaching the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, under
the forms of bread and wine, vvherin the sacrifice and order of Melchisedech,
consisted according to whose order our Savior was priest, differing in this
notvvithstanding, that Christ and his sacrifice was the truth prefigured,
Melchisedech and his sacrifice the figure.

Iurauit Dominus, and non paenitebit eum: quibus verbis immutabile futurum esse
significat, quod adiungit, Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordine^
Melchisedech: ex eo quod iam nusquam est sacerdotium and sacrificium secundum
ordinem Aaron, and vbique offertur sub sacerdote Christo, quod protulit
Melchisedech, quando benedixit Abraham, quis ambigere permittitur, de quo ista
dicantur?

S. De ciuitat. Dei l. 17. cap. 17.
Augustine another Africa^ Doctor teaches the same saying. By these words, our
Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him, is signified that, that which
follows is immutable; thou art a priest for ever according to the order of
Melchisedech: for that the priesthood and sacrifice according to the order of
Aaron, is now no where; and every where under the priest Christ is offered
that, which Melchisedech brought forth when he blessed Abraham: who can doubt
of whom these things are spooken?

Of this same subject he has a large discourse upon the Psalm. 33. conci. 1.
which is over prolix to be related here S. Ambrose is as plain, saying.

In cap. 5. ad Hebraeos.
Huius ordinem sacrificij per mysticam similitudinem Melchisedech iustissimus
rex instituit, quando Domino panis and vini fructus obtulit. Constat enim
pecudum victimas perijsse, quae fuerunt ordinis Aaron, non Melchisedech: sed
hoc manner potius institutum, quod toto orb in sacramentorum erogatione
celebratur.

Melchisedech rex Salem sacerdos Dei altissimi, qui panem and vinum
sanctificatum dedit nutrimentum, in typum Eucharistiae.

The most just King Melchisedech did begin the order of this sacrifice by a
mystical similitude, when he offered to our Lord the fruits of bread and
wine. For it is evident, that the sacrifices of beasts, which were of the order
of Aaron, are ceased, not that of Melchisedech; but that this institution does
rather remain, which is celebrated in the whole world, in the nimistring of
the sacraments. Clemens of Alexandria who lived 1400. years ago has the
same doctrine in these fevv, but plain words. Melchisedech King of Salem
priest of God most high who gave bread and wine, sanctified food, in figure of
the Eucharist.

And Theodoret who lived 1200. years ago testifies the same yet more
clearelie.

4. Stromat. ad finem.
Caeterum Melchisedech non Iudaeorum, sed gentium est sacerdos. Sic and Dominus
Christus non pro Iudaeis tantum, sed pro omnibus hominibus semetipsu^ obtulit
Deo. Exorditur autem sacerdotium in nocte, qua crucem subiuit, cum accepit
panem, and gratias egit, fregit, and dixit. Accipite and comedite ex ipso, Hoc
est corpus meum. Similiter and Calicem cum temperasset, dedit discipulis suis,
dicens, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Hic est enim sanguis meus noui testamenti, qui pro
multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum. Inueniens autem Melchisedech
sacerdotem, and regem esse, (figura igitur erat very sacerdotis, and regis) and
offerente^ Deo non sacrifiiia ratione carentia, sed panem and vinu^.

Nelchisedech (says he) is not priest of the Jews, but of the gentiles, as
also our Savior Christ offered himself to God, not for the Jews only, but
for all men. And he began his priesthood the night, when he underwent the
cross, when he took bread, gave thanks, brake, and said, take and eat ye of
this: For this is my body. In like manner when he had mingled the Chalice, he
gave to his disciples, saying, drink ye all of this. For this is my blood of
the new testament, which shall be shed for many for remission of sins. For we
find that Melchisedech was priest, and King (and therefore a figure of the true
priest and King) offering to God not unreasonable sacrifices, but bread and
wine.

But the testimony of S Hierome setting down not only his own doctrine, but
that also of his ancestors Hypolitus, Irenaeus, two Eusebiuses and
Eustachius, is worthy of more special note. Epist. 126.


Neque ille (Melchisedech) carnis and sanguinis victimas immolauerit, and
brutorum animalium sanguinem dextera susceperit, sed pane and vino simplici
puroque sacrificio, Christi dedicauerit sacramentum.

Neither did he (Melchisedech) offer sacrifice of the flesh and blood of brute
beasts, but with bread and wine, a simple and pure sacrifice, did he dedicate
the sacrament or mystery of Christ.

3. Notwithstanding all these clear testimonies of vncorrupt, and impartial
antiquity, whereunto might be added many more, Lib. 5. cap. 2. page 609.
if necessity required, for the proof of Melchisedech his offering of bread
and wine, in sacrifice M. Mason in the name of all his brethren reformed
stoutly denies, that ever he offered in these kinds, or that our Savior
Christ ever offered in the like. But upon what ground think you, does he so
peremptorily contradict such evident testimonies of venerable antiquity?
Surely upon no other, then his own wilful obstinacy, that will not permit
him to acknowledge the truth. For if all were true, that M. Mason says for his
negative, yet would it nothing hinder the truth of that we affirm, as shall
appear in every particular of his discourse, which is this.

Genes. 14 18
It cannot be gathered out of this text: (And Melchisedech King of Salem
brought forth bread and wine, and he was a priest of the most high God) that he
sacrificed to God in bread and wine. Antiquit. li 1. c. 11.
Josephus says, that he gave entertainment to the soldiers of Abraham: Con
Iudaeos cap. 14.
Tertullian says, that he offered bread and wine to Abraham, returning from
the battle. Lib. 4. de sacrame^tis cap. 3.
S Ambrose says likewise, that Melchisedech did offer it unto Abraham. De
vulgari editisne Lati. lib. 4. Defens. page 636.
Your own Andradius says, I will be of their opinion which say, that
Melchisedech refreshed with bread, and wine the soldiers of Abraham, being
weary and tired with a long battle. In Genes 14
And Cardinal Caietan: Here is nothing spoken of the oblation or sacrifice,
but of the prolation and bringing it out, which Josephus says was done to
refresh the conquerours.

Be it so; what repugnance has any part of all this, with Melchisedech his
offering of bread, and wine to God in sacrifice, that M. Mason should so
confidentlie or (truer) impudentlie deny it, contrary to the clear
testimonies of so many, and so great fathers, positiuelie affirming it as
expressed in holy scripture? none at all: For he having brought forth bread and
wine, what might hinder him to offer it first to God in sacrifice, and that
done divide it to Abraham and his soldiers for their refreshing? was it ever a
whit less fit for their refreshing and nouriture, for being offered to God, and
thereby sanctified, or not rather much more fit? The custom and manner as well
of Jews as Gentiles, feasting and banqueting with the same meat that was
offered in sacrifice, (whereof I suppose M. Mason is not ignorant) does show,
that there is no repugnance betwixt Melchisedech his offering to God of bread
and wine in sacrifice, and his entertaining, feasting, or refreshing Abraham,
and his army with the same. And that the feasting or entertainment, which
Melchisedech made to Abraham, was not of mere frindship or hospitality, but a
sanctified and holy feast, it is plain even by Josephus the Jew, whom M. Mason
cites, who says that Melchisedech made unto Abraham a holy banquet, as the
Greek word will without any force bear. But seeing M. Mason makes force of a
Jews authority, against the most ancient Christian Doctors, in a matter
pertaining to Gods worship, and true sense or understanding of holy scripture
(which to any good Christian may seem justly absurd) I will remit him in this
point to Philo the Jew, who was not only Josephus his ancient, but also
esteemed of more authority by many degrees, as well for his judgment, and
learning, as for his sincerity in his religion. His words are these. When
that great, Philo lib. de Abrahamo.
and principal Bishop of God most mighty saw Abraham returned in safety, with
victory, his company all whole, (for he had lost never a man) admiring the
great prosperous success, and thinking (as it was true) that by Gods special
providence, and help, he had carried himself so prosperously, holding up his
hands to heaven blessed him, and sacrificed a victorius banquet, and richly
feasted all his company. Whereby M. Mason may learn, that Melchisedech his
banquet prepared for Abraham was not a profane feast, or a mere civil
entertainment, but such a religious banquet, as was wont to be made both by
Jews and Gentiles, in such occasions of joy, and exultation, accompanied with
sacrifice to God. And therefore without all show of reason does he deny, that
Melchisedech offered sacrifice of bread and wine, seeing so many, and so grave
fathers do in most express words testify the same, and no one good author
does deny, or contradict it.

Farther M. Mason deals most injuriously with his authors. For both S.
Ambrose and Andradius in the very same places by himself cited, do most
expreslie teach Melchisedech his sacrifice, which M. Mason so peremptorily
denies. Melchisedech (says S. Ambrose offered bread and wine. Lib 4. de
Sacram. cap. 3.
And commenting upon the 5. chapter of the epistle to the Hebrews he says
thus. Melchisedech was not priest according to the law (of Moses) but
according to the dignity of a singular priesthood, offering to God bread and
wine, not the blood of brute beasts, in the order of whose priesthood Christ is
made eternal priest.

Andradius disputing with Kemnitius has a large and learned discourse, wherein
he maintains against his adversary, the truth of the vulgar Latin
translation: reading the text of Genesis thus: Melchisedech bringing forth
bread and wine for he was priest of the most high God: and thereby proouing the
Catholic doctrine of the sacrifice of the Eucharist, does most expressly
mention the sacrifice of Melchisedech in bread and wine. Thou may see him if
thou please diligent reader, and detest M. Masons bad dealing with him. But
because every one can neither have, nor understand the book being in Latin: I
will out of his long discourse set down here one periode only of his in these
words. In the place cited above by M. Maso^.
As in other things Melchisedech bare the person of Christ, so did he represent
his priesthood, in that he first after the accustomed manner, offered to God as
to the author of a most glorious victoire, the bread and wine, which he gave
for the nourishing of Abraham his army.

As for Cardinal Caietan, whose singular interpretation of holy scripture is
often worthily reproved, though otherwise a great and learned Doctor I appeal
to M. Mason himself, whether his authority be of such weight as for it alone,
any prudent man may follow it in a matter of moment, against the judgment of
all the other Orthodox writters, as well modern as ancient. Thaugh he also
speaks rather according to the opinion of Josephus then his own as appears
by his words cited by M. Mason seeing well that in the expositors of this
passage, neither old nor new, he can have any help for the ouertrowing of
Melchisedech his sacrifice in bread and wine, he recurreth to the text it self,
and to make it seem to serve his turn somewhat, he boldly condemns the
ancient vulgar translation of error, Page 210.
and says.

4. The vulgar translation, which you follow is erroneours: for according to
the Hebrew it is not (for he was a priest) but (and he was a priest) as Arius
Montanus translateth it, and Ballarmine confesses. So the clauses are not
joined together with a conjunction causall, but with a copulative: therefore
your argument drawn from the causall vanishes away.

But he himself eases me of the labor in answering this objection: for in
the lines immediately following, he brings diverse examples of the like
reading by the copulative in the Hebrew, and Greek, which themselves read by
the causall: as Behold thou art angry, Esaias 64.2.
and we have sinned: which they turn. Behold thou art angry, for we have
sinned. And blessed art thou among women, Luke. 1.42.
and the fruit of thy womb is blessed. Which they turn: because the fruit
of thy womb is blessed. These are M. Masons examples, Genesis 20.3.
whereunto I will add other two: Genesis 20. where the Hebrew is: behold thou
shall die because of the woman, which thou have taken: and she has a husband.
they read with the vulgar translation, for she has a husband. And Genesis 24.
the Hebrew has: And he dwelt in the south. Genesis 24.62.
Which they turn with the vulgar. For he dwelt in the south. Seeing therefore
M. Mason and all his reformed brethren confess, that the Hebrew copulative is
often most truly turned by the causall, and seeing it has ever been so turned
in this place (which we now speak of) by the most learned and ancient
Fathers, as appears as well by their own testimonies, as by the vulgar Latin
translation, which is most ancient, and cannot be suspected of partiality,
being extant many hundredth years before this controversy began, is not he
more then impudent, that dare condemn the reading of error? Especially having
seen this self same objection made before by Kemnitius, so fully satisfied by
Andradius, in the place by himself alleged, as he neither can, nor dare say
any thing against it, but wittinglie dissembling the answer, wilfully
repeateth the objection, as though it had never been answered. Is this sincere
dealing, and worthy a reformer of Gods church? Not having much confidence in
this shift, he thinks to elude the force of this testimony, another way and
says.

5. Melchisedech gave entertainment to Abraham, moved thereunto by consideration
of his own office, even because he was not only a professor of the true
religion, but also a priest; For as it becomes all that embrace religion, to
love one another, and rejoice at their good, so this duty specially belongs
to the priest. And your learned Jesuit Andradius, The learned Andradius was no
Jesuit.
hence observes the great link of religion. Therefore is there no necessity to
say, that he sacrificed bread and wine: for the text, even read and pointed as
you would have it, may in the judgment of some of your learned divines, admit
an excellent sense without any sacrifice.

But this is wholly besides the purpose. For first Melchisedech is not said to
have sacrificed in bread and wime, because there appears no other occasion,
why he should bring forth bread and wine to Abraham, but only to sacrifice: for
none that I know ever dreamed of such a reason. But because the scripture
interpreted by the Doctors, and Pastors of Gods church, to whom he has given
the keie of knowledge, to interpret his law unto his people, does teach, that
he did sacrifice in bread and wine, when he met Abraham. Secondly, the words
of the scripture as they have ever been read, since they were turned into
Latin, cannot have any convenient, or probable sense, without his Sacrifice
be understood. For though the Profession of the true religion might be a
motive, why Melchisedech should rejoice at Abraham's victory, and consequently
entertain him with a civil, and friendly banquett, yet the holy Ghost giving
for the reason of his bringing out of bread and wine, that he was the priest of
God, must in any reasonable man's understanding be thought to express
something done by Melchisedech, bringing forth bread and wine that was proper
only to a priest to do which could be nothing but Sacrifice. For the other
frindly entertainment beseemed him rather as a King, agreeing with Abraham in
the worship of the true God, then as a priest. And therefore if there had been
no other matter in Melchisedech his bringing forth of bread and wine, then a
frindly act of Hospitality, the holy Ghost giving the reason thereof would
doubtless have said. For he was King of that country; and not: for he was priest
of God most high. Again seeing the link of religion, as M. Mason says (after
Andradius) might move Melchisedech to congratulate with Abraham a stranger
for his victory, and to entertain him with a civil banquett, rather then to
condole with his neighbor Kings for their overthrow: the same link of
religion might with greater reason also move him being a priest, to offer to
God Sacrifice of thanksgiving for his victory, and to receive him with a
religious, and sanctified feast, especially the ancient custom being, that
solemn banquets were never made, without sacrificing first to God. Neither
does Andradius admit any probable sense of those words of Genesis, wherein
Sacrifice is not expressed, as M. Mason falsely fathereth upon him.

6. M. Mason comes now to cast his shot anchor, and says. Though it be
imagined, that Melchisedech offered bread and wine, yet will it be nothing to
our purpose. For our Savior Christ never offered bread and wine in our
doctrine, but his body and blood, and therefore from Melchisedech his offering
of bread, and wine, can we infer nothing for the proof of that sacrificing
priesthood, which we pretend to have been instituted by our Savior Christ in
his last supper. This is the full sense of that he would say, for his words
are too many, and too empty of matter, to make rehearsal thereof all at large.

This mean objection which is M. Jewels, or M. Hoopers, S. Cyprian prevented,
and answered 1300. years ago and more. And therefore my labor in answering
the same, shall be only to relate his words: that if M. Mason disdain to learn
his faith, of the present Catholic church, yet he may not refuse to learn
it of the same church, teaching the same doctrine in S. Cyprians days. Thus
therefore writes that ancient prelate, and glorious martyr. Who is rather the
priest of the most high God, then our lord Jesus Christ, who offered sacrifice
to God the Father, Epist. ad Cecilianum.
and offered the same thing that Melchisedech offered, that is, bread and wine,
to wit, his body and blood?

How can it be, will M. Mason ask, that our Savior Christ offered his body
and blood, as S. Cyprian with the Catholic church does teach, and yet offered
the same thing which Melchisedech offered, who offered only bread and wine?
This question in M. Masons belief, or rather misbeliefe, is not easily
answered, but in S. Cyprians doctrine, which is that of the Catholic church,
it has small difficulty. For S. Cyprian does in the same place explicate, how
both these are true, of whom if M. Mason will learn, he will find this hard
question easily, and clearly solued. Thus he writes. Therefore that the
blessing of Abraham in Genesis might be rightly performed by Melchisedech the
priest, the image of Christ's sacrifice constituted in bread and wine went
before, which thing our lord perfecting, and fulfilling offered bread and the
chalice mixed with wine, and he which is the fulness (or perfection) did fulfill
the truth of the prefigured image. So that the clear doctrine of this holy
Father is, that our Savior Christ, who was prefigured by Melchisedech, offered
his body and blood, the truth or thing it self of that, whereof Melchisedech
offered the figure in bread and wine, and therefore may truly be said to have
offered the same thing, that Melchisedech did. Which is also in another
respect, to wit, in that the sacrifice of our Savior Christ did not differ in
external form and appearance, from that of Melchisedech, both of the^ being
in form of bread and wine, which is a sufficient reason, why our Savior may
be said to have offered in bread and wine, though not in substance of bread and
wine. For it is no unusual matter in holy scripture, Acts. 1.10. Acts. 10.30.
to call things by that name which they appear outwardly to be, as for
example. Behold two men stood by them in white garments. And again. A man
stood before me in white apparel: and elsewhere often.

7. Having thus showed (sufficiently as I suppose) all M. Masons euasions and
shifts, against Melchisedech his offering of bread, and wine, to be of no
moment, in comparison of the weighty authority brought for it, wherein I have
been defendant only: he shall now give me leave as opponent, to ask him one
question, which shall be this. Wherein he will make the peculier priesthood of
Melchisedech to stand? which question is neither impertinent, nor unprofitable.
For seeing it is evident first, that he was a priest. Secondly, that he was
priest of an order distinct from that of Aaron, and peculier to himself.

Thirdly, that our Savior Christ was priest of his order. Fourthly, that it
ought chiefly to be honored of all Christians, as appears as well by that,
that God himself would so highly honor it, as to make his own only son
priest of that order for our sakes, and thereby obliged us peculiarly, to honor
both him and his priesthood, as also by the high, and maiesticall style,
wherewith the holy ghost does proclaim his order in this manner, Psalm. 109.
Our lord has sworn, and it shall not repent him; thou art a priest for ever
according to the order of Melchisedech. All this I say being evident, it is
most necessary for us to know, wherein this highly honored priesthood does
consist, which I would learn of M. Mason. But unless he can show out of holy
scripture some particularitie, proper only to this order, (which seeing he
rejects the Sacrifice of bread and wine, he is no more able to perform, then
to pull the sun out of heaven with his fingers) he can never satisfy this
demand. For three things only are mentioned in holy scripture, which
Melchisedech did as priest: First that he brought forth bread and wine. Genes.
14.
Secondly, that he blessed Abraham.

Thirdly, that he took tithes of him, whereof the two last are common to the
priesthood of Aaron, Numbers. 6.23. Hebrews 7.5.
as is manifest by the places cited in the margent, so the first only remains
as proper to Melchisedech.

Are not our new masters more then perverse, to forsake in a matter of
principal moment, the testimony of holy scripture, interpreted by so many
faithful, and impartial pastors, and to grope after uncertain fancies, and
vain conjectures of their own wavering, and wandering brain? But such is the
impotent malice of heresy, that it esteems not into what evident absurdities
it falls so that the Catholic truth may be obscured, and drawn into
question. When M. Mason shall set down out of holy scripture, the proper
function of Melchisedech his order, that thereby we may come to know the high
priesthood of our Savior Christ, so extraordinarily established by the
immutable oath of his eternal Father, and shall prove it as firmly, as his
Sacrificing of bread and wine is proved, he shall say something to the
purpose; till then he must not think much, if following his own singular
fancies, he be esteemed, as all other sectaries are, a seducer of Gods people.
Unless he think better, as it is indeed, to turn back, and follow the
trodde^ path of Gods Catholic church. And that I say to M. Mason, I
understand as said to all those, that deny a Sacrificing priesthood in the
church of Christ.

8. He comes next to declare the eternity, or continual exercise of our
Savior his priesthood, wherein though he do fowly err as he does in other
points, yet because mine intent is not to handle here all matters of
controversy, but only such as are necessary for the proouing of a Sacrificing
priesthood in the Evangelical law, which is proved by the priesthood it self
of Melchisedech (as we shall see in the end) without disputing this pointt of
the eternity of our Savior priesthood, though by this it be also proved, I
will not stand here to refute his error touching the same. But I will only
bring one authority of Theodoretus for this purpose, which I make not choice of
amongst many others of the ancient Fathers, because I esteem it the most
formal of all others, but because it is brought by M. Fulke for the contrary
end; Yet do I not so much intend hereby to tax M. Fulke of want of judgment,
in bringing a testimony so clearly against himself, as thereby to show the
poverty of the cause he would maintain, seeing it is forced to seek support
from the^, that bear testimony against it, and the force of truth. Which he
would impugn, which is so evidently strengthened by the arguments brought for
the contrary. Fulke Hebre. 7. sect. 8. ad medium.
These are Theodoretus his words upon the 109. Psalm, as M. Fulke relates
them. Christ is now a priest, which is sprung of Judah according to the flesh,
not offering any thing himself, but is called the head of those that offer,
seeing he calls the church his body, and therefore he exercises the
priesthood as man, but he receives those things that are offered, as God. And
the church offers the tokens of his body and blood, sanctifying all the
leaven by the first fruits. Theodoret says here three things, out of which is
manifestly concluded, the continual exercise of Christ his priesthood, to
consist in the visible Sacrifice of the church, to wit the holy Eucharist.
First he says, that Christ is now a priest. Secondly, that though he offers
nothing himself, yet is he the head of those that offer, and consequently does
offer by them. Thirdly that as man he exercises even now his priesthood, to
wit concurring as head with those, that offer as his members or ministers.
Whereby it is manifest, that in Theodorets doctrine, the continual exercise of
Christ his priesthood consists in the visible Sacrifice of the church. Which
Sacrifice whether it be the true body and blood of Christ, as the Catholic
church teaches and believes, or no, it pertains not to this place to
examine, being a distinct question from that, which we have here in hand. Now
to return to the question in hand of Melchisedechs Sacrifice, M. Mason
confirms his doctrine touching the same in this sort.

9. The Apostle to the Hebrews speaking very particulerly of this ripe (of
Melchisedech in respect of Christ) says not one word concerning his Sacrifice,
but unfolds it in these branches following. First that he was King of
justice. Secondly that he was King of peace. Thirdly that he was both King and
priest. Fourthly that he blessed Abraham. Fifthly that he received titles of
Abraham. Sixthly that he was without Father and another. Seauenthly, that he had
neither beginning of his days, nor end of his life. Thus the scripture
unfolds the type of Melchisedech, plentifully and particulerly and yet says
not one word concerning his sacrificing, which is an evident argument, that it
is a mere devise and imagination of man's brain.

It is true that our Savior Christ was prefigured in all these things by
Melchisedech: but not only in these for he was also prefigured by him as priest
as the holy scripture testifies psalm. 109. And that the Apostle says nothing
of his (Melchisedechs) Sacrifice it is more the^ false. For in this 7. chapter
to the Hebrews, does he insist specially in the inculcating of our Saviors
priesthood, according to the order of Melchisedech, as is chief drift in that
chapter (as any man that will read it shall plainly see.) How can therefore
any man (that is not blind either with malice, or ignorance) say, that the
scripture speaks not one word concerning Melchisedechs Sacrifice, seeing
priesthood, and Sacrifice are no less co^ioined together, then are fatherhood
and generation? Tell me I pray you good Sir, if one should say that M. Mason
is a husband or a Father, according to the ordinary manner of other husbands
and Fathers: should he say nothing concerning those actions, without which all
me^ know you can neither be husband, nor Father? You will not I suppose deny,
but that he should make such mention of them, as that all men might understand
them to be in you.

How therefore can you so confide^tly say, that S. Paul says nothing
concerning Melchisedechs Sacrifice, seeing he says so much of his priesthood?
unless peradventure you can find out some priesthood without Sacrifice, which
was yet never heard of.

10. There is not one word (says M. Mason) in the whole Bible to declare, that
Melchisedech was a type of Christ in offering such unbloody Sacrifice in the
forms of bread and wine; And this very silence is like the voice of a trumpet
proclaiming unto the world, that popery is the mere invention of man, and
shall wither in the root from whence it sprung.

Your threating prophecies Sir, are heretical vanities like those of your
Father Luther, who threatened to be the ruin of the Pope; But he is dead and
rotten, and the Pope is where he was before he was borne, and so shall popery
(as you scornfully term the Catholic truth) be, when you and all your
fellows shall be gone, to give account of your heresy, and rebellion against
God and his church, with the rest of all those, that have impugned the
Catholic verity, ever since the first founding of the same. God give you his
holy grace to prevent it by true repentance, I do not greatly marvel, that
you cannot find any word in the whole Bible, declaring Melchisedechs Sacrifice
in bread and wine, in figure of Christ unbloody Sacrifice. For never any
heretic could find any word in the Bible (or that which he took for the
Bible) against his heresy. Arrius could find nothing for the consubstantiality
of the son with the Father, nor Eunonius or Macedonius, for the divinity, or
godhead of the holy Ghost; Nestorius, Eutiches, Pelagius, and the rest in like
manner, could not find one word in holy scripture, for the proof of the
Catholic truth by them impugned. But what then? Shall we therefore say, that
the holy Bible contained no one word of all these truths? M. Mason I am sure
will not say so. For though those wretches blinded, with heretical pride and
obstinacy, could see nothing of all this in the holy scripture, yet the
Catholic Pastors, who defended against them the Catholic truth, did find
them all contained therein, as also their Catholic successors now do this
truth, which M. Mason here impugneth, whose judgments if he will not yield
unto, as either suspected of partiality, and moved with passion against his
error: or that he esteems his own judgment as good as theirs: yet if he
have either but any one spark of the light of reason, or dram of modesty in
him he cannot appeal from the judgments, of those great lights of the world,
the Fathers of the primitive church, against whom neither of these exceptions
can be made, who found in holy scripture the Sacrifice of Melchisedech in
bread and wine, in figure of Christ's unbloody Sacrifice, as has already been
showed, and M. Mason himself is at last forced to confess in these words.

Ibidem.
11. First, Some of the Fathers say not, that Melchisedech offered bread and
wine to God, but to Abraham who are these Fathers? why are they not named? but
be it so: this does not for all that exclude the offering thereof to God, but
rather include it, as is already seen. Secondly, (says he) those which say it
was offered unto God as a Sacrifice (as all do that write either upon the 14.
cap. of Genesis, or the psalm 109 or by other occasion handle this marter) may
mean an Eucharisticall Sacrifice, and not a propitiatory. So may they mean
both, as they do in deed. Thirdly if any of the Fathers say, that he offered
a propitiatory Sacrifice, yet it follows not, that because they make the
oblation of Melchisedech a type of the Eucharist, that therefore in the
Eucharist, there is a propitiatory Sacrifice. And why Sir I pray you does it
not follow? If you consider that the condition of a type, or figure is always
to be less perfect, then the thing it self which is figured by it, you will
find it to follow a fortiori, or with greater reason.

But you say, that those which hold so (to wit that Melchisedech offered a
propitiatory sacrifice) must make a double oblation of this bread and wine,
the first to God by way of sacrifice: the second to Abraham, and the army in
the manner of a banquet: the first might have relation to Christ upon the
crasse: the second to the Eucharist. There is no doubt, but the fathers
understood this double oblation you speak of, the one to God in sacrifice,
the other to Abraham and his army for their refreshing but whether the first
offering in the fathers meaning had relation to Christ upon the cross, and not
to him as offered under the form of bread and wine in his last supper, the
fathers clear testimonies before alleged for this purpose, yea and M. Calvin,
and the Centurists sayings hereafter cited, (whose authority I hope will sway
something with you) shall witness, you add.

Fourthly, your popish massing sacrifice presupposes transubstantiation, which
is contrary to Christ's institution of the Eucharist, as in due place shall be
declared. Wherefore those fathers, which understand the Eucharist according to
Christ's institution, cannot refer the type of Melchisedech to any
transubstantiate sacrifice.

You flinch M. Mason, you flinch; what have you here to do with
transubstantiation? Our question was whether in the judgment of the ancient
fathers, there be any mention in holy scripture of Melchisedech offering bread
and wine, in figure of the sacrifice of the Eucharist. Why do you therefore run
to the question of transubstantiation? I know the reason as well as if I were
in your bosom. Your own eyes convince you of the question in hand, and
because your obstinacy will not permit you to yield to the manifest truth, you
run to that other question of transubstantiation, which cannot orderly be
spoken of, before the other be decided, as you saw your self, when you deferd it
to another place.

But to let this pass, and to take that only, which victorious truth has
drawn from you, I will only ask of you, what you think of the doctrine of
those fathers, who you confess to have taught Melchisedechs sacrifice in bread
and wine, (be it Eucharisticall or propitiatory, it shall not much import for
the present) whether it be comformable to scripture or no? If you say no: you
will not be believed of any man, that has but one dra^ of true judgment. For
who can imagine, that those great lights, and pastors of Gods church, whose
learning, piety, and other excellent virtues beseeming the pastors of Gods
church, have made them venerable to all posterity: living many hundredth years
before these controversies were hatched, and therefore void of all passion and
partiality, were not more like to find out the true sense and meaning of holy
scripture, and also to deliver it with more sincerity, then either you M.
Mason or any of your reformed brethren, who though you were of equal learning
with those ancient fathers (which very few or none at all will believe) and
of as great piety and other virtues as they were (which is evidently false)
yet you being parties in this cause, as authors of the controversy, your
sincerity cannot but most justly be suspected, and therefore your judgment
lawfully excepted against as partial. With no show of reason therefore can you
say, that the ancient fathers doctrine, is not conformable to holy scripture
in this point. Wherefore if you will speak with any probability in this
matter, you must answer to the question proposed affirmatiuelie, and say that
you think the fathers doctrine, teaching the sacrifice of Melchisedech in
bread and wine, in figure of the holy Eucharist to be according to holy
scripture. Whereby you shall find, how far and fowlie you ouerlashed, Page 215.
When you said, that there is not in the whole bible one word to declare, that
Melchisedech was a type of Christ in offering such an unbloody sacrifice in
the forms of bread and wine. Page 209.
And yet farther when you dare to say: We deny that Melchisedech did offer
any bread and wine, for a sacrifice to God. But I will leave you to advise with
your self (now at your more leisure) whether these propositious have any
verity in them, or no: and will conclude of that which has hitherto been
said, that (unless you will deny the evident truth) you must necessarily grant
a sacrificing priesthood (truly and properly, as that was of Melchisedech) in
the law and church of Christ, in this distinct and brief manner.

First we have out of holy Genesis 14.18.
scripture Melchisedechs priesthood. Hebrews 7.11.12. etc.
Secondly his proper order of priesthood, distinct from that of Aaron. Genes.
14.18.
Thirdly we have out of scripture (interpreted by vncorrupt and unsuspected
antiquity) Melchisedechs sacrifice in bread and wine, as the proper act of his
peculier priesthood, and order. Psalm. 109. Hebr. cap. 7.
Fourthlie we have out of holy scripture, that our Savior Christ was, and is
priest according to the peculier order of Melchisedech: whence follows, that
he sacrificed, according to the rite of Melchisedech in bread and wine. Luk,
22.19 What one of all these six verities can M. Mason upon any probable grownd
deny.
Fiftlie, that he gave to his Apostles commandment, and power to do the same
thing, which he did, when he offered according to that rite. Sixthlie, that the
same power, which he gave then to his Apostles, remains still in his church,
and consequently, that there is in the church at this day a sacrificing
priesthood, no less truly and properly, then was that of Melchisedech,
according to whose order, our Savior Christ was ordained priest for ever, by
the immutable oath of his eternal father. Such a clear deduction from holy
scripture, interpreted by the ancient church, would I gladly see in proof of
the Protestants empty, and naked ministry, which may the more justly be
exacted of them, because they pretend neither to teach, nor believe any thing,
but that which may be proved by holy scripture: but I will now proceed to the
second proof of the Catholic priesthood of holy scriptures.

The second testimony of holy scripture, Malachie cap 1.11.
clearlie proouing a sacrificing priesthood in the eua^gelicall law, is out of
the Prophet Malachie who fortelleth the dignity of the sacrifice of Gods
church, under the new testament in this sort. I have no will in you says the
Lord of hosts (speaking to the priests of Aarons order,) nor offering will I
receive at your hand. For from the rising of the sun to the setting thereof, my
name is great amongst the Gentiles, and in every place is there sacrificing,
and a clean oblation is offered to my name.

The Protestants do not deny, that this prophecy is fulfilled in the church of
Christ: but they deny that this clean oblation, which the Prophet here
speaks of, is any sensible or proper sacrifice, but a spiritual or inward
oblation: unto which miserable shift they are driven by force. For if they
should grant this clean oblation here fortold to be a true, proper, and
sensible sacrifice, their pretended church should be convinced to be a
Synagogue of Satan, and not the true church of Christ, because it has no such
sacrifice. But if there be any certain means, to find out the true sense and
meaning of the holy scripture, either by the sound of the words themselves, or
by the circumstance of the place, or the understanding of the ancient church,
or agreement and conformity, as well with other places of scripture, as with
natural reason and discourse or by all these together, their interpretation of
this place is evidently false, and consequently their reformed church
heretical.

The sound of the Words.
First the words sacrificing and clean oblation being without any restriction
drawing them to a spiritual sense, are to be understood in their proper
signification, and as they sound, without limitation.

Page 220.
M. Mason answers, that this rule is not generally true* for the Prophet Esaias
says. They shall bring of their brethren for an offering to the Lord, out of
all nations where he uses the same word that Malachy uses, and yet it is not
meant that the gentiles should be offered carnally, but spiritually.

Which example makes clearelie against himself: for who sees not that this
word (brethren) restrains the word (offering) to a metaphorical
signification. Let him find such a restriction in the words of the Prophet
Malachie, and then shall his example be to some purpose.

Secondly the Prophet in the whole chapter speaks of true, and proper
sacrifices, and makes a direct and express antiphesies, or opposition
between this pure sacrifice, and the sacrifices of the Jews, which were
proper and sensible, and has not one word of improper, or spiritual sacrifice.

The circumstance of the place.
Thirdly the properties ascribed to this sacrifice, cannot agree with the
spiritual offerings of prayer, praise, thanksgiving and the like. For this is
said to be one: they are many: this is proper to the church of the gentiles
under the law of grace: they are common not only with the Jews under the law
written: this succeeds the Jews sacrifices; they succeeded none but are
joined with all sacrifices of all laws: this is a clean sacrifice, and cannot
be polluted by him that offers it: they (at least in the Protestants
doctrine) are polluted and as a stained cloth: by this oblation Gods holy name
is said to be greatly glorified, which is proper to external and sensible
sacrifices: for spiritual sacrifices having their being and perfection, from
the inward intention, which is hidden from all others, but him alone which
offers them, Philo. lib. de victimis.
are not fit to make Gods name magnified by other men, as is evident. Now of
the contrary part it cannot be denied, but all those properties do exactlie
agree with the sacrifice, of the body and blood of our Savior Christ in the
holy Eucharist.

To the first of these properties M. Mason says. Vbi supra.
That albeit the word used by the Prophet be of the singular number, yet by
that offering, many offerings may be signified, as when it is said sacrifice
and offering thou would not have; where thaugh the word be singular yet the
sense and meaning is plural.

But he marketh not, or at least will not mark, Hebr. 10.8.
that there is as great a difference between this saying of Malachie: In every
place a clean oblation is offered to my name: and that of the Apostle.
Sacrifice and effering thou would not have; (I mean in respect of the
number) as there is between this saying: the King will receive no gift or
present: and this, the city will give to the King a gift or a present. Which
first saying, though it be of the singular number, yet does it evidently
import, the refusal not of any one gift, but of all gifts: whereas the latter
saying imports one only single gift or present, as every man may plainly see.

If M. Mason understand not the reason hereof, and be desirous to learn it;
let him turn back to his Logique, and see the difference between the nature
of an affirmative, and a negative proposition, for here is no place to read
him any longer lesson of this matter. In the mean while by this example may he
see, how impertinent his instance is for his purpose. But his answer to the
second property is not only impertinent, but also most impious.

13. They (the Jews, Ibidem.
says he) might euerywhere pray and praise God as well as we, but this was not
a discharge of their duty, unless to these spiritual sacrifices they annexed
carnal: to be offered at the time and place appointed: so their spiritual
sacrifice were mixed, but ours are merely spiritual, and these are proper to
the Gospel.

O traitor of Christianity: what greater advantage can a Jew desire against
Christian religion, then this confession? to wit that they have the same
oblations, and sacrifices that Christians have (wherein the profession and
practice of all religion consists) and that over and above, they have the
sensible and external sacrifice of creatures: whereby they offer unto God not
only their prayers, and praises of his name by spiritual sacrifice, but also
their goods and temporal substance by external oblations: wherein M. Mason
freely confesses their religion to exceed, and surpass ours Such is the
obstinate blindness of heresy, that rather then to embrace the Catholic
verity expressed in holy scripture, and testified in all antiquity, will make
the immaculate spouse of Christ (whereof most glorious things are spoken)
inferior in religion, Psalm. 86.2.
and less perfect then the Jews reproved Synagogue. And to make up the
measure of his malice, against Gods church and Christian religion, he yet
runs on into more gross absurdities. For to the third property of the
sacrifice mentioned by Malachie, which was that it succeeds those of the
Jews, whereas the spiritual sacrifices are joined with all, and succeed none
he says.

Ibidem.
Though the spiritual sacrifice of the Jews and of the Christians were all
one in substance: yet they differed in manner, because as I said theirs were
mixtly, ours merely spiritual, and the merely succeed the mixed.

If the sacrifices of the Jews were the same in substance with those of the
christians: they should also be the same in substance with that of our Savior
Christ which notwithstanding is more then heretical to affirm.
What other thing is this, then that in substance the Christian religion and
worship of God is the same with the Jews, and differs from it only in
manner; and that in such a manner, as that of the Jews remains the more
perfect, seeing it contains the same perfection, that the Christian religion
does, and over and besides something more? But M. Mason thinks he has
learnedly prevented this absurdity in saying, that their sacrifices were
mixedly, and are merely spiritual, whereby (as I suppose) he would say that
ours are better, and more perfect then theirs, which yet is more senseles then
the rest. For I would ask of him, whether by adding the external, and
corporal sacrifices to the spiritual, these are made less spiritual, and
consequently less perfect? He cannot say yea. For unless we suppose, that this
addition should change the nature of the spiritual sacrifice (which M. Mason
will not have, for he says they are both of one substance) it cannot be
imagined, how the adding of the corporal, or external sacrifice may make the
internal less spiritual, or less perfect. And he himself will confess the
same in this example. If one should give him a purse with twenty pounds of
gold in it, and another should give him another with as much gold, and besides
with as many pieces of silver more, I think not that he would esteem the
latter gift of less value, the^ the other for the silver added thereunto, but
of more worth. So in like manner no man of judgment can esteem the spiritual
sacrifices of the Jews, (which M. Mason says are the same with those of
Christians) to be either less spiritual or less perfect, but rather of more
perfection, by reason of the corporal sacrifices adioined thereunto. For if it
were otherways, God having commanded the^ to offer such sacrifices, should
have commanded a thing both hurtful to them, and displeasing to himself (as
impayring and diminishing the valor, and worth of their spiritual sacrifices)
which is very absurd to imagine. The Jews therefore haueing the same
spiritual offerings that Christians have, as M. Mason confesses, and over and
above other corporal sacrifices commanded, and ordained by God himself, (and
therefore cannot be hurtful to the other being good in themselves) it must
necessarily follow, that in M. Maso^s doctrine, the Jews offerings and
sacrifices are more perfect, then those of the Christians, and consequently
their religion also and manner of Gods worshipe more perfect. So that M. Mason,
whilst he will be a Protestant in this point, does prove himself more a Jew
then a Christian, and yet he goes forward in most palpable absurdities. For
answering to the fourth property, which was that this sacrifice spoken of by
Malachie, is so clean of it self, that it cannot be polluted by the priest
that offers it, be he never so wicked; whereas the spiritual sacrifices,
being our works are stained, and unclean in the Protestants judgment:
answering I say herunto, he very wittily as he thinks, retorteth the
argument in this sort.

14. Are all our spiritual offerings unclean? Ibidem.
then all our good works are imperfect, and if they be imperfect, they cannot
justify, they are not meritorious, nor satisfactory.

But most ignorantly (by his good leave be it spoken) does he infer these
consequences against the Catholics, upon an antecedent which is his own only
and none of theirs. For this antecedent all our good works are stained,
unclean, and imperfect, is the doctrine of Protestants, and not of the
Catholics, therefore though the Catholics do inuinciblie infer thereupon
against them, that our works cannot in their doctrine be that clean oblation
spoken of by Malachie, because one of those propositions both evidently
destroy, and contradict the other: yet cannot they upon the same antecede^t
(which as I said is none of ours) infer against us, that our works are not
meritorious or satisfactorie. Mary whether upon the contrary proposition, to
wit (the good works of men proceeding from Gods grace are clean, meritorious,
and satisfactorie) which we acknowledge to be our doctrine, may be inferred,
that they are that clean oblation mentioned by Malachie, is another question,
which shall by and by de touched. But we will first see, how M. Mason accords
these two things together, that our works are unclean, and yet are the clean
oblation here spoken of: which two ends if he can well bring together, he
shall be a Master Mason indeed; thus he discourses.

They (that is our good works) are clean but vnperfectlie: that is in plain
English they are clean, but they are not clean, which is a plain
contradiction: for that which is vnperfectlie clean, is not clean, as all men
know I think. Well let him go for ward, perhaps he will make something of
this matter at least.

They are clean (says he) because they proceed from the christaline
fountain of the spirit of grace: they are imperfect) he should have said
vnperfectlie clean, if he had minded what he went about, but pardon him for he
is in a maze) because they are wrought by the will of man, which is regenerate
only in part, and so the pure water gathers mudd, because it runs thorough
a muddy channel.

O more then muddie brain. Mark I pray thee, judicious reader, how groslie he
builds one absurd error upon another. To prove that man's works, even such
as proceed from the christaline fountain of the spirit of grace, are vnpure,
or vnperfectlie clean, he saish that they are wrought by the will of man,
which is regenerate only in part. An evident falsitie, directly against many
clear testimonies of holy scripture, whereof I will briefly point at two or
three. Deuteron. 32.4.
The works of God are perfect. Act 22.17
Be baptized and wash away thy sins. Tit 3.5.
He has saved us by the lauer of regeneration, and renouation of spirit.
Ezech. 36.25.
I will power upon you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all your
contaminations. Psalm 50.
Thou shall wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow; with many others to the
same effect, not necessary here to be specified.

By all which it is evident, that Gods grace being in the soul of man does
purify and cleanse it in such manner, that it is made whiter then snow or
wool: how then can any man imagine, that it should leave the soul so impure,
or to use M. Masons metaphore so muddie, that it may infect and defile those
works, which proceed from the same clear fountain of grace? False therefore
is the ground, whereupon M. Mason would infer the impurity, or imperfect
cleannes of our works proceeding from the Spirit of Gods grace.

Well then (may M. Mason say) if they be clean, they may the rather be that
clean oblation mentioned by Malachie, and so have I made a good argument for
him, and against my self: I have argued for the manifest truth, and neither
for him, nor against my self, as we shall see by and by, after I have
discovered one point more of M. Masons absurd doctrine. Upon his last words he
makes unto himself this objection.

15. If they be muddy, how can they be called the pure offering in Malachy?
Whereunto he answers in these words.

Because (sait he) the denomination is of the worthier part, and the graces of
God in his children are in like unto the light, which shines more and more
unto the perfect day: Proverb. 4.18.
and though the flesh rebelleth against the Spirit yet at lenght the Spirit
shall have the victory, and the flesh shall be abolished. In mean time though
our good works be stained with the flesh, yet God looks not upon them as an
angry judge, but as a loueing Father crowning his own graces in us, and
pardoning our offenses. Now because they are imperfect, they cannot justify,
merit nor satisfy, yet because they are Gods graces, they are the pure
offering.

Here are scarce so many words in this answer, as three are absurdities and
impertinencies, and in sum nothing proved either by reason or authority but
barelie affirmed, and therefore might with good reason, without any Farther
refutation as easily be denied: but I will deal more courteously with him,
and take some pains to refurt his paradoxes.

Our good works (says he) though muddy may be called the pure offering in
Malachiy, because the denomination is of the worthier part: to wit of that,
which proceeds from the Spirit of Gods grace. Here are two gross
absurdities. The one in supposing that our good works have two parts, the one
clean as proceeding from Gods grace, the other unclean as proceeding from the
will of man regenerate in part-According to which doctrine not only our good
works, but our greatest abominations may be called the clean offering in
Malachie: because all our works, be they never so bad, proceed from God
according to some part (as M. Mason speaks) For he works in us all our
works (says the Prophet) And our Savior himself: Esaie. 26 12. Ioh. 15.5.
Without me you can do nothing: in respect of which part they may be said to
be clean, as prooceeding from God: and because the denomination is taken (as
he says) of the worthier part, those very wicked works may be said to be a
clean offering. This I suppose M. Mason will not deny to be most wicked
doctrine, and yet how he will avoid it according to his grounds I see not.

If he ask me how this inconvenience may be avoided in the Catholic opinion,
Taugh all our works, proceed from God, and necessarily depend of him, yet is
he not the cause or auctor of our badd works. For those he only permits:
giueing us strengh to work, and leaueing us in our liberty to use it as we will.
which teaches that all our works proceed from God; or depend of him I
answer that it is easily avoided in true divinity, and Philosophy, according
to which our whole actions do proceed from God, or depend of him and
nevertheless the same whole actions proceed also from us, but after a diverse
sort and order. For from God they proceed as from the first, universal,
indeterminate, and independent source, or agent: from us as from a secondarie,
dependent, and limited, or determinate cause, from whence they take their
nature, quality, valor and denomination: so that they are wholly good, or
wholly bad, and not party colored, as M. Mason would have them. Which point
because it is somewhat nice, and subtle, and not easy to be understood of
every one, I will make more plain by this example. The actions or operations,
whereby the fire brings forth heat or fire, an appletree brings forth an
apple, a horse begets a horse, or a man a man, and the actions of all other
creatures whatsoever, do proceed from God as from the first and supreme
cause, from the heavens or the sun, as from an inferior, or secondarie cause
or argent (for without the cooperation of these causes, the inferior agents
can do nothing) and also from the fire, tree, horse, man, or other creature, as
from the lowest, nearest, and most immediate cause. And no action, or operation
of these inferior creatures is produced, but by the concurse, and cooperation
of all these agents not in part, as if one part were produced by God, another
by the sun, and a third by the fire, or other creature, but every one of these
agents co^curre to the producing of the whole action, but in his order and
degree, and though all these causes do concur to every one of these actions,
yet is it not many actions of diverse natures, but one only action and of one
nature or quality, and therefore that, which is brought forth by it is one
only thing, for example heat, fire, apple, horse, man or the like, and not
partly fire or apple, and partly another thing. Farther that, which is
brought forth by any one of these actions, Our good works thaugh only moral,
do otherways proceed from God, the^ do our badd For our good works God
counsels, and often commands* and the refore by his inspirations moves
as unto the^ but our badd works he forbideth and by threats of punishment
withdraws us from the^, and haueing given us strengh to work, only
permits us to work ill. Al^ this tends only to show how our actions are
either wholly good, or wholly badd, and not to show that our good actions do not
chiefly proceed from God.
proceeding (as is already noted) from all these subordinate causes, takes it
whole nature and quality from the immediate, and nearest cause, for example
that which is brought forth by the actio^ of the fire together with the other
superior causes, is fire, and not party fire, and party any other substance,
and so in the rest.

And the reason hereof is, because the cooperation of the fire being determined
to one effect, does determine the concurrence, and cooperation of the superior
agents, (which of themselves are indifferent, and as fit to bring forth any
other thing as fire) to this determinate effect. The fire therefore or apple
have not the being, essence, or nature of fire or apple rather then any other,
from the cooperation or concurrence of God, or the sun, but from the fire or
the tree, from whence they proceed immediately, though they do as truly proceed
from the sun and from God, as they do from the fire and from the tree. So in
like manner our moral actions do take their whole nature, quality, and moral
valor good or bad from us, from whom they immediately proceed, and not from
God: though they as truly proceed from him (forasmuch as pertains to the
substance of the action) as from us. Therefore if they be according to the rule
or prescript of right reason (which is the measure of all humane actions) they
are good, honest, and laudable, not in part but in whole, though they proceed
from man as well as from God, as an apple is an apple not in part but in whole,
though it proceed as well from the sun and from God, as from the tree. If they
be not according to the prescript of right reason, they are vicious, inhonest,
and blameworthie, not in part but in the whole, though the whole substance of
the action proceed from God as well as from man, because the nature, and
quality of the action is taken from the immediate agent, as is noted before.
And Farther if they proceed not only from our free will guided by the light
of nature, but also from the pure fountain of heavenly grace, they are not
only morallie good and honest, but meritorious before God of the increase of
grace and glory, not in part, but in whole. False therefore and frivolous is M.
Masons imaginary mixture of our works, according to diverse parts, whereof one
should be good and another bad, one clean and another unclean.

The Other absurdity contained in M. Masons former word is: that our works are
denominated of the worthier part. For though it were true, as it is already
proved to be most false, that our works had two parts, the one clean, the other
unclean (as M. Mason necessarily supposes when he says, that they are
nominated of the worthier part) yet would it be false, and absurd to say, that
they take their nomination of the worthier part. For the contrary is most true,
as appears by that evident rule of nature noted first by S. Dennis, De diuini
nominibus. Bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quocumque defectu. Dion.
and since received of all as well Philosophers, as divines, that that which is
good is of a perfect cause, but evil is of every particular defect. So that,
that work, or action, which has in it any defect, is truly said to be evil,
and consequently all our works being in part unclean, (according to M.
Masons doctrine) must needs be naught, and therefore cannot be that pure
offering foretold by Malachie. And this is evident by the common judgment of
all men, who esteem a man or woman bad, though they have but one bad quality
or condition, so we say a rotten apple or cracked vessel, though the greatest
part thereof be good and sound: and we say likewise a lame man and a tearne
coat, though he want the use but of one hand or foot, or there be but one
hole in the coat: By all which examples and a thousand more it is evident,
that M. Masons proposition is most false, whose ertour in this particular
proceeds of ignorance in natural Philosophy, which teaches him to
distinguish betwixt those things, that so consist of two positive parts, that
the one is the form in respect of the other, in which his proposition of taking
denomination from the worthier part is true. And therefore a man is said to be a
reasonable creature in respect of his soul, which is the worthier part, and a
horse is said to be a living, moving, and sensible thing, for the like reason.
And betwixt those things that are composed, or consist to speak as the vulgar
sort conceiueth) of one positive, and another negative or privative part, as a
man may be said to consist of a whole, and a lame leg, an apple of a sound and
rotten side, and the like. In all which the denomination always follows the
defective part, for the reason given before out of S. Dennis: and of this
latter kind are our works and actions, which when they want any circumstance,
or perfection which is due unto them, and which they ought to have (as all our
actions do in M. Masons doctrine) are always said to be evil and naught; and
therefore can in no sort be said to be that pure offering mentioned by the
Prophet Malachie.

Having thus refuted M. Masons shifts, concerning the pure offering so often
mentioned, I will now satisfy the objection before insinuated, which may be
framed out of the Catholic doctrine in favor of M. Mason in this sort.

16. The good works of a just man proceeding from Gods grace are meritorious,
satisfactorie, and iustificatiue, and consequently are pure and clean. Why
therefore may they not be that pure offering mentioned in the Prophet Malachie?

The answer is easy. For though a just man's works, which proceed from Gods
grace, be pure and clean, yet can they not be that pure offering, whereof the
Prophet Malachie speaks, for diverse reasons, whereof some part are already
touched. Namely for that the Sacrifice fortold by Malachie is a true and
proper Sacrifice, whereas our good works are but metaphoricallie, and
improperly called a Sacrifice: that is but one; these are many: that is proper
to the church of the gentiles: these are common to the Jews and gentiles. That
succeeds the Sacrifices of the Jews: these are joined with all Sacrifices,
and succeed none. Therefore the holy ghost reproouing the priesthood and
Sacrifice of the Jews in respect of that of the gentiles, it must needs be,
that he meant some other Sacrifice, then all that which the Jews offered: who
notwithstanding offered the same Spiritual Sacrifice of prayer, praise, and
thanks giueing, that the Christian gentiles do. For* otherwais the Sacrifice
of the gentiles, if it were no other then of Prayer, and praise cowld not be so
preferred before that of the Jews as that it showld be approved by God, and
the other. All these reasons are already touched, and show manifestly, that our
good works although never so clean, and pure, cannot be that pure offering
mentioned by the Prophet; which will also more evidently appear by that, which
shall now be said to prove, that the testimony of Malachy is necessarily to
be understood of a proper, sensible, and external Sacrifice. From prosecuting
of which point I have been thus far deturned, by occasion of M. Masons odd
shifts thrust in to thwart my purpose. To return therefore thither where I left
before, I say.

Conference of places.
27 Fourthly that the pure oblation spoken of by the Prophet Malachie being
understood of a true and proper Sacrifice, agrees rightly with other places of
holy scripture; and namely with that of Genesis. Genesis 14.
But Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, for he was the priest of God
most high. And that of S. Luke. This is my body which is given for you, Luke
22.19.
do this for a commemoration of me. And of the Psalm. Psalm. 109. Hebr. 12.10.
Thou art a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech. And of S.
Paul. We have an altar, whereof they have not power to eat that serve the
tabernacle. Dan. 11.31. and 12.11.
And of Daniell. They shall take away the daily Sacrifice. Which places
cannot literallie be understood without a proper and sensible Sacrifice in the
new law. Again the prophecy of Malachie being understood, is not repugnant
to any other testimony of holy scripture, as shall clearly appear
hereafter.

Fifthly, the testimony of Malachie being understood in the foresaid sense is
no less consonant with natural reason, then conformity with true reason are
the Sacrifices of the law of nature, and of Moises, yea by so much more
conformable to natural reason it is, that we should have a true and proper
priesthood, and Sacrifice in the law of grace, then in that either of Moises or
of nature, by how much greater tie of gratitude, and thankfulness we have to God
our sovereign Lord for greater blessings and benefits received, then they had
that lived under the former laws. mark the testimony of S. Ireneus following.

Interpretation of the ancient church.
Sixtlie the ancient church of the first two, three, four, and five hundredth
years after Christ, the judgment whereof our adversaries dare not refuse,
understands this oblation to be a true, and proper Sacrifice, and that very
same, which our Savior Christ offered in his lost supper. Which only reason
is more then sufficient to persuade any one (well affected either to his own
salvation, or to the knowledge of the truth it self) of the true sense and
meaning of these words.

And to begin with most ancient Irenaeus, who lived within the second hundredth
year after Christ: that is more then 1400. years ago. thus he writes.

Sed and Apostolis suis dans consilium, primitias Deo offerre ex suis
creaturis, non quasi indigenti, sed vt ipsi nec infructuosi nec ingrati sint,
cum qui ex creatura Panis est, accepit and gratias egit dicens: Hoc est corpus
meum. Et Calicem similiter, qui est ex creatura quae est secundum nos, suum
sanguinem confessus est, and noui testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam
ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens, in vniuerso mundo offert Deo, ei qui alimenta
nobis praestat, primitias suorum munerum in nouo testamento, de quo in duodecim
prophetis Malachias sic praesignificauit: non est mihi voluntas in vobis, dicit
Dominus exercituum, and sacrificium non suscipiam de manu vestra, ab ortu enim
solis, vsque ad occasum magnum est nomen meum in gentibus, and in omni loco
incensum offertur nomini meo and sacrificium purum, manifestissime significans
per haec, quoniam prior quidem populus cessauit offerre Deo; omni aute^ loco
sacrificium offertur Deo and hoc purum.

But giving council to his Apostles, to offer to God the first fruits of his
creatures, not as if he stood in need, but that they should neither be
unfruitful nor vngreatefull, he took bread and gave thanks saying. This is
my body: and in like manner the chalice he confessed to be his blood, and
taught a new offering of the new testament which the church receiving from the
Apostles, offers through the whole world to God, who gives us food, the
chief of his gifts in the new testament, whereof Malachy one of the twelve
prophets foretells in this manner. I have no will in you says our lord of
hosts nor offering will I receive at your hand: for from the rising of the
sunn to the going down thereof, my name is great amongst the ge^tils, and in
every place incense and a pure sacrifice is offered to my name, most manifestly
signifying by these words, that the former people (the Jews) have ceased to
offer to God, and that in all places is offered to God a sacrifice, and that
pure.

Which words judicious reader if thou diligently mark, thou will find that if
this holy Father had lived in our days, he could not almost have spoken more
directly against the Protestants heresy, in this point. First he gives the
reason, why our Savior taught his Apostles to offer Sacrifice to God, that
they should neither be without the Spiritual fruit of Gods grace, nor
ungrateful to him for his benefits received; as if without Sacrifice they
should be both. Secondly he teaches what this Sacrifice is: to wit the body
and blood of our Savior Christ, and how it is offered, in these words: this is
my body: this is my blood: Thirdly he says that Christ in this action taught
a new Sacrifice of the new testament, and therefore such an one as had not been
before, as the Spiritual Sacrifices of our works are. Fourthlie that this
Sacrifice being delivered by the Apostles to the church, is offered to God
through the whole world, and therefore cannot be the Sacrifice of our Savior
Christ, as he was offered upon the cross. Fifthly he faith that the prophet
Malachie foretold the same in the words related out of him. All which things
well weighed, I do not see what could be said more direct for the proof either
of the churches Sacrifice, or that it was foretold by Malachie the Prophet.

Aug. de ciuit. lib. 18, cap. 35.
S. Augustine teaches the same verity in as plain terms saying: Malachias
Prophetans ecclesiam, quam per Christum iam cernimus propagatam Iudaeis
apertissime dicit ex persona Dei: non est mihi voluntas in vobis: and munus non
suscipiam de manu vestra; Ab ortu enim solis vsque ad occasum, magnum est nomen
meum in gentibus, and in omni loco sacrificabitur, and offeretur nomini meo
oblatio munda: quia magnum est nomen meum in gentibus, dicit Dominus. Hoc
sacrificium per sacerdotium Christi secundum ordine^ Melchisedech, cum in omni
loco a solis ortu vsque ad occasum Deo iam videamus offerri, sacrificium autem
Iudaeorum, quibus dictum est: non est mihi voluntas in vobis, cessasse negare
non possunt: quid adhuc alium Christum, quum hoc quod Prophetatum legunt, and
impletum vident impleri non potuerit nisi per ipsum?

Malachias fortelling the church which we see propagated by Christ does in the
person of God most plainly say unto the Jews. I have no will in you, nor
offering will I receive at your hand. For from the rising of the sun to the
going down thereof my name is great amongst the Gentiles, and in every place
is there sacrificing, and a pure oblation is offered to my name. This sacrifice
of the priesthood of Christ according to the order of Melchisedech, seeing we
see offered in all places from the sun rising to the setting thereof: And they
cannot deny the sacrifice of the Jews (to whom it was said I have no will in
you) to be ceased: why do they yet expect another Christ, that being fulfilled,
which they read to have been foretold, and could be fulfilled by none but him?



And what S. Augustine means by the sacrifice of Christ's priesthood according
to the order of Melchisedech, thou shall hear (good reader) of himself, who
in another place vvritteth thus.

Haec quippe ecclesia, est Israel secundum spiritum, a quo distinguitur ille
Israel secundum carnem, qui seruiebat in vmbris sacrificiorum, quibus
significabatur singular sacrificium, quod nunc offert Israel secundum
spiritum; cui dictum atque praedictum est: Audi populus meus and loquar tibi,
Israel and testificabor tibi etc. De huius enim domo non accepit vitulos, neque
de gregibus eius hircos. Iste immolat Deo sacrificium laudis, non secundum
ordinem Aaron, sed secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Nouerunt qui legunt quid
protulerit Melchisedech quando benedixit Abraham. Et iam participes eius,
vident tale sacrificium nunc offerri Deo toto orb terrarum.

For this church is Israel according to the spirit, Lib. 1. con. aduers. legi^
and Prophet. c. 20.
from which is distinguished that according to the flesh, which served in the
shadows of sacrifices, whereby was signified one singular sacrifice, which the
spiritual Israel now offers; to which it was told and foretold: Hear my
people and I will tell thee, Israel and I will testify unto thee I God am thy
God, I will not receive calves of thy house, nor goats of thy herds. For from
the house of this spiritual Israel he receives not calves, nor goats from
her herds. This Israel offers to God a sacrifice of praise, not according to
the order of Aaron: but according to the order of Melchisedech. They know that
read it, what Melchisedech brought forth when he blessed Abraham, and now they
are partakers thereof: and see such a sacrifice offered to God throught the
whole world.

Now do I appeal to thy judgment, indifferent reader, whether M. Mason
(affirming this testimony of the Prophet Malachie to be understood of
spiritual offerings, by the judgment of the fathers, and namely of these two)
does not say either he cares not, Page 219.
or knows not what? But let us see, upon what ground he affirms a thing so
far from all appearance of truth. Marie because these fathers with S.
Hierome, and Eusebius say, that by incense (which according to some readings
the Prophet here mentions) are understood the prayers of saints, which are
spiritual offerings: This is true indeed: but nothing to the purpose. For
both the Prophet Malachie, and all these fathers speak expreslie of a clean
offering, over and above the incense: the text it self as M. Mason turns it
being this: In every place incense shall be offered up to my name, and a pure
offering. Be it therefore that these fathers understand by incense the prayers
of saints, yet by the pure offering expressed by the Prophet, they with all the
rest that handle this matter, do understand the sacrifice of the holy
Eucharist, even by M. Caluins own confession as we shall see by and by.

Again though by incense the fathers understand the prayers of saints, yet is
there no reason to think, that they should thereby exclude a true, and proper
external oblation, and sacrifice, more then the sweet odor, which God smelled
from the sacrifice of Noe, did exclude, Genesis 8.21.
or take away the true external oblation of beasts and fowls, which he made
to God at his issue out of the Arc. So that M. Mason without the least show of
reason, affirms the aforementioned fathers to understand this testimony of
Malachie only of spiritual offerings: which is yet farther, most evidently
convinced out of S. Augustine, August lib. 18. de ciuitat. cap. 25. Chrisostom.
orat. 3. con. Iudaeos ante finem.
and S. Chrysostom, who use this testimony of the Prophet Malachie against
the Jews, to prove that the Messiah is already come, by the change of the
Leuiticall sacrifice into that, which is foretold by the Prophet. Which
argument (the Prophet being understood of spiritual sacrifices) could be of no
force at all. For besides that these spiritual sacrifices being principally
internal, cannot be unto men, who see not that which is in the heart, any
evident sign of another thing whereof they stand in doubt, as the Jews do of
that point, that the Messiah is already come, and therefore should very
impertinentlie be brought to prove it. Besides this I say, these fathers who
use this testimony, if they should understand it only of spiritual offerings,
as M. Maso^ would have them, could not infer thereupon any change of the Jews
sacrifices into some better, which the Prophet plainly fortelleth, saying in
the person of God. I will take no offering at your hands, for in all places is
offered to my name a pure offering: but a bare cessation of the Jews external
sacrifices, without substituting any other in their place, and continuation of
the internal, which they wanted not: And consequently the Jews should hereby
rather be confirmed in their error, then drawn from it, seeing by this
argument their religioni proved to be more perfect, then that of the
Christians, as is before clearelie deduced.

And I appeal to M. Masons own judgment, whether if he where at this day to
prove unto a Jew, that the Messiah whom he expects, is already come, he
would think this testimony of the Prophet Malachie, understood only of
Spiritual Sacrifices, would be a God medium for his purpose? I have not so bad
an opinion of his judgment to think, that he would verelie take it so to be:
for it is evident, that this place so understood could have no show of proof
at all against the Jew: which seeing it is so, how can he think that S.
Augustine, and S. Chrysostom, the latter especially disputing expreslie
against the Jews, should use so impertinent an argument? can he think that
they were less judicious, in choosing their testimonies against their
adversaries, then he would be? And I would have him observe, that S.
Chrysostom does not only urge the latitude of the place, where the sacrifice
of the new law is to be offered, which the Prophet expresses in these words,
from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, and in every place, but
also much insisteth upon the sanctity of this sacrifice above that of the
Jews, declared by the Prophet in these words a pure offering, and that not
only in respect of the imperfection which the Jews sacrifice might have, from
the offerers, but in respect of the very offering it self, whereof he says
thus.

Si quis ipsum hoc sacrificium conferat cum alio, inge^s. immensumque discrimen
inueniet, vt iuxta comparationis rationem solum hoc purum dici potest.

If this sacrifice (foretold by Malachie) be compared with that (of Moses
law) so huge and incomparable difference will appear betwixt, the^, that in
comparison this mentioned by Malachie may only be called pure.

Whereby it evidently appears that S. Chrysostom speaks of some other
sacrifice, then of the spiritual sacrifices of our good works, which cannot
so far exceed the sacrifices of the Jews, whose spiritual sacrifices were
the same with ours, as M. Mason expreslie confesses.

18. But if all these reasons will not persuade M. Mason to think, that the
fathers understood by the pure offering, mentioned by the Prophet Malachie, an
external, sensible, and proper sacrifice, and that they taught such a
sacrifice to remain in Christ's church, he will (I doubt not) do that honor to
his great Master. M. Calvin, as to credit his judgment herein: or if he will
decline and disclaim from him, as being the father of the puritan faction,
yet in no reason can he refuse the sentence, of those great lights of the
Protestant church the Centurists, who will tell him the same: but let us hear
the words as well of one as the other.

M. Calvin vvriteth thus.

Cum obijciunt locum Malachiae sic ab Irenaeo exponi (de Sacrificio missae)
oblationem Melchisedech sic tractari ab Athanasio, Ambrosio, Augustino, and
Arnobio: breuiter responsum sit eosdem illos scriptores alibi quoque pane^
interpretari Christi Corpus: sed ita ridicule, vt dissentire nos cogat ratio
and veritas.

When they object the place of Malachie to be understood so (of the Sacrifice
of the mass) by Ireneus: Call. lib. de vera eccl. reform.
and the offering of Melchisedech, to be handled in like manner by Athanasius,
Ambrosius, Augustine, and Arnobius, it is briefly answered, that these same
writers do in other places, also interpret bread the body of Christ: but so
ridiculously, that reason and truth constrains us to dissent from them.

Here we see the Sacrifice of the Mass, and real presence of Christ in the
blessed Sacrament, to have been believed and taught by the Fathers, both of the
east and west church, above twelve, and thirteen hundredth years ago even by
Caluins own confession. The Centurists say also of S. Irenaeus.

De oblatione porro Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 32. satis videtur loqui incommode,
cum ait noui testamenti nouam docuit (Christus) oblationem, quam ecclesia ab
Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo.

That he speaks not well of the oblatio^, Cent. 2. coll. 63.
when he says that Christ taugh a new offering of the new testament, which the
church receiving from the Apostles does offer to God through the whole world.

And of S. Cyprian, who lived within the third hundredth year of Christ, the
same authors testify that he says.

Cent. 3. col. 83.
Sacerdotem inquit (Cyprianus) vice Christi fungi, and Deo patri Sacrificium
offerre.

That the priest performs the office of Christ, and offers sacrifice to God
the Father.

For which speech they reprove him of superstition, in their alphabeticall
table of that century under the letter 5. 9.

Now though I might justly suppose these most pregnant testimonies of corrupted
antiquity, grounded upon the express words of holy scripture, abundantly
sufficient to prove the truth of the Catholic faith in this point of a
sacrificing priesthood in the law of Christ: yet because this verity does not
only serve to convince the protestants of want of true Bishops and pastors (for
which purpose it is here disputed) and consequently of he like want of a true
church; but also is a point principally impugned and controuersed, by them, I
will for the more abundant and evident clearing thereof here add the
testimonies of the ancient pastors, and Doctors of Gods church, of the first
500. years after Christ, not of any one country or nation, but of all the
three parts of the Christian world, Asia, Afric, and Europe, that thereby the
partialest reader may see, this doctrine to have had no other authors or
beginners then them, of whom the holy ghost says. Psalm. 15.5.
Their sound has gone forth thorough all the earth, and their words have
raught to the ends of the round world,

Theodoret. Dialogi. 1.
To begin therefore with S. Ignatius that most glorious martyr, made Bishop of
Antioch in Syria by S. Peter himself, and is cited by Theodoret Bishop of Cyre
1200. years agone. This great personage speaking of certain heretics says.
Theodoret. Dialogo. 3.


Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur Eucharistiam
esse carnem seruatoris nostri IESV CHRISTI, quae pro peccatis nostris passa est.

They receive not the oblations and Eucharists, because they believe not that
the Eucharist is the flesh of our Savior JESUS Christ, which flesh suffered
for our sins.

S. Justinius a Jew borne in Palestina, Dial cu^ Tripho. printed at Basil.
who suffered martyrdom 1400. and 50. years ago says.

De Sacrificio quod offertur a nobis gentibus in omni loco, id est Eucharistiae
tum pane, tum poculo, praedicit (Malachias) dicens nos clarificare nomen eius.

Of the Sacrifice which is offered by us in every place, to wit of bread and
wine of the Eucharist, Malachie foretold saying, that thereby we glorify his
name.

Of S. Irenaeus Archbishop of Lions in France and martyr, who lived more then
1400. and 40. years ago see a most pregnant testimony before in this same
chapter.

Tertullia^ borne and brought up in Afric in his book of prayer written,
vvhilest he was yet Catholic, De oratione cap. 14.
above 1400. years ago.

Nonne solemnior erit statio tua, si and ad aram Dei steteris? Accepto corpore
Domini and reseruato, vtrumque saluum est, and participatio Sacrificij and
executio officij.

Will not thy statio^ (or fast) be more solemn if thou assist at Gods alter?
having received and reserved the body of our lord? both the one and the other is
safe, as well the participatio^ of the sacrifice, as the execution of the
office or duty.

And again declaring the custom of the Christians in his time. De corona
militis cap. 3.


Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs, annua die facimus.

We offer for the dead: and for the birth days (so were the^ and are still
called the feast days of martirs) upon the years day or anniuersarie.

S. Cyprian another African Doctor, Bishop of Carthage, Cyprianus epist. 63. ad
Cec llium.
and martyr above 1300. and 50. years ago, besides that inevitable testimony
before related has this doctrine in the same epistle.

Apparet Sanguinem Chrsti non offerri si desit winum Calici: nec Sacrificium
Dominicum legitima sanctificatione celebrari, nisi oblatio and Sacrificium
nostrum respondeat passsioni.

It appears that the blood of Christ is not offered, if wine be wanting to
the chalice: nor yet that our lords Sacrifice is lawfully celebrated, unless our
oblation and Sacrifice answer to his passion.

And yet again.

Sacerdos sacrificium verum and plenum tu^c offert in ecclesia Deo patri, si
sic incipiat offerre, secundum quod ipsum Chriu^um videat obtulisse.

The priest does then offer to God the Father a true and full Sacrifice in the
church, if he do so offer as he sees Christ to have offered.

Yea the whole epistle is such, as no man that reads it can deny, but that
S. Cipria^ did believe and teach a true, sensible, and external Sacrifice, and
consequently a true and proper sacrificing priesthood, in the new law and
church of Christ.

Epist. 66.
And in his epistle to the clergy and people of Furnes he says.

Episcopi antecessores nostri religiose considerantes, and salubriter
prouidentes censuerunt, ne quis frater excedens, ad tutelam vel curam clericum
nominaret: ac si quis hoc fecisset, non offerretur pro eo, nec Sacrisicium pro
dormitione eius celebraretur. Neque enim ad altar Dei meretur nominari in
sacerdotum prece, qui ab altar sacerdotes and ministros voluit auocare.

The Bishops our predecessors religiously considering and holsomely providing,
have ordained that if any brother departing this life, should make any clerk
ouerseer or executor of his will, the offering should not be made for him, nor
the Sacrifice celebrated for his departure. For he does not deserve to be named
at Gods alter in the prayers of the priests, that would withdraw the priests
and ministers from the alter.

And the first counsel of Nice celebrated almost 1300. years ago, the
authority vvherof was never rejected or denied by any but the damned Arians,
says.

Neque Canon neque consuetudo tradidit, vt qui offerendi potestatem non habent,
is qui offerunt dent Corpus Christi

Neither Canon nor custom has taught that those, Council. Ni cen. can. 18,
who have not the power to offer (speaking of deaco^s) should give the body of
Christ to those that offer (to wit to priests.)

Eusebius, who lived at the same time, setting down the history of the
council holden at Jerusalem under Constantine the great, says.

Alij incruentis Sacrificijs and misticis consecrationibus diuinum numen
placabant.

That some Bishops did adorn the solemnity with prayers and sermons etc. other
did appease or (propitiate) God with unbloody sacrifices and mystical
co^secratio^s. Eusebius. de vtta Constant. li. 4. cap. 45. printed ad Geneua.


S. Cyrill Patriarch of Jerusalem 340, years after Christ, that is 127.
years ago in his catechisticall sermons.

Deum benignissimum oramus vt super illa proposita Sanctum Spiritum emittat, vt
panem quid^m faciat Corpus Christi, vinum vero Sanguinem Christi. Omnino enim
quod attigerit Spiritus Sanctus, hoc Sanctificatur and transmutatur. Deinde
vero postquam confectum est spirituale Sacrificium, ille cultus incrue^tus:
Super ipsa propitiationis hostia obsecramus Deu^ pro co^muni ecclesiaru^ pace.

Rogamus and inqua^ nos omnes, and hoc sacrificiu^ tibi offerimus, vt
meminerimus etia^ eoru^ qui ante nosobdormierunt: primum Patriarcharum,
Prophetarum, Apostoloru^, Martyrum, vt Deus orationibus illorum deprecationibus
suscipiat preces nostras. Deinde pro defunctis Sanctis patribus and episcopis;
denique pro omnibus oramus, qui inter nos vita functi sunt, maximum esse
credentes animarum iuuamen pro quibus offertur precatio Sa^cti illius and
tremendi quod in altari positum est, Sacrificij.

We pray the most merciful God, Cyrill. Hiero solimit. catech. misti. 5.
to send the holy ghost upon the gifts proposed, that he may make the bread the
body of Christ. and the wine the blood of Christ. For that which the holy ghost
touches is altogether sanctified and changed. And after that the spiritual
Sacrifice is prepared the unbloody worship,)cult or service) over the
propitiatory host, we pray God for the common peace of the church etc. And
again. We beseech the and we offer unto thee this Sacrifice in memory of those
that are deceased before us, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martirs, that God
by their prayers and intercessio^s may receive our prayers: then for the
departed holy Bishops and Fathers, and to conclude for all our brethren
departed, beleeueing that the holy and dreadful Sacrifice that is placed upon
the alter is a sovereign help of those souls for which it is offered.

And yet again.

Nos pro defunctis Christu^ pro nostris peccatis mactatu^ offerimus, vt and
nobis and illis, eu^ qui est benignissimus, propitiu^ reddamus.

We offer for the dead Christ Sacrificed for our sins, that we may make him
that is most merciful, appeased (or propitious) both to us and them.

And so many most notable things has this holy Father in the same place, as
well for the declaration of this point, and diverse others of Catholic
doctrine, as also for the increase of true piety, that I could wish he were
read and understood of all me^. S. Epiphanius in his epistle to John Bishop of
Hierurusale^ successor to S. Cyrill, which is translated by S. Hierome above
1200. year ago, and is amongst his epistles the 60.

Cu^ vidissem quia multitudine Sa^ctorum fratru^ in monasterio co^sisteret, and
Sancti presbyteri Hieronimus and Vincentius propter verecundia^ and humilitate^
nollent debita nomini suo exercere sacrificia, and laborare in hac part
ministerij, quae Christianorum praecipua est salus etc.

When I saw a great number of holy brethren in the monastery, and that the holy
priests Hierome and Vince^t for modesty and humility would not exercise the
sacrifices belonging to their title, and travel in that part of the ministry,
which is the principal safety (mark this) the principal safety of Christians.

S. Gregory of Nlsse brother to the great S. Basil, who^ S. Gregory Nazianzen
calls child of light, and man of God, who lived 1200. and 30. years ago
delivers the Catholic doctrine, of the Sacrifice of the new testament in
these memorable words.

Meme^to Dominici dicti, nullus tollit anima^ mea^, sed ego pono ea^ a meipso.
Hoc mihi stet firmum, and quaestio de triduo mortis fuerit explicata. Na^ qui
omnia pro potestate, atque authoritate administrat, no^ expectat ex proditione
necessitate^ vel Iudaeos grassantes, vel Pilati iudicium iniquum, vt illorum
hominu^ scelus ac malitia principium esset salutis nostrae: sed pro ineffabili
arcanoque, and qui ab hominibus cerni nequit, sacrificij modo, sua dispositio
ne praeoccupat impetu^ violentum, and sese oblatione^ offert pro nobis, simul
sacerdos and agnus qui tollit peccata mundi. Sed dices mihi quando hoc accidit?
Tum cum corpus suum ad manducandum, and sanguinem familiaribus praebuit ad
bibendu^: Homo enim vesci non potest, nisi mactatio processerit. Qui igitur
dedit discipulis suis Corpus ad manducandum, aperte demonstrat iam perfectam
and absolutam esse agni immolationem. Non enim ad edendum Corpus animatum
victimae esset idoneum. Ia^ ergo late^ter pro potestate sua inuisibiliter, and
ineffabiliter Corpus immolatu^ erat.

He who governs all things by his power, and authority, Gregor. Nisse^ erat
de resurrectione.
does not expect till he be betrayed, nor the raging Jews, nor the unjust
sentence of Pilate, that the wickedness and malice of those men might be the
beginning of our salvation. But by an unspeakable and secret manner of
sacrifice, which cannot be discerned of men, does by his own ordinance
prevent their violent force, and offers himself a Sacrifice for us, being
both the priest and the lamb, that takes away the sins of the world. But
thou will say to me: when happened this? Then, when he gave to his domestics
his body to eat, and his blood to drink. For no man can eat the lamb unless
it be killed before. Therefore he, that gave to his disciples his body to be
eaten, does evidently declare, that the Sacrifice of the lamb is already done
and post: for the living body of the host is not fit to be eaten. Therefore even
then was his boby secretly, and inuisibly through his power offered.

And S. Gregory Nazianze^, for his singular knowledge in divinity surnamed the
divine, S. Hieroms master, of the same age with S. Gregory of Nisse,
compagnon in studies with his brother the great S. Basil.

Orat. 1. con. Julian. Apostat.
Manus suas profanat (nefario scilicet sacrificiorum sanguine) vt nimirum eas ab
incruento Sacrificio, per quod nos Christo, ipsiusque passioni ex diuinitati
communicamus, elueret ac purgaret.

Non iam aras a puritissimo and incruento Sacrificio nomen habentes, scelesto
sanguine contaminabunt.

He stained (says he) his hands (with the blood of profane sacrifices) to
that end that he might purge the from the unbloody Sacrifice, whereby we are
made partakers of Christ, of his passion, and divinity. And again. They (the
gentiles) will not now defile the alters, that take their names of the most
pure and unbloody sacrifice with the detestable blood (of profane sacrific.

And in his apologeticall oration having declared what perfection was required
eue^ in the priests of the old law, he concludes with these memorable words.

Haec igitur cu^ ego nosse^, illudque insuper, nemine^ magno and deo, and
sacrificio, and Po^tifice, dignum esse nisi qui prius seipsum hostiam viuentem,
sanctam exhibuerit, ac rationabile obsequium, gratum, atque acceptum
ostenderit, Deoque Sacrificium laudis, ac Spiritum contritum obtulerit) quod
solum Sacrificium, is qui omnia dedit, a nobis exposcit) quo tandem modo
externum illud Sacrisicium, illud magnorum mysteriorum auti typum, ipsi offerre
auderem? aut quomodo Sacerdotis habitum and nomen subire?

Having known these things, and besides, that no man is worthy of the great
God, and Sacrifice and Bishops unless he have first given himself a lively and
holy offering to the same God, and presented him vith a reasonable, grateful,
and acceptable service, and offered to God a Sacrifice of praise and a co^trite
heart (which only Sacrifice he that gives all things does require of us,) (to
wit of that we have, or can give him of our own, for he does not ask of us
the facrifice of our goods and cattle as he did of the Jews.) How could I
dare to offer unto him that external sacrifice (mark this word external)
that exe^plar of the great mysteries? or how could I put on the coat and name
of a priest?

S. Ambroise Bishop of Millaine 1220. years ago besides the testimonies
alleged out of him before says thus.

Ego mansi in munere, missa facere caepi. Dum offero, raptum cognoui a populo
Castulum que^dam, quem presbyterum dicerent Arriani; hunc autem in platea
offenderant transeuntes. Amarissime flore and orare in ipsa oblatione Deum
caepi, vt subueniret ne cuius sanguis in causa ecclesiae fieret.

I abode in mine office, Epist. 14. ad Marcellam sororem.
and begu^ to say mass (that is his very word) whilst I offer I knew that
the people had laid hand upon one Castulus, which the Arria^s said was priest,
who was found by me^ passing through the street. I begu^ to weep bitterly,
and to pray unto God in the very oblatio^, that in the cause of the church
there might not be any blood shedd.

And again.

Upon the psalm. 38. and 9. verse.
Vidimus principem sacerdotum ad nos veniente^, vidimus and audiuimus offere^te^
pro nobis sanguinem suum: sequamur vt possumus sacerdotes, vt offeramus pro
populo sacrificium and si infirmi merito, honorabiles tamen sacrificio. Quia
and si nunc Christus no^ videtur offerre, tame^ ipse offertur in terris, qua^do
Christi Corpus offertur.

We have seen the chief priest come to us, we have seen and heard him offer
his blood for us: let us priests imitate him as we may, and offer sacrifice for
the people, being honorable in sacriefice though small in merit. For though
Christ be not now seen to offer, ye is he offered upon earth, when the body
of Christ is offerred.

And yet again he proves the excellency of this mystery by these words of
the cano^ of the holy mass.

Lib. 4. de Sacrame^tis cap. 6.
Memores gloriosissimae eius passionis, ab inferis resurrectionis, and in caelum
asce^sionis, offerimus tibi hanc immaculatam hostia^, rationabilem hostia^,
incruentam hostiam, hunc panem sanctum and Calicem vitae aeternae; and petimus
and precamur, vt ha^c oblatione^ suscipias in sublimi altari tuo, per manus
Angeloru^ tuorum sicut suscipere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti Abell and
sacrificium patriarchae nostri Abrahae, and quod tibi obtulit su^mus sacerdos
Melchisedech

Remembering his most glorious passion, resurrection from hell, and asce^sio^
into heaven we offer unto thee this immaculate host, reasonable host,
unbloody host, this holy bread, and chalice of life everlasting, and we
beseech thee to receive this offering in the high alter by the hands of thy
Angels, as thou wouch safest to receive the gifts of thy just servant Abell,
the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and which the high priest Melchisedech
offered unto thee.

S. Optatus Mileuitanus an Africa^ author of the same antiquity with S. Ambrose
writing against the Sacrilegious Donatists, who brake down Gods alters,
amongst many other sharp and vehement reprehensions (which I wish thee
dilligent reader to see thy self, being too long to relate here, and which are
by so much more proper for our Protestants, then they were for the Donatists,
by how much more outrageous they have been in pulling down churches and
alters then the Donatists ever were. Lib. 6. con. Parme ad initium.
)

Quid vobis fecerat Deus qui illic inuocari co^sueuerat? quid vos offenderat
Christus cuius illic per certa momenta Corpus and Sa^guis habitabat? Quid vos
offendistis etiam vos ipsi, vt illa altaria fra^geretis in quibus ante nos per
lo^ga te^porum spatia, sa^cte vt arbitramini obtulistis? Apud Dominum Elias
Propheta querelam deponit. His autem locutus est verbis quibus and vos inter
alios ab ipso accusari meruistis Domine (inquit) altaria tua confregerunt.

What had God done unto you) that was wo^t to be prayed wnto there (at the
alters? wherein had Christ offended you, whose body and blood for certain times
did dwell there? what had you done to your selves, that you should break in
pieces those alters, upon which you your selves long time before us did holily
as you thought offer? And a little after. Elias the Prophet co^plaineth to God
in these words, wherewith you deserve to be accused lord, (says he) they have
broken down thine alters. Commentar. in epist. ad Tit. cap. 1. 1. Cor. 7.5.


S. Hierome who wrote above 1200. years agone says thus.

Si laicis imperatur vt propter orationem abstineant se ab vxorum coitu: quid
de episcopo sentiendum est, qui quotidie pro suis populique peccatis illibatas
Deo oblaturus est victimas. Inuenimus sacerdotem Abimalech de panibus
propositionis noluisse prius dare David and pueris suis, nisi eos audisset ab
heri and medius tertius vacasse ab opere coniugali, and mundos esse a
coniugibus suis. Tantum interest inter propositionis panes and corpus Christi,
quantum inter vmbram and corpora, inter imaginem and veritatem etc.

If lay me^ be commanded to abstain from the company of there own wives to
give themselves to prayer, what shall we think of Bishops that ought every
day to offer to God immaculate hosts for his own and the peoples sins? We
find that the priest Abimelech would not a given to David and his company of
the loaves of proposition, 1. Reg. 21.
had he not first understood that they had abstained from their own wives from
yesterdaie and the day before. There is as much difference betwixt the loaves
of proposition and the body of Christ, as there is betwixt the shadow and the
body, betwixt the image and the truth, betwixt the figure and the thing figured.

S. John Chrysostom who lived about 1200. years ago besides diverse other
sentences to the same purpose has these express words.

Commentar. in. 10. cap. 1. epist. ad Corinth.
Hic in eo quod est horribilius and magnifice^tius, sacram co^stituit
operatione^, vt qui and ipsum mutarit Sacrificiu^, and pro caede brutorum
seipsum iussit offerri. No^ frustra su^t haec ab Apostolis legibus co^stituta,
Homil. 3. in epist. ad Philippenses par. morali.
vt in venera^dis inqua^ atque horrificis mysterijs memoria eoru^fiat qui
decesserunt. Noueru^t hinc multum ad illos lucri accedere, multum vtilitatis.
Eo enim tempore cu^ vniuersus populus stat manibus expa^sis, ac caetus
sacerdotalis, and illud horrore^ venerationis plenu^ incutie^s Sacrificiu^,
quomodo Deum no^ placabimus pro istis orantem.

He has here (to wit in the new testament) instituted the sacred actio^ in
that which is far more dreadful and magnifice^t, as he that has changed
the sacrifice, and for the immolatio^ of beasts has commanded himself to be
offered. And again. Not without cause have the Apostles by laws ordained that
in the venerable and dreadful mysteries the dead should be remembered. They
knew that thence they received much gain and profit. For when all the people
hold up their hands, and the whole company of priests, and that dreadful
sacrifice placed there, how shall we not appease God praying for them.

And S. Augustine that great light of the latin church of the same antiquity
with S. Chrysostom Bishop of Hippoe in Afric says.

Lib. 1. de anima and eius origin ca. 9.
Salua fide Catholica and eeclesiastica regula nulla ratione co^ceditur vt pro
no^ baptizatis cuiuslibet aetatis hominibus offeratur sacrificium corporis and
sanguinis Christi.

Cum offerretur pro ea sacrificiu^ pretij nostri, ia^ iuxta sepulchru^ posito
cadauere, priusquam deponeretur, sicut fieri solet.

Orationibus vero Sanctae ecclesiae, Sacrificio salutari, and elcemosinis quae
pro eorum spiritibus erogantur non est dubitandum mortuos adiuuari, vt cum eis
misericordius agatura Domino, quam eorum peccata meruerunt.

Hoc enim a patribus traditum vniuersa? obseruat ecclesia, vt pro eis qui in
corporis and sanguinis Christi communione defuncti sunt, cum ad ipsum
Sacrificium loco suo commemora^tur, oretur, ac pro illis quoque id offerri
commemoretur.

Neither the Catholic faith nor the rule of the church does permit that the
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ should be offered for those, that are
not baptized of what years soever they are. And again. Lib. 9.
co^fesfessionum. cap. 12.
Whilst the sacrifice of our rede^ptio^ was offered for her (his mother) her
body being placed near the grave before it was laid down as the custom is.
And again he says. It is not to be doubted that the dead are helped by the
prayers of the holy church, and the healthful sacrifice and alms bestowed for
their souls, that God may deal more mercifully with the^ then their sins
have deserved. For this the whole church observes, as delivered by tradition
from the Fathers, to wit, that for those that are dead in the communion of the
body and blood of Christ when they are remembered in that sacrifice in their
place they should be prayed for, and that it should he declared that it is
offered for them.

If thou desire good reader to see more testimonies of this great Doctor to
this purpose, see him in his book of heresies in the heresies of Aerius. his
20. book against Faustus cap. 21. his 10. book de ciuit. Dei cap. 20. the 17.
book cap. 20. the 18. book cap. 35. and the 22. book and 8. cap. for my
purpose will not permit me to stay longer in him.

S. Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria who died the year 444. in the explication
of his 11. anathema or curse examined in the third general council where he
was not only present but president by Celestinus then Pope of Rome his
appointment says.

Sanctum, viuificum, incrue^tumque in ecclesiis sacrificium offerimus, corpus
and pretiosum sanguinem, quae proponuntur, non communis nobisque similis
hominis esse credentes, sed magis tanquam viuificantis verbi proprium Corpus
and sanguinem accipimus.

We offer the holy, life-giuing, and unbloody sacrifice in the churches,
believing that the body and precious blood which are proposed are not of an
ordinary man, or of one like us, but we receive the^ as the proper body and
blood of the word (that is of the son of God) that gives life to all things.

S. Leo the great created Pope the 440. year after our Saviors nativity.

Epist. 81. ad Dioscoru^ Patriarcham Alexandr.
Volumus vt cum solemnior festiuitas conuentum populi numerosioris indixerit and
ad eam tamen fidelium multitudo conuenerit, quam recipere Basilica vna non
possit, sacrificij oblatio indubitanter iteretur, cum plenum pietatis atque
rationis sit, vt quoties Basilicam in qua agitur praesentia nouae plebis
impleuerit, toties sacrificium subsequens offeratur, Necesse est autem vt
quaedam pars populi sua deuotione priuetur si vnius tantum missae more seruato,
sacrificium offerre no^ possint, nisi qui prima diei part co^ueneru^t.

We will (says he) that when the solemnity of the feast has drawn together
so many faithful people that the church cannot receive the^ at once, that the
oblatio^ of the sacrifice be without doubt reiterated or done again: seeing
all piety and rason will, that so often as the church is filled with new
people, so often a new sacrifice be offered. For it must needs be that some
part of the people be deprived of their devotion, the custom of one only mass
observed, if they only that come first may offer the sacrifice.

S. Fulgentius an African, made Bishop the year 504. and died 529. says.

Dicis a no^nullis te interrogatu^ de sacrificio corporis and sanguinis
Christi, quod plerique soli patri existima^t immolari. Ha^c etiam asseris
haereticorum esse quasi palmariam interrogationem.

Thou say thou have been demanded of by diverse concerning the sacrifice of
the body and blood of Christ, Lib 1. ad Monimum.
which many do think to be offered to the Father only; and say that this is
the principal question of the heretics.

And a little after.

Cum ad patrem litantis destinatur intentio, sacrificij munus omni Trinitati
vno eodemque offertur litantis officio.

When the intention of the sacrificer is directed to the Father the gift of the
sacrifice by one and the same act of the sacrificer is offered to the whole
Trinity. Et Infra.


In the latter end of this age to wit the year 590. was S, Gregory the great
chosen to sit in the seat of S. Peter, of whose doctrine concerning the
sacrifice of the mass, and consequently of a true sacrificing priesthood in
the church of Christ, there can be no more question made, then whether there
was ever such a man in the world as S. Gregory. And from his time downward to
our own days is there less question of that matter. For he sent S. Augustine
into England who with Christian religion brought in the holy sacrifice of the
mass which from that time till Edward the sixth his reign, has ever continued
there as is evident by all Kind of records. So that it remains clear, that
in Europe, Asia, and Afric, (that is) in all parts of the Christian world
ever since the Apostles times. This doctrine has been common and never
impugned or gainsaied by any one of those vigila^t watchmen, and sentinells,
Esaie. 62.9. See the answerable protestants apology for the Catholic faith,
in the conclusion to the judges sect. 5.
who^ God from time to time according to his promise, has set to watch over
his church, and who have not ouerseene, or let pass the least error in faith,
that since Christ his ascension into heaven has sprung up, but have, as soon
as it has appeared or been uttered, espied it, impugned it, and never desisted
till they had driven it down to hell again from whence it came, witness all
the heresies that have been raised in all parts of the Christian world since
Simon Magus over whom S. Peter himself triumphed. This doctrine I say having
been thus universal both in respect of time and place, has not been impugned
by any one before Martin Luther, who (as he confesses himself, to his own
and all his followers eternal confusion received his instructions from the
devil for the purpose.

If the Sacrifice of the church had either been practiced in secret corners or
that it had been a matter either indifferent or of smallest moment, such as are
not so well either instructed, or persuaded of Gods continual care and watch
over his church as they ought to be, might peradventure think it a thing
possible that it might creep in and continue for some time. But being as it
is, not only the public service of all Christians, but that at the
celebration whereof, all things that are to be published, are for the more
solemn publication denounced, and besides is of that moment, as no act of
Christian cult, worship, and religion is comparable to it, being a most
express and direct act of idolatry (if it were not the true worship ordained
by God) for the which God, jealous of his honor, has from time to time so
severely punished all nations as well Jews as Gentiles, this I say being, I
do and dare boldly avouch, that it cannot be esteemed possible by any man,
that has the least dram of true judgment, or knowledge of the foundation of
Christian faith and religion, that it should have been practiced so publicly,
so universally, and for so long time, (as already appears by irreproouable
testimonies that it has (without controlement and contradiction.

Now having sufficiently proved, as I think, a sacrificing priesthood to be
in Christ's church, it remains that we satisfy such objection, as our
adversaries make against the same. For as all other articles of Christian faith
have had, have, or may have arguments made against them, even out of the
scripture it self, so likewise has this.

The Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, not truly understood, is depraved by
the Protestants in prejudice of this truth, and to their own perdition as S.
Peter says, 2. Petri. 3.16.
the rest of the scriptures, and namely those of S. Paul are by the unstable:
that is such as will have no other interpretation of them but their own. Out
of this epistle are drawn diverse arguments, against the holy sacrifice of the
Mass, whihh may all be reduced to this form.

19. The Apostle to the Hebrews teaches first, that the priest of the new
testament is one only. Secondly, that the host or sacrifice of the new
testament is but one only. Thirdly that the offering, or sacrificing of that
one host in likewise but once performed, and not often iterated or repeated:
All which seems directly against the sacrifice of the Mass, which has
many priests, many hosts, or at lest the same host often offered. Further he
teaches, that the priest of the new law, is not only one, but such a one as
has no need to offer for himself? That the host or sacrifice is so precious,
that it takes away all sin; And that the offering thereof is so effectual,
that Gods people has no more guilt of sin. Which singular degree of
perfection in the priest, sacrifice, and offering of the same does make, that
there can be but one in each kind, as is said before; so that this latter
argument is rather a reason and cause of the former, then any new and distinct
argument. All this is proved by the express testimonies of the Apostle. In
setting down whereof I will observe the order of the chapters, and not the
order of the points here touched, whereunto they may be easily applied.

The other indeed were made priests being many, Hebr. ca. 7.23.24.25.
because by death they were prohibited to continue. But this for that he
continues for ever, has an everlasting pristhood, whereby he is able to save
also for ever, going by himself to God, always living to make intercession
for us: who has not necessity daily (as the priests) first for his own sins
to offer hosts, then for the peoples. For this he did once in offering
himself.

By his own blood entered once into the holies, Cap. 9.12.13.14.
eternal redemption being found. For if the blood of goats etc. how much more
has the blood of Christ cleansed our conscience from dead works, to serve the
living God.

Nor that he should offer himself often, as the high priest enters into the
holies, every year in the blood of others: otherwise he ought to have suffered
often from the beginning of the world: but now once in the consummation of the
worlds, to the destruction of sin, he has appeared by his own host. Cap.
10.1.2.
So also Christ was offered once to exhaust the sins of many. For the law
having a shdow of goad things to comme, not the very image of the things: every
year with the self same hosts which they offer inceassantly, can never make
the comers thereunto perfect. Otherwise they should have ceased to be offered,
because the worshippers once cleansed should have no conscience of sin any
longer.

Cap. 10.10.11.12.
In the which will, we are sanctified, by the oblation of the body of JESUS
CHRIST once. And every priest indeed is ready daily ministering and often
offering the same hosts, which can never take away sins. But this man offering
one host for sins, for ever sits on the right hand of God. For by one
oblation has he consummated for ever them, that are sanctified. But where
there is remission of these, now there is not an oblation for sins.

These are the passages, which our adversaries ordinarily use, for the
impugning of the sacrifice of the Mass.

For the better understanding of the Apostles doctrine in this epistle,
touching the sacrifice of the new testament, it is first to be observed: that
he speaks not any one word directly, and expreslie of the sacrifice of the
Mass, or holy Eucharist, as especially our adversaries must grant; seeing
they teach and believe, that there is no such sacrifice at all. If therefore
they will prove any thing against it out of this epistle, they must do it by
consequence and deduction only: which kind of arguing that it may be good and
lawful, the Apostles principal drift, and intent must attentively be
considered. For it is no lawful arguing to infer that upon any man's words,
without which his meaning is otherways full and perfect: As for example
Heluidius did falsely, Math. 1.25.
and hereticallie upon these words: And he knew her not till she brought forth
her first borne son: deduce, that the blessed virgin did not continue
perpetually virgin, inferring more upon the Evangelists words, then his
meaning was to express, as the Protestants do also by S. Paul's doctrine, in
this point of the sacrifice of the Mass.

It is secondly to be observed, that the chief intent of the Apostle in this
epistle is, to prove the dignity, and prehemine^ce of our Savior Christ's
priesthood, and the necessity and efficacy of his sacrifice, and oblatio^ upon
the cross, against such misbeleeuing Jews, as held and esteemed the
priesthood, and sacrifices of Moises law, to be everlasting, unchangeable, and
sufficient of themselves for the remission of sins, without respect or
dependence of any other priesthood, or sacrifice to be instituted, from whence
they might have their valor and force.

The Apostles chief intent therefore in this epistle being this, it no way
pertained to his purpose, to treat of the sacrifice of the Eucharist. For this
depending of the sacrifice upon the cross, which the Jews, for whose
instruction S. Paul wrote this epistle, did not yet believe, they could not
profitablie be instructed therein, nor S. Paul but very preposterouslie, could
treat directly thereof. This being well kept in mind, it will easelie appear,
that the Apostles intent is not to speak any thing in this whole epistle
against the sacrifice of the alter, and consequently that whatsoever our
adversaries would infer thereof to that purpose, they do it besides the
meaning of the Apostle, and therefore can be of no force.

20. M. Fulke obiecteth, against this that the Hebrews, Ad Hebraeos 7. sect.
5. and cap. 10. sect. 4.
to whom the Apostle writes, were Christians, and therefore could have no such
opinion of the sacrifices of the law, which no faithful Jew had before the
coming of Christ. Whereby he would insinuate, that the Apostles intent could not
be to prove, the necessity of the sacrifice of the cross.

But M. Fulke is either deceived, or would deceive. For S. Hierome delivering
not only his own opinion, but the doctrine of his ancestors, which he also
embraces, says; that the Apostle wrote to the Jews, that were not yet
Christians, nor true believers. And that those, Epist. 126. ad Euagr. Hebraeis
enim, idest, Iudaeis persuadebat, non iam fidelibus, quibus passim proderet
sacramentum. Hebr. cap. 7.11. Cap. 10.4.
to whom or against whom the Apostle wrote, were of that opinion, that their
sacrifices were of themselves sufficient, without any respect or relation to
any other sacrifice, it is more manifest by S. Paul's own words, even in this
place handled by M. Fulke, then can stand with his ignorance therein; and
therefore does he wittinglie, and wilfully deprave the Apostles doctrine, and
go about to deceive his reader. The Apostles words are these. If then
consummation was by the Leuiticall priesthood (for under it the people received
the law) what necessity was there yet another priest to rise, according to
the order of Melchisedech, and not to be called according to the order of
Aaron? And agine in the 10. chapter. It is impossible, that with the blood of
oxen and goats, sins should be taken away. Is it not manifest hereby, that the
Apostle disputes against such, as taught the sacrifices of the law to be
sufficient, for the consummation of our redemption, and remission of our
sins? Certes it is over evident to be denied by any man, not deprived of
common sense. The Apostle therefore in this dispute, does not so much instruct
the Catholic believing Jews in their faith, as confute the errors, and
falsities in their misbeleeuing countrymen, as all other Catholic Doctors,
and pastors of Gods church do, whilst they write in confutation of the newly
rising heresies.

Fulke.
But he urges farther, and demands, how the Apostle could omit to speak of
the sacrifice of the Mass, seeing as we say, his drift was to avouch the
eternal fruit, and necessity of Christ his passion, whereof the sacrifice of
the Mass depends? An impertinent question: For as well might he ask, how
the Apostle could omit to speak of the Eucharist, as it is a sacrament, and of
all other mysteries of our religion, which he confesses (and necessarily) to
depend upon the passion of Christ. And which (I pray you) of all the holy
writers does explicate all the mysteries of our faith at once, or in one place,
though they have depende^ce the one upon the other? If M. Fulke had been but half
as quick sighted in the search of the truth, as he was to impugn it, he would
easily have found the reason, why the Apostle made no mention of the sacrifice
of the Mass in this epistle. For the Jews, to whom he wrote, believing not
the necessity of Christ's passion (as is noted before) it could not be
convenient, that the Apostle should instruct them in that other high mystery,
which necessarily required the belief of our Saviors passion before. Which
reason the Apostle himself does clearelie insinuate, saying; Of whom
(Melchisedech) we have great speech, Hebr. cap. 5 11. Hieron. vbi supra.
and inexplicable to utter: because you are become weak to hear. Not because
the Apostle could not (says S. Hierome) explicate that he would say, but
because it pertained not to that time. For he spoke to the Jews not yet
faithful believers, to who^ he would eftsoons have opened the mystery.

Yet M. Fulke is not satisfied, but replieth, that this reason is vain, unless
we will confess that there was no Mass said among them, since they were
converted; still running counter, taking the misbeleeuing Jews for true
Christians, and supposing their conversion, before they were converted.

Yea but (says he) such as were converted, and had the sacrifice of the Mass
amongst them, were necessarily to be instructed in the ground of it out of the
law and Prophets, as well as of the sacrifice of Christ's passion which if order
required to be first handled, yet reason would not, that the Mass should have
altogether been omitted: yea the other being so handled as they could not see,
what need they had of Mass, but rather should be brought into detestation of
it, if ever before they had used it.

The converted and believing Jews were so well instructed, in the ground of
the sacrifice of the Mass, out of the Genes. 14.
law, which records Melchisedechs oblation in bread and wine, and out of the
Psalm. 109.
Prophets, which testify our Savior Christ to be a priest of that order:
Malachy ^. Dan 11.31.12.11.
and that the time would come, when that their carnal sacrifices should cease,
and a clean oblation should be offered to God in all places, And that there
should be a daily sacrifice, as they were so far from being brought into
detestation of it, (as M. Fulke seems to be by his more then Judicial
incredulity) that they saw it most conformable to holy scriptures, and
perfectly agreeing with the all consummating oblation of the cross; as all
other truly believing Christians have also done ever since that time. And
therefore is it more the^ false, In the same place.
that the Apostle does not only omit to speak of the sacrifice of the Mass,
but does speak much against it, as M. Fulke impudentlie affirms. For he is
not able to produce any one approved author for 1500. years after Christ,
that ever found any such thing in this epistle. Is not he therefore more then
impudent, that dare so peremptorily father that upon the holy Apostle, that
none of those watchful sentinels, whom God has from time to time set to watch
incessantly over his church, could ever epsy? Esaias 62.6.
but to leave this forger of new fa^les to himself.

21. It is thirdly to be observed, that the ancient fathers writing upon this
epistle, and explaning the Apostles doctrine therein, saw the same objections,
that the heretics of these times now make out of it against the sacrifice of
the Mass, and answered them above 1200. years agone, So far are they from
thinking, that the Apostle speaks any thing therein, against this holy
sacrifice. Is not this only consideration sufficient, to persuade any
reasonable understanding, of the truth of the Catholic belief in this point?
These fathers were as learned, and as Zealous of Gods truth, as the Protestants
are (to say no more) and besides this advantage they had above them, that they
were deuoide of all passion, and partiality against any party, having lived
many hundredth years before this question was moved, and therefore much more
like to give true judgment thereof. But let us hear what they say.

S. Chrisostom and S. Ambrose, (for both these holy and ancient fathers have
the same saying, and almost the same terms in their commentaries upon these
words of S. Paul. Hebr. cap. 10.1.2.
The law having a shadow of good things to come, not the very image of the
things: every year with the self same hosts, which they offer incessantly,
can never make the comers thereunto perfect. Otherwise they should have ceased
to be offered, because the worshippers once cleansed should have no conscience
of sin any longer.

Upon these vords I say thus write these holy fathers. What, do we not daily
offer? we offer truly, but we renew the memory of his death. For we offer
always the same, not now another, but always the same, Mark that it is
Christ that is daily offered.
and therefore is it for this reason one sacrifice. Because it is offered in
many places, are there therefore many Christ's? Not so, but one Christ, who is
wholly there, and wholly here one body. Like as therefore he is offered in many
places being one body, and not many bodies, so is he but one sacrifice.

Why the Mass thaugh often repeated is but one sacrifice and how the same
thing is offered therein that our Savior offered. Ad Hebraeos cap. 10. sect. 9.
It is our high priest, that offered that sacrifice which cleanses us: and we
now offer that, that then was offered, which cannot be consumed. This is done
in remembrance of that which then was done. For he says, do ye this in
commemoration of me. We do not offer another host, as the high priest (of the
old law) did, but always the same, or rather we make a commemoration of that
host and sacrifice (of the cross.) The like sayings have other fathers of
latter times as Theophilast, Oecumenius of the Greeks, and of the Latins
Haymo, Remigius, and Paschatius.

And Primatius who was S. Augustins scholar, answers the same objection in
these words, as he is related by M. Fulke himself.

What then shall we say? do not our priests the same thing daily, while they
offer sacrifice continually? they offer indeed, but for the remembrance of
his death. And because we sin daily and need daily to be cleansed, because
he cannot now die, he has given us this sacrament of his body and blood, that
as his passion was the redemption, and absolutio^ of the world: (mark) so also
this oblation may be redemption and cleansing, to all that offer it in true
faith, and have a good intention.

So that it is clear that the objections, whereby the adversaries of the
Catholic truth think to overthrow, the holy sacrifice of Gods church, were
forseene and answered above a thousand years, before our new masters of
reformation were heard of in the world.

22. And that the indifferent reader be not deceived, by the ^ergiuersations of
our adversaries in this particular, it is necessary to beware of their
cauilling shifts, which they use to avoid these clear testimonies of
antiquity. For because these fathers say, that the daily sacrifice of the
church is a commemoration, or remembrance of the sacrifice of the cross, they
would against their express words and meaning infer that it is no true
sacrifice. But by the same argument they may also conclude, that all the
sacrifices of the law of Moises were not truly, and properly sacrifices. For
they all had the like respect to the same sacrifice of the cross, that the
sacrifice of the Mass has, without any other difference at all, but that
those, because they went before, did prefigurate or forshew it as being yet to
come, and this of the Mass is a remembrance or commemoration of the same, as
being now past: which difference can no way prejudice, or impair the
perfection, and true propriety of a sacrifice in this latter, as is too too
manifest. If therefore the respect of prefiguration in the sacrifices of Moises
law, did not let or hinder them to be properly sacrifices; the respect of
commemoration, in the sacrifice of the Mass, cannot make it to be improperlie
a sacrifice. But to come nearer the difficulty, and to declare the true
meaning, and sense of the Apostle, in the speeches before related.

23. It is fourthlie to be observed, that he disputing against the error of
those Jews, that taught the priesthood, and sacrifice of Aaron to be so
perfect and absolute of it self, that it sufficed (without respect to any
other) to cleanse the professors of the law from all guilt of sin, and to
open unto them the kingdom of heaven, as is before declared. He proves first
the insufficie^cy of the priesthood, and sacrifice of the Leuiticall law, to
take away any sin at all of it self, and much more to discharge and redeem
all mankind from all sins, or to open unto them the kingdom of heaven. This
he diuinelie demonstrateth a first on the behalf of the priests, who being
sinners, themselves had need of a mediator, Cap. 7.27.28. cap. 9.7.
and redeemer, as well as the people for whom they offered. Secondly on the
behalf of the Cap. 9.9. cap. 10.4.
sacrifice, which being but only the flesh and blood of goats and calves,
could not possible cleanse the souls of men from sin, nor pacify Gods wrath
against them. Thirdly on the behalf of the Cap. 7.19. cap. 10.1.2.11.
action of offering, which being so often repeated, was manifestly proved of
small or no force, for if it had been effectual, it should have ceased, for
the worshippers once cleansed have no more conscience of sin.

Haueing thus proved the insufficie^cie of the Leuiticall priesthood, and
sacrifices to the effects before mentioned; he Cap. 7. from the 11. verse.
infers the necessity of another priesthood, and sacrifice, which should
work the consummation, that is, the universal redemption of all mankind from
all sin, and the opening the gates of the heavenly kingdom: And shows
this priest to be our Savior Christ, and his passion to be the consummating
sacrifice, declaring that in all the respects before mentioned, wherein the
leuiticall priesthood was defective, this is most perfect. Cap. 7.26.
His person being most innocent, impolluted, separated from sinners, and made
higher then the heavens. Cap. 9.12. cap. 10.10.
His sacrifice not the flesh and blood of beasts: but his own body and blood*
and the Cap. 9.25.28 cap. 10.10.12,
action of sacrificing, or offering but once performed or done, being so
effectual that it needed not to be repeated any oftener.

This being the principal intent, and purpose of S. Paul in this dispute of
our Saviors priesthood, and sacrifice (as will evidently appear to all that
read him with indifferency and atte^tion) neither his words, nor meaning can
with truth, and reason be urged against the sacrifice of the Mass, or any
other sacrifice not supposed, or pretended to be sufficient of it self for the
clea^sing of sin, and redeeming of man from the same, whereas against such a
sacrifice his reasons are invincible, and would conclude as effectually
against the sacrifice of the Mass, if it were maintained to be a propitiation
of men's sins absolutely of it self (without respect or dependence of the
sacrifice of the cross) as they do against the leuiticall sacrifices, falsely
maintained by the Jews to have been such. But because no Catholic Christian
ever dreamed, that the sacrifice of the Mass should be such a consummating,
redeeming, and independent sacrifice, as the Apostre here speaks of, and as
the misbeleeuing Jews esteemed theirs to be, the Apostles discourse makes no
more against it, then it does against the sacrifices of Moises law, even in
those very times, when they were appointed by God himself to be used, as
shall by and by be clearly deduced.

In the mean while it is to be noted, that there are two sorts of sacrifice (I
speak only in respect of their efficacy, for in other respects there are
diverse sorts:) the one absolute and indepe^de^t, having effect and efficacy of
it self, without respect or dependence of any other, and may be called
co^summatiue or redemptiue: the other respective and dependent, which has not
efficacy of it self to remit sins, or of it proper institution, but from
another and may be called applicatiue, because it applies the efficacy, and
valor of another to such effects, as it is ordained unto. Amongst all the
sacrifices that ever were, either in the law of nature, of Moses, or of Jesus
Christ, that only of the cross is of the first kind; all the rest (yea that
of the Mass) are of the second sort. For all true Christians did, and do
believe and confess, that the holy sacrifice of the Mass has the whole
efficacy, and virtue, which it has, as it is propitiatory, from the
sacrifice of the cross. And in this respect depends no less thereupon, then
the Jews sacrifices did: though in respect of the perfection as well of the
chief priest, as of the host or thing offered (both being our Savior Christ
himself) and consequently of the greater virtue it has, to apply unto us
the merits of Christ his passion, this does incomparably exceed thothers, as
S. Chrisostom before cited does evidently teach. Supra n. 17.


This distinction of an absolute, independent, redeeming, or consummating
sacrifice, and of a respective, dependent, and applying sacrifice, our
adversaries must necessarily confess, and acknowledge to be good and
allowable, malgree all their malice against the sacrifice of the Mass: unless
they will either wholly exclude all the sacrifices of the old law, from the
number and nature of true sacrifices, or say they were redeeming and
independent sacrifices, neither of which extremes they will dare to avouch.

14. This doctrine therefore of these two diverse sorts of sacrifice being
necessarily allowed it will easelie be showed, that the same arguments, that
our adversaries make out of the Epistle of S. Paul, against the sacrifice of
the Mass, have the same force against the Leuiticall sacrifices, and if they
conclude that to be superstitious, and idolatricall, they will conclude the
same of these, even for the time they were approved by God, and therefore ought
not only now to cease, but never to have been instituted, or practiced. And
farther, that all the reasons, that prove the sacrifices of the Leuiticall law
to have been good and holy, notwithstanding the necessity and efficacy of
the sacrifice of the cross, do prove the very same of that of the Mass.
This difference only being, that they prefigurating Christ's passion as going
before it, are now necessarily ceased: This commemorating or renewing the
memory of the same as coming after it, being to continue so long as the new
testament, (which is established and dedicated in it, our Savior saying. Math
26.28
This is my blood of the new testament,) shall last; which shall be to the worlds
end.

Hebr. cap. 10.14.18.
The doctrine of S. Paul in this epistle cannot otherwise be urged against the
sacrifice of the Mass: then, for that by one only oblation once offered, the
high priest of the new testament Christ Jesus having consummated for ever the
sanctified: there can remain no more sacrifice for sin, because the
worshippers once clea^sed, they have no conscience of sin any more.

Cap. 10.2.
But all this may in the same manner be urged, against the sacrifices of the old
law, as it is against the Mass, and proves as much against the one, as against
the other. For this self same one only sacrifice once offered upon the cross,
by Christ Jesus the high priest of the new testament, was offered as well for
the sins committed under the Leuiticall law, as for those that were
committed since the abolishing of the same, Hebr. 9 15.
S. Paul expreslie saying, that our Savior died for the preuarications, which
were under the former law. And our adversaries dare not deny, but that all the
sins remitted since the beginning of the world, have been remitted by virtue
of this one only sacrifice upon the cross; and not only that, but that this
one sacrifice is the consummation of all sanctity given to men, and all
worship given to God by all the former sacrifices. If therefore the argument
before alleged, prove the sacrifice of the Mass to be superstitious or none
at all, it will also prove the same of all those sacrifices, that have been
since the beginning of the world. And the self same reason that makes the
sacrifices of the law of nature, and Moises (being not only true sacrifices,
but propitiatory in their degree, even for those sins that were to be taken
away by the sacrifice of the cross) to be good and lawful (notwithstanding
that the consummation of those worshippers was to be made, by that one only
sacrifice of the cross) does prove the same of the sacrifice of the Mass.

If it be said that the sacrifice of the cross, whereby the consu^mation is
wrought, being not yet offered, there might be diverse just reasons for the
institution and use of other sacrifices, such as were in the law of nature, and
of Moises: But that sacrifice being now finished, all those reasons seem to
cease, and consequently all sacrifices to be abolished: It is impertinent; For
either those reasons, making for the institution of other sacrifices in the
former laws, were repugnant to the virtue, and efficacy of the consummating
sacrifice of the cross, or they were not. If they were, they could not
justify the institution and use of any such sacrifices. If they were not (as
manifestly they were not) the same may be said of the sacrifice of the Mass,
which has no more repugnance with the sacrifice of the cross, then those
other sacrifices had. For that accidentarie circumstance of time, by reason
whereof the old sacrifices went before the all consummating sacrifice of the
cross, and the sacrifice of the Mass comes after it, makes no such
difference between them, that by reason thereof the one may be good and lawful,
and the other unlawful: because the virtue and efficacy of the sacrifice of the
cross, did reach to all the time as well going before it, as following after
it: It being that sacrifice, wherein was offered the la^be, which in Gods
preordinatio^ was slain before the beginning of the world, and in respect and
regard whereof all sacrifices were acceptable to God, as being founded in the
valor and merit thereof.

25. If it be demanded, why then are these sacrifices abolished and taken
away, and another instituted, if there be no difference between them, by
reason of that circumstance of time, they going before the consummating
sacrifice, the other following after? I answer they are not abolished for any
repugnance, that a true and propitiatory sacrifice (whether it go before or
follow after) has with the only redeeming sacrifice of the cross. For by
that reason they should not only have ceased, but should never have been
instituted, as is showed before. But they are abolished for two reasons amongst
others. First they were figures, and shadows of that which was to come, as is
confessed of all Christians, and therefore the truth whereof they were shadows
appearing, it was necessary they should cease, and vanish away.

Secondly because of their grossenes and imperfection, which fitted not the
state of the new testament, for which God of his infinite goodness, and wisdom
had provided better promises, and therefore instituted a sacrifice for this
time, in substance the very same with that upon the cross, though in manner
and external form different from it. Which albeit in perfection and
excellency, it does as far exceed the sacrifices of the former laws, as
the body and blood of Christ our Savior does exceed that of calves and
goats, yet has it some resemblance with them in two other respects.

The One, that as those sacrifices had relation to the sacrifice of the cross,
and depended thereupon in regard of their effect; so does also the sacrifice of
the Mass. For it is not an absolute and independent sacrifice, as that was
upon the cross, neither does it redeem us from sin, nor purchase unto us
grace, otherways then by applying unto us the fruit, valor, and effect of
the bloody sacrifice upon the cross; as also the other sacrifices of the
former laws did in a certain degree, but not in such perfect and ample
manner, nor ex opere operato, or of work it self as this does.

The Other, as they did prefigurate, or foreshew the sacrifice of the cross as
going before it: so this does renew the memory, of the same being now past, as
S. Paul testifies, saying. So often as you shall eat this bread, 1. Corinthians.
11
and drink this cupp, you shall declare the death of our Lord.

Farther it is to be observed, that if our adversaries will take away the
sacrifice of the Mass, prete^ding that it does derogate from the merit,
dignity, and sufficiency of Christ's passion, of which the scripture says,
that it alone has consummatet all the sanctified: they must also for the same
reason take away the sacraments of the Eucharist, and of baptism, and which
is more, even their justifying faith. For all these do no less derogate, from
the perfect consummation of our redemption, wrought by the sacrifice of the
cross (being necessary for the effectual applying of the merit, valor, and
effect thereof unto us) then does the sacrifice of the Mass. For if they will
that every mean, whereby the merit of Christ's passion is applied unto us,
though it have this very applicatiue power from the passion of Christ, does
derogate from the sufficiency thereof, then must they necessarily say, that
the aforesaid sacraments, and also faith it self do derogate from it, not
otherways profiting us then by applying unto us, those graces and blessings,
which Christ by his passion merited for us. But of the contrary part, if they
will admit some other mean, distinct from Christ's passion, to apply unto us
the merits thereof without derogating from it (as all Christians do and must)
then have they no reason at all, for that respect, to deny the sacrifice of
the Mass.

26. And that the careful reader may see, that by this doctrine of our
adversaries against the sacrifice of the church, is erected that abomination of
desolatio^, whereupon follows the taking away of the daily sacrifice,
fortold by the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 12.11.
he may observe with detestation, that nothing in Atheism it self can be more
impious, then by the triu^phant cross of Christ and his bitter passion, the
firm and immouable rock of all true religious worship, to take away from the
new law that only worship of sacrifice, which ever even by the light of
nature, has been with all true worshippers properly due, to the eternal
power of Gods majesty.

Thus is not only proved a truly sacrificing priesthood, Conclusion.
to be in the church of Christ, but also are satisfied the cheifest objections
against it, whereupon it clearelie follows, that the pretended Bishops that
succeeded M. Parker, and the rest promoted with him until this day, (of whom
the question is in this chapter) being no true priests, could be no true
Bishops, as is before irreproouablie showed, and therefore have such an
essential defect in their calling, more the the others had, that though their
predecessors had been true Bishops, as they were not, yet these could be none.

But now to conclude them all in one, and the same damnation: I say, that
though every one of the arguments brought here against the Bishops of England,
since Cranmers fall into heresy, should not demonstrate them not to be lawful
Bishops and Pastors, yet all of them together cannot but make a clear
demo^stration thereof, which may be framed in this sort. 27. Those Bishops whose
calling and consecration is justly, and with good reason doubted to be
essentiallie defective, and they therefore to be no Bishops, but mere usurpers
of that title, are euide^tlie no lawful and canonical Bishops. But such are
all the protestant Bishops in England, since Cranmers revolt, and apostacy
from the Catholic Roman faith and religion.

Therefore are they evidently no lawful, and canonical Bi^hops.

The first proposition of this argument is evidently proved diverse ways.

First by this example. No civil Magistrate, be he judge, lieutenant,
Ambassador, or other officer whatsoever, who is justly and upon good reason
doubted to have no such authority, but is suspected upon good ground to be a
counterfeite, usurper, and deceiuer, is so evidently no lawful magistrate,
that whosoever should obey him in his pretended office, should thereby commit an
act of rebellion against his sovereign, who sends no magistrates to his
subjects, but with clear and undoubted warrant. For to a lawful magistrate is
not only required, that the have authority, but also that he have a clear
and evident constat or proof that he has authority. Therefore much more are
they no lawful Bishops, or ecclesiastical magistrate, Who are in like manner
doubted to have no such authority, and power: I say much more: because as the
harm, and inconvenience which would follow of such abuses in the
Ecclesiastical government, is far greater, and less remediable, then that
which might arise by the same in the temporal state, so is the provision to
avoid it greater, and more easy, by his providence who is sovereign govern
our thereof.

28. Secondly, the magistrates in all common wealths, and kingdoms, are
always so evidently, and clearelie known to be such, that no reasonable doubt
may be made of their power and co^missio^. And it is necessary it should be
so. For otherways whatsoever they should do in their office, should be
doubtful and uncertain, and co^sequentlie would bring all things to strife
and confusion, then which nothing can be more pernicious. Therefore those
magistrates, that are justly and reasonably doubted to be none at all, cannot
be any lawful magistrates. This reason holds a fortiori in Bishops, who are
Ecclesiastical magistrates and governors. And so the first proposition of the
former argument remains evidently proved: to wit, that those Bishops whose
calling is justly doubted to be essentiallie defective, and they therefore to
be no Bishops but mere usurpers, are evidently no lawful Bishops.

The second proposition is evident by that, which has hitherto been said,
against the calling of our English Bishops, and may cleerelie be concluded in
this manner. The calling of those Bishops is justly doubted to be essentiallie
defective, which is manifestly doubtful both on the part of the callers,
called, and calling; but such are the Bishops in England, as appears before.
ergo.

Secondly their calling is justly doubted to be essentiallie defective; (that
is, to be none at all) for the proof of the sufficie^cie whereof nothing can be
said, that may not as truly be alleged for their calling, who are evidently
and confessedlie known to be no Bishops, as the Arians, Nouatians, Nestorians,
Pelagia^s, and the rest of the old condemned heretics. But such is the
calling of the Bishops in England. ergo.

Thirdly their calling in justly doubted to be essentiallie defective, which
has no instance or example of the like, in the whole Christian church, for
above 1500. years after Christ.

But such is the calling of the Bishops in England. ergo. And so remains
proved the second proposition of the former argument, and co^sequentlie the
conclusion must necessarily be true; to wit that the Bishops of England
descended from Cranmer since his revolt from the Catholic church, are
evidently no lawful Bishops.

29. Whereupon I farther infer, that the pretended church of England is no
true church, and consequently the faith and religion thereof to be no true
faith and religion.

For where there are no true Pastors and Bishops, there can be no true church,
as all our adversaries confess, and it is of itself evident, the church (as
S. Cyprian says) being in the Bishop, Epist. ad Flore.
and the Bishop in the church, or otherwise the church is the flock united
with the Pastor, and Pastor with the flock: and where there is no true church,
there can be no true faith and religion; the true church being the house of
God, Ad Timoth.
the pillar and ground of truth, (as S. Paul testifies) and our adversaries
deny not. Now where there is no true faith, how can there be any means of
salvation? seeing that without faith it is impossible to please God, as
teaches expreslie S. Paul. Ad Hebr. 11.6.


Mark well (I beseech thee judicious reader) this clear deduction, and if
thou be a Protestant, and professor of the English religion, see which may
thou can avoid it with the contentment, and satisfaction of thine own
conscience.

And if thou find the mean to do it, set down thy conceptions clearlie, and
without wilful wrangling, and thou shall (God willing) have a satisfying
reply. If thou can not, (as if thou lay aside wilful obstinacy, which
hinders the sight of all truth, I think thou can not) return quickly to
the unity of Gods Catholic church, and be not so grossly and inexecusablie
deceived, as to think to find thy salvation in that congregation, which has
no true Pastors, and consequently neither true church, true faith, nor true
religion.

The eightteenth Chapter. That neither the present superintendets in England
have, nor their Protestant predecessors ever had any lawful Episcopal
Jurisdiction.
1. HAVING thus far showed the pretended Bishops in England, promoted to
bishoprikes since Cranmers reuoult from the unity of the Catholic Roman
church, and lapse into heresy in Edward the 6. his reign, to have wanted the
true power of order, it now remains to show, that they want also the lawful
power of jurisdiction; whence it will follow, that they have nothing belonging
no true Bishops, saving the possession of the temporal livings, and the bare
name of Bishops. For the whole ecclesiastical power being divided into the
power of order, and jurisdiction, as M. Field, Field of the church. l. 3. c.
29. Carleton of jurisdiction page 7.
and M. Carleton with all Catholics truly confess, if they be found to want
both, they can have nothing pertaining to true Bishops.

That the power of jurisdiction is necessarily required, to the lawful
calling of ecclesiastical ministers, and pastors of Gods church, is without
all controversy granted, and confessed of all parties, as well protestants as
Catholics: and the question here is only, whether our English Intendents
have any such lawful jurisdiction or no. Which question that we may dispute
more clearlie, and fitly for the capacity of every one, it will be necessary
briefly to declare, both what jurisdiction is in general, what parts it has,
and of what kind of jurisdiction we are here to treat.

It is first therefore to be understood, What jurisdiction is.
that though this word (jurisdiction) sounds only delivery of the law, or
denouncing of judgment, or sentence in matters of justice, yet is it both here,
and ordinarily every where taken for the power it self that one man has over
others, not only in matter of law and justice, but in all other manner of
rule, government, or dominion: so that in this large signification parents may
be said to have jurisdiction over their children, masters over their servants,
Kings and sovereign Lords over their subjects and vassalls, and Bishops or
pastors over their flock and charge.

Secondly it is to be understood, that jurisdiction in the first and proper
signification is two fold, Spiritual, which is also called ecclesiastical, to
which belongs the government, charge, disposition, and administration of all
those Spiritual helps and means, which our Savior Christ has left in his
church, for the farthering of man to his eternal salvation, as are Gods holy
word, and his Sacraments, and those actions and things that belong thereunto,
whereof S. Paul speaks when he says. Let a man so esteem us as ministers of
Christ, 1. Corinthians. 4.1.
and dispensers of the mysteries of God: and temporal or seculer, which
governs and commands in matters pertaining to men's temporal weal, and
prosperity; as to minister justice in causes civil and criminal, and to
command that which is just and honest in all occasions, and occurrences of the
common wealths, and to forbid the contrary. Either of these kinds of
jurisdiction may be yet farther divided, into directive, and coactiue, or
coercitiue. The directive makes laws, and gives precepts guiding men to that
end, for the attaining whereof the jurisdiction is ordained, which, if it be
spiritual, is life everlasting: if temporal, is the peace and prosperity of
the common wealth, and of every particular person as member of the same. The
coercitiue compels men by penalties, and punishments, to the obseruaunce
as well of the same laws and constitutions, as also of those prescribed by God
and nature, and therefore is well termed coercitiue.

Thirdly it is to be understood, (that leaving apart the temporal, or secular
jurisdiction, as not pertaining to our purpose) we speak here only of
spiritual, or Ecclesiastical, which either administrateth matters immediately
pertaining to the soul, and conscience, without respect to the external or
contentious court, as to preach and minister sacraments, and therefore is called
of some internal; or examineth, hears, and determines, in the external and
contentious court, such cases and causes, as arise amongst men, by the
transgressions of the prescripts, and prohibitions of the Ecclesiastical
superior, and what other causes else are known to belong to the
Ecclesiastical tribunal, and this is called also by some external.

That the spiritual jurisdiction has all these parts or members, not only in
the Catholic, but also in the protestants doctrine, it is evident by their
own practices. For besides their preaching and ministering sacraments, which
appertains to the internal jurisdiction, they have their external and
contentious courts, where by Ecclesiastical power they judge, try, and
determine, without recourse to the temporal court, very many causes, and
especially such as arise by the undue ministering of the sacraments, or other
holy actions: in which cases they exercise both direrectiue, and coercitiue
jurisdiction. I have seen a printed book entitled thus.

Articles to be inquired of within the diocese of Chichester. In the second
general visitation of the R.d father in God, Lancelot Bishop of Chichester,
holden in the year 1609. containing 79. Articles, with the form of an oath to
be ministered to the church wardens, and sworn men; which (if it were not
clear otherwise) does show, that they pretend to have all these kinds of
spiritual jurisdiction here mentioned.

This therefore being clear, the question is, The question.
whether our pretended Bishops in England have indeed any such jurisdiction,
as by their practice they pretend to have, or no. And they are proved not to
have any such in this sort.

Of themselves, and as they are men, they have no such jurisdiction, for all
men, as they are men, are equal, and neither subject nor superior one to
another, as is evident, neither have they it from any other (as shall be
proved) therefore have they it not at all.

2. That I may prove that they have no jurisdiction from any other, and with
the same labor refute M. Masons shifts in this point, thou art (judicious
reader) to understand, that he, being driven thereunto by miserable necessity,
patcheth up for their Bishops a jurisdiction of two parts: one whereof he says
they have from Christ himself, Mason fol. 143.
the other from the Prince.

But what part it is, that they receive from the Prince, neither does M. Mason
tell us, nor is it easy to gather either out of his own or his fellows
doctrine. For from the Prince they cannot receive that jurisdiction, which the
Prince has not to give, as is evident: but the Prince has neither that part
of jurisdiction, which is called internal, consisting in the administration of
Gods holy word and sacraments, as the articles of their religion do expreslie
declare.

Neither has he the external coercitiue jurisdiction, Article 37.
consisting principally in inflicting the censure of excommunication,
suspension, and the like. For M. Mason shows out of Tortura Torti, that the
Prince has not this jurisdiction: Tort. tort. page 151. Carleton of iurisdict.
page 9. 10.
Nos Principi censurae potestatem non facimus: says he, that is, we give not
the Prince power of inflicting censures. And M. Carleton says the same in most
express words hereafter cited.

Neither has he the directive jurisdiction, consisting in the power to make
canons and constitutions, for the giuding and directing of ecclesiastical
ministers, in the due ministry of the Sacraments, and of the people to
receive the same, and other actions pertaining to the charge of pastors. For
this is merely a Spiritual power (as the Sacraments, to the due
administration and use whereof, this power appertains, are also Spiritual)
and therefore cannot belong to the Prince, in the Protestants doctrine. We give
(says M. Carleton) all Spiritual power to the church: Page 4. Page 5. 6.
And again. The Spiritual government of the church is committed to Spiritual
governors: as first from Christ to his twelve Apostles: from them to Bishops,
Page 9.
and Pastors, their successors. And yet again. As for Spiritual
jurisdiction of the church, standing in examinations of controversies of faith,
judging of heresies, deposing of heretics, excommunication of notorious and
stubborn offenders, ordination of priests and deacons, institution and
oblation of benefices, and Spiritual cures etc. this we reserve entire to the
church, which Princes cannot give, or take from the church.

And to strenghthen M. Carletons authority with an evident reason. If the
Prince had this Spiritual directive jurisdiction, he should also consequently
have, the compulsiue, or coercitiue of inflicting censures, which proceeds
from directive as necesrily requisite, Tortura Torti. pa. 151.
that it may take effect. But this kind of power the prince has not, as is
already showed out of their own doctrine: Neither therefore has he the other.
What part therefore or kind of jurisdiction, the Bishops and Pastors of Gods
church, can receive from the temporal Prince, even in the Protestants doctrine
I see not: Neither can M. Mason, or any other for him show it. And therefore his
doctrine of a Spiritual jurisdiction (for of Spiritual jurisdiction he
speaks) partly received from the Prince, is evidently false.

For though the prince have power to make laws, whereby the contumacious, and
obstinate contemners of ecclesiastical canons and censures, may be by
corporal penalties compelled, to the due observance of the just, and
profitable constitutions of their lawful pastors (which power both M. Mason,
and M. Carleton call external coercitiue jurisdiction) yet is this power so
far from being soueraignly above that of the church, or that the churches
judgments depend thereupon, that it is evidently subordinate thereunto, and
therefore does not intermeddle with any such delinquent, till the Spiritual
judge has declared him incorrigible by ecclesiastical means, and therefore
leaves him in the hands of the temporal magistrate, to proceed with him
according to the temporal laws, enacted for such offenders.

And for the avoiding of all cauills, and intermedling with questions not
pertaining to the present purpose, I would have it noted, that I speak here of
cases merely Spiritual or ecclesiastical, such as M. Carleton in his words
last cited says, are so entirely reserved to the church, that the Prince can
neither give, nor take from it the judgment thereof.

Again, whatsoever this external coercitiue power is, which the Prince has
in either of these, or other causes pertaining to the ecclesiastical, yet is
it not any such as he gives, or communicates to the Bishops, and Pastors of
the church (who neither have nor pretend to have any such power) but to his
civil and temporal magistrates. And therefore whatsoever this power is, it is
wholly impertinent to M. Masons purpose, which is to show that Bishops have
some part of their jurisdiction, necessary for the exercise of their episcopal
power, from the Prince. This says M. Mason page 113.


He may peradventure say, that the Prince gives them license, to exercise
their functions freely within his territories, and therefore may in some sense
be said, to give then jurisdiction in the same. But this is too too idle to be
imagined. For neither is it in the Princes lawful power to deny, or take away
thie leave, or liberty from the preachers, and Pastors of Gods church, as is
evident in all doctrine: Neither is this leave necessary for the lawful
exercise and execution of episcopal power, as appears by the first planting
of Christianity in the world, which was effected without it, yea contrary to
the decrees, and ordinances of the temporal Princes, And our new reformers,
who pretend to preach Gods word, and minister his Sacraments, do not expect the
leave of the temporal Prince, but think they may lawfully do it without their
leave, in case they will not give it, as we see by daily experience. No part
therefore or parcel of Spiritual jurisdiction, have the Bishops and Pastors of
Gods church from the Prince, even in our adversaries own doctrine.

And here before I come to show, that our English Intendents have as little
jurisdiction from Christ, as they have from the Prince, and consequently that
they have none at all: I will put the reader in mind of a most unchristian, and
sacrilegious kind of dealing in our English Prelates, both with God and their
Prince.

First year of Elizabeth.
3. First, they gave their consents, if not their counsels, for the establishing
of an oath, whereby the queen was sworn, to be supreme governor of her
dominations in all things, or causes, as well spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as
temporal; the first refusal whereof is praemunire, the second high treason; And
also for the enacting of a statute, whereby all such jurisdictions, privileges,
superiorities, and preheminences spiritual, as by any spiritual power has
hitherto been, or lawfully may be used, for the visitation of the
Ecclesiastical state and persons, and for reformation, order, and correction
of the same, and of all manner errors, heresies, scismes, abuses, offenses,
contempts, and enemities are for ever united to the crown of England. By which
statute the latitude, or extent of the power ascribed to the queen in the oath
of supremacy, is in part declared, which oath is declared by the queens
injunctions, to give unto the same authority, that king Henry the 8.
challenged in the 26. year of his reign, in a statute of this tenor, Anno 26.
Fl. 8. c. 1.
as it is abridged by M. Poulton. The King shall be taken, and reputed the only
supreme head in earth of the church of England, and shall have power to
redress all errors, heresies, and abuses in the same.

Secondly, they have all of them taken the aforesaid oath, and therefore have
by their proper fact approved it as good and lawful, whereby not only the
Prince has been moved to exact the same of all her subjects, as both lawful
of it self, and of right due unto her sovereignty, but many have been for
the same reason moved, to take the same oath as lawful.

All this notwithstanding, do they in printed books teach, that Princes have
no such spiritual authority, power, or jurisdiction, as by the aforesaid
oath, and statute is ascribed unto them. And therefore have they either by their
sacrilegious perjury, not only themselves highly offended God, but also
induced their sovereign, and many of her subjects into the same offense, or
else by their false doctrine do they manifestly detract, from the lawful power
of their Prince and sovereign. Whether of these two extremes they will make
choice to confess, I know not, but that they must necessarily be guilty of
the one, I shall easelie prove, and every indifferent man will easily see,
their fault to be sacrilegious perjury, joined with pernicious, flattery of
the Prince. But let us see their doctrine, that thereby we may know how well it
agrees with their oath.

The whole clergy of both provinces (in their article agreed upon, in the
conuacatien holden at London the year 1561. and are of principal authority
in their new church) say thus. We give not to our Princes, the ministering
either of Gods word, or sa^raments.

But I would know, why they give not to the Princes this ministry: Is it
because they have not power and authority requisite for it? If it be so, why
do they then swear, that they are supreme heads, and governors in all
spiritual things or causes? For supreme governors have power to do by
themselves all actions, under or within their government, and which they can
give power to others to do: As our Savior Christ being supreme head, and
governor of his church, had power to do by himself all those things, which he
gave power to others to do. So likewise sovereign Princes have the like power
in all temporal causes within their dominions. Or is it because this function
is not worthy of their royal dignity? Indeed M. Mason seems to insinuate
such an answer. Page 143.
For giving a reason, why our Princes did never practice the inflicting of
Ecclesiastical censure, he says, that it is because regal jurisdiction
consists not in a ministerial power, but in a supreme commanding
authority. But all Christian ears will abhor to hear such a reason, seeing
our Savior Christ the king of kings did exercise this ministry, of the word
of God and his sacraments, as pertaining directly to his office and function.
The doctrine therefore of this article can no more stand with the oath of
supremacy, then can these two propositions accord together. The Prince is
supreme head and governor of all things, and causes spiritual: And, The
Prince is not supreme head, and governor of all things or causes spiritual.
The former is the same with the oath; the latter is the same, or equivalent
with the article: and are directly contradictorie the one to the other, and
therefore one of them necessarily false. The same contrariety between the said
oath, and their doctrine, is showed out of Tortura Torti expressly saying. We
give not to the Prince power to inflict censures. Page 151.
Therefore (do I infer) do you not give to the Prince, supreme power in all
Spiritual things and causes, as you swear. This saying of this author M.
Mason Mason page 143.
cites and approoueth.

But yet this is more plain out of M. Carleton, who has written a whole book
of this subject, wherein he has these express sayings. In his admonition to
the reader.
The Fathers write for the Spiritual jurisdiction of the church above Princes,
which we never denied. Why do you swear the^, that the Prince is supreme
head, and governor of the church in all things, and causes Spiritual? how can
the church have Spiritual jurisdiction above the Prince, and yet the Prince be
supreme head of the church, or governor of all Spiritual things? If these be
not contradictions there are none at all to be found. Again he says. We give
all Spiritual power to the church. And yet again. Page 4. Page 5. 6.
The Spiritual government of the church is committed to Spiritual governors,
as first from Chrsst to his twelve Apostles: from them to Bishops and Pastors
their successors. How then can you without perjury swear, that the Prince
being neither Bishop, nor Postor, is supreme governor in all things
Spiritual? And yet more directly against the oath, and the statute, declaring
the latitude of the power, given to the Prince in the oath before mentioned, he
says thus. As for Spiritual jurisdiction of the church, standing in
examinations of controversies of faith, judging of heresies, deposing of
heretics: excommunication of notorious and stubborn offenders, ordination of
priests and deacons, institution and collation of benefices, and Spiritual
cures etc. This we reserve entire to the church, which Princes cannot give, nor
take from the chucrh. The Prince does not meddle with the keys which God has
given to the church: Says M. Mason page 113.
How this doctrine (which is true, though it be not the whole truth) can accord
with the oath and statute mentioned, which gives all this power to the Prince,
passes my capacity to conceive. Infinite other proofs of the contrariety of
their doctrine, with the oath which they have sworn, might be brought: but
till I see how they will reconcile, and satisfy these, I will spare farther
labor.

5. Both M. Carleton and M. Mason mention more then once, Vhi supra and M.
Mason pa. 143.
an external coercitiue ecclesiastical jurisdiction, which supreamly (as they
say) belongs to the prince; whereby if they intend to satisfy the before
mentioned difficulty, and to reconcile their doctrine with their oath, they are
far short of their purpose. For first this jurisdiction is so far from
being any supreme ecclesiastical jurisdiction that it is no way
ecclesiastical, or Spiritual, not reaching to any Spiritual thing at all,
but resting in the mere temporal, to wit the goods of nature, or fortune: as
are life, liberty, lands, or goods, whereof the prince has power to deprive,
the declared obstinate contemners of the ecclesiastical ordinances, and
censures, but not to judge of their cause or offense, as appears by their
former doctrine. Now they know (if they know any thing in true Philosophy)
that the nature, or quality of every power is measured by the object or thing,
wherabout it is conversant, or whereunto it reaches; so that this external
coercitiue power of the prince, reaching only to things temporal (for it
touches no kind of Spiritual, or ecclesiastical thing, function, or action,
as by M. Carletons doctrine before related is manifest) cannot by any means be
Spiritual, or ecclesiastical, and much less can it be supreme in that kin^:
Especially seeing it can neither reuerse, nor control the Ecclesiastical
judgment but only help to accomplish the same, by inflicting of temporal
penalties where the ecclesiastical ce^sures are contemned: Neither can it
euoque unto it, the causes directly pertaining to the Spiritual court, or
tribunal, but does only receive the delinquents already judged thereby, to
proceed with them according to the rigor of the themporall law.

Secondly, though this jurisdiction were an ecclesiastical power (which is
evidently false) yet would it not serve to excuse them from sacrilegious
perjury, when they swear, that the prince is supreme governor in all things,
and causes Spiritual and that he has all jurisdiction and superiority
Spiritual that by any Spiritual power has hitherto or may lawfully be used,
as the statut before mentioned expressly declares.

For there is as great falsitie in this oath and statute (though the coercitiue
jurisdiction were granted to be Spiritual) as there would be in that, whereby
any one should swear, that King James is sovereign lord over all the whole
world. For as this oath is evidently false, notwithstanding that his majesty be
truly sovereign lord of some part of the world, because he is not sovereign
over the whole, so is also that whereby it is sworn, that the prince is
supreme governor of all things, and causes Spiritual, though it were true,
that he had the coercitiue Spiritual, jurisdiction. And this is true not only
in it self, but even in the doctrine of our English Protestants, who) as we
have seen) teach, that there are many things, wherein the prince has no power,
or jurisdiction nor can have any.

Hence it is evident, first how unlawful, even in the doctrine of the
Protestants, themselves, the oath of supremacy is, being a manifest breach, of
the second commandment of the first table, as not only taking the name of God
in vain, as it happens in idle, and not necessary oaths though true, but
also calling God to witness, and to testify a thing which they see and say to
be evidently falls then which, can hardly be any greater offense committed by
man.

Secondly it is evident how unjustly the Bishops, Heath, Bo^ner, White, and the
rest of their brethren, were deprived of their Bishoprics in Q. Elizabeth's
time, for refusal of the same unlawful oath: and consequently, how manifest
intruders they were, that were thrust into their places upon the same refusal,
whereof we have spoken at large before.

Thirdly, how uncertain, and dangerous guides of souls these new prelates
are, that by their public suffrage in parliament first, and then by their own
personal fact in swearing, have approved an oath, which by their auerred and
auowed doctrine is evidently false.

6. The reason also of this so shameless, and wicked doubling, in a matter of so
great moment, is worthy to be observed. For which purpose it is to be
understood, that the new intendents of the new church and gospel, seeing that
the oath, and statute of supremacy did discharge them of all subjection, and
obedience to the church, and Bishop of Rome their true and lawful pastor, and
thereby gave them liberty to bring into the Realm, their new doctrine and
heresy, which without their separation from the unity of Gods church, and
casting of the yoke of obedience to their supreme pastor, they saw well they
could never effect, they were willing, and ready not only to give way unto it,
and to set it forward with their suffrages, but also to their own perpetual
disgrace, and dishonor to swear thereunto themselves; I say to their own
disgrace: For the temporal lords being by express act of parliament
privileged, and exempted from taking the oath, they (the pretended Bishops I
mean) did basely subject themselves thereunto, whereas the freedom, and
privileges of the lords Spiritual were always equal, if not greater then
those of the temporal lords. But they that had already broken league with God,
and his church, for the setting forward of their own libertine fancies, no
marvel though they made no difficulty, to morgage their honor and
reputation, for the gaining of their Bishoprics. Having done this, and yet
finding both by the little light of natural reason, that dark heresy had left
vnextinguished in them, and also by the unanswerable arguments, of their
Catholic adversaries at home, together with the disauow of their most
renowned reformed brethren abroad, as Calvin, Centurists, Chemnitius, and
others, that their fact was no way to be justified, no nor colored; they to
make their double disloialtie to God and his church, their prince and country,
known to all the world, publish in their printed books, that they mean
nothing less, then to give to the prince supreme power, and jurisdiction in
all things and causes Spiritual, which notwithstanding they swear unto in
most express terms. For when they come to explicate, what supreme
Spiritual; or ecclesiastical power the prince has, they comprehend it all in
an external coercitiue power, by inflicting temporal penalties, which power
is as much Spiritual, as oxen, horses, houses, lands, and man's life or
liberty (to which things only this power does reach, as is already noted) may
be called Spiritual, so that they swear one thing, and teach the contrary.
Now having noted this by the way, I will return to my former purpose, and
prove, that our Protestant prelates have as little jurisdiction from Christ, as
they have from the prince, and consequently that they have none at all.

6. The jurisdiction, which they pretend to receive immediately from Christ,
they say they receive by the means of their episcopal consecration, Mason
page 145.
as M. Mason expressly teaches, and they must all say the same, having no
other means whereby they may receive any jurisdiction. But our Protestant
prelates have no true episcopal consecration, as is already largely proved.
Therefore have they not, Cap. 12.
nor can they have any jurisdiction from Christ. This argument (supposing the
proofs of the nullity of their consecration to be effectual, as till they be
effectually answered, which never will be, they are to be esteemed) is
unanswerable as well in it self, as in their own doctrine, which testifies,
that they have no other jurisdiction from Christ, but that which they receive
by their episcopal consecration.

But I will (for the more clear euicting of my purpose against them) suppose,
contrary to the proved truth, that their consecration is good and canonical,
and yet will I show, that they cannot have any jurisdiction from Christ. For
the more easy and clear proof whereof, one or two grounds are to be laid
before.

First that the power of order, which is given by consecration is so distinct
from the power of jurisdiction, that the one may be without the other. This is
manifest by the use of excommunication, suspension, deposition, and other
censures (common as well with the Protestants as Catholics) which though they
take away the jurisdiction from the parties, upon whom they are inflicted, and
thereby make all the exercise of the power of order in them to be unlawful, yet
do they leave entire the power of order, as M Mason often shows, and they
must all confess that allow the power of excommunication. Hence it is evident,
that the power of jurisdiction cannot rightly be inferred, from the proof of
the power of order, because this may be without that.

Secondly no crime does either more justly, or evidently draw with it the
censure of excommunication, and consequently the loss and deprivation of
jurisdiction, then heresy or apostacy. For heretics are excommunicate by
our Saviors and the Apostles own mouths, Math. 18.17 Tit. 3.10.
who say he that will not hear the church let him be as a publican and
heathen: and. Fly a man that is an heretic, after the first and second
admonition. Which is also so evident by the perpetual practice, of the most
ancient church, that it would be imprudencie to prove it.

Thirdly it is a received principle, and denied of none of common sense, that
no man can give to another that, which he has not himself; as for example, he
that has not a groate cannot give a groate to another. Evident therefore it is,
that he that has not jurisdiction himself, cannot possibly give it to
another.

Out of these evident and received grounds, I conclude by as evident deduction,
that our new Intendents in England have no episcopal jurisdiction: though (as
I said) it should be granted against the truth, that they were truly
consecrated. Some may peradventure think, that I will make ruin argument in
this sort.

The pretended Bishops in England are condemned heretics.

But all condemned heretics are excommunicated and thereby deprived of all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Therefore our pretended Bishops in England are
excommunicated, and deprived of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. This argument
indeed is clear, and every proposition thereof most true, yet because my
adversaries will wrangle upon the first proposition, and deny themselves to be
heretics, and here I intend not to enter any tedious dispute with them, Cap.
11. n. 7.
especially having convinced the same against the^ already, by four several
arguments, which they can neither solue nor retort, I will here use an argument
more free from all cavil, and no less effectual against them in this sort.

If either the Protestant Prelates, or the Bishops of the Roman church; from
whom they receive their consecration, be heretics, the Protestants can have
no episcopal jurisdiction.

But either the Protestant Prelates, or the Bishops of the Roman church are
heretics? Therefore can the Protestant Prelates have no episcopal
jurisdiction.

The first proposition is clear by the grounds before mentioned, and is
evidently deduced in this sort. If the Bishops of the Roman church, from whom
our new intendents pretend to receive their consecration (as we have seen in
this whole treatise) and consequently their episcopal jurisdiction, which
they say they receive with their consecration, were heretics, they were
excommunicate, and thereby did they loose their jurisdiction, which having lost,
they could not give it to their Protestant successors, and if the Protestant
intendents were heretics, they could receive no jurisdiction for the same
reason: So that the first proposition is clear: the second is without all
debatable controversy; The conclusion follows naturally, and necessarily
of the premises: Therefore the whole argument, where by it is concluded, that
the Protestant intendents have no Episcopal jurisdiction, is evidently clear.

7. And now will I wind up, our whole dispute with our English Protestant
Prelates, in this short and perspicuous argument.

The whole ecclesiastical power of Bishops and pastors consists of the power
of order, and the power of jurisdiction. But the English Protestant Prelates
have neither power of ordor, nor jurisdiction. Therefore have they no part of
ecclesiastical power. The first proposition is clear, and denied of no
English Protestant, the second has been proved by sundry arguments, which
never will have any true, or effectual answer or solution, the conclusion is
necessary, supposing the truth of the premises. And therefore do our English
pretended Bishops remain, proved no Bishops, no nor ecclesiastical persons,
but mere lay men.

The consequences that necessarily follow hereupon are briefly deduced in the
later end of the precedent chap. n. 29. turn back thither and see them.

8. And now for a farewell to M. Mason, I would know of him, how he can justify
the descent, and succession of their Bishops, from those of the Roman church,
who had their jurisdiction from the sea of Rome, ^. Eliza. 1.
without incurring the praemunire; this being a manifest defending, and
acknowledging of the lawful power of the Bishop, and see of Rome in England,
at least for the time past. Whence it farther follows, that if it was ever
lawful, it is, or at least ought to be lawful now, and ever hereafter. For if
the Bishop of Rome ever had any lawful power in England (as doubtless he had,
and M. Mason must needs grant it, unless he will frustrate his whole proof of
their lawful succession, from the Bishops of the Roman church) he had it by
such power, as cannot by temporal laws be impaired, or taken away. M. Mason
therefore is to advise with himself, whether he will quit, and renounce the
proof of their consecration, and vocation, taken from their succession to the
Catholic Bishops, (the only true proof, of the lawful calling of
Ecclesiastical pastors) or standing thereunto, will incur the danger of
praemunire; which, if he should find but equal judges, I think he would not
easily avoid, as neither his directors, or abbertors in this work, whose
penalty in these cases are known, to be like, with that of the principal
offender. He and they may peradventure rely, upon the grace of the prince for
their pardons: which truly I do not envy them, but think they have in some
sort deserved favor, not having committed this transgression altogether
voluntarily, but upon a certain necessity, not finding any other means, to
maintain the calling of their new ministry. Yet I thought good to let them
know, that the world takes notice of such a repugnancie in their ministry,
even with their own parliament laws, that it cannot be maintained without the
transgression of them: which manifestly argues, that either their laws are
unjust, or their ministry unlawful I say either, not because both may not
be, or de facto are not, but because the one is infalliblie inferred, upon the
repugnance found betwixt them.

9. Some may peradventure think, that to the full accomplishment of this
treatise, should be added some proof, of the true calling of the Catholic
pastors, because it is not a sufficient establishment of the truth in this
point, as likewise in none other, to have rejected, and refuted that which is
false, unless the truth be also made manifest. But we are quit of this traueile
by our adversaries themselves, who pleading, that their best right, and title
to episcopal calling, is received from our Bishops of the Roman church, must
necessarily confess, that they have at least sufficient calling, (for it is
otherways altogether impossible, they should derive it unto them) with which
acknowledgment we are content for this time, especially having already
justified the same calling in that point of a sacrificing power, and
priesthood, which is the chief, or only thing they carpe at in the same. And
though this justification of the calling of the Catholic Bishops, and
pastors, might be sufficient, yet will I add farther and above, this brief
argument.

10. The Bishops of the Catholic Roman church have the same calling, which
the Apostles delivered unto their immediate successors. But they delivered to
their successors the true, and lawful calling. Therefore the Bishops of the
Catholic Roman church have the true, and lawful calling.

The first proposition (which being made good the whole argument is evident) is
thus proved. The Bishops of the Catholic Roman church receive their
calling, by not interrupted succession from the Apostles: which our adversaries
can with no more reason deny, then they can deny, that the same sun, which
God created in the beginning of the world, does now shine unto us, but that it
is some other made since; unless they can show when, where, and by whom this
other calling, which they pretend to be now in the Roman church was brought
in, which they can no more do, then they can show the change of the sun.
Therefore does it remain clear, that the calling of the Catholic Bishops is
the same, which the Apostles delivered to their immediate successors, and
consequently the true and lawful calling. When this argument shall be solued by
any other answer, then may in the same manner be applied, to the instance
made of the change of the sun, I will confess it to be satisfied; till then,
I shall esteem it unanswerable, and consequently, the calling of the
Catholic Bishops thereby inuinciblie proved.

THE CONCLUSION TO THE CAREFVLL READER.
HAVING thus showed (careful Reader) that no sect or sort of Protestants, or
those that falsely pretend the reformation of the Catholic Roman religion in
these our days, have any true Pastors or teachers, and namely that those who
now bear the names of Bishops in England are no true or lawful Bishops, but
mere usurpers of that title, and consequently that all the inferior Pastors,
Preachers, or Ministers ordered or sent by them, have no manner of lawful
calling or commission to preach or Minister Gods word, or Sacraments to his
people, but are such as the holy scriptures call false Prophets, thieves,
robbers, and wolves, if thou have but the least sense, care, or feeling of
thine own eternal salvation (which if thou should loose, it were better
for thee a thousand times that thou had never been borne) thou will quickly
and carefully provide, that thou do not live and die a member or professor of
any one of those sects. For seeing it is a truth, both most evident in it
self, and confessed by all Protestants of what pretended reformation soever,
that where there are no true or lawful Pastors, there can be no true church
(the church being no other thing then the sheep united with the Pastor, or the
people with their Bishop) and further that where there is no true church there
can be no true faith (the church being the house of God, the pillar and ground
of truth,) as witnesses S. Paul. 1. ad Timoth^ 3 14.
And yet further that where there is no true faith, there can be no true mean
of Salvation (S. Paul also teaching that, Ad Hebr. 11.6.
without true faith it is impossible to please God:) These things I say, being
both evident in themselves, and confessed by all Protestants, thou can not be
so blind as to think that thou may find thy salvation amongst any sect of
Protestants, who are so evidently proved to have no Pastors. And so desiring
in thee no other disposition to come to the true knowledge of the mean to save
thy soul, then only an effectual desire to save it, with a competent
consideration of the points here briefly deduced, I leave thee to Gods most
holy grace, who has not only made thee to his own Image, but has redeemed
thee with the most precious blood of his only Son, and this neither for any
profit of his, or merit of thine, but for his own goodness, and that thou
may be a saved soul in his eternal kingdom, where I beseech God we may
once meet.

FINIS.
COurteous Reader, the authors absence from the press having caused diverse
escapes in the print, be pleased to use the observations following, for the
correction of the most and chiefest of them.

Page 14. the three first lines are to be read as a marginall note, and not as
pertaining to the text.

page 217. is the deposition of Abiather by Solomon spoken of, which by error
is repeated again page 238.

For the rest note, that the fault is not expressed in this table, but the
correction only, the letter r. signifyng, Read, the letter. e. the number of
lines, not from the beginning, but from the end of the page.

The Ciphers of the pages from 89. unto 100. are false, and 196. and 266. and
315.

Faults in the text.
PAge 5. lin. from. the end 7. r. we will wittinglie. p. 6. l. 1. put out,
observes. p. 7. l. 7. e. r. institution. p. 10. l. 3. r. prosecuted, page 13.
l. 10. r. Ministry. p. 16. l. 16 e. wants a full point. before (we) p 18.
l. 1. n. answer. p. 25. l. 13. e. r. how severe. p. 32. l. 9. e. put out (no).
p. 34. l. 23. r. Roman. p. 35. l. 8. e. r. easily. p. 38. l. 14. e. r. must
needs do, that, p. 39. l. 13. e. r. these. p. 47. l. 5. r. always joined. p.
48. l. 6. r. condign. p. 50. l. 19. r. what. p. 50. l. 3. e. r. true. p. 53.
l. 5. r. thrust. p. 53. l. 9. r. then thy. p. 55. l. 6. e. r. ordain. p. 56.
l. 18. e. put out (as). p. 57. l. 5. e. r. now. p. 59 l. 13. r. nor take. p.
67. l. 3. e. r. Arius. p. 73. l. 7. r. has heard. p. 74. l. 4. r. 1500.
years. p. 77. l. 15. e. r. or government. p. 86. l. 17. e. r. seeing. p. 93.
l. 6. e. r. I wis. l 3. r. does quite. p. 94. l. 1. r. source. p. 97. l. 7. r.
either. p. 97. l. 3. e. r. and. therefore. p. 107. l. 7. r. not interrupted. p.
111. l. 4. r. The reason. p. 115. l. 11. e. r. separated from. p. 116. l. 17.
r. M. Mason, and so ever after. p. 116. l. 9. e. r. now are. p. 132. l. 4. r.
or brand. p. 156. l. 15. r. the whole. p. 159. l. 5. r. do consist. p. 161. l.
20. r. was ever. p. 161. l. 3. e r. Richard Shilders. p. 162. l. 9. r. teaches
that. p. 165. l. 9. put out (in their doctrine) p. 169. l. 4. r. judge Dyar. p.
171. l. 10. r. insufficient. p. 172. l. 12. e. r. presumptuous law. p. 173. l.
9. r. further. p. 173. l. 13. e. r. and the manner. p. 174. l. 9 e. r. any
quirke. p. 175. l. 14. e. r. th^nke it. p. 176. l. 13. r. against her. p. 177.
l. 16. r not leave. l. 8 e. after (speak) want these words (more by and by,
and namely when we come to speak) p. 183. l. 8. r. began to be. p. 187. l. 7.
e. r. Poynet. p. 189. l. 1. r. purity of the gospel. p. 191. l. 2. e. r. one
half proof. p. 196. l. 6. r. he had already. p. 203. l. 11. r. sees. l. 14.
r. Coxe. l. 2. e. r. bring one out. p. 207. l. 18. e. r. may not. p. 213. l. 3.
e. r. condemned. p. 217. l. 4. e. r. I will remit the reader to the Chapter
following and to the last Chapter. p. 223. l. 11. e, r, he can. p. 236. l. 7.
e. r. hosts. p. 237. l. ^. being not able. l. 14. r. lawful use. p. 24^ l.
11. r. how far the power of the keys. p. 253. l. 5. e. r. is also true. p.
26^. l. 21. r. antithesis. p. 262. l. 10. e. r. law written, but also to the
Gentiles in the law of nature. p. 264. l. 17. e. r. and owes. p. 265. l. 4. e.
r. does evidently. p. 266, l, 15. r. at last. p. 267. l. 17. r. are like l.
15. e. r. there are. p. 270. l. 15. e. r. a torn coat. p. 271. l. 2. e. r.
the other reproved. p. 272. l. 20. r. being thus understood. l. 15. e. put out
(conformity with true reason) l. 2. e. r. his last supper. p. 280. l. 9. r.
letter S. l. 11. r. incorrupt antiquity. p. 283. l. 6. r. ijs qui, l. 15. e.
r. 1270. years. l. 1. e. r. rogamns te. p. 286. l. 6. r. past. l. 12. r. and
diuinitati. p. 290. l. 7. e. r. orantes. p. 292. l. 15. r. tanta fidelium. p.
310. l. 9. r. which way. p. 311. l. 13. e. r. in the strict, p. 314. l. 16. r.
collation, p. 316. l. 9. r. her dominions, l. 19. e. r. to give unto her, p.
317. l. 11. r. articles agreed upon in the convocation. p. 323. l. 14. r. make
mine.

Faults in the margent.
Page 71. r q. Armenor. ibidem for. g. 9. r. q. 9. p. 78. in the citation of
Illiricus r. 730. 731. p. 116. r. Ezechiel. 13. 11. p. 142. r. 81. p. 143. r.
act. 1. p. 213. r. orat. ad ciues timore epist. 32. p. 234. r. is from god but
what then? will it follow that humane reason. p. 235. r.. 22. p. 248. r. 209.
p. 273. wants the quotation of Ireneus. l. 4. C. 32. p. 283. r. orat. p. 291.
add the quotation of S. Augustine ser. 32. in verb^ apostoli ad
Thessalonicenses. p. 293. r. unanswerable apology. p. 297. r. ad Hebr. 7,
sect. 6.


