AN ANSWER TO CERTAIN scandalous Papers, Scattered abroad under color of a
Catholic Admonition.

Qui facit viuere, docet orare. Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

ANNO 1606.

AN ANSWER TO CERTAIN scandalous Papers, scattered. abroad under color of a
Catholic Admonition.
Having lately resolved to recall my Thoughts from the earthly theater, where
they sat and beheld the variable motions of men, with those cares and
cogitations which are the proper companions of public ministers, hoping
thereby to be made partaker of their contentments, which borrow from public
Action, to give to private Contemplation; I persuaded my self, that I could
never make choice of a better Subject for my meditation, then of the late
Treatise, Entitled: His Majesty's Speech in the late Session of Parliament,
together with a Discourse of the manner of the discovery of this late intended
Treason. Wherein, so many true and lively Images of Gods great favor and
providence, are represented: (Every line discovering where Apelles hand has
been) As all that observe the natural description of this Tree of Treason,
amp; in Ramo and in Radice, may truly say, Cap 6. lib 2. Reg.
there needs no Elisha in our days, to tell the King of Israel, what the
Aramites do in their priuatest Councels. In this Princely and religious work,
his Majesty (like to those kings of whom Seneca speaks, that do more good
by Example then by Laws) has increased our obligation, by leaving under his
own hand, such a plain and perfect Record of his own true thankefulnes to
Almighty God, for his so great and miraculous graces; as neither the present
Time, nor ages to come can ever be so ingrate, as not to retain the same in
perpetual memory. A duty required by God of all his creatures, Non ad
praemium, sed ad honorem. For as amongst all the excellent faculties of the
mind (next to the understanding) Remembrance has the precedencie, for
necessity and use: So in the accounts of all those services we owe to God,
(who desires rather, we should remember what he has been to us, then
curiously to affect what he is in himself,) Remembrance is the first, and the
first commanded. In this faculty we excel die beasts, and imitate the Angels:
For they being present behold at once, GODS Goodness and Love, in the mirror
of his Deity; and we upon earth, (in the Table of his Works) have a present
and full view of that which God is, by that, which he does. So as, although
we cannot see him in himself, yet we do particularly see him in his means,
especially in those great works of deliverances and defenses, which he
provides for whole Nations and people, against public and private practices.
And therefore if we shall grow forgetful, or think it sufficient for a day
or a year to pay him our Tributes of humble thankfulness, when the Heathen
themselves do continually offer unto their false gods, their Cynamom and
Frankincense, Then shall our error be no less, then that of Israel, whose
praise and prayers ended almost as soon as they had passed the Red Sea.

But now while I was in this most serious and silent Meditation, (sometimes
ravished with the infiniteness of GODS Mercy and Justice, who restrains the
power of the wicked, as he did the Viper from the hands of Paul; sometimes
comforted in calculating my days of happiness, to live under a King, blessed
in himself, blessed in his Olive branches, beloved of men for his integrity
and wisdom, and pleasing to God for his zealous endeauours, to cleanse the
Vessels of his Kingdom from die Dregs and Lees of the Romish grape;) Even then
(I say) when my heart was not a little cheared, to observe so much as the least
note of my Name, in his Register, for one that had been of any use in this so
fortunate a Discovery, (much like to the poor day labourer, who takes
contentment many years after, when he passes by that glorious Architecture,
to the building whereof he can remember to have carried some few sticks or
stones:) Even then, was I most bitterly calumniated, with many contumelious
Papers and Pasquils, dispersed abroad in diverse parts of the City, without any
Author, and yet so continually coming upon me, one after another (like the
messengers of Job) as I could neither devise to whom to turn me to make my
answer, nor yet imagine by what hard destiny I had drawn upon me their fury,
thus to single me out for a Subject of so much bitterness, in the days of so
great joy and gladness: Yea even in the time when I was persuaded, that they
which had divided themselves for conscience sake from all Communion with us in
our Religious offices, would yet have tuned their harps, to have joined with us
in cheerful Songs for this our happy deliverance.

Resting long in this debate with my self, whether I should now begin a
warfare of words, that had so long put on an habit of suffering, especially
against any of those, with whom Disputes are endless; because their end is
clamor, without desire to receive satisfaction; After I had taken secret and
faithful counsel, from the love and duty, which lives always in me
toward my Sovereign, and entered into serious consideration, how easily die
errors of public Ministers, may reflect upon the best deserving Princes;
having also heard from Foreign parts, how far my Name was there proscribed
for a man of blood; I thought it fit in regard of the place I hold, to take
some occasion to express my self in some clear terms; left any of those
clouds which are unjustly cast upon me, might darken the brightness of his
Royal mind, which has been always watered with the mildest deawe of Mercy
and Moderation.

And therefore although I know, that Stylus prudentiae est silentium, and do
remember well the caution prescribed by Solomon, in the apprehension of
scattered calumnies, wherein the follyes of men like clouds of tempest are
imagedm when they lack occasion to power forth showers of malice, on the
heads of Persons in place of gouemment: Yet finding my self in such an
absolute possession over my own soul in patience, as it is not in the power
of any calumniator to disturb the peace of a quiet mind; I throught it meet
to break silence, and to the intent my answer might be the better conceived,
to set down first the Copy of one of their original writings; Whereof the
tenor follows.

To the Earl of Salisbury.
MY Lord, Whereas the late vnapprouable and most wicked deseigne, for the
destroying of his Majesty, the Prince, and Nobility, with many others of
worth and quality, (attempted through the undertaking spirits of some more
fiery and turbulent, then zealous and dispassionate Catholics) has made the
general state of our Catholic cause so scandalous in the eye of such, whose
corrupted judgments are not able to fan away and sever the fault of the
professor from the profession it self; as that who now is found to be that
Religion, is persuaded, at least in mind, to allow (though God knows as much
abhorring as any Puritan whatsoever) the said former most inhumane, and
barbarous project: And whereas some of his Majesty's Council, but especially
your L. as being known to be, (as the Philosopher terms it) a primus motor
in such uncharitable proceedings, are determined (as it is feared) by taking
advantage of so foul a scandal, to root out all memory of Catholic
Religion, either by sudden banishment, Massacre, imprisonment, or some such
unsupportable vexations, and pressures; and perhaps by decreeing in this next
Parliament, some more cruel and horrible Laws against Catholics, then
already are made: In regard of these premises, there are some good men, who
through their earnest desire for continuing the Catholic Religion and for
saving of many souls, both of this present, and of all future posterity; are
resolved to prevent so great a mischief, though with a full assurance
aforehand of the loss of their dearest lives. You are therefore hereby to be
admonished, that at this present there are five, which have severally
undertaken your death, and have vowed the performance thereof, by taking
already the blessed Sacrament, if you continue your daily plotting of so
tragical Stratagems against Recusants. It is so ordered, that no one of these
five knows who the other four be, for the better preventing the discovery of
the rest, if so any one by attempting and not performing, should be
apprehended. It is also already agreed, who shall first attempt it by shot,
and so who in order shall follow. In accomplishing of it, there is expected no
other then assurance of death; Yet it will willingly be embraced for the
preventing of those general Calamities, which by this your transcendent
Authority, and grace with his Majesty, are threatened unto us all. And indeed
the difficulties herein are more easily to be disgested, since two of the
intended Attemptors, are in that weak state of body, that they cannot live
above three or four months. The other three are so distressed in themselves
and their friends; as that their present griefs (for being only Recusants)
do much dull all apprehension of death. None is to be blamed (in the true
censuring of matters) for the undertaking hereof: For we protest before GOD,
we know no other means left us in the world since it is manifest that you
serve but as a watch, to give fire unto his Majesty; (to whom the worst that
we wish, is, that he may be as great a Saint in Heaven, as he is a King on
Earth,) for intending all mischiefs against the poor distressed Catholics.
Thus giving your Lordship this charitable admonition, the which may perhaps be
necessary hereafter, for some others your Inferiors (at least in grace and
favor) if so they run on their former inhumane and unchristian rage against
us, I cease, putting you in mind, that where once true and spiritual
Resolution is, there, notwithstanding all dangers whatsoever, the weak may
take sufficient revenge of the great.

Your L. well admonishing friends, etc. A. B. C. etc.
Postscript.
It may be your Lordship will take this but as some forged Letter of some
Puritanes, thereby to incense you more against Recusants. But we protest upon
our salvation it is not so, neither can any thing in humane likelihood prevent
the effecting thereof, but the change of your course toward Recusants.



THis being now one of their charges verbatim, because it is not my meaning to
wander further, then the paths of their own uncharitable passions do lead me; I
will only direct my answer to the several parts thereof; though the same as
they lie, druert me from any other good or regular method.

For the first part therefore, wherein this writer in the Name of the
Catholics protests against the fact as an vnapprouable and most wicked
desseigne; I must shortly say, that whosoever shall read the Panegyricall
oration of Sixtus Quintus, made upon the murder of Henry the third the French
king, shall well perceive that sin to be preferred before the act of Judith
to Holofernes, by which Gods people were delivered; and may also observe in
diverse other cases, how generally our adversaries are inclined, to make an ill
interprestation only of those things, which fail in execution (for otherwise
foelix scelus virtus vocatur) to which may be added that which is vulgarly
known, what number of Authors are illustrated strated in Rome, which strongly
maintain the doctrine of deposing kings. Nevertheless, because I have ever
loved to measure others by my self, and always wished that by some clear and
constant course, the state of Christendom might be freed from all pernicious
instruments, which seek not to plant peace, but to work confusion; I have bin
a long time sorry, that those which employ so many seditious spirits, daily to
instruct the unlearned Catholics in those mysteries of deposing Princes, have
not, by some public and definitive sentence orthodoxall (in which it is
supposed the Pope cannot err) made some such clear explication of their
assumed power over Sovereign Princes, as not only those which acknowledge his
superiority, might be secured from fears and iealousies of continual Treasons
and bloody assacinats against theirpersons; but those Kings also which do not
approve his Papal jurisdiction, and yet would feign reserve a charitable
opinion of their subjects, might know how far to repose themselves in their
fidelity, in ciurl obedience, howsoever they see them divided from them in
point of conscience. For whosoever shall attribute most to the force of
Excommunication, shall never find it (if I mistake it not) further powerful
either by the original institution, or in the succeeding practice for many
years after Christ, then only to deprive men from spiritual graces, and to
shut them as it were out of the doors of heaven, without so gross an
usurpation, as to remove them out of the earth, or to destroy their being in
Nature. Insomuch as the writ it self de excommunicato capiendo, and other such
like courses, which are variable in sundry governments, have rather issued from
the goodness of such Christian kings, as were desirous to work the better
obedience to the Rules of the Church, then from any power of Excommunication in
his own nature, all censures of the Church having left life untouched, sieve
fuerat Ethnicus sieve Publicanus: Many of the heathen themselves having taught
this for a rule, Bonos imperatores voto expetere oportet, quoscunque tolerare.
And therefore I cannot but marvel the more at some dark and cautelous
writings published of late upon this accident, and auowed under the name of one
of their Prime men, wherein he has bestowed many thundering words, against those
which shall attempt against Princes by private authority, and yet reserueth
thereby a tacit lawfulness thereof, in case it be directed by public
warrant. A matter no less discrediting the sincerity pretended in this
particular, then that most strange and gross doctrine of Equivocation, which
is so highly extolled in the Church of Rome, though it tear in sunder all the
bonds of humane conversation. For who so shall please to read one place of
the holy Father Saint Augustine (of whose Books by this occasion I have turned
over some few leaves) shall find, that when the Priscillian Heretics in all
their examinations before the Rulers of that time, did seek to dissemble their
heresy, by using those answers of Equivocation, wherewith the Papists now
maiutaine it lawful to deny all truth under a mental reservation, and
wresting the words of S. Paul, who requires every man to speak the truth to
his neighbor, inferred, as if they might speak falsely to all others. This
reverend Father soundly and clearly refuted that irreligious Principle, with
this short sentence; Cord creditur ad Iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem:
Otherwise (says he) Peter, who professed Christ in heart, and denied him in
words, would never have redeemed his denial with so many Tears. This were to
take away the Crown of Martyrdom, and to make all the holy Martyrs fools;
who, making a conscience to dissemble with Heathen Magistrates, sealed with
their blood the inward thoughts of their hearts and confessions of their
mouths. Neither should any man profess this opinion, but he that seeks to
subvert all Laws and duties of Civil society, breaking out into this
Expostulation, O fontes lachrymarum, Where are ye to be found, O ye fountains
of tears? How shall we hide our selves from the displeased face of Truth?

For the second part, where you pretend an apprehension of so many massacres
and pressures to come against Catholics, or some more horrible Law to be
decreed in Parliament, then is already allowed, and therein tax me as one that
am like to prove a fiery Instrument; Give me leave to tell you, That those
are false pretenses, which some lewd Impostor has used as false glasses to
multiply your fears.

These poor Calumniations are like to Adams fig leaves, unable to cover your
shame. For as he sought a covering, non quia nudus sed quia lapsus; So is it
your fault, not your fear, that makes you cast those unjust Imputations upon
your Prince and State. Sed pereuntibus mill figurae.

These men that rule your consciences, have first dazzled your eyes with
fearful, but false objects, thereby hoping to engage you more deeply in
their pernicious Attempts.

They have sought with Nero to set Rome on fire, and after to lay the blame on
Christians.

Thus has your credulity been overtaken with vain shadows, whereas, the
children of Wisdom are of slow belief.

If therefore you had measured those things by the rules of Time, and had
entered into a true comparison of things past, with things present; you must
needs have conduded better of things to come. For if you behold the precedent
Reigns of the two late sister Queens of different Religion, you shall find
more blood in five or six years of the first, then in five and forty years
of the second.

Examine likewise, whether you have seen since this Kings time, any the least
prints of bloody steps. Has he added new seuerities to the Laws of the former
Time, which he found established? or has he not in some things qualified them?
and in other forborne to execute them, even upon those persons which publish
with sound of trumpet the sentence of divorce betwixt his Subject and his
Souereigntie? Let me appeal to your own consciences (which in every man
holds place of Judge and Witness) whether upon the present fury of this
fiery Treason, which inflamed so many against the generality of the Papists
(according to die nature of sudden peril, which hardly admits of rust
distinctions) there has been any one act of blood or cruelty committed;
though all men know, that die greatest violences that could have been used in
such cases, under color of public safety, would have been interpreted to be
the true effects of care and providence. Nam crudelitas si a vindicta, iustitia
est si a periculo, prudentia. Nay rather behold the excellent temper of his
Majesty's mind, who doubting what the humor of sudden apprehension might
produce at such a time, no sooner had performed his own public duty of
Praise and Thanksgiving to God, but he pronounced in open Parliament how far
he was from the condemnation of the general for particulars. All which being
laid together, I doubt not, but those which are not in the desperate
consumption of sin, will freely acknowledge his Majesty to be a Prince of
PEACE and MERCY, that delights nor in the noise of Chains and Fetters, but
rather with Theodosius deferreth Execution, and wishes Se potuisse potius
mortuos a morte reuocare.

And now for the imaginary Power, which it pleases you to ascribe unto us of
his Majesty's Counsel, in which number, as a plotter against Romish
Catholics, you make me to be one of the Quorum; I should take it always for
an Honor and happiness, for me to receive not only injury, but persecution it
selte in so Noble a Society, where persons of so great Honor and Judgment
are Actors; who know full well, that Counsailors of Kings do stand for
thousands or hundreds, only as it pleases them to place them; and that all
their greatness grows merely from humble endeauours, no further meritorious
then as they are valued by a gracious acceptance. Nevertheless, seeing I am
made by you a divided Member from the Body, and graced with so hard an Epithete
as a Boutefeu, and that you are content to borrow my Name to scandalize the
State you live in; I must freely say to you without bitterness, That howsoever
it may serve your turn for a while, to make me the mark of your malice; yet
those that rightly judge of the spirit in which this writer speaks, will
hardly imagine, that this Faction follows any other Body, then the Body of
Authority. It is not the Head alone, nor any other particular members that
these men shoot at, but at the Church and Commonwealth; which like Hippocrates
Twins have long both wept and laughed together. These are the things which
the Enemies of this tithe do study to subvert, and not any poor greatness
of mine, who am only great in the eyes of Envy. Nay rather they are angry with
Aristotle, who bids wise Princes keep down Faction, which is ever humble till
it get the Key of Power. They are grieved, or rather heart-broken, to behold
such an Unity of State and Council, as dares bid the world do, as she would
be done unto. These are known so well to be the true causes of their Despair
and Coffeehouse, as they shall ground a faith upon very weak Principles, if
they imagine, that open vows of my destruction (a matter of so small
consequence) can make them free from imputation of contriuing higher Practices.

But now for that which comes in the third place, which is their
protestation, that for the avoiding new mischief to come, it is intended by
good men upon a spiritual Resolution, to take my life; and that there are five
persons upon the secret, but all bound up by the Sacrament, whereof two are so
weak and so sickely, as they can hardly forfeit two or three months of life:
To these I can only say, that having their feet so nigh the grave, their
ghostly father deserves small thanks, that will send them thither in bloody
coffins. For they do neither carry the marks of Rome Heathen, nor of Rome
Christian: for under Heathen Emperors, the victories were scorned, which were
barbarously gotten, mixtis veneno fontibus: And when Rome was pure and
primitive, you shall find the Arms of the Church were Tears and Prayers. But
now their Oracles are so far degenerate from the former purity of that
ancient Church, as they make murder spiritual Resolution, and openly threaten
the lives of Kings that are Gods breathing Images; when die Prophet David
trembled to violate the skirt of King Saul's garment.

All which considered, I doubt not but those Recusants which do discover such
pernicious spirits, will out of the light of this fire perfectly discern the
darkness and danger of that Religion, whereof the faith is lapped up in such
an ignorant and implicit obedience; and so much the rather, because it has
fallen out so often, that the scruples of Conscience and seeds of Treason, have
grown up as close together, as the husk and Come in one ear. And therefore I
should think that those men, which carry the unlearned Papists, like Hawks
hooded, into those dangerous positions, may instly challenge any that shall
seek to rob them of the deserved Titles of Boutefeux and fiery matches. For
these are they that have made their Church a Court, their religion a vassal to
ambition, and are so hot upon earthly Honors, as they cannot distinguish Inter
summa and praecipitia. These are they that enjoin men to eat their God, upon
the bargain of blood; where those whom they deprave do know, that whatsoever
God does affect in goodness, he does effect by good means. And howsoever they
term our Sacraments as bare and naked signs; we may justly say that we have
never hitherto brought them into the combination of murder, or into the house
of crying sins. As for that sort of them which pretend to be so full of
present grief, through the distress of themselves and their friends (for
being only Recusants) as it dulleth alt apprehension of death: Those that
lack charity, will judge this dullness to be, Plus tristitiae quam
poenitentiae, more for sorrow that the project has failed, then that it was
concerned. As for the Plotters and stratagems whereof they complain, If those
which use lawful means to prevent conspiracies, must be esteemed Plotters,
and Subjects fit for procription; how shall his Majesty escape their censure,
that was Gods chosen minister upon Earth for this particular Discovery? Or to
what end do Princes admit of Counselors care, or Secretaries vigilancie,
(whose Offices are to stand Sentinel over the life of Kings, and safety of
States) if their endeavors to countermine the secret mines of Treason, be thus
exposed to misconstruction? Or if by stratagems those Laws are meant, by which
all branches of Treason are punished; why do they forget that those ordinances
are derived from the wisdom of Parliaments, two hundred years before my
cradle? Besides, if any think it in the power of few, much less of anyone,
to be able to extort determinations of extremity, or procure new Laws in
Parliament by self humor; those neither understand the course of Law-making,
nor the wisdom, gravity, or nature of Lawmakers in this State, where Kings
themselves, from whom (as from the Center) all the lives and executions of
Laws take their beginning, are pleased freely to admit their Subjects
negatiues, with good and gracious acceptance.

And now for my self, with whom you would condition to leave Plotting, as you
term it, against Recusants: First, discretion tells me, that as the
Husbandman, which casts his eye ouer-curiously upon winds and clouds, does
neither sow nor reap in season; so, that servant, whose faith and zeal in the
service of Kings, becomes awful of enemies either for their power or envy,
is neither worthy of favor nor protection. For when I consider die Prince I
serve, that he has not taken up wisdom of Government upon credit, but
carries still the Iethro of order in his own bosom, disposing the mean
causes, to those that are fit to rule over hundreds, and over fifties,
reserving still the greatest to the greatness of him self, like a King rich
in the experience of many years Reign, over a free and valiant people, both
by nature, seat, and education: I freely profess both before mine own and all
other Nations, that although I participate not with the follies of that Fly,
who thought her self to raise the dust, because she sat on the Chariot
wheel: Yet am I so far from disauowing my honest ambition of my Masters
favor, as I am desirous that the world should hold me, not so much his
creature, by the undeserved Honors I hold from his Grace and Power, as by my
desire to be the shadow of his mind, and to frame my judgments, knowledge
and affections according to his: toward whose Royal Person I shall glory more
to be always found an honest and humble Subject, then I should to command
absolutely in any other calling. For the rest which may concern me in my
Religion (howsoever darkened with this middle veil of sin and frailty) it is
built upon the sacred grounds of Hope and Faith, in the precious blood of my
Redeemer, without presuming upon any particular merits. And whereas they
allege, that men resolved to die, are masters over other men's lives; My
answer is, they have no more power then the least Spider, who by permission
can do as much. And if the days of my life were in their hands; as they might
peradventure take from me some months of joys: So am I assured they should
take me from years of sorrows. But these poor threats amaze no hopes of
mine, I am none of those that believe with the men of the old world, that the
Mountains shake, when the Moules do cast. And far I hope, it shall be from
me, who know so well in whose Holy BOOK my days are numbered, once to
entertain a thought to purchase a spanne of time, at so dear a rate, as for
the fear of any mortal power, in my poor Talent, Aut Deo, aut Patriae, aut
Patri patriae deesse. For who doubts that the Magistrates who converse with
variety of spirits, must not sometimes undergo Tempests? All our actions are
upon the open stage, and can be no more hidden then the Sun. If we deserve
ill, we shall hear ill; Or if the present time do flatter us, yet when our
glasses are run, (which cannot be long) that glory which makes worthy men
line for ever, dies with us; and our posterity shall be the heirs of our
dishonor. And therefore suadeat loquentis vita non oration. Besides, that error
which in all mortal things has her power, strength and declination; has now
her foundations discovered and her Towers taken, so as it is to be suspected,
she will play so long with the temporal Sovereignty of Kings, as it shall
be the glorious work of Kings to break down her walls and strongest
defenses: And therefore ill becoming servants to slack their pace, for fear
of malice, but rather to rest assured, that unto such as faithfully bestow
their time in the service of God, the evening and the night shall come upon
them naturally one after another: Their faith shall ascend before them, and
their good fame shall remain after them.

To conclude, seeing God has pleased to deliver us from so many unspeakable
miseries and afflictions ready to have fallen upon us, like the visitation of
Jerusalem, whereof the Prophet speaks; When their candle has his cleared
light, and when they sleep in the arms of peace, lo then shall he the time
of their visitation: And seeing this should have happened unto us in the days
of a just and gracious King, when every man rejoiced under his Vine and under
his fig Tree: Let us both for the honor of our Nation, and the good of our
souls, be mind-full to inform our selves so perfectly of all our duties both
divine and humane, as we may not become (through our own gross ignorance)
the authors of our own confusion. Let no man set so high a price on that false
reputation of keeping oaths to private friends, as for their sake to forfeit
faith and loyalty to Prince and Country. Will you find true friends, says
Seneca? Search them inter recta officia, and there shall you find them So
says the Canon Law, Nonest appellanda fides, quae ad peccatum inuitat. Tully
in his books of Offices disputing the case inter Patrem and Patriam, If thy
father (says he) intend a Treason to his Country and State, and tell thee of
it; thou must first dissuade, after threaten, and after accuse. For this is a
Rule approved; In promissorio prore iniusta, iurans illicitum, obligator ad
contrarium. And therefore seeing God has saved us so miraculously from this
confusion; whereof the mind of man (which within a moment searches from East
to the West) can no way find the bottom; Let us make it appear unto the
world, by the difference of our constant measure of thankfulness, that we
esteem not this an ordinary act of Gods providence, nor a thing to be imputed
to any fault or failing in their plots or proiects, but a miraculous effect of
the transcendent power, far beyond the course and compass of all his
ordinary proceedings. Who although he seem for a time to give way, as though
he regarded not how men come to their ends and purposes; (letting them grow
like poysonfull herbs,) yet at length when they are ripest, he will cut them
off, and when they are fullest of their venomous quality, pull them up for
other men's medicine; having made the Scorpion to carry the oil about him,
which cures the wounds he gives. To which let us add this further Faith,
that as the place where this prodigious Massacre should have been committed, is
the same place where the ancient Religion of the Primitive Church, shook off
the bonds and fetters of the Roman corruption under which it had long
continued in servitude: So whiles the same Faith shall be Religiously and
constantly professed, that it shall never be in the power of mortal man, to
shake the least corner stone of that blessed and sure foundation.

Thus have I given my pen her liberty to run her stage; thereby to free my
mind traveling (as a woman with child,) with more weighty cogitations then I
could contain in silence, or express in order; hoping my intentions shall
receive a favorable censure, seeing they are bounded with honest and humble
limittes. If it be said that I have taken too slight an occasion to answer a
slander that lacks an Author; I desire to be thus rightly concerned, that no
man would have sooner contemned those Shewells or dead papers, which move with
the wind, then I should, if so many aduertisements from abroad, and
Confessions at home (concurring with this calumny) did not in Justice
challendge at my hands some speedy course to preserve my poor reputation from
these cruel aspersions. In which consideration, although my desires to wear
out many days, are drawn within as small a circle as my fears, and both my
spirit and Judgment, far from such a deiection or weakness, as to
endeavor, or expect a remove of fixed resolutions, by force of Arguments or
protestations; Yet when I remember with Seneca, that even the great and fairest
Kingdoms, whose Laws abound in bloody lines, do loose so much of their
beauty, as they become no less deformed, then the basest Shambles; and when I
know that our greater IVDGE, and SAVIOVR of the World, who allows voices to
all kinds of sins, has made the voice of blood to speak so loud, as it
pearceth HEAVEN it self: I do presume so well of all indifferent and equal
Judgments, as my desence in this degree, shall never be held for a needless
curiosity; Quia Inauditi, tanquam innocents pereunt; Especially seeing mine
own conscience tells me so plainly, that as Clemency is the truest keeper
of Kingdoms, So Cruelties are of al other the falsest Guards. If it be said, I
have been too sharp in censuring the Romish Catholics in general, because I
have been injured by some Infested spirits of that Profession; I do profess
ingenuously, that I am not persuaded that such a Malice as this, which has no
Parallel, can ever fall into those hearts that hold any seeds of Conscience, or
that these five pretended good-men, which are combined in this resolution, have
any sense of any Religion at all, but rather that they are some dispersed
remnant of that impious Consort, whose eyes and hearts are daily wounded, to
behold so many fair Mornings, to follow after so black a Day, as had prepared
misery even for the child unborn.

And when I do remember upon the death of the late Queen of happy memory,
with what obedience and applause, both professions did concur to his
Majesty's succession and now observe how little assistance was given to these
late sauadge Papists, who had gathered together some few rotten branches,
fallen from such decayed and withered Trees as CHRIST had cursed in the Gospel,
hoping therewith to have set a Fire, and made a combustion in the State:
Although my prayers shall never cease, that we may see the happy days, when
only one Uniformity of true Religion is willingly embraced in this Monarchy;
Yet I shall ever (according to the Law of God) make so great difference in my
Conscience between seeing sins, and sins of Ignorance, as I shall think
it Just by the Laws of men, Solum necis artifices art perire sua.

And now for answer to your Postscript, wherein you seek so much to divert me
from suspecting those whom you call Puritanes to be Authors of this Slander; I
have only this to say, That you should never have needed to put your self to
so much pains for that persuasion, seeing neither the regular Protestant, nor
those that are uncomfortable to the present Discipline of the Church, can ever
be justly charged to have mixed their private differences with any Thoughts,
much less with any Acts of bloody Massacres. Et hic baculum fixi.

Further replies expect not therefore at my hands: I will henceforth rest in
peace in the House of mine own Conscience, where if I do good deeds, no
matter who sees them; if bad, (knowing them my self) no matter from whom I
hide them: for they are of record before a Judge, from whose presence I cannot
flee. If all the world applaud me, and he accuse me, their praise is vain.
Falli potest fama, conscientia nunquam. If this may not suffice, but that you
will still threaten and exclaim, I must hear with patience, and say with
Tacitus, You have learned to curse, and I to contemn: Tu linguae, ego aurium
sum Dominus.


