THE GARDEN OF OUR B. LADY. OR A devout manner, how to serve her in her Rosary.

Written by S. C. of the Society of JESUS.

Veniat dilectus meus in Hortum suum. Cant. 5.

Let my beloved come into his Garden.

M.DC.XIX.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, TO THE Devout Catholic Laity of ENGLAND.
THE Beloved of the Espouse, after her many and sweet ^uitements to a Garden of
^elight, being won by her ^ire requests tells her, I am come into my garden,
Cant. 5.
O m^ sister Espouse; where having found variety it self placed in the midst
of spiritual delights, preferred before all those ornament which that place of
pleasure brought forth, the Myrrh, which he vouchsafed first of all to gathe^
saying: O my sister Espouse, have reaped my myrrh. Sma^^ explication of these
word (most devout Catholics is desired: yet for the more general
understanding o^ them, take (which the ancient Fathers) the Beloved to be our
Savior, the Espouse his B. Mother, the Garden Perfection, and Myrrh the acts
of Penance.

And since you have so ^imitated the Beloved of the Espouse, in preferring
before althings his blessed choice of Myrrh, by enduring so many pressures,
for the love and imitation of him, The reason of the dedication.
and the defense of his Truth; (which state of yours being that of persecution,
may well be termed a certain state of perfection) me thinks I behold the
Espouse inuiting you also to come into her Garden, knowing already your choice
to be so like unto that of her Beloved.

That Garden of perfection this small Volume resembles, in which are with
order disposed, the admirable perfectio^s both of the Espouse and her Beloved:
and although those of her Beloved give forth a clearer light, and are of
greater ornament to this place then those of the Espouse; yet here it is the
Beloved his will (seeking to honor her) to call this Garden hers, and by
adding his graces unto it, to make his Espouses worthiness the more apparent.

Enter therefore with all confidence (being so lovingly invited) into this Garden
of our B. Lady, in which your interest is so great: view, and with all
attention behold the native beauties and the fruits that are in it so
delightful, Our intention once rectified our end ought ever to be in sight.
see what pleasant paths are here plained forth, how straight they are, and
without turnings; at every entrance whereof, the end is most clearly discovered.
The passages of this nature are many, and diversely employed: in some you shall
find divine Love leading the B. Virgin to the Temple in Jerusalem to consecrat
her self unto perpetual virginity; in others you shall behold her (conducted
by the same guide) going to give her consent to become the mother of the
Savior of the world; here she is in her iourny to visit her Cousin Elizabeth,
and by her presence to make holy the fruit of her womb; in these paths she
rejoices and mourns, mourns and rejoices, divine love producing in her
purest heart divine effects.

But besides these most even and direct passages (Love being the contriuer of
this Paradise) there are pleasant descents, which rising again into mounts,
keep correspondence one with the other; in these descents you may behold the
Virgin as an humble handmayd going toward Bethleem, to bring forth her
glorious Infant poorly, flying into Egypt fearfully, seeking her lost Jesus
amongst her kindred carefully, and following her tormented Jesus unto his death
most dolefully. But in the ascent or rising again, the things you are to see
are far different: for divine Love having out of the descent redoubled the
Virgins forces, The humility of the B V^rgin gives increase to al her other
virtues.
leads her up first toward the sight of her most glorious risen Son,
thence to the behoulding of his most powerful Ascension, to her own
replenishing with the holy Ghost, to her most happy death, to her assumption
both of body and soul, and lastly to her most glorious Coronation.

To give you a full description of this Garden, and to tell you, what
Fountains, Figures of the B. Virgin.
and Tabernacles, what Houses and Towers, what Roses, what Lyllies adorn it,
were never to end; wherefore desiring you to be curious perusers of it your
selves, and not to pass any thing unnoted, I leave to be any longer hindrance
from your entering into it. This only requesting at your hands, The Authors
request.
that those things in which this Garden shall seem pleasing unto you, and by
which your pious affections shall be any way moved, you would seek by imitation
to transport them into your own Gardens, whereby you shall make your entering
into it, not pleasant alone, but withal most profitable.

S. C.

A TABLE OF the Contents.
Chap. 1. page 1. Chap. 2. page 5. Chap. 3. page 10. Chap. 4. page 14. Creed in
general. Chap. 5. page 17. Creed, and their sense. Chap. 6. page 20. Chap. 7.
page 25. Chap. 8. page 39. Aue Maria. Chap. 9. page 52.
Of the six Feasts of our B. Lady.
The Conception. Cap. 1. p. 62. The Nativity. Chap 2. page 65. The
Presentation. Chap. 3. page 67. The Visitation. Chap. 4. page 69. The
Purification. Chap. 5. page 71. The Assumption. Chap. 6. Page 74.
Of the Rosary.
The five Joyful mysteries.
The Anunciation. Chap. 1. page 77. The Visitation. Chap. 2. page 83. The
Nativity of our Lord. Chap. 3. pa. 82. The Purification. Chap. 4. page 85. The
finding Jesus in the Temple. Ca. p. 5. 89.
The five sorrowful mysteries.
The praying in the garden. Chap. 6. pa. 92. His whipping. Chap 7. page 94. His
crowning with thorns. Ca. 8. pa. 100. The bearing of his Cross. Cha. 9. page
104. His crucifying Chap. 10. page 108.
The five glorious mysteries.
Of Christ his Resurection. Cha. 11. pa. 112. His Ascension. Chap. 12. page
119. The coming of the holy Ghost. Chap. 13. page 125. The Assumption of our
B. Lady. Chap. 14. page 130. The Coronatio^ of our Lady Cap. 15. pa. 134
Of the seaue^ Words on the Cross.
The first Word. Chap. 1. page 141. The second Word. Chap. 2. page 146. The
third Word. Chap. 3. page 153. The fourth Word. Chap. 4. page 159. The fifth
Word. Chap. 5. page 166. The sixth Word. Chap. 6. page 172. The seventh
Word. Chap. 7. page 179.
Of the five Wounds.
The right Hand. Chap. 1 page 187. The left Hand. Chap. 2. page 193. The side.
Chap. 3. page 199. The right Foot. Chap. 4. page 206. The left Foot. Chap. 5.
page 214.
Of the four last Things.
Of Death. Chap. 1. page 222. Of Judgment. Chap. 2. page 233. Of Heaven. Chap.
3. page 240. Of Hell. Chap. 4. page 215.
THE GARDEN OF OUR B. LADY OR A devout Manner of serving her in her Rosary.
What the Beads signify. CHAP. I.
THE Holy Scripture binds us to pray always, 1. These. 4.
and wills us to perform our prayer devoutly, because it is that Incense
which we are to offer unto God in every place. And therefore accursed is that
man who does this work of God deceitfully. Romans 12. Apoc. ^. Psalm 14. Hier. 48.
Many ways there be of praying: some mental, some vocal, others manual, by
well performing our daily functions; and each of these is divided into sundry
branches: all good, but not all fit for every one, by reason of the diversity
of men's inclinations. All cannot mount up with the Apostles unto the height of
mysteries, Math. 5.8
but the multitude must stay below in the vale of Vocal Prayer, and there
serve God in reading devout books, and in saying their Beads: which humble
way of prayer was practiced by most men before Luthers time for some hundreds
of years, although there wanted not most learned, wise, and godly men, who
most devoutly employed themselves, as well in Marthaes devotion, as in Maryes
high contemplation.

For long before, especially since the time of S. Dominicke, the Vicar of
Christ, with the approbation of his authority, approved and privileged the use
of Beads, the Holy Church vniuersaily received them, The general use of Beads.
all good Catholics in all Christian countries seriously and with great
veneration used them. The Congregations of the B. Virgin (which are
innumerable) have admittted the Rosary for their essential Character, all the
Christian world admitts the Beads in their Banners, as a chief Ornament,
thereby to be known and distinguished from the Conuenticles of Heretics, and
Infidels.

And although this form and number of the Beads now in practice, and
ordinarily used, bears not the antiquity of above 500. years; The antiquity
of the Beads
yet this praying by number is a thing most ancient, and practiced by those
old Inhabitants of the wildernesses, as appears in holy Paphnutius his life,
Ioachim Perionius in his life.
who was accustomed at the recital of every prayer, to let fall a little
stone, he having gathered many together for that purpose, till he came unto
the number which he had prescribed unto himself. And no doubt but this holy
Father saw this practiced by his predecessors, which may well prove the
antiquity of this devotion. So that we see the first use of Beads is most
ancient: and this now in use to be the very same brought into method, and
applied to the honor of the B. Virgin mother of God, and Mediatrix of mankind.

Of the fruits of praying on the Beads. CHAP. II.
AS the end of all prayer (whether it be mental or vocal) is the glorifying
of God, The end of prayer
the manifestation of our love, the performance of our duty, the exhibition of
gratitude, and the fulfilling of Christ's Commandment, who bids us to watch
and pray least we fall into temptation: so the fruit of praying, especially
upon our Beads, devoutly performed, is twofold, Internal, and External.

Internal fruit is remission of sins, victory over our inordinate passions,
obtaining and increasing of grace and infused virtues; all which concern the
general estate of our souls. Moreover we gain thereby particular gifts for
every power of the same as light of knowledge, wisdom, faith, prudence, art,
and such like intellectual habittes, which purify and clear our
understanding. Also, a celestial flame of charity, consuming in our will the
impure love of this world, and enkindling in our hearts, the fire of Gods love.
Lastly, we obtain a joyful remembrance of Gods goodness, manifoldly discovered
unto us by infinite benefittes hourly bestowed upon us, wherewith our memory
is invited, and encouraged continually to remember him who is the fountain of
all goodness, and incessantly to thank him for his infinite mercies, powered out
so plentifully every instant upon us.

External fruit of prayer is likewise manifold: first, delivery from many
bodily harms, which might happen to our selves, our friends, our followers,
our goods, or possessions, by infinite casualties of fire, water, tempest, and
many the like worldly chances, or by the malice of the Devil, as happened to
holy Job. Job. 7.
Secondly obtaining of temporal happiness, as of health, honor, wealth,
lawful pastimes, and preferments, when either they are expedient for the
increase of Gods glory, the good of his Church, or furtherance of our
salvation. Thirdly the preservation of the whole world from perishing; for were
it not for the fervent prayers of diverse servants of God, who earnestly pray
both for themselves, and others, as did blessed Abraham, Jeremy, S. Stephen,
and others, the whole world would, perish; Man's sins crying vengeance against
him. Let therefore every devout soul do his best endeavor by daily saying the
Beads, to auert the scourge of God from us, and all mankind, which hangs
hourly over our heads, for our offenses and ill behavior toward our maker.
Let us also by the same devotion incessantly make supplication for increase of
Gods grace, that we may run the paths of his Commandments, all the course of
our life, and at the end of our race happily arrive at the haven of heaven.

Lastly the reverent wearing, and due using of our Beads, Why we wear
publicly our beads.
increases the external act of religion; it aduanceth God, and his Blessed
Mothers honor, adorneth their Clients, pleases God, rejoices Angels,
triumphs over Devils, confounds Heretics and Infidels, conserueth peace
and uniformity in the Church of God.

Of Preparation to say the Beads. CHAP. III.
AS by all spiritual men the life of man is considered to be threefold, to wit,
Active, Contemplative, and Mixed of both; so we may very well say that Prayer
is, Vocal answering to Active; Mental to Contemplative, and Mixed to both. Of
those three former kinds, it is concluded by the general consent of all, that
the third is most perfect, to wit the Mixed, consisting of both the other. Now
whether in prayer the purely mental, or mixed (to wit mental, and vocal
conjoined together) be most perfect, I will not here dispute. It is enough
for my purpose to declare that I understand the saying of the Beads, The beads
a mixed ^ind of praying.
to be mixed prayer, wherein vocal and mental are conjoined, the words which we
pronounce, giving our mind occasion of meditation: therefore what preparation
we find requisite for either vocal or mental prayer, let us use before and in
the saying of our Beads, which consists of both the fornamed manners of
praying.

To prepare our selves to prayer we are commanded, Eccles. 18.
least we be like to those who tempt God. They who run indiscreetly, and
irreuerently to prayer, performing it coldly, with many voluntary distractions,
do often loose their labor, and purchase Gods displeasure; for of such
undevout servants he complains, saying: Isa. 29.
This people honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far off from
me. God requires of his servants, that they serve him with their hearts,
saying: Matt 15. M^rc. 7. Prou. 23.
My son offer up to me thy heart. In which words two things are included,
namely Corporal Preparation, and Spiritual Disposition in fruitfully saying
our Beads. The former of these two depends upon the exterior disposition of
our body to this exercise, which consists in these points.

Corporal Preparation
First in decent placing of our body, in the well ordering of our five outward
senses, in well endeavoring to keep them from distractions, as also by so
scituating our selves that the overmuch diseasing of the body, either by
continual kneeling, or prostrating our selves upon the ground, by extension of
the arms in manner of a cross, and the like mortifications, cause not the
distraction of our minds. Wherefore for the time thou prayest, I could wish thee
not to put thy self to any great corporal affliction, but so to dispose of
thy body, that it remain quiet, and if it were possible, as if thy soul were
for that time separated from it.

The later, Spiritual disposition
namely spiritual disposition, is a restraint of all our internal sensitive
powers, in keeping them attent, and wholly employed about our prayer; also a
devout applying of our three spiritual faculties of the soul, namely our
Will, Understanding, and Memory, with all their actions, and functions, to Gods
service in this holy exercise. For seeing God has created both soul, and body
to his service, commanded us to love him with all our soul, heart, mind, and
power, and seeing the performance of the work is a proof of our love; it
stands with great reason we should endeavor to employ our selves in this
action wholly and sincerely performing it with all reverence both of soul and
body.

Of the several parts of the Beads. CHAP. IIII.
I Intend to discourse upon this pious manner of praying plainly and clearly,
to the end that the explications I shall here make may be more generally
understood. Wherefore I will speak only of such parts thereof as are appointed
by our holy Mother the Catholic Church, to wit, the Creed, Pater Noster, and
Aue Maria.

An usual pair of Beads commonly consists of one Creed, three Aues, six
Decades, or six times ten Aues more, and seven Pater Nosters. The decade, or
ten Aues is said in remembrance or honor of the ten Commandments of God. The
Creed signifies the Union of our Faith, according to that of the Apostle: One
faith, Ephesians. 4
one God, one Baptism, and therefore is but once said in the Beads. The Pater
Noster betokneth hope, and is seven times repeated, and that for diverse
reasons. First in respect of the seauenfold graces, or gifts of the holy Ghost,
which we still pray for. Secondly for the extirpation of the seven deadly
sins out of us. Thirdly, for the obtaining of the seven contrary virtues.
Fourthly for the sincere and pure use of the seven Sacraments. Fifthly, for the
Christian practicing of the seven Works of Mercy, as well spiritual, as
temporal.

The Aue signifies Charity, and is repeated sixty three times after the Creed,
in saying over the beads, to wit thrice after the Creed and ten times in each of
the six decades; and this for three causes, First in honor and remembrance of
our B. Ladies age, who lived on earth sixty three years. Secondly, to
insinuate unto us the frequent use of works of mercy, and of all moral
Virtues, whose good habits help our weak powers with their assistance in all
our operations. Thirdly, and especially, to teach us, that the Works of charity
ought far to surpass in number and value, all the actions of intellectual
and voluntary habits.

Of the Creed in general. CHAP V.
IN saying our beads we always begin with our Creed, By the Creed Faith is
expressed.
which is a brief sum of our faith, and a bridgment of Christian Religion.
The reason why we begin with our Creed, is, because the devout saying of it, is
an express profession of our faith, which is to be made in the first place.
Quia accedentem ad Deum oportet credere: because he that comes unto God must
believe. Again prayer is an access of the Creature to his Creator, which can
by no means be more advanced, then by an act of Faith. Lastly, the foundation
of justice, which by prayer we seek for, is Faith, which is comprised in our
Creed. To this purpose the Apostle says: with heart we believe to justice, Romans
10.
and with mouth we make profession to salvation.

In which sentence we are taught two things touching our Creed. First an inward
action of our soul, which is nothing else but a spiritual motion of our mind
and will toward God the giver of all virtues, and the only rewarder of the
same. What faith is.
For faith is an infused habit, proceeding from God, which perfecteth our
Understanding, and inclines our Will with a pious affection to believe in God,
and consequently by the means of his divine grace, to attain unto
Justification.

Secondly, we are taught an outward action of our body, consisting in a
profession of our faith, when with words we outwardly make known to others
that faith which inwardly in heart, and mind we believe: Which action also
co^ioyned with charity does bring us unto Justification. Wherefore in saying the
Creed, we must attend to four things. First to the words, and their meaning.
Secondly to the persons to whom they are directed, who are always God the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Thirdly to the mysteries comprised in
those twelve articles, which are many, and admirable. Fourthly to the manner
and fashion wherewith the B. Trinity does communicate to mankind those his
manifold, and exceeding great benefits.

Of the words of the Creed, and their sense. CHAP. VI.
ADMIRABLE are the sacred words of the Creed, because they are signs, leading
us into an Ocean of divine mysteries, whose signification is mystical: upon
which I will only stay, omitting the pious conceits of some upon the number of
the words, which in latin are 75. but in other vulgar languages 77. for the
latin word Credo in all vulgar tongues is two words, I Believe, Ie crey, Io
Credo etc. which word being twice inserted into the Creed, makes up seauenty
seven; and these words signify the whole essence of our belief. I will not
say these 77. words in our Creed signify the 77. Matthew. ^.
times we ought to forgive our brethren when they offend us, nor that they
betoken the Grand Iubiley, because S. Luke writes in the 77. generation from
Adam downward, Christ our Savior was borne, Genesis 4.
who as Origin and diverse other of the Fathers upon Genesis have noted, did
superabundantly satisfy for all mankind. These and the like pious conjectures
omitted, I will come to the signification of the words.

The sense and meaning of these words in our Creed, ought to be discussed
seriously, and with great attention, for they import, and signify marvelous
things. Wherefore as the Israelites departing out of Egypt carried away with
them the borrowed treasures of the country, Exodus 3.
and that by Gods own appointement: so the twelve Apostles, the pillars of the
Catholic Church, at the departure out of Jury, and dispersing into the whole
world, made (by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost) this abridgement of
Christian belief, carried it away with them, as an infinite treasure, and
dispersed it through out the whole world.

And to the end thou may orderly proceed in finding out the true literal
and mystical sense of every word, begin with the first word of thy Creed,
which is Credo, and by it learn how to meditate upon the rest. Search, and
diue into it profoundly; this only word I assure thee, is sufficient to hold
thy understanding employed all they life time. In this one latin word, are
these two English, words, I believe. In this word I, thou may contemplate al
things belonging to man his substance, his being this man and not an other, his
body and soul united, and also separated, his inclinations, end, helps,
miseries, whence they do spring, and the like. And when by consideration of
these particulers thou have satisfied thine understanding, endeavor to stir
up in thy will, some good affection of love, hope, joy, desire, or
thanksgiving etc. For this is the end of all prayer, to praise God, and to
inflame our affection in his love, detesting sin and desiring grace, and all
virtues: which good affection being once enkindled in thy heart, by the help of
Gods grace, endeavor to continue, and increase it by fervent prayer,
recollection, purposes of good life, and so begin thy Beads, desiring perfect
obtaining of that good purpose and affection, which thou seelest in thy soul.
And thus by example of this first Word thou may perceive the manner how to
understand and consider with spiritual profit the rest of the words of the
Creed.

Of attention to the Divine Persons. CHAP. VII.
THIS attention here required is unto the Majesty of the three Divine Persons,
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; who are three distinct
Persons, united in one Nature: these Persons are expressed in our Creed by
these terms, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The nature of these Persons is
expressed by the word, God. The chief object of prayer.
Unto these Persons, as to the chief object of thy prayers, thou art to have a
serious attention, considering with thy self, that in ^aying thy Creed thou
make the profession of thy faith before these divine Persons, whose majesty
is such, that all the reverence, and attention thou can make, is not
sufficient to show the least part of thy allegiance: and having duly
considered, before what a Majesty thou treatest, say devoutly thy Creed in
professing thy belief touching these divine Persons.

Before the first Aue, say: O God the Father of heaven, essentially endued with
all perfection, have mercy upon me; and so offer up thy Memory in saying the
first Aue. Before the second, say: O God the Son, Redeemer of the world,
essentially endued with all perfection, have mercy upon me, and so offer up to
him thine Understanding, in saying the second Aue. Before the third Aue, say: O
God the holy Ghost, sanctifier of the whole world, essentially reple^ished with
all perfection, have mercy upon me, offering up to him thy Will, and Affection,
as devoutly as thou can. Then say the first Pater ^oster, in asking grace
fruitfully ^o meditate upon the divine perfections, included in the Holy
Trinity.

Before the first decade or ten, consider the first Attribute or Perfection,
Omnipotent.
which is the Omnipotency of God, who can do all things, when, how, and where
he pleases; to whom no creature can ^esist, to whom nothing is either
impossible, or hard to do: who with one word created all things, governs the
world withal facility, and with one blast can annihilate it again. This
omnipotency with all thy soul believe, hope in, love, and adore; to this
submit thy self; of this crave pardon, whom through thy weakness, and frailty
thou have so often offended* To this Omnipotency entierly commend, and resign
thy self beseeching the Saints in heaven to assist thee in loving and praising
this Omnipotency, by saying* Gloria Patri etc. Glory be to God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, because they are omnipotent, As they were in the
b^ginning, now and always, world without end* Amen. This done say one Decade,
or ton Aues, and a Pater noster, in praising his Omnipotency, and in humbly
desiring always to be directed and defended by the same.

Before the second Decade call ^o mind the Infiniteness of God, Infinite.
his power, wisdom, goodness in ^ll his actions etc. For example, ^ehold his
Infiniteness in wisdom; first in so prudently crea^ing Heaven, Earth,
Angels, Men, etc. Secondly in so dis^reetly disposing and ordering all things
in number, order, and measure. Thirdly, in so proui^ently governing the whole
world, and all therein contained. ^ourthly in providing so abun^antly all
necessaries for each crea^ure in his kind. Fifthly in cer^ainly foreknowing from
all eter^ity all future events, till the ^orlds end. And lastly, in
pre^estinating all the elect by most ^onuenient, and sweet means, ^o the
attayning of eternal glory; all which believe, hope for, admire, adore; and
then with the celestial Court thank God most humbly for the same in saying,
Glory be to the Father, Son, an^ the holy Ghost, for their Infiniteness in
Nature, and Power, a^ it was in the beginning, is now, an^ always shall be,
world without end Amen. Then say ten Aues and one Pater noster in praising Gods
Infiniteness, and in humbly beseeching always to be guided, and directed by
it. Eternal.


Before the third Decade, consider the Eternity of God, that he was always,
before the world was made, and, that he shall ever so remain God, thrice
happy* whose Eternity is part of his nature, cause, and measure of all time.
See how all other things had their being, beginning, and continuance from him:
then lifting up thy affection, to adore this true Eternity, say with all the
blessed Inhabitants of heaven, Glory to God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, who are Eternal, as they were in the beginning, and ever shall be, world
without end, Amen. After this say ten Aues and one Pater noster, that thou
may be his faithful servant in this world, and partaker of his glorious
vision in all eternity.

Before the fourth Decade think upon the Imutability or unchangeableness of
God, Unchangeable.
who was, is, and ever shall be the same God he was from Eternity, both in Nature
and Operation, without all chang or alteration whatsoever; so that now he is
the self same God in all respects, that he was a million of millions of years
past, and as he shall be, and continue world without end: for heaven and earth
shall pass and change, but thou (O Lord) remaynest for ever. Here deploring
thy continual decay, and howerly alteration, and admiring his vncha^gablenes,
inuit the Saints, and all Pilgrims of the militant Church, to praise God, in
saying: Glory be to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, for their
unchangeableness, as they were in the beginning, and now, and ever shall be
unchangeable, world without end, Amen. Here say ten Aues and one Pater,
demanding perseverance in Grace, Charity, Purity of life, and all other
virtues.

Before the fifth Decade, look into incomprehe^sible Goodness of God, Good.
who is goodness it self, all other Creatures good by participation of his
Goodness. Furthermore, God is not only Goodness it self and maker of all things
good, but also he works with his creatures all those works which are good:
for without him we can do nothing: Joan. 15.
and in this respect we are called (when we do well) Cooperatours, Joan. 3.
and (as S. Paul says) Coadiutours with God, 1. Cor. 3.
who says of himself: Phil. 4.
I can do all things in him who comfort me: but most plainly of all, the
Prophet Isay teaches us this truth saying: Thou, O Lord, Isa. 26.
our God have wrought in us all our works.

Consider also this ineffable goodness of God which hinders infinite evils,
which the wicked spirittes, and their accomplices evil men would do, if Gods
goodness did not hinder them. Again those evil works which men do bring to
pass by Gods permission, by this goodness of God in the end, turn to the good
of his faithful servants, as witnesses his Apostle: Al things tend, Romans 8.
and cooperate to the good of them that love God. Lastly this goodness of God,
neither is, neither can be cause of evil, but only of good: for of goodness
what can proceed but good? Ose^. 13.
Hence the Prophet says: Thy salvation, O Israel, is of me, but thy perdition
is from thy self. And so being ravished in the love of this inestimable
goodness, implore the assistance of all the Saints, and with them give glory to
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, for their inestimable goodness, as
they were in the beginning, are now, and ever shall be world without end, Amen.
Then say ten Aues, and one Pater Noster in extolling this goodness, and humbly
beseeching to be wholly inamoured of it.

Before the sixth Decade open thine Understanding, Merciful.
and look as well as thou may into Gods mercy, which in all respects is
infinite. First, most firmly believe, that as humane misery (which is the
proper object of Gods mercy The object of Gods mercy.
) surmounteth in greatness all other moral accidents casual unto man (for
misery accompanies al men their souls, bodies, and whatsoever, for it is
their companion into the world, it continually attends them till their dying
day, yea and from some it never parts for all Eternity) so in regard of us,
and our necessities, the mercy of God surpasses all other divine attributes,
Eccl 18. (...). 140.
or powers, as the prophet fitly to this purpose says: The mercy of our Lord
is above all his works.

Secondly, in particular consider the mercy of God the Father, toward
unfortunate mankind, who having but one only begotten Son, Joan. 3.
condemned him to a most cruel death, to restore us to life again.

Thirdly, so unmeasurable is the mercy of God the Son, that he took upon him
our mortality, Romans 8.
suffered for our sakes most shameful reproaches, and death it self, to free
us captives to Satan, and to make us who were vassalls to sin, heirs of his
Kingdom.

Fourthly, God the holy Ghost is so naturally endued with mercy that he in
proper person continually sanctifies, guides, and governs the universal
Church of God in unity of truth, Joan. 14.
even until the worlds end.

Fifthly, all the three divine Persons jointly and equally, are as merciful to
every man in particular, as they are toward all the world in general; and
therefore most truly said S. Augustine: In Confess.
God loves every one man, as much as he loves the whole world: the reason is,
because God loves every man infinitely, and can love all men together but
infinitely.

Sixthly, so ready and attendant is Gods mercy for every man all the time of
this transitory life, Ezech. 18
that at what hour soever any sinner will accept of it, repentant for his
sins returning unto God by amendment of his life, God is most ready to
receive him to his mercy, to indew him with his grace, and to bring him to the
crown of glory. Let no sinner therefore despair of Gods mercy, though he be at
the last gasp, yea and overwhelmed with a world of sins: for greater is Gods
mercy then man's sins or misery, because Gods mercy is infinite.

Lastly consider his goodness in being readier to pardon men al their offenses,
then men can be desi^ons to be pardoned, as appears in Christ toward the
good thief. And here admiring Gods infinite mercy, and craving the assistance
of the celestial spirits, in exalting Gods praises, say: Glory be to the
Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, for their unspeakable Mercy, as it was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. And then
saying ten Aues and one Pater, instantly desire to be always partaker of Gods
mercy. Thus for a taste have I given thee an example how to meditate upon God
Almighty, and the three Divine Persons in Trinity, in saying thy Beads.

Of the Pater Noster. CHAP. VIII.
THE holy Scripture commands us to hope, By the Pater Noster hopers
signified. Joan. 16.
it being the anchor of our salvation. To this end Christ says: Have hope, for
I have overcome. Whereupon the Apostle says: Hope never confounds. The reason
is, because hope is a heavenly Virtue infused by God into our souls, whereby
with a certain confidence, we expect at Gods hands life everlasting. Things to
be prayed for, are of two sorts, either good or bad. For the former, we pray
they may be given us; from the later we pray we may be delivered. Diverse are
the good things we stand in need of, both for soul and body; some spiritual,
others temporal, and all of them help us to the attayning unto our final and
complete happiness. Infinite are the evils, as well ghostly, as bodily, which
greatly encomber us in this our pilgrimage, from which evils we earnestly pray
to be delivered: and all these, both good and bad in general, Matthew. 6.
were by our Savior briefly compacted together in our Pater noster, which
contains in it all the things that are to be hoped for, as also all those
things, that we desire to be delivered from.

In saying the Pater noster, first let thy mind be fixed upon Almighty God, who
is the person unto whom thou offerest thy prayer. Secondly, penetrate the
sense, and meaning of every word, beginning (for example) with the first word,
Our. This word shows, that God is a Father unto us all; and as to all, so is
he to every one. First consider that he would be called Ours, that we should
not repine to offer up our selves, and all we have to him, to obtain that
sweet title to be called his Secondly inflame thy affection, and consider how
happy thou art if thou may rightly say this word Our, for then thou art his,
and he thine. Thirdly in this word embrace thy neighbor, who by it is made thy
brother and fellow heir of Eternal felicity.

Then go to the second word, Father; not Lord, nor Judge, nor Creator, nor
King, or the like; but Father: a name of love, lincking himself unto us, as
near as may be, to make us love him like dutiful children. He is our Father
for six causes. 1. For making the substance of which we are composed. 2. For
casting the mould whereof we were forged. 3. For fashioning the frame of our
bodies. 4. For creating and uniting our souls to our bodies. 5. For bringing
us up and giving us whatsoever we have. 6. Lastly, and especially, for adopting
us heirs to his eternal Kingdom, giving us all the means possible to
attain thereto, guiding, governing, and conducting us thither, as it were by
the hand. Which six points apply to the six Decades.

If follows, Which art, which may also be considered by six points, and may
be applied to the Beads, as the former. First, how God is absolute in himself.
2. How God is only of himself, and independent of any other. 3. And for
himself, not to any further end, being his own blessedness, and end of all
things. 4. How all creatures whatsoever they be, even Angels and men, are of
God, for he made us, and not we our selves 5. All things are in God, for. In
him we live, move, and are. 6 Lastly, to God all creatures belong, as to their
Cause, Maker, Redeemer, Sanctifier, Governor, and last end: for God made all
things for himself.

In heaven, to put us in mind of our Country and inheritance, to which we were
borne: for this place in which we live, commonly called the World, is our
exile, and place of pilgrimage, penance and probation, 2. Cor. 5.
but heaven is our home, City, and country. Now seeing that God is our Father,
let us his children learn, first fully to know the worthiness of our vocation,
Romans 8.
and adoption, who are by grace made the children of God. Secondly to direct
all the course of our life to the attayning of this supernatural end Thirdly,
to moderate with reason all our passions and inclinations; for if God be our
Father, we ought to love and fear him, with the fear and love of children, to
trust in him steadfastly, to rely on him only, and so to govern all our
motions, like well nourtured children, in the presence of our Father who
always is with us, and still beholds us. Fourthly to converse with our
heavenly Father (from whom we cannot fly, because he is every where) most
dutifully, and with all cordial respect, in humility, charity, patience,
obedience, and all other virtuous comportments. Fifthly, not only to conform
our wills to his will, but also quite to cast off our own will, and to put on
his, by taking all things (adversities as well as prosperities) as special
favors sent from him, for our particular good. Sixthly, seeing that this our
Blessed Father has his glorious Palace in heaven, let us abhor all evil
conversation of this world, all excess in apparel, pleasures, feeding of our
senses, and the like actions common to brute beasts and hau^ our hopes and
affections in Heaven, Ephesians. 2.
whose Citizens we are, and of which we are made Coheires with Christ.

Hallowed be thy name. Here we pray for the increase of Gods honor, and
consequently for the increase of the number of the faithful; for by those only
the honor of God is propagated. Also for the augmenting of Gods grace in us,
and extirpation of mortal sin, for without his grace, we can no ways
cooperate to the honor of God, for they must be pure vessels that serve to the
increase of Gods honor, and therefore was S: Paul taken forth to preach the
name of Christ to Nations, because he was Vas el^ctionis, a chosen vessel.

Thy Kingdom come. In this we pray for our Child's part in the other world,
which is life everlasting; as also for the means to attain unto it, which are
infused virtues, and supernatural helps, as grace, faith, hope, and charity,
and all other virtues, especially the eight Beatitudes, which are as it were so
many steps or ascents toward heaven.

Thy will be done. Here we resign our selves entirely to the will of God, for
by wishing the performance of his will, we submit our own to his: in which
resignation (those that have experience of it) do find the greatest comfort and
quietness of mind that may be, and within themselves such a peace, as the world
cannot give. To such a soul as wholly lays her self in the hand of Almighty
God, what can come amiss? Nothing without doubt, for such a soul at the
coming of any accident whatsoever, says not, This such a one has done, mine
enemy, one that has watched to do me this ill turn, and the like; but
contrarily says: This is sent me from the hand of God, the gift of a Father
to his child, his will be done, and blessed be his name for ever.

In earth, as it is in heaven. We pray here like those that are perfect, let us
in all our actions show our selves to be lovers of perfection, in imitation of
our Father, in wishing that Gods blessed will may be performed as exactly here
in earth, as in heaven; we do wish also that there may be no greater repugnance
in our obeying here unto it, then there is in heaven. And in this we pray for
that perfection, which every true Christian ought to aspire unto: and then how
sweet and pleasant would the service of Almighty God be unto every one, in
being wholly conformed unto his holy will, as the Saints of heaven are. This was
that perfection which S. Paul arrived unto, when he burst forth into those
words of perfect resignation: Now I live no more, but Christ lives in me.

Give us this day our daily bread. By these words we ask all necessary food,
as well spiritual as corporal. We say not, Lend us, since we owe him so much
already, that we never shall be able to pay him any thing, but still must
increase our debt. Neither say we, Pay us, for God owes us nothing, but we owe
all what we have unto him: and therefore beseeching his infinite goodness to be
bountiful toward us still, we entreat to give it us. This day, signifies the
shortness of our life, our daily want, our continual failing, Matthew. 6.
and perpetual need of Gods providence toward us. Daily bread, puts us in
mind of only necessaries, and neither to demand, nor care for superfluities.

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. So
that if we will not forgive any that has offended us, God will not forgive us
our offenses, and since this is our own petition, we must take heed we
condemn not our own selves.

Lead us not into temptation, by permitting our frailty to fall; but support us
from falling, that is from consenting to sin.

Deliver us from evil, because without Christ we ca^ do nothing having enemies
on every side of us, and the chiefest of all within us, to wit our selves.

Amen, as a seal is added, which signifies Be it so, if it please thee. And
thus much for the literal sense of our Pater Noster.

Of the Aue Maria. CHAP. IX.
OF all affections, that of the mother to her child is held to be the
tenderest; By the Aue Maria Charity is vn^ rstood.
there being between these two, the greatest natural union and participation
one of the other, that can be. But if this natural affection be raised to a
degree above nature, to wit made spiritual, that is a natural affection
refined or purified; then without doubt there can be nothing added to the
perfection of it In this height of affection which is termed Charity, does
this B. Virgin love mankind, being ever toward him as a most tender Mother, a
Mother of Grace, a mother of Mercy, that is a Mother unto all those, that by
her mediation ask mercy. To this mother let us come with an inflamed
affection, with a fervent desire to imitate her charity and purity.

Now let us proceed to the litteral explication of the Aue Maria. In the first
part, is contained an Honorable Salutation of our B. Lady, uttered by the
Angel Gabriel, sent unto her as a messenger from the B. Trinity about the
business of man's Redemption, in which this B. Virgin was a special Agent. Hail
Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee: she cannot be saluted by a greater
title then full of grace, since in it all other dignities are contained. The
Angel would not call her mother of God for as yet she had not given her loving
consent to be a mother, and yet a Virgin. Yet in calling her full of grace, he
did signify that she was come to such height of perfection, as was not to be
given to any but to the mother of God; and he was commanded so to entitle her,
by that Divine Counsel that sent him. She is called by the Angel full of
grace, that all sinners might have recourse unto her for grace, since being her
self full, we might by our humble prayers touch that vessel, that some of
those graces might fall upon our souls.

Our Lord is with thee, in a most eminent manner, by desire corporally to
inhabit in her to make her the Mother of his only begotten Son. These words
also tell, from whom the greeting came, from the B. Trinity that made her so
admirable a piece of workmanship, that out of her was drawn, by the hand of
the holy Ghost, the Humanity of Christ Jesus God and man. Our Lord was with her
even at the very instan of her Conception, then showing himself unto her a
Lord and Protector, in defending her from the original, and general blemish
of mankind. Hitherto the Angel Now follow the words of S. Elizabeth, admiring
and praising the happiness of this B. Virgin her Cosen.

Blessed art thou amongst women. For six singular privileges, which thou
may apply unto the six Decades. Six privileges that ma^e the holy Virgin
Blessed amongst women.
1. In being chosen out of thousands from all eternity as most fit to bear the
Savior of the world. 2. In giving her obedient consent unto the Angel, who
spoke things she understood not. 3. In containing God the second Person in
Trinity nine months in her sacred womb. 4. In being a mother remaining a
Virgin. 5. In having her own maker all his whole life obedient unto her. 6. In
being privileged immediately after her death, to have her body reunited to her
glorious soul.

And Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, Jesus. This last word explicateth the
whole sentence: for this Blessed fruit of her womb, was nothing else but swet
Jesus; and this fruit grew upon no other ^eethen upon the B Virgin from whom we
receive this pleasant and vital fruit. In this Virgin (a Paradise of
pleasure) these spiritual fruits abound; for co^tayning this one fruit, which
has the nature of heavenly Manna, she satisfies the taste of all spiritual
souls; for Jesus is a fruit containing in it self all delights.

We come now unto the last of these three harmonicall parts, which is sung by
our holy mother the Catholic Church, and adjoined unto the two former parts of
the Angel, and S. Elizabeth. Holy Mary, mother of God, pray for v sinn^rs, now,
and in the hour of our death. Had the Church said only, Holy Mary pray for us,
her high pre-eminence of being mother of God had bin left out. And had it bin
only said, Mother of God, pray for us, her Dignity indeed had bin specified,
but it had not bin made known from what lowliness she was exalted, Luke. 8.
Quia respexit humilitatem ancillae suae, from the humility and lowliness of a
handmaid she was raised to be the mother of God; therefore we say, Holy Mary
mother of God: by Mary, signifying her humility, and by the Mother of God, the
dignity unto which her being humble Mary, raised her.

Pray for us sinners, thou that were exempt from all sin, thou that beganst
the overthrow of sin, thou that know the malice of sin being the mother
of grace pray for v^ sinners, that have so often offended thee, by offending
thy dear Son: who deserve nothing of our selves, Bernard. sermon. 12. in Apoc.
nor can better ask for mercy then through thy Blessed mediation, knowing thy
Son Christ Jesus can deny thee nothing. Of thee therefore, O blessed Virgin,
we beg to pray for us.

Now, and in the hour of our death. By the first word Now, we consider our
present life, the misery and calamity of the same. We beseech therefore the B.
Virgin to assist us in this life of misery, that we may make this Now a passage
unto happiness, which shall last for Ever. And in the h^ure of our death, in
which we have most need of her powerful aid, considering that upon that
instant, our eternal estate depends.

This is the time in which the tree falls, where it shall remain for Ever.
We may here out of these words reflect upon the tender love of the Catholic
Church toward all her children, aduising them by this prayer (which she has
taught them) to make recourse unto so potent a friend, as the Mother of God is,
at this most important hour, after which immediately insueth Ever. Let these
two words Now and Ever sound in thine ear perpetually. Never think upon the
one, but let thy thought embrace also the other. Never let thy conceit stay
upon Now, to wit upon this present life and the miseries thereof, but think
also upon Eu^r, to wit the joys of heaven, prepared for those that pass
through these miseries constantly; and let not the fond and false pleasures of
this life represent themselves unto thee, unless thou also set before thee the
eternity of pains due to those that neglecting their salvation, follow these
short delights in blindness. Let Now commit nothing, that it shall be ashamed to
avouch before Ever: but let both these prove and examine the action of each
other, that so we may Now serving this great Virgin faithfully, enjoy her in
happiness for Ever.

OF THE SIX FEASTS OF OUR B. LADY.
HAVING briefly explicated the Pater, Aue, and Creed, we will descend unto the
feasts of our B. Lady, applying them to our Beads, making trial whether we can
make use of what has bin hitherto said. And beginning with her pure
Conception, we will run through her six feasts, ending with her Assumption;
since most of these festiuities were means unto our Redemption, which ought to
stir up in us the more affection and devotion, to contemplate upon them.

The Conception of our B. Lady. CHAP. I.
CONSIDER, that ordinarily the Conception of man is in sin, The first feast.
Psalm. ^0.
according to that of the Royal Prophet, Et in iniquitatibus concepit me matter
mea: and in sin my mother conceived me.

This sin in children is termed Original sin, as well because it is
derived unto us from our first Parents, The effects of original sin.
as because it possesses every one at his first being, or coming into this
world. This sin infecteth the whole man, body and soul, shuts Heaven
gates against him, making him slave unto Satan.

The penalties of Original sin are diverse: Bodily deformation, all kind of
sickness, and death it self, dimnesse of Understanding, weakness of our Will,
pronesse to sin, and damnation if we dye in it, without the remedy of
Baptism.

Our B. Lady by singular privilege was preserved from this Original sin,
and consequently prevented with grace in her Mothers womb: and at the first
instant of her Conception was endued with all virtues, as Original Justice,
and the like:

She was by the same privilege, adorned with all natural perfections of body,
as health, beauty, strength, and the like graces.

Lastly, she was not subject to any actual sin, not so much as venial,
preserving still entier ^er Original Justice; much less was she subject to
damnation. ^onder every one of these six points according to thy devotion
applying them to the several parts of thy Beads.

The Nativity. CHAP. II.
FIRST consider her no less wonderful nativity: The second feast.
for as she was conceived without sin, so was she borne of her aged mother S.
Anne, as we may piously presume, without all pain.

How joyful to Angels was her birth, because she was to bear the King of
Angels, and to be their Queen.

Glorious to us men was her Nativity, because she was to be the Advocate of
Gods Church, and potent Mediatrix between her Son, and mankind.

Gladsome was her Nativity to the B. Trinity, because she was from al eternity
predestined the Espouse of God the Father, Mother to God the Son, and
Tabernacle to the holy Ghost.

Terrible to the infernal powers was this Nativity of hers, because she was to
bruise the Serpe^ts head. Genesis 3.


Lastly, comfortable to all sinners of the Catholic Church was this Nativity;
because she is borne a mother of mercy. Queen of heaven, and Refuge of
sinners, to whom all have free access, to whom God the Son will deny
nothing; and whose clemency is such as she takes upon her to obtain all
sinners humble petitions.

Apply these points as the former to the six Decades.

The Presentation. CHAP. III.
FIRST, our B. Lady being chosen out of the whole world to be mother of God,
The 3. Feast.
was by degrees disposed to this office; for being only three years old, she
was by divine inspiration presented, and offered up to God in the Temple.

In the sacred Temple, being come to riper years, first amongst all the Jews,
she made a vow of perpetual Virginity.

In the Cloister of this Temple she served God in all Justice and Sanctity of
body and soul; giving an example to all those that abandon the world, to leave
with the world themselves also; for without perfection invertue, she knew no
enclosure to be strong enough against the world; teaching the best and surest
enclosure to be that of our affections.

Fourthly in that retired place, she continually exercised all virtues, and
good works suitable to her calling.

There she mortified that Virginal body of hers, imitating in the spirit of
Prophesy, her Blessed Son, S. Amb. lib de Virgin.
who although he could not be subject unto any rebellion against the law of
reason, yet did by fasting and praying give example to all that followed him,
that the way unto the Kingdom which he promises, is full of mortifications and
crosses.

Being thus trained up in all kind of virtue, hence she was exalted to be the
mother of God. A virtuous life in this world is a disposition to attain unto
happiness in the next.

The Visitation. CHAP. IIII.
FIRST our B. Lady being declared, The fourth feast.
by the message of the Angel, to be the mother of God, took a tedious journey
on foot, passing the mountains toward her cousin Elizabeth to visit her.

Withal patience and spiritual joy she performs this iourny and that with
great speed: for S. Ambrose upon this place says: Devotion done with speed
yeldes most abundant fruit, because there is discovered the fervor of Charity.

Entering into her cousin Elizabethes house, she saluteth her courteously, whose
salutation caused joy both to S. Elizabeth and to her son S. John, yet in her
womb.

Our B. Ladies virtues being deservedly praised by S. Elizabeth she bears her
self notwithstanding most humbly and modestly.

She refers al honor unto God, singing her sacred Canticle: Magnificat
anima mea dominum, my soul does magnify our Lord. In which many mysteries are
contained, and documents for our instruction, how to refer all our actions to
the honor and glory of God.

Lastly, our B. Lady having served with all care and respect her aged cousin, for
the space of three months, retourneth to poor Nazareth with her Spouse S.
Joseph expecting the time of her marvelous delivery.

The Purification. CHAP. V.
FIRST our B. Lady remaining a Virgin, The fifth Fe^st.
and yet now made a mother by bringing forth the light of the world, out of her
humility observed the legal number of days for her retirement; and keeping
all the other accustomed rites, went up to Jerusalem, there to make her great
offer of Thanksgiving for the high dignity bestowed upon her: Quia fecit ei
magna qui potens est, Luke. 1
because he that is mighty has done great things unto her. For great
benefittes, great thanks must be given.

And according to her poverty and purity, she offered a pair of Turtle Doves,
the best gift she could make, instructing us to offer up to God the best we
have, since indeed we give it not, but restore it to him of whom we have
received it.

Consider, that the great gifts offered to her Blessed Son by the three
Kings, were by the B. Virgin and her Spouse speedily given away in alms, since
two Doves were now the best gift they had to offer.

Holy Simeon receiving his Savior into his arms, sings: Nunc dimittis, Luc
2.
now thou do dismiss thy servant, O Lord, because mine eyes have seen thy
^aluation. This holy Saint ha^ing seen his Savior, desired not to live any
longer. Here set^ing before thine eyes Happiness, which is the vision of God,
and the Miseries of this world, make reso^utions worthy of thy choice.

Our B. Lady hearing both holy Simeon and Anne to prophesy of the greatness of
our Savior, stood withal humility in the Temple, converting none of all these
praises to her self, who was ^udged worthy by heaven to bear ^his Savior of
the world.

Lastly, her behavior toward all that were present (in such a concourse of
praises and admirations) was such, as she endeavored to make them esteem of
her but as of an ordinary woman, who needed Purification.

The Assumption. CHAP. VI.
The sixth Feast.
FIRST, the most happy soul^ of this B Virgin separated from her body by death,
is by Angelical powers transported up to heaven.

In like triumph her body by singular privilege is carried up by Angels, and
in all happiness reunited to her soul.

Reflect upon the joy at this union, applauded by the three Persons in the B.
Trinity, and all the Quiers of Angels and Saints.

At the hands of her glorious Son, she receaueth a Crown, of eternal bliss.

She is placed at the right hand of her Son, and proclaimed Queen of Heaven.

Lastly endeavor thou by all means possible, to make this Queen of glory,
adored also here on earth, by drawing and exhorting as many as thou can, to
deuote themselves unto her.

And thus by these six feasts, I have given thee some light how to apply any
mystery to thy Beads. But when thou art grown expert in this kind of Prayer,
thou may either saying thy whole Beads meditate upon one only mystery, as
for example the Conception of this B. Virgin; or else thou may apply to
every decade or ten, one of these mysteries, and so in thy six decades thou
shall run through all the six mysteries.

And thus much concerning the Beads, consisting ordinarily of six decades. Now
we will pass unto the Rosary, consisting of 15. Decades, or 150. Aues, and of
15. Pater nosters.

OF THE ROSARY.
THE Rosary, The Rosary.
which diverse Sodalities both Religious and secular, daily use, is made of 15.
D^cades, or fifteen times 10. Aues, and 15. Pater nosters, and is divided into
three Crowns, each crown containing five Dacades of Aues, and five Pater
nosters. And to proceed with the first five, we will apply unto it the five
Joyful mysteries, to wit, The Annuntiation, Visitation, The Nativity of our
Lord, his Presentation, his finding in the Temple. Which five mysteries are to
be applied to the first Crown, each mystery to a several Decade.

Of the first Joyful mystery, which is the Annuntiation. CHAP I.
CALL to mind the History of the Annuntiation, The first joyful mystery. Luke.
1.
as it is recorded by the Evangelist, in which narration, six points are
remarkable. First the Consultatio^ made in heaven by the three Divine Persons
in Trinity, how they might assist man, and bring him again into the way of
salvation* and no other means was found more expedient, then that the second
Person of the B. Trinity should become man.

Consider then the obedience of the Angel in undertaking and discharging the
Embassage he was willed to bear unto the Virgin Mary, dwelling in N^zareth: as
also how the Angel carried himself toward this chosen Queen, he
discoursing with her in an humble low voice, briefly, and gravely, after the
manner of treating with Princes.

Likewise her Virginal modesty, being troubl^d at the merueilous speeches of
the Angel, and her deep si ence, Luke. 1.
considering with her self what a kind of salutation this was.

Again, Her singular wisdom, ^aving with her self: Quomodo fiet istud? How
shall this be done? conjoined with a purpose of purity, because she knew not
man.

Also her holy fear, Fear not O Mary, thou have found grace before God; for
that the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
ouer-shadow thee.

Lastly contemplate upon the marvelous fruitfulnes promised her in giving her
consent: The obedience of the B. V^rgin highly revvarded.
Behold thou shall conceive and bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his
name Jesus. End this point with admiration at the B. Virgins exceeding
promptnes and humility: Behold the handmayd of our Lord: her courage; Let it be
done unto me; Her faith and confidence: According to thy word; and lastly her
devout thanksgiving: My soul does magnify our Lord.

The Visitation. CHAP. II.
The second joyful my^tery.
SET before thine eyes, the first pilgrimage of our B. Lady, in visiting her
Cousin S. Elizabeth mother of S. John the Baptist; wherein consider these six
points, applying one to every Decade.

First contemplate the B. will of God to be, that this iourny should then be
undertaken by the B. Virgin to sanctify S. John, by her gracious salutation.

The B. Virgin knowing it to be the will of God that she should take this
journey, suddenly, without any delay rose up, and went into the mountains; by
the which the holy Fathers understand perfection in all virtue, at which the
whole Eua^gelical law aymeth.

3. Make thy self present and see the pious strife between these happy women,
allied nearer in virtue then in blood, endeavoring each one to exceed in acts
of humility and charity.

4. If we be forced to discover our own vvorth let us do it as rather being
mortified th^n pleased to make known unto oath rs wh re our measure lies.
The glorious mother of God, although she could not hide from her Cousin the
greatness whereto she was called; yet her humble manner of disclosing it, was
such as could not proceed but from the mother of God, replenished with all
grace and virtue.

5. Then consider the virtues practiced by the B. virgin for the time that she
stayed with S. Elizabeth, which was three months.

6. And out of each of these flowers, suck like an industrious Be some sweet
document: and admiring this Virgin-Mothers virtues, and those of S. Elizabeth,
namely their devotion, diligence, courtesy, and humility, most humbly demand
grace, now to be both prayser and follower of their virtues, and after thy
death, partaker of their glory.

The Nativity of our Lord. CHAP. III.
The third joyful mystery.
GO, and put thy self into the company of sheepheards, and by thy humility and
poverty, dispose thy self for the inuitatio^ of Angels, to go and behold, in
poor Bethlie^ the King of Kings, thy Savior and Reedemer.

1. Consider the B. Virgin being now in her journey, to satisfy the proud law
of Augustus Caesar, being come to Bethleem, there brought forth the Redeemer of
the world Christ Jesus.

2. Jesus thus preferring poor Bethleem, before great Jerusalem for his birth
place, was borne in a stable, all other houses refusing his B. Mother and him,
because they were poor.

3. Behold the wonderful poverty this Blessed Company was reduced unto: he who
provides for all creatures in all abundance, feels the misery and want of
all things.

4. See the B. Mother seeking all means possible, to defend her happy infant
from the injuries of a most sharp season, being the depth of winter, wrapping
the Creator of the world, and maker of al things, in a few simple clouts
having no other company to assist her, but her espouse S. Joseph, and an Ox,
and an Ass.

5. Holy Joseph knowing al what had passed, admireth at this goodness of God,
and reflecteth upon the vision made to the Patriarch Joseph, Genesis 37. Heb. 5.7.
who, in his dream seemed to b^hold the sun, moon, and stars adoring him.
This vision our holy S. Joseph with great humility applied to sweet Jesus, the
newborn Savior, who was infinitely respected by his heavenly Father, being
heard for the reverence that was borne unto him, and adored by the B. Virgin
his Mother, and by Quiers of Angels.

6. Endeavor to imitate this true poverty and profund humility of our B.
Savior and his holy Mother, by exercising, (at last some times) acts of
poverty, to wit the want of some comodity: as also of humility, Virtue is not
^o^ten but by practice.
by preferring others before thy self. And certainly know, that unless thou
practice thy self in these virtues, thou shall not obtain them, much less
the reward due unto them.

The Purification. CHAP. IIII.
SEEING this mystery has bin treated of before in general, The fourth joyful
mystery.
we will here only speak thereof so, as it may inform the acts of our
understanding, and will, in imitation of this B. Virgin.

1. First thou art to consider this Cerimony not to have bin necessary, the B.
Virgin being most pure before, in, and after her happy delivery. Learn to do
works of supererogation which are of exceeding great value, as in punishing in
thy self little offenses with punishment due unto great. And so in like manner
in the exercise of virtues, content not thy self with an ordinary victory over
thy passion, but lift thy self far above it, to the end it may be the
further of from thee, if it should at any time return to assault thee. Let us,
says S. Gregory, debar our selves of lawful things, that we may be the
further off from unlawful.

2. Since thou can not offer, with that charity which this B. Virgin did,
endeavor nevertheless to do it in the best manner thou can. Offer up unto God
all that thou art; offer up daily all thy words, thoughts, and actions.

3. Offering up before Almighty God these thy oblations, endeavor to make them
pure, and let them be the first begotten, to wit, when thou risest, that they
may be patterns to those, that should follow the whole day after.

4. Holy Simeon, received answer of the holy Ghost, Luke 2.
that he should not see death, until he saw first the anointed of our Lord;
the reason of this wonderful privilege was because, as it is recorded, The
way to see God.
he was Just, and Religious, expecting the consolation of Israel.

5. The chief cause why this holy Company resorted thus unto the Temple, was
Jesus: do thou never mingle thine intentions, nor debase them with other
thoughts, but enter into the Temple purely for Jesus, there passing thy time
so, as thou may not offend the eyes of him that beholds the most inward
passages of thy mind.

6. Wish thy self present to see this mystery performed, that thou might
learn to offer the best thou have with the B. Virgin, how to embrace sweet
Jesus with Simeon, and how to praise Gods goodness with all this holy troop.

The finding of Jesus in the Temple. CHAP. V.
ACCORDING to their yearly custom the B. Virgin, and her Spouse S. Joseph, The
fifth joyful Mystery. Luke 2.
leading between them their only Comfort and Consolation Jesus, went up to
Jerusalem, there to adore. Here mark another act of supererogation,
especially in Bl Jesus, whose humanity had always conjoined with it his
Divinity.

2. Behold the voluntary poverty of these happy Pilgrims suffering many wantes
and discommodities in the way, to teach us som^ymes to leave our ease and to
put our selves for Gods sake into some wants, that we may the better humble our
selves, and in a more lively manner imitate these moving examples.

3. The solemnity ended, the parents of Jesus returned homward, and having
travailed one days iourny from Jerusalem toward Nazareth, Luke 2.
at night in their Inn they missed the child, and seeking him amongst their
kinsf^lkes, and acquaintance, they found him not. Note that they did not pass
many days without reflection upon the loss of Jesus; do not thou defer thy
conversion, nor refuse to return by penance into the favor of God, even upon
the very first day of thy transgression.

4. At night in their Inn the^ missed the child: although the vanities of the
world have possessed thee the whole day, yet at night at least find him again
whom thou have strayed from. At night examine thy conscience, and look into
that Inn of thy soul, that has entertained all those passengers, and if thou
find Jesus to be absent, impute it unto thine own great offenses, that have
caused him to leave thee.

5. Seek where Jesus is to be found.
And seeking him among their kinsfolks and acquaintance, they found him not.
Since thou see he is not to be found amongst carnal acquaintance and
kindred, why do thou yet spend thy time in vain, since thou know where
thou seek, thou shall not find him: and if thou find not him, thou
loosest with thy self, all.

6. Lastly, since the world affords thee him not, go into the Temple, a place
pure, segregated from worldly thoughts, The force of good Motions.
there thou shall find him teaching thee, and disputing with the doctors, with
thy perverse will, that thinks it knows much, but it shall find it self
confounded by a child: for every good motion, be it never so young, is
sufficient to confound and put to silence, the most obstinate will that may be.

Of the five sorrowful mysteries. The praying in the garden. CHAP. VI.
WE must not look in this Garden for delights o^ pastimes, The first
sorrovvfull M^stery.
such as the world affoardeth. No fountains here are to be seen, but such as
sweat blood. No Statuaes here are placed, unless thou will behold Jesus
kneeling immovable, and in an agony. No banquets here prepared, only an
Angel appears with a cup of dolours; therefore let none enter into this
Garden but with a firm purpose and desire to see nothing else but causes and
arguments of tears, and bitter compassion.

1. First, sweet Jesus being in anguish of mind, Luke 22.
knowing that the hour of his betraying grew near, he went into the Garden of
Gethsemani to pray; teaching us in all our affliction to make recourse unto
Almighty God by prayer, that being the only way to attain unto the perfect
peace of mind.

2. And his sweat became drops of blood. The Jews had not his first blood
that was shed, but Divine love that wounded him had the honor to draw the
first blood from him: if thou spend thy blood, let it be for Gods cause, and
then thy wounds are honorable.

3. Here our sweet Savior was in an agony, and the blood retired to his
blessed heart, as to the last hold to have assisted it, but his infinite love,
which commanded over this heart, sends back all succor, and refuses aid,
whence proceeds this bloody sweat. Endeavor to aspire unto this greatness of
spirit, as to refuse all consolations, much less to seek after them, when it
shall please God to give thee the privilege to suffer for him.

4. Notwithstanding, not my will but thine be done. This infinite cloud of
sorrow was not able to oppress Christ Jesus, or to remove him from his
resolution to dye for mankind, for we may well perceive by the perfect
resignation of his will to his heavenly Father, that he desired nothing more
then the performance of his will; The only tranquillity in this world.
the cure of all our afflictions is the resigning of our selves up into the
hands of Almighty God.

5. Matt. 17.
He awaketh his disciples and bids them pray least they enter into
temptation. S. Peter and the other two disciples James and John had seen part
of his glory in mount Thabor, and yet here they sleep. No trial is like to
that of affliction: sleep not when Christ desires to suffer in thee, but be
watchful and attent, to receive Gods inspirations.

6. The spirit is ready, but the fle h is weak. The true description of our B.
Savior in his agony, which was nothing but a conflict between the superior
and inferior part of his soul which with this act of resignation were
appeased. Let not the superior part of thy soul, be led by the inferior,
sense guiding reason; but in all thine actions show thy self a reasonable
creature, suppressing al^ sensual desires.

His whipping. CHAP. VII.
CONSIDER how the B. Virgin missing her Jesus, The second sorrowful Mystery.
sought him with pensive heart, and at the last finds him, not in the Temple
disputing, but in Pilates house bloudily whipped; not arguing the case, or
alleging his inocency, but most meekly and patiently receiving the cruelest
blows those bloody executioners could lay on; who striued one with another,
who should exceed either in number, or greatness of stripes.

2. Look upon this spectacle with his B. Mother, and weeping with her, ask
with the deepest sorrow thou can pardon of the^ both, as cause, through thy
sins, of this their so extreme affliction.

3. Behold their cruel manner of tying swet Jesus his hands to a pillar which
reached no higher the^ his knees, As appears by the pillar yet extant in Rome.
to the end there might no part of him be defended from their blows. Blessed
Jesus would let no part of him also be exe^pted from suffering for thee:
Endeavor to suffer somewhat (at least) for him that suffered so much for thee.

4. Amongst all the wounds these hard-harted Jews gave him, As appears in
the holy Syndon at Turin.
two especially procured him most pain, over each hippe one, for there the
force of the whippes met and many wounds were there united.

5. Behold the hands of him that is omnipotent tied fast to a pillar, the
innocent whipped, the creature abusing the Creator, and man God; the Holy of
Holies reviled, and every thing done by contraries, to the end thou might
proceed in order, permitting thy Reason to comaund over thy Sense.

6. In seeing al these insolences and enormities committed against thy Savior,
look still into the causes, why he would suffer so much; and thou shall find
thy self to be the cause, who art not yet content with these his torments, but
do endeavor daily to increase them (as much as lies in thee) by thy
greiuous offenses. For one of thy ungrateful sins committed against his
goodness afflicts him more, then all these bloody stripes, and millions o^
wounds.

His crowning with thorns. CHAP. VIII.
GO forth with the daughter^ of Jerusalem, The third sorrowful Mystery.
and behold thy King crowned, not with a diadem of honor and power, but with
a sharp wreath of thorns in derision and contempt.

1. First consider the malicious intent of the Jews to appare^ him like a
ridiculous King, applying this unto sweet Jesus for saying he was their King:
they crown him therefore with thorns place in his hand a reed for his scepter,
and apparel him with an old purple ragge.

2. Behold the cruelty of the setting on of this crown of mockery; they press
it, and beat it upon those sacred brows to the end the sharp pointed thorns
should every one pierce a vein; that no part of that divine head should want
torment; and that no part of this cruel diadem should be left unused, those
thorns (which were few) that lighted not upon the sacred head of Jesus, were
sent by divine love, as darts to penetrate thy stony heart.

3. No doubt his Blessed face was all imbrued with the abundance of blood
continually falling from his wounded head, yet had it not hitherto suffered any
thing (only the traitorous kiss of his fallen disciple excepted) and therefore
he permits a wicked Jew to box and buffet the same, in the beholding where
of Angels place their happiness. The same was also spit upon, and made the most
deformed place of all.

4. Thus whipped, crowned, apparelled, and in all respects infinitely infused,
he is brought forth to the Jews, to know whether yet they were satiffied in
his punishment: Behold the man. And here before thou depart, spend some tears
in beholding this Man that is showed thee. Think with thy self what an
infinite love must this Man bear thee that would be brought into this misery
merely for thee. Behold the man, this is he that left Heaven, the seat at the
right hand of his Father, and would be borne poorly, circumcised severely, in
agony sweat bloudily, whipped cruelly, crowned scornfully, and all to gain thy
love. This was he* Behold the man, if thou can for weeping.

5. Imagine thy self to hear those incredulous Jews, crying out unto Pilate
with open mouth, Free not this man, not this, but Barabbas. Do not only imagine
thy self to hear and see this as a looker on, but thou may well think
thou did bear a part of this hellish music, As often as vv^ follovv
unlawful pleasures we prefer Barabbas before Jesus
in so often times preferring soul sensual delights before the divine
inspirations of thy Savior, giving Barabbas life, and crucifying in thy soul
sweet Jesus.

6. Lastly see the fond ceremony of Pilate to condemn thy Savior, and yet
pretend innocence by washing his hands. How often have thou through thine
offenses condemned swet Jesus, extinguished the good motions sent thee from the
holy Ghost with thy idle pretenses and euasions. This washing thy hands will
not hold for a sufficient excuse at the day of judgment: souls there shall be
looked upon: cleanse thine here by penance that it may be found pure there, and
capable of eternal glory.

The bearing of his Cross. CHAP. IX.
BEHOLD how sweet Jesus after all these conflicts with his enemies, knowing he
should end with victory, The fourth sorrowful My^y^ry.
marches forth toward the place of his last battle, bearing the ensign upon
his shoulders, wherein he was to conquer; this we may well imagine to be the
discourse of Jesus within himself.

1. But since we are yet in sorrows, let us here consider him loade^ with an
heavy Cross, and drawn hastily away toward the place of execution.

2. How fit was Jesus to bear this weight, being extreme weak and faint
through the loss of so much blood, in his sweat in the garden, his whipping,
and crowning: Consider his infini^e goodness toward thee, who will never lay a
greater weight upon thee then thou art able to bear.

3. He himself faints under the Cross, and another is compelled to help
him. Admire his seuerenesse toward himself, and his me knes toward thee,
telling thee, that the yoke which he will lay upon thee is sweet, and the
burden light. Imitate thy Savior in this point: be severe unto thy self,
mild, and gentle toward others.

4. Sweet Jesus beholding the multitude that followed him out of the gates of
Jerusalem, and diverse tender-harted women lamenting him, turned and said unto
them: Luke 23.
daughters of Jerusalem weep not upon me, but weep upon your selves, and upon
your children. Imagine thou did hear him most meekly say the same unto thy
soul, not absolutely forbidding thee to compassionate his sufferings, but
chiefly to greiue upon thy self, who have bin cause of this his bitter
Passion, and through daily offenses do as it were increase the same.

5. Being come up unto mount Caluary, after their rude pulling and haling of
him; They gave him to drink win mingled with myrrh, and he took it not: Matt.
17.
Whether this were a comfortable drink they offered him, that he might live to
endure yet greater torments, or were it noisome, since tasting it, he would not
drink, I leave to thy devout consideration.

6. And now being ready to crucify him, they hastily pulled of his garments,
which being fast cloven to his festered wounds, set those bloody fountains
again on running, to the excessive torment, and weakening of dolorous Jesus:
and here weeping (if thou can tears of blood) lay thy self down at the
feet of thy tormented Savior, and keep that precious blood from being lost,
opening thy heart to receive it.

His crucifying. CHAP. X.
AS thou approachest to contemplate the bitter Passion of our Savior, The
fifth sorrovvfull Mystery.
so therein comes he nearer and nearer to the consummating of thy Redemption.
Here see, how far thy love can extend it self toward sweet Jesus, that
loves thee unto death.

1. View the sacred body of Jesus flung down upon the ground, and being drawn
unto the Cross, was laid rudely thereon. Sweet Jesus endured this with
unspeakable patience, Isa. 7.
behauing himself like a lamb drawn to the slaughter.

2. There were those sacred hands and feet cruelly pierced with nails, which
wounds being made in the most feeling parts of the body, caused unto Jesus
greater grief then any he had yet felt.

3. Thus mild Jesus being nailed in form of a Cross, is lifted up into the
air, there to be exposed unto all lookers on, as a pattern of dolor and
misery-Heare him in the Prophet crying out: Of all ye that pass by the way,
attend, and see if there be any grief like unto my grief.

4. Thus placed in the air betwixt heaven and earth, a true mediator, hear
him crying out to thy soul: Christ upon the cross, a true mediator. Joan. 12.
If I be exalted from the earth, I will draw althings unto my self. See thy
Savior exalted from the earth and yet thou remaynest upon earth, together
with thy earthly affections; accuse not thy Savior, and say, thou art not
drawn: but accuse thine own perverse affections, that feeling him draw thee,
refusest to follow him.

5. Consider the fond wisdom of the world in conspiring here with the enemies
of Jesus, VVorldly vvisdome confounded.
to expose him thus ignominiously, to the end he might be forsaken of all, and
that the contempt of the world which he preached, might by this reproachful
death of his, be quite (with him) extinguished. Who therefore knowing Jesus to
be able to have freed himself (if he had pleased) from all these miseries,
would not prefer misery before worldly felicity, and with the Saints of God,
a crown of thorns before the diadem of Princes? None without doubt, but those
that love not Jesus, since if they truly love him, they cannot but love to
imitate him.

6. Lastly, placing thy self under thy Savior crucified, reflect upon thy
happy choice of that holy refuge, being there defended from all assaults of
thine enemies. Raise in thy soul acts of love toward this loving Savior of
thine, and give him thy affection, since thou have nothing else to give, for
nothing can thou give more acceptable.

And thus much for these five sorrowful mysteries. And in this last I have
purposely abstained from speaking in particular of the five sacred wounds of
our Savior upon the Cross, of his speeches uttered there, and of the
marvelous signs then showed, intending to give thee points to meditate upon
them a part.

Of the five Glorious Mysteries.
Of Christ his Resurrection. CHAP. XI.
LEAVING sorrows, and passing beyond joys, we mount here unto the
consideration of these mysteries which are in themselves glorious, The first
glorious Mystery.
and are of power (if we profitably contemplate upon them) to make us also
glorious; since the light of our soul is increased by nothing more, then by
contemplation of divine things, the mind drawing, as it were, into it self the
object upon which it fixes it self, the which being glorious, cannot but
impart unto the soul some of the light wherewith it is endued.

1. And now in this Resurrection of our Savior, fix the eye of thine
understanding steadfastly upon that glorious body which thy mind has set before
it. Behold it casting forth beams of light, penetrating the monument where it
lay, dazeling the eyes of the guard that kept it, and through his own power
raising himself in that admirable manner which thy faith teaches. Adore thy
rising Savior, and endeavor to rise with him, since thou have long bin dead
in sin, Penance rea^ueth those former ^ood vvo^k^ whi h sin had k^lled.
arise by penance, which is of that power that it reuiueth thy former good
works which were before killed, by sin.

2. If thou look into the causes why the body of our Savior should now
appear more glorious then either in his birth, or in the rest of his life,
many will represent themselves unto thee. As for example, he being now as it
were no more of this world, nor to converse with men, he resumed unto himself
that robe, which he had till his death voluntarily laid aside, and by this
means he would triumph over death and hell. But I would have thee piously to
imagine great part of the brightness of this body, to proceed from those
precious wounds of his, which now in heaven give forth extraordinary light.
Adore those wounds and seek occasion to suffer for God, since sufferings are
the seeds of glory.

3. In this mystery we will also comprehend the aparitions of our Savior,
first to his B. Mother comforting her by his presence, and committing to her
care his beloved disciples, and in them all good Christians. Behold the joy of
the B. Virgin, in beholding him, whom she knew to be hers although since she
saw him he seemed unto her much advanced in glory.

4. Next he appears unto the blessed Magdalen, Luc. 4.
out of who^e he had cast seven devils. Marc. 16.
Behold the care sweet Jesus has of comforting that soul whom he has once
converted. Contemplate the affectionate discourse of the B. Magdalen with him
in habit of a Girdener; and having once known him, she cries straight Lord,
that is, Commander of my soul. As soon as thou perceauest thy soul moved
from God Almighty, cry with out all delay as this happy Penitent did, Lord,
that is, I most humbly thank thee for thy blessed inspiration, thou shall
command over my soul, and it shall obey thee as Lord.

5. He joins himself with two of his disciples in their way to Emmaus, where
having many discourses with them, Luke 24.
and arguing their incredulity, vouchsafing also to suppe with them, he
presently vanished away. Hear the Disciples say: Nonne cor nostrum ardens erat
in nobis, Luke 24.
dum loqueretur in via? Was not our heart burning in us, whiles he spoke in the
way, and opened unto us the Scriptures? Whiles thou trauailest in this world
upon the way toward thy country and true inheritance, seek by thy life and
conversation to have Jesus still with thee, and thy heart cannot but burn with
his love.

6. Lastly, he makes himself known to his disciples gathered together in
Jerusalem, saying unto them: Pax vobis, ego sum. Luke 24.
Peace be with you, it is I. Our B. Savior found them together, and yet he
wishes unto them peace: to let us understand, that the peace of the mind is
that which he requires in us, which he found wanting in his disciples, who
were yet wavering in believing the mystery of his Resurrection He tells them,
It is He. If thou find in thy rebellious nature repugnance in having charity,
and peace with thy neighbor, hear B. Jesus telling thee, It is I, who inioyne
thee to have peace with all, It is I, who for thee etc. And so run through the
parts of Christ's Passion, and imagine him most lovingly alleging his
sufferings, and by them entreating thee to have peace, and to forgive thine
enemies.

His Ascension. CHAP. XII.
THIS our potent Redeemer Christ Jesus having run his race of perfection, The
second glorious Mystery.
and absolute example to all Christians his followers, beginning to be our
instructour from his very birth, till his life was consumated upon the Cross,
and after his glorious Resurrection, out of his infinite love to his B. Mother,
and to his disciples staying yet upon earth forty days, appearing unto them in
a most comfortable manner, instructing them how to behave themselves in his
absence, is now called by his Eternal Father to come unto him, and to ascend
unto his Throne of glory.

1. In their sight he was elevated. Act. 1.
Consider with thy self the desire the holy disciples had of longer enjoying
their glorified master, believing in him now more firmly then ever, yet even
in the wanting of this heavenly comfort they are most resigned, expecting the
coming of the holy Ghost.

2. The hour of our Savior his Ascension being come, behold the large
blessing he bestowed upon them, and specially upon his dearest Mother,
promising her a crown of immortal glory for her Motherhood toward him and
his disciples; and so giving thanks (yet here upon earth) unto his Eternal
Father for establishing of his Church by his means, and for the opening of
heaven again unto mankind, in their sight he is elevated.

3. And a cloud received him out of their sight: Exodus 33.
The eyes of mortal men cannot behold glory, and live, which is as much to
say, this world is not a place of glory but of misery, our eyes are opened and
made capable of glory by death. Hence we may see that even to the eyes of these
blessed men, glory is denied, and a cloud is interposed: which as it did in
them, so let it in us increase acts of divine hope, one day to see this King of
glory face to face, without any Eclyps, Let our life be conformable to our hope.
or interposition of clouds. Let thy life here upon earth be conformable to
this hope of thine, having for the ground of thy hope thy cooperation with Gods
goodness.

4. Viri Galilaei quid statis aspicientes in caelum etc. Ye men of Galiley why
stand you looking into heaven? Act. 1.
Consider the ecstasy of this holy compamy, following their dearest beloved
Jesus, as far as their eyes could carry them, and not being able to pursue
him further, they stand fixed in contemplation, and with their affections
looking into heaven. But our Savior appointed Angels to comfort them, and ask
why they stood thus looking into heaven; which was not only an awaking unto
them, but an admonition, that since they were not yet to follow him, before
they had also dyed for him, as he had don before for them, they should return
unto Jerusalem, and expect the promised Comforter.

5. Hic Jesus sic v^ni^t quemadmodum vidistis etc. This Jesus (say the Angels)
shall so come as you have seen him going into heaven, to wit, in the like
glory and majesty. And as now he asce^deth in triumph carrying with him the
trophies of his victories over the world, and infernal powers: so shall he
come in the latter day to show himself a Judge of mankind. Terror unto those
who love not Christ his Cross.
Then shall his glorious Cross appear, unto the which whosoever has not bin
conformable, shall not be accounted off as his. Adore thy Savior here
ascending and through thy perfect imitation of his sufferings, arm thy self
against this his terrible coming, who shall be as a severe and impartial judge,
not as an indulgent Redeemer.

6. Lastly return with these disciples to Jerusalem, and imitating their
union in spirit, expect the coming of the Holy Ghost. If thou desire to know
Gods holy will, retire thy self as they did, and in this inward attention unto
the voice of thy Savior, persevere praying to know his divine will, and no
doubt but he will impart it unto thee, Luke 12.
which, when thou know put it in practice, otherwise the imputatio^ of
knowing the will of thy master, and not performing it, will lie heavy upon
thee.

The coming of the holy Ghost. CHAP. XIII.
YOU have seen in the precedent mystery what diligent preparation these holy
followers of Christ made, The third glorious Mystery.
to the end they might be more fit vessels to receive the holy Ghost. And
besides the former points, of their peace, and unity amongst themselves, and
retyring from the conversation of the world, it is moreover specified in holy
Scripture, that the better to make this retirement of theirs, Act. 1.
They went up into an upper chamber: Of which words I would have thee a pious
interpreter, and to imagine this upper room to be the superior part of the
four, to wit thy reason, in which thou must dwell, whenever thou desire to
know the will of God, never staying below in the sensual part, which in such a
business serves for nothing but to blind thine understanding. Let thy sense be
commanded by reason, and it will presently teach thee, that God is to be served
before the world, and the Creator before the Creature.

1. Consider at the coming of the holy Ghost, There was made ^ sound from
heaven, Act 2.
as of a vehement wind coming, by which noise, The power of the holy Ghost.
thou may consider the power of the holy Ghost, which, as it oftentimes st
rreth up in us great conflicts, between our own perverse nature, and Gods
Grace, that offers to enter into it; so also it makes us most valiant and
constant in the service of Almighty God, and the maintayning of his glory; the
sound pre-figuring unto us the difficulties which outwardly may arise by the
constant profession of his holy name.

2. Most fitly is the coming of the holy Ghost expressed by fire, the sign of
love and charity, the holy spirit proceeding from the Father, and the Son, by
a feruorous act of love. Never resist this holy spirit, which will breath
divine love into thy soul, separating thine affections from earthly things.

3. No sooner had these fiery tongues lighted upon the heads of these holy
disciples, but with the gift of tongues, which was then infused into them, they
do speak of the great works of God. Imitate the fervor of these, and let
never the grace of God be void in th e, 1. Cor. 15.
but put in practice those gifts which God has given thee by using them
sincerely in his service.

4. Consider how incapable of spiritual things those are, who measure all
things by the conceit of the world; this gift of tongus is interpreted in the
Apostles to proceed from madness, or from some excess committed. Let not the
fond interpretation of the world hinder thee from the service of God; for if
the Cross of Christ were (as the Apostle says) to the Gentiles a foolishnes,
and even to the very Jews a scand^ll, 1 Cor. 1.
never be detected if the world laugh at thy proceedings, which it
understands not; Matt. 10.
for the disciple must not place himself above his Master.

5. The cooperation of these holy disciples with the grace of God was such, as
they were all replenished with the holy Ghost, working miracles in the face of
Jerusalem, Act. 5.
and their very shadows were potent to heal infirmities. At the gate of the
Temple S. P^ter gives an alms of health to a lame creature from his Nativity.
Act. 3. Act. 2.
He conuerteth three thousand at his first Sermon. See of what great virtue the
holy spirit is, without which, neither in thy self, nor in others thou can
make conuersions.

6. Beholding with thy self attentively how this spirit is attained unto, how
necessary it is to have it, and how easily it is lost; make resolutions in thy
soul fit for one who has this spirit, knowing it gives life unto thine
actions; and abhor sin that expels it.

The Assumption of our B. Lady. CHAP. XIIII.
The fourth glorious Mystery. Cant. 8.
BEHOLD this glorious Virgin ascending, Flowing in delights, leaning upon her
beloved: and with all contemplate upon our B. Saviors tender affection toward
his dearest Mother, requiting (as it were) her love, who in his infancy was
borne in her blessed arms, and leaned upon her; now he assisting her in this
glorious triumph, bears her up toward the place of her Eternal Happiness.

1. Thou may here consider the happy passage of this B. Virgin out of this
life (fear not by considering this death to fall back unto sorrowful
mysteries since death is here glorious) how the Apostles dispersed through the
whole world, were miraculously brought together, to be at this glorious
departure of the mother of God. Together with the Apostles were also there
present S. Denis, Dionys. ad Timeth. Damas. de dormit. Deip.
S. Timothy Disciple unto S. Paul, and S. Hierotheus. Ponder the excessive joy
of these Saints behoulding the troops of Angels attending the instant of her
happy souls departure, ready to accompany it into heaven. No grief could
here enter, since all things gave arguments of joy, and those tears that fell
from the Apostles when the B. Virgin made her last pathetical speech unto them,
were tears of comfort, and consolation.

2. As S. Denis writes, the B. Virgin ending this mortal life and beginning
an immortal, Ep^st ad T m^th.
S. Thomas was absent, and coming to Jerusalem three days after her
departure (all which time S. Denis says, that himself with the rest heard
most melodious harmony of Angels) and understanding she was buried in
Gethsemani, requested he might behold her dead, whom he was unfortunate in not
seeing to dye.

3. And to satisfy the devotion of S. Thomas they opened the monument, ib d.
which breathed forth most sweet savors, Consider the antiquity of this holy
tradition.
and finding the body taken away; they al firmly believed, it was also by the
hands of Angels carried into heaven, and reunited to her glorious soul, this
privilege being but comfortable to the rest with which she was endued in her
life.

4. As in this, so in other verities, reverence the authority of Traditions in
the Catholic Church which has devoted it self even from the Apostles time
unto this glorious mystery of the Assumption of the mother of God.

5. Consider the true resignation of this holy company assembled at the blessed
departure of the mother of God, al of them bearing that respect unto her
living, as they now doubted not to find her in heaven a most careful mother of
them. Deuote thou thy self (by the imitation of these thy holy predecessors)
unto this B. Virgin that thou may also find her a Mother, and mediatrix of
Grace.

6. Lastly, let thy soul affect with an extraordinary love, this holy mother
of Grace, particulerly in this her sweet departure out of this life, and in her
miraculous Ascension; begging by the merits of them both, that she will assist
thee with her potent care at the hour of thy death, that thou may enjoy her
for ever in bliss.

The Coronation of our B. Lady. CHAP. XV.
SINCE thou art to contemplate upon this high mystery of the Coronation of the
Queen of heaven, The fifth glorious Mystery.
dwell willingly in those celestial parts with thy mind, and till thou have
accomplished thy devotion, look not down upon earth, nor to the distractions
it bears, and say unto thy mind, with holy Macarius the Eremite: Thou have
Angels, Archangels, Cherubims, Ioachimus Perionius in vita.
and Seraphims, yea God himself for thy object. Make therefore for a while thy
abode in heaven, since no where can be found so noble objects. But it were too
much for thee to have thy mind so obedient unto thee, as this Blessed Saints
was, which for the space of two whole days together remained fixed upon those
heavenly delights, without any distraction at all.

1. First behold this celestial Queen, in this day of her Coronation, most
beautifully adorned withal perfections both of mind and body, all the blessed
inhabitants of Heaven attending her, and rejoicing at the increase of her
glory. If these happy souls be so joyful at their Queens exalting, what
ought thou to be, since thou art far off from that happiness, and desire
to attain unto it by her mediation.

2. Behold the three Blessed Persons in Trinity jointly cooperating to the
triumph of this glorious Virgin, all of them placing with one consent a Diadem
of glory upon her head, the reward of her faithful service to their Deity in
this world. And marvel not at the extraordinary glory she is endued with, but
consider the high vocation she was called unto, and in how great a business she
was employed in this world, and how completely she performed the same.

3. Contemplate the allegiance which all the Orders of Angels, with the rest of
the Blessed Souls in Heaven, performed to their new crowned Queen, all
singing her praises, and extolling her dignity and worthiness.

4. This crown of glory imagine to be her most perfect beholding of Almighty
God, The B. Virgins Crown.
(as much as any pure Creature can do) receiving from him as from the fountain
of al glory and light, these her beams of brightness.

5. According to the capacity of every soul glory is infused: some are more
glorious then others, and yet all full of glory. This glorious Virgin was full
of grace here upon earth, and therefore must needs be full of glory in heaven;
which fullness of glory proceeds from the happy vision of Almighty God, which
she enjoys, according to the large measure of her merits.

6. Lastly, rejoice in the highest degree thou can, at the happy estate of
this Queen of Glory; and think no small happiness redoundeth unto thee, since
thou have chosen for thy Patroness, and Advocate one so glorious and powerful;
and renew thy fervent desires to serve her with all fidelity, laying open
before her eyes of mercy thine afflictions, and begging redress at her
merciful hands, by her potent intercession to her Son.

And thus I have brought thee to an end of these considerations upon the
fifteen mysteries of the Rosary, which (as thou have seen, are divided into
Joyful, Sorrowful, and Glorious, the which thou may not unfitly apply unto
the three Estates of men in this world, The application of these mysteries.
who carefully work their salvation, to wit, of those who begin, those who
profit, and those who are perfect: the which three estates are termed by
spiritual men, the Purgative, Contemplative and Unitive. For by the Sorrowful
mysteries we may comprehend grief for our sins past, which is the way to
purge us, since penance is the next bath unto Baptism. By the Joyful we may
understand Contemplative when we meditate and ponder upon those Mysteries which
are full of joy. And lastly to the Glorious we may fitly apply the estate of
Union with Almighty God, since Glory is nothing but an effect of this happy
Union, unto which we all aspire, it being the end whereto we were created.

OF THE SEVEN Words of our Savior upon the Cross, applied unto the seaue^
Days of the Week.
HAVING ended the Rosary, I intend to lead thee into the contemplation of the
seven words spoken by our Savior upon the Cross, applying each word or
sentence to a several day of the week; that thou may the better harken
unto this sweet Savior of thine, who never leaves preaching unto thee. For
upon his bitter Cross he teaches thee these divine documents, showing even at
his death, the exceeding love he bare unto thee, being then most mindful of
thee, that thou might the oftener remember him, and chiefly upon his Cross.

THE FIRST WORD. Pater ignosce eis, quia nesciunt quid faciunt. Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do. CHAP I.
FIRST consider the exceeding love of our Savior showed in Luke 23.
these words, A meditation for Sunday.
whose afflictions (although they were extreme) could not make him forget our
misery, but that crowned with thorns, torn with whippes, wearied out with
pains, his sacred hands and feet pierced with gross nails, he would yet beg
pardon for his enemies, neglecting his own painful estate. Love this loving
Savior of thine, and love him ardently, since thou can never love him
enough, who loved thee so entierly.

2. He seeks all means possible how to obtain their pardon, for he calls
upon God by the name of Father, a name of meekenes, a name of mercy; as if he
should say: I thy obedient Son who suffer here upon the Cross, call upon
thee my Father, to forgive them, for they know not what they do. In imitation
of thy Savior, forgive thine enemies, and endeavor to make others to do the
like, diminishing their errors and hiding their offenses.

3. Consider that our Savior did not only pray for these present persecutors
of his, but for all who ever did, or shall offend him, even from our first
Parents to the worlds end; and imagine that when thy dearest Savior pronounced
these words, he beheld every particular sin of thine, pondered the
circumstances, considered the occasions, and marked the great malice of thy
sin, in despising him, and preferring before him some idle transitory
pleasure, and yet would ask thy pardon, so earnestly excusing thine offense.
Oh then love this ardent lover, and weep bitterly that ever thou have offended
him.

4. One only offense in the Angels was eternally punished, God more severe to
Angels then to men.
and yet for thy many offenses the second Person in Trinity makes
intercession, and chooses his time when he knew he should move his Father
most unto compassion. Let fear be a companion unto thy love in this place, for
as he beggeth pardon, so can he beg revenge, and punish men, as well as
Angels.

5. Our actions ought to be suitable to our words: we are convinced in our
understanding that the perfect imitation of our Savior is to forgive our
enemies, and if it be asked of us, whether we ought to do it, we acknowledge
that we ought. Let therefore our actions be conformable to our opinion, by
heartily, and willingly for giving our enemies, imagining it to be (as really it
is) an act of the greatest courage that may be; true Fortitude consisting in
the conquest of our selves.

6. Lastly, consider what great rewards are prepared for those that are perfect
imitatours of Christ; neither is this a point of high perfection or counsel,
and not a commaundment for if we forgive not our enemies, we daily give
sentence against our selves, desiring God to forgive us no otherwise, then we
our selves forgive our enemies.

These six points apply to the six Decades of thy beads, and so consequently do
with the meditations following, humbly beseeching the Mother of Grace to
obtain for thee those virtues which are treated of.

THE SECOND WORD. Amen, dico tibi, hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. Amen, I say
unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise. CHAP. II.
A meditation for Monday.
WE gather out of the holy Scripture and the Fathers who write upon this place,
that of those two Thieves crucified with our Savior, SS. Amb. and Aug. upon S.
Luke, lib. 3. de cons. Euang.
one only blasphemed him; for this happy Thief (whose sorrow obtained so
sudden a pardon) rebuked his companion, saying: Neither do thou fear God,
Luke 23.
whereas thou art in the same damnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive
worthy of our doings: but this man has done no evil. And he said to Jesus:
Lord remember me when thou shall come into thy Kingdom.

1. First consider how grateful unto our Savior this act of Faith was, being
as it were of power to exact a full pardon at his hands, according to his
promises, and acording to the example which he showed in the Penitent Magdalen:
Lord (says this happy offender) remember me. Behold his singular faith in the
midst of all those reproaches, when our Savior seemed least able to help
him, he desires him to remember him. Imitate this faith, and when humane helps
appear least, then let thy recourse be most unto this Savior, who hears us
soonest when we are in most distress, our prayers being then most full of
confidence in him.

2. No sooner had this Thief uttered these believing words, but our B.
Savior (whose mercy was most tender) being touched, said unto him: Amen, which
is as much as, Truly, I say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. This act shall be sufficient to obtain thy pardon. Were thy sins as
scarlet thy penance (cooperating with my grace) shall make them as white as
snow: Isa^. 1.
admiring this infinite mercy of thy Savior upon the Cross who was most glad
of this poor sinners conversion, promising unto him presently Paradise. Behold
how he attends thy conversion in like manner, desirous to give thee heaven if
thou would but only be sorrowful for thine offenses.

3. Some good works it is like thou have done in thy life, but probably this
Thief never did any, as by his death (the re^ard of his life) appears. Shall
then one act of sorrow for his sins gain him a Kingdom, and thou neglecting
thy conversion (after many virtuous acts) dying unrepentant, for some
particular sins of thine, loose the sight of Almighty God eternally, and be
tormented forever? Differing amendment dangerous.
Commit not so great a madness, but while time is given thee, repent: all
shall not have the grace to be called at the last hour, for where one
obtayneth it, thousands are denied it.

4. Ponder the greatness of the reward, bestowed upon this sinner for his true
conversion: he is promised Paradise, to wit, the fruition of God Almighty and
his blessed Vision, the greatest and highest gift that can be bestowed upon the
best deserving creature and from a world of calamities both of body and soul,
is this penitent Thief delivered, The force of Pe^na^ce.
and brought into a Paradise of pleasures. O strange alteration wrought by the
powerful hand of penance! Be thou as penitent in time, and by Gods grace thy
penance shall be as potent.

5. Christ differreth not this reward, but says: This day thou shall be with
me in Paradise, a diligent rewarder of a small service, and in this is declared
the difference between the rewards which the world bestows upon his
servants, and those which are given by Christ unto his; the world promises
delights, but pays misery; Christ whathe promises performs, giving a
Paradise, to wit himself: the service of the world in rewarded with long
hopes, which in the end prove vain. Christ says, This day thou shall be with
me: art thou not led by a higher love, then the love of rewards? yet this very
love will teach thee to choose Christ rather then the world.

6. This fortunate sinner makes this glorious confession in the face of
Christ's enemies, when all the Apostles fled, and hid themselves for fear, and
yet (as it is probable) he was never acquainted with Christ before, nor had
ever heard him preach of the hundredfold rewards promised to those that
followed him, Matt. 19.
and yet he now cries our: O Lord remember me when thou shall come into thy
Kingdom. How soon he gave his assent to that infused faith which was set
before him. The Apostles as they went toward Emaus were slow in believing, and
yet this public offender no sooner had our faith propounded unto him, by Gods
holy inspiration, but he presently proclaimed that with his mouth what his heart
had given consent unto.

THE THIRD WORD. Ecce matter tua, ecce filius tuus. Behold thy mother, Behold
thy Son. CHAP. III.
BEFORE we enter into contemplation of these words, let us hear what the holy
Evangelist speaks, A meditation for Tuesday. John 19.
who will give us no small light: And there stood beside the Cross of Jesus
his mother, and his mothers sister Mary of Cleophas, and mary Magdalen. When
Jesus therefore had seen his mother and the disciple standing whom he loved,
he said to his mother: Woman behold thy Son. After that he said to the
disciple: Beheld thy mother, and from that hour the disciple took her to his
own.

1. Consider that out of this third Word many fruitful documents may be
gathered, as first the infinite desire that Christ had to suffer for us, and to
offer unto his heavenly Father a full, and rigorons satisfaction for our
offenses; for this cause was he willing to have his dear mother, and the
disciple whom he loved, beholders of his affliction, to the end his torment
might be increased by their presence, adding to his passion a greater grief of
compassion.

2. Our dear Redeemer Christ Jesus powered forth four fountains of his most
precious blood; he would have his Mother, and his beloved disciple present,
that they might also power forth four fountains of tears; he rereceauing as
great grief at the effusion of their compassionate tears, as at the loss of
his own dearest blood. Heat thy dear Savior speak being now nailed upon
the Cross: Psalm. 17. Luke. 2. Bellar. de 7. verbis.
The pains of death have compassed me about, but the sword of sorrow foretold
by Simeon that should pierce my most innocent mothers soul, does afflict me as
much as any torment I feel upon this Cross. O bitter death, do thou thus
separate not only the soul from the body, but even the mother, and such a
mother, from her some, and from such a Son? For this respect love would not
permit me to say Mother, but Woman behold thy son.

3. Look upon the three women who stood near unto the Cross of our Lord.
What the three. Mary's signify.
Mary Magdale^ bears the person of Penitents, that is of Beginners, Mary of
Cleophas, of Proficients, or of those that profit in the way of spirit, and
Mary Mother of God, and yet a Virgin, signifies those who are perfect, unto
whom we may join pure S. John who was also a Virgin. Christ recommendeth his
dear mother to the pure custody of a Virgin, preferring thereby the state of
virginity, S. John being the disciple whom he loved; yet are all others, who
are signified by the two other Maryes, admitted to the privilege of standing
near the Cross, of which we may make a virtue, if we will, since all estates
of life whatsoever, abound with Crosses.

4. Learn by this word the office of a Parent toward his child. Parents ought
to love their children, yet so that the love of their children do not hinder
the love of God; this did the B. Virgin exactly observe, for she stood near
unto the Cross (upon which her son hung bleeding) with grief, and constancy
equal. Her grief, The B. Virgin most resigned.
showed her to be a mother, and her constancy made manifest her resignation
unto God Almighty. Could she do otherwise then grieve for this Son of hers,
knowing what a Son he was? And could she be otherwise then resigned being the
mother of God and full of grace?

5. Reflect upon the happiness of S. John, to have this singular privilege
granted him by his beloved master, dying upon the cross, who bequeathed unto
him his dearest mother. Who would not have been desirous to have lived with her,
in whom the second person in Trinity dwelt corporally? Who would not have
piously envied the Apostle in this great blessing? yet since Christ Jesus has
made us his coheires and brethren, ler us with humble confidence beg, that
recommending us unto this his mother, he will say, Behold thy children, that we
may be also coheires of her love.

6. Lastly, that we may be the better prepared to hear this word of comfort
spoken by our Savior to his mother, Behold thy children, let us stir up in
our selves an ardent devotion toward this B. Virgin whom we desire to make
our mother, imitating her virginal purity, or at least, purity in our state of
life, and let us animate, our selves the rather to deuote our selves wholly to
this B. Virgin, it being one of the surest signs we can gather in this life,
of our future salvation.

THE FOVRTH WORD. Deus meus, Deus meus, vt quid dereliquisti me? My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? CHAP. IIII.
IN the three former words which our Savior pronunced upon the Cross, A
meditation for vvendesday.
we have described him newly crucified, now we come to the middle of the day in
which (for the horror Nature had to behold her maker thus abused) darkness was
spread over the face of the whole earth, the sun by a miraculous Eclypse
denying his wonted light, darcknes being so deep, as at midday the stars were
the greatest lights that appeared.

1. The first word spoken in this darcknes, was: My God, my God, Philogon. lib.
2.
why have thou forsaken me? Consider that our Savior by these words would show
us the greatness of the torments he suffered. Hitherto we might have thought he
had had a body impassible, or not feeling what was done unto him, his patience
in all his whole passion being so admirable, permitting them to whippe him,
crown him with thorns, nail him to the Cross, and never so much as to give
one sigh, or the least sign of dislike, of what was done unto him; now with a
loud voice he gives forth these words, that we might see what he suffered for
us, and that he was sensible of the least thorn that had wounded him. And as
he desired we should see what he suffered, so was his desire that we should see
it with fruit; considering for whose sake he brought himself most voluntarily
into these straites, Isa. 53.
since he was offered because himself would.

2. That we might the better attend unto him, and consider what he did suffer
for us, he took this opportunity to speak unto us in this great darkness, when
all distractions were taken from us, and when we might be wholly attent unto
him. Public meetings are not the places where the inspirations of God Almighty
are heard but put thy self into the darkness of retyrement, and there thou
shall hear thy Savior speaking unto thee, and instead of hearing, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me, thou shall hear him say: My creature, my
creature, why have thou forsaken me.

3. Let us here reflect upon these three hours; from six unto nine, in which
our Savior was silent; horror had invaded the whole world, by reason of the
unwonted darkness, and our Lord hung still upon his painful Cross; in his
whole life (which was nothing but a course of grief) he never suffered more
afflictions, and yet never suffered them more willingly: for now by the
weariness and hanging down of his body, his wounds were more and more
enlarged; and with them his grief, by the absence of the sun, and sharpnes
of theaire, was increased and with all his naked and torn body more tormented;
and yet all there afflictions seemed easy unto him, in respect of the infinite
desire he had to redeem us. Let us rejoice if at any time we have occasion
given us to suffer for him, who suffered these intolerable pains for us.

4. Why have thou forsaken me? These words proceeded from an ardent desire of
suffering, since he would have no part of him free froth enduring somewhat for
us. This voice therefore may be truly said to be of the tongue, which being
sorrowful, that it had yet endured nothing for us cried out: My God, why have
thou forsaken me? That all men may be redeemed, let all Jesus be tormented, The
most innocent tongue of Christ suffered also for us.
that no part may want his special redeemer, especially the tongue, the
instrument of so many off^nces, of detractions, bearing false witness, of impure
words, and oftentimes denying Christ: this petition was heard, Math. 27.
and incontinently one of them running took a sponge and filled it with
vinager, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.

5. In the three first Words our master Christ Jesus recomme^ded unto us three
great virtues: Charity toward our enemies, Mercy toward those who are
miserable, and Piety toward our Parents. In this fourth Word he commends
unto us Humility, a virtue most necessary for all men and where could he show
us more humility, then in these words, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? For here Christ shows (through the permission of God) all his glory and
excellency, to be quite obscured before the face of the whole world, as
appeared by those strange obscurityes in the heavens. Vidimus gloriam eius,
says S. John, we have seen his glory, John 1.
but it was not here where he saw it. Great was the difference between mount
T^abor, and mount Caluary: in one Christ could not be seen for light, in the
other he could not be seen for darkness.

6. Lastly, consider that this darkness was light to some, being an argument of
belief, and means to the light of faith. Learn out of this, to make thy best
of every thing. If light may be gathered out of darkness, far easier may
virtues be drawn out of afflictions which although they be brought unto us by
a certain necessity; yet may we make this necessity a virtue, and by our
intention give life to that, which otherwise would have bin a dead action.

THE FIFTH WORD. Sitio: I thirst. CHAP. V.
HAVE thou not yet, my sweet Savior, received torments enough? A meditation
for Thursday.
Will that Thirst of thy divine love toward man, never be extinguished? O
dolorous Jesus, unfold this mystery, and let our thirsty souls receive the
influence of thy graces, that we may thirst after nothing but thee the
fountain of life.

1. First contemplate upon this word, I thirst, and take it literally, seeing
our Savior through the loss of so much blood, could not but feel an
exceeding thirst, his natural moisture being almost wholly spent, his sacred
veins being empty, his tongue scarce able to move for very drought, which
forced him to speak in one only word, I thirst, as if he should have said: In
this excessive torment which I feel of Thirst, is there none who will affoard
me any refreshment? See thy Savior in this distress and still be sorrowful
for thy sins, that were the cause of these his afflictions.

2. I thirst after the consummation of the business I have in hand, The cause
of his thirst.
the redemption of man, for whose love I thirst after more torments. I thirst
after afflictions, that men (an easy imitation of me) should not desire, and
thirst after offenses; my thirst is satisfied with gall and vinagre, that thine
might be satisfied with those heavenly joys which I promised thee. I am
content to endure all hardness for thee, only requiring at thy hands, that thou will make use of my sufferings.

3. We read in holy Scripture only twice where Christ discovered his thirst;
once to the Samaritan woman, John 4: John 19.
and now here upon his Cross; in both he discovered his infinite charity
toward mankind, thirsting after the conversion of souls; he asked drinck of
the Samaritan, only to give her occasion by discoursing with him, to know, that
he was able to give her water of life, if she demanded it; and here he
thirsts the general good of souls, and their true return unto him, and to
the end that may be effected, he thirsts after torments, yea death it self.

4. Desires are well termed thirstes, what we desire that we are said to thirst
after: our good desires Christ thirsts after to have them persevere to the
end, for our evil he thirsts after the extinguishing of them; if our thirst
be after heaven, how pleasant is it to the soul; that thirst is as great a
fullness as can be possessed in this world, where true happiness is only
possessed by desiring it, but if our thirst be after transitory things, as
riches, honors, pleasures, and the like which the world falsely calls goods,
then we shall truly experience, that this thirst is a torment, and an
insatiable desire, which is more and more increased, by how much more we
possess what we desire.

5. Wonder, and with grief consider with thy self, how thou can behold thy
Savior in his whole life and passion, so ardently thirst after thy salvation,
and yet thou thy self remain careless of the same, as if thy salvation were
a thing of nothing, and that it concerned thee not; how thou can desire and
continually think upon gayning those things which thou must leave, perchance
to morrow, and neglect those things which remain, and which in joy thou may
possess for ever.

6. Lastly, Christ thirsted after that glory which he had voluntarily put o^
living in this vale of misery 33. years, apparelled in our natural habit; and
now knowing the end of his pilgrimage to approach, he desired the glorious
company of his heavenly Father. Reflect here upon thy self, and consider that
where thy treasure is, there is thy thirst, thy heart, thy desire; imitate thy
Savior in thirsting after heavenly things, and if there be thy treasure,
there will be thy thirst; Where thy treasure is there is thy thirst.
but if thy treasure lie upon earth, thy desires also will be earthly, for
desires always take their natures from those things which are desired.

THE SIXTH WORD. Consummatum est: Is it consummated. CHAP. VI.
CONSIDER here a Proclamation for the general pardon of the sin of mankind,
A meditation for Friday.
endited by the eternal Word, written by the finger of God, in the paper of
our humane Nature, upon the altar of the Cross, sealed with the blood of the
Lamb, subscibed by the holy Trinity, dated the hour of Christ his death,
recorded by S. John the Evangelist, and pronounced by the mouth of Jesus then
crucified, in these words, It is consummated, that is, man's ransom i^ paid
Gods wrath is appeased, men shall have mercy, grace and glory; Gods Justice is
fully satisfied, the ruin of Angels repaired, mankind made free of heaven,
Glory be to God, peace to men.

1. Contemplate here with holy S. Augustine upon this place that our Savior
had an especial eye and regard unto those truths which he had given forth by
the Prophets, Aug. in cap. 19. Joan.
all being (even until his death) most exactly fulfilled which they had
foretold, there remained only to be verifyed his death. He confirms therefore
by this word, It is consummated, all that had bin said of him, yea even his
death. For having said: It is consummated, bowing down his head he gave up the
Ghost.

2. Consider also with S. Chrysostom these words to have bin said in regard of
the power of those who had crucified him, which was now consummated and ended:
Romans 6.
Mors ei vltra non dominabitur, death shall no more insult over him. He is
freed from his laborious pilgrimage, and brought again unto that glory which
he most willingly left for our redemption. The greatest sacrifice of all is now
offered and consummated, in which sacrifice the Priest was both God and man,
the Altar was the Cross; the Lamb the sacrifice, the fire of this sacrifice
was Charity, and the fruit of it the Redemption of the world.

3. Since we have seen the exact fulfilling of the prophesies before Christ,
and that by this very word, It is consummated, all that was foretold was
verified; why are we so incredulous of those things which are to come, and are
foretold by Christ himself, and his Prophets? We have heard of the general
punishment by water, Genesis 7.
and in the time of Noe it was executed. 2. Petr.
We hear daily of the worlds consuming by fire at the later day, and yet we
live as if we believed it not, and with such greedines embrace those things,
which if we live to those times, shall be taken out of our arms by consuming
fire.

4. As thou have meditated before with holy S. Chrysostom that by this word,
It is consummated, was understood the consummation of that wearisome and
dolorous pilgrimage of Christ: So here consider that although it were most
panifull, yet it lasted but thirty three years, a moment in regard of
Eternity, in which he shall possess perpetual joys. The Jews triumphed for
an hour (as it were) over Jesus; Judas had an hour of content in his avarice;
Pilate enjoyed for an hour the friendship of Augustus; but how many years
have these already bin punished for that hours false contentment, and yet
their torments shall never end. Let us think them most happy, who from their
youth take up the Cross of Christ, and seek thus meritoriously to be
afflicted as long they can in this life, since the passions of this time (so
short and transitory) Romans 8.
are not condign to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us.

5. By this word, It is consummated, is understood the victory which Christ
made over hell, and the infernal spirits, when by his victorious death he
took mankind out of the Devils power, arming us with his grace against all
assaults. Since Christ our glorious Redeemer has so vanquished our ennemy, and
as it were taken his sting from him; why do we so often yield our selves unto
one who is so weak, having him on our side, whose very name puts him to
flight? Since so many by thy assistance of Christ Jesus our Captain, have
given this enemy so many overthrows; why should we fear, why should we doubt,
but to be able to do the like, having the like helps?

6. Convince thine understanding with this former argument, Lib. 8. Confess. c.
11.
as S. Augustine did, placing before himself many Saints who had given this
overthrow to the enemy; and among the rest he set before him diverse tender
Virgins, and said unto himself: Why can not thou do what these, and these
have done? These and these could not have do^e these things without the help of
their Lord and God. Here say unto thine enemy: It is consummated, thou shall
have no more power in me, since all thy power proceeds from my self, no man
receiving wounds but from his own hands.

THE SEVENTH WORD. Pater, in manus tuas co^mendo spiritum meum. Father, into
thy hands I commend my spirit. CHAP. VII.
THAT our redeemer Jesus endured all these afflictions most voluntarily, A
meditation for Saturday.
and not by constraint or violently forced, is most evident, since he needed
not have suffered unless he would; therefore if ever action were free, this was
it, the which in no part was forced: and the more free it was, the more it
binds us to love him to deal also more freely with him that dealt thus
freely with us. And that these sufferings proceeded out or a natural
propension he had to suffer for us, appears out of his manner of suffering
for he endured most for us in the end of his passion: In finem dilexit nos,
Joan. 13.
he loved us to the end, there receiving more pains for us then ever. The
condition of al natural motion is to be greater in the end then in the
beginning, which proves well to our purpose, for the Evangelist here
records, Luc. 23.
that Jesus cried out with a loud voice, which before he was not wont to do:
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and saying this he gave up the Ghost.

1. Consider the literal sense of these words, he says: Father, and with
great right, because he was his obedient Son even unto death: Into thy hands,
that is, unto thine understanding knowing al things, and unto thy will able to
do all thngs, I do commend, as it were giving unto thee as a depositum or
pledge, that it may be restored me when due time shall come My spirit, that is,
my corporal life, which I recommend unto thee My Father, that thou will
shortly restore it to my body which now it leaves.

2. Consider why our Savior showed this care of his body, recommending unto
his heavenly Father his spirit that it might not long leave the body destitute.
Our Savior was not sollicitous for his soul, for he knew that was already
most blessed, and needed none to defend it, he only had care of that which had
need of care; teaching us to provide and be sollicitous for that part of us
which requires our care, to wit our soul, by often reco^mending it into the
hands of him who created it, and without whose helping grace it would
degenerate and stray from that end unto which it was created. As for our bodies
the least care is to be had, since (do we what we can) they will fall into
dust, The end of pampering our bodies.
and the more we pamper them, the greater banquets we make for worms, and
perhaps fuel for hellfire.

3. Let us contemplate upon the wonderful accidents which happened immediately
after these words were pronounced: Matt. 27.
And behold the Veyle of the Temple was rent in two pieces, from the top even
to the bottom: by which was signified the opening of heaven unto mankind; the
Veyle that took from us the beholding of the Holy of Holies being rent in two,
and man made capable of the blessed vision of God. It was rent from the top
to the bottom, to show, that this holy vision of God was granted to all from
the highest to the lowest: but as our Savior says, There are many ma^sions in
the house of my Father, John 14.
which signifies the difference amongst the blessed in their possessing of
God almighty; and as there are great, so are there minimi in regno caelorum,
Mat. 5.
those who are the least in heaven.

4. And the earth did quake: Mat. 27.
Imagine with thy self the great terror which was spread over the whole face
of the earth at the death of the Author of Nature, great and wonderful
mutations being made at this earthquake; Luke. 23.
yet the change which was most acceptable to God, was that of the Jews, Who
returned knocking their breasts; this was the earthquake intended by our
Savior, who endeavored to draw those unto him by fear, who would not be
drawn by love.

5. And the rocks were rent, and the graves were opened. Here consider the
true conuersions that were to ensue upon our Saviors Passion^, and signified
here: by the renting of the rocks, and opening of graves: obdurate hearts were
to relent, and even break with sorrow, for their sins, and they who had bin
long buried in sin, and ouerwelmed with earthly thoughts through the passion
of Christ and the force of his suffering, were to raise themselves out of their
loathsome sepulchers, and begin to live again to Christ. Seek from thy heart to
be amongst those who are thus converted, and know that one of the powerful
means to make this rock of thine, thy heart, tender, is to bath it in tears.

6. Give God humble thanks for those holy inspirations which his divine
Goodness has given thee, in meditating upon these his last seven Words opon
the Cross, and be a most devout fulfiller of those things which he has
inspired thee to do or suffer for him; assuring thy self that as these were
his last, so did he mean to leave them unto thee as documents of exceeding
great comfort.

Having ended the Considerations upon the seaue^ last Words of our Savior upon
the Cross, I will lead thy pious mind unto contemplation upon his five most
glorious and principal wounds, that thou may the oftener think upon him
crucified, yea for thee crucified, The most profitable and most delightful
thoughts.
and tormented in that cruel manner. The most happy consideratio^s which thy
mind can make, are about this object of infinite love; well may thou think
thy thoughts ill spent upon businesses of this world, but behold this object as
long as thou will, and thou shall never need to repent thee of thy labor,
since there can be nothing thought upon with more profit, or more delight then
Christ Jesus crucified.

OF THE FIVE WOVNDES of our Blessed Savior.
The right Hand. CHAP. I.
LET us contemplate upon those sacred hands of our Savior pierced with sharp
nails, and fastened to the Cross, and first let us perform our devotion to
the right hand.

1. Consider those words of the Prophet: Habac. 3.
His brightness shall be as the light, horns in hands, or (as the hebrew version
has) splendor in his hands: there is his strength hid. Behold this sacred
wound, and admiring the splendor and beauty thereof, desire ever to remain
under the protection of the same.

2. Ponder with thy self what an admirable light proceeds now from this
sacred hand. The brightness proceeding from the vvou^ds of our Savior.
If the martyrs of Christ shall have their bodies glorified, and chiefly in
those parts in which they suffered; how glorious shall this right Hand of thy
Savior be, whose sufferings were of infinite merit, and consequently whose
glory must be infinite? Imagine the light of a thousand Suns united
together, to be very darkness in comparison of that infinite splendor, shining
in this most glorious wound.

3. After thou have considered the admirable beauty of this his glorious right
hand as it is in heaven, cast thine eye upon it fastened unto the painful
Cross, there thou shall see nothing but streams of blood, gushing out of that
tormented hand of thy dolorous Savior. Here is no glory, no splendor, no
light. Here is his strength hid, here this potent right hand creates no
worlds, but is used as the most abject of creatures: here it judges none, but
is judged to excessive torments: in fine no power is here showed, all lies
covered under the veyle of humanity, and here is his strength hid. Love and
admire this act of infinite fortitude in thy Savior, in so many injuries and
torments, In the right hand fortitude.
to hide his strength and to deliver that hand to be pierced, which was of
power to destroy that world which it had created.

4. The enemy of mankind, and chief agent in the bitter passion of our
Savior, having hitherto used the Jews as instruments in this Tragedy, and
having given them counsel to whippe him most cruelly, crown him most
bloudily, and load him with his heavy Cross, and yet perceauing his invincible
fortitude, wills the^ at last to pierce his sacred hands, imagining there to
lie hid his strength, as indeed it did, they being amongst the last wounds
which he received living O my Savior and Redeemer, thou who heldest out in thy
fervor of charity to suffer for me till thy last strength was exhausted, give
me thy grace to desire fervently never to be overcome in suffering for thee.

5. Since we see it is the greatest strength to be weak for Christ, The more
wounds the greater victory in Christ's quarrel.
and the greatest victory to take most wounds for him, why stand we so much
upon our guard fearful to spend our blood in his quarrel? Temerity is to be
avoided, least presuming upon our forces we fall, but when the combat is
offered, then imitate thy Savior in putting forth thy right hand, and
submitting al thy forces, bind them fast unto the Cross, which is the standard
in which thou art to overcome.

6. Lastly consider, that although outwardly the strength of this right Hand
lay hid, yet how powerfully it wrought upon the Thief who hung under it, by
drawing him unto it, and making of a great sinner, a great Saint: Dextera tua
inueniat omnes qui te oderunt, Psalm. 20.
says the prophet, O Savior, let thy right hand find all those who hate thee;
either by punishing them with thy justice, or converting them by thy mercy.
Here was also verified that of the Spouse: Cant. 5.
Manus meae distillauerunt myrrham, my hands have distilled myrrh that is, the
sweet odor of penance and contrition which the happy Thief collected and
gathered together, and offered up unto his dear Redeemer, in odorem
suauitatis.

Apply (as thou have done before) these six points unto thy six Decades, saying
thy beads before each wound, begging of the dolorous Virgin Mary, whose soul
was pierced with a sword of afflictions to give thee some of her compassion, in
beholding thy Savior thus wounded for thy sins.

The left Hand. CHAP. II.
ADORE with like affection the glorious left hand of thy Savior, and
contemplate upon those words of the spouse: Cant. 2.
his left hand under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me. Thou have
already beheld the embracing of the right hand, which was stretched forth upon
the Cross, ready to embrace and intertaine all sinners: this was clearly
showed by calling the Thief out of sin, into grace, and out of a world of
torments into a Paradise of joys. Now let us consider the left hand.

1. First behold it as full of bloody streams as the right, and in every point
as full of pain, and what comfort could the Espouse take in laying this
bloody, and painful hand under her head? Perhaps she desired to have the
impression of this bloody hand, left in her heart, to the end she might never
forget it: strive to co^serue fresh in thy memory this left hand of thy
Savior, The left hand Justice.
by which his Justice is signified, and by the impression of it, remember that
sacred blood which was shed for thee, of which they who make not the best use,
shall find a severe judge; who as he called one at his right hand, so he
permitted an other at his left to perish.

2. Endeavor to keep this left hand under thy head. Between the earth and
thee, let the Justice of Almighty God mediate. Earth ca^ attempt nothing
against thee, when it shall behold how strongly thou art guarded. Weigh all thy
actions in the balance of Justice, and thou shall never offend. If thou lay
pleasure in one scale, lay torments due unto it in the other. If this life,
being but a moment, present delights unto thee, call Eternity unto thee, and
let it confront that moment, and it will soon have victory.

3. His left hand under my head. Love is commonly distinguished between
filial, and servile, That is, the love of a child to his Father, and of a
servant to his Master: let this Left hand, to wit, the Justice of our Savior
be under our head, that is, between the earth, and us, let at the least the
fear of Justice be placed. If we ariue not to that perfection (which we al
ought to tend unto) to contemn the pleasures, and vanities of the world merely
for the love of God, preferring that pure affection before all things; yet let
us contemn them for the dangers that are in them, and for fear of the severe
hand of Justice, which punishes those who follow them.

4. His left hand under my head and his right hand shall embrace me: so that
unless his left hand be under thy head, his right hand shall not embrace thee.
Does thy soul desire the loving imbracements of thy Savior, and the sweetness
of his mercy? lay under thy head the fear of his Justice, let that be thy
foundation, and the beginning of thy wisdom, Psalm. 110.
then shall his right hand embrace thee, when it shall find his left hand under
thy head.

5. The Espouse desires his left hand may be under her head, that is, from her
beginning, from the first entrance into this world, till her going out of it,
that all the days of her life; she may walk the paths of his Justice. Most
fitly was this spoken of the immaculate Virgin and Mother, who had this left
hand under her head, being (even in her very Conception) endued with original
Justice, the which, under her head, as it were, in her first beginning most
graciously preventing her, made her worthy to bear the Son of God, and
Savior of the world.

6. His left hand under my head. As thou have hitherto applied this left hand
to the Justice of God; so here apply it to that Justice which every true
Christian, that is, which every follower of Christ, ought to bear toward
himself. If we our selves lay this left hand under our head, and become our
own judges in this world, measu ing our actions by the rule of Justice, and
making them straight by penance; then shall we facilitate our judgment in the
next world, preventing Gods severe and rigorous sentence; then shall his rig^t
hand embrace us, because our own left hand has chastised us. Apply these
points as the former.

The Side. CHAP. III.
AND now descending from the Mercy and Justice of our Savior, let us repose
our selves in the seat of his divine Love; and beholding it as it is in heaven
glorious, let us adore those streams of his ardent Love, which issued out of
that sacred heart, the Citizens of heaven exulting at the sight of so immense
charity. Psalm. 45.
Fluminis impetus laetificat ciuitatem dei, The violence of this river (says
the Prophet) makes the City of God Joyful, when those blessed Inhabitants
beheld the violence and force of this bloody river, bringing into that haven of
felicity new Colonies, to replenish the seats of fallen Angels; this being
that river which issued out of the place of pleasure, Genesis 2.
to water Paradise, as well that celestial Paradise by replenishing it with
daily increase of glory, as the terrestrial Paradise of the Church, by
prospering and increasing his graces, the seeds of glory.

1. First therefore let us behold this glorious wound in the side of our Savior
hanging upon the Cross, in which we are not to consider any grief, this wound
being inflicted after his death; out of the circumstances therefore frame thy
pious meditation, as that, as soon as the soldier with a spear had opened his
side, John 19.
presently there came forth blood and water; that being here fulfilled which
was prefigured by Moses striking the rock with his rod. Exodus 18.
O happy wound of the gracious side of our Savior, out of which, Tract. 9. in
Joan.
(says holy S. Augustine) issued the holy Sacraments.

2. That River which watered Paradise divided it self only into four, but
this that streamed from the sacred side of Jesus; multiplied it self seven
times, making seaue^ most precious bathes, whose nature is to wash souls, and
make them pure for heaven. When thou make thy access unto these divine
Sacraments, remember the sourse whence they did spring, and let thy devotion be
suitable to the dignity of those mysteries thou desire to be partaker. Think
(says S. Chrysostom) when thou come to drink of the holy Chalice, Hom.
84. in Joan.
thou do put thy mouth unto Christ his side, and suck thence his sacred
blood.

3. Consider with thy soul how zealous Divine Love showed it self toward
mankind in the business of his Redemption. Nature endeavoring to succor the
humanity of Christ, drew into the last hold as much strength as was possible,
striving to fortify the heart, divine Love triumphed over this humanity in such
sort, as even after death, it entered this sacred fort, being the sole
commander thereof, and drew forth all those forces, with which Nature
endeavored to have resisted. As thou do admire this fervor of Love, so
bend thy forces to imitate the same, and stick not upon toys, and trifle of
this world, Ponder this well.
that endeavor to keep thee from an entier oblation of thy self to Almighty
God. Can thou see thy Savior opening his very heart to give thee his last
blood, and yet retain unto thy self such foul resolutions, that are so much
displeasing unto him?

4. No part of our Savior was free from a particular affliction, but the heart
was partaker of all the torments which every part endured; the heart was
whipped, the heart was crowned with thorns, with the hands and feet the heart
was pierced, the heart was tormented in them all, as the Prince in his subjects;
and therefore whiles any part suffered, the heart desired to be entyer, that it
might feel part of all. To all the tormented parts of thy Redeemer how
infinitely art thou bound, and chiefly to this sacred heart that suffered most
of all for thee, and only to gain thy heart? Stir up thy frozen affection,
and with a most fervent zeal desire with holy S. Anselme, to have no feet but
such as should travail for thy Savior, no hands but such as should labor for
him, no head but that which should think of him, and no heart but that which
should most ardently love his divine goodness.

5. Behold the infinite conuersions of souls wrought by the powerful side of
thy Savior, the which pouring forth a bath of blood upon them, has cleansed
them from all impurity, as it were creating a new, clean hearts: Filij tui de
long venient, Isa. 60.
et filiae tuae de latere surgent: O Lord, thy sons shall come from far,
and thy daughters shall rise from thy side; they who were greatest sinners, and
were far off from thy grace, shall render themselves thine, and thy sacred
side shall as a fruitful womb bring forth a spiritual generation.

6. Of which happy generation, beg (by the mediation of the B. Virgin) that
thou may be one, and hoping that she has obtained for thee thy petition,
behave thy self as a child of so admirable a parent, who to bring thee forth
was feign to dye, and to have his heart pierced with a Lance, that thou might
live; be ever mindful of thy offspring, which was ardent Charity; and be not so
base as to degenerate by doing any thing that should be contrary to this
virtue, Charity the r^le of our act^o^s.
which has made thee the child of God, and Coheire with Christ Jesus.

The right Foot. CHAP. IIII.
BEHOLD thy loving Savior most willingly putting forth his sacred right Foot
to be nailed to the Cross, for the love he bare unto thee, being most constant
in his sufferings for thee, loving thee thus ardently to the very end; and
desiring of thee no other recompense, then love for love, and constancy and
perseverance in thy love; not to fly from him for difficulties, for he followed
thee, leaving the ninty nine, to wit, those glorious troops which adored him
in heaven, and coming down here upon earth, labored to seek thee, desiring
to gain thee, though it were through miseries, reproaches, and death it self,
which constant love of his, fastened him to this Cross, and pierced his sacred
hands, heart, and feet.

1. Let thy first consideration fix it self as the former, in conceauing the
excessive pain thy dear Redeemer endured in the piercing of this sacred right
foot, which consisted of so many joints; in the midst of which a gross nail
was rudely driven, putting all those tender parts out of their places, and
with great violence tearing, and breaking all that made any resistance unto
that cruel invasion; no torment could be greater then this, and yet thy
dolorous Jesus endures it as if he felt it not, love ouercomming grief, the
greatness and firmness of his resolution, surmounting al afflictions that
could be imposed upon him.

2. Consider with thy self the nature of the affections of this world. The
nature of the affection of the world.
The world loves as long as any interest remains, when that cease, the
worlds love cease; having always for it object those cold words (as S.
Bernard terms them) Meum and Tuum, Mine and Thine. The affection of our
Savior toward man was most entier and pure, not capable indeed of any Meum or
Tuum, or private interest, since he bestowed incomparably more upon man by
making himself man, then man could possibly render unto him, if he should have
striued to have showed himself most grateful, which Christ knew many, and
most men would not do; out of which consideration admire the constancy of his
love which held out to the end, What motive Christ had to love us.
having no other motive to make him love, then that he was absolutely resolved
to love.

3. Contemplate the powerful operation of the glorious sufferings inflicted
upon the feet of thy Savior, which redoubled their forces after they were
pierced, and by their wounds received strength; if before his Passion they were
of force to convert all those who came near them, Mat. 9.
to penetrate the happy Magdalens heart, Luke. 7.
who stood but behind them, and to draw tears from that rock; what would they
have don now, when streams of blood, answer to drops of tears? here
consider how powerfully constant Jesus works with souls, infinitely
ouerco^ming them in every thing he desires of them. If he desire our heart, he
gives us his own wounded: if he bid us take up his yoke, he makes it light
for us, but loadeth himself with a most heavy Cross: in fine, if he ask
tears of us, he gives us his blood.

4. This dolorous Foot putting it self so readily into the path of
afflictions, teaches us what way to walk in this worldly p^lgrimage,
preferring the way of the Cross, before the way of Pleasure, Eccles. 7.
and the house of sorrow, before the house of joy. Our Savior could have ended
his iourny with out these painful steps, but he sparing no grief, was as it
were prodigal in his sufferings, that he might recover man who was be come
prodigal in his offenses. All who detract^d from thee (says the Prophet)
shall adore the steps of thy feet, Isa. 60.
when through thy constant love, they shall be confounded, and convert themselves
again unto thee, whom they had most ungratefully forsaken.

5. Shall we imagine this sacred Foot to have received any ease or rest from
that step that was placed under it, and upon which it stood? No; Bellar de 7
verbis. Isa. 1.
as from the sole of the foot unto the top of the head there was no whole
part in him; so was there no ease. This was that done, Genesis 1.
who find ng not where his foot might rest, for the exceeding deluge of blood,
retyreth himself into the Arck of his divine Love, which was as strong as
death, Cant. 8.
and enabled his body to bear what we imagine, as it were impossible to be
endured; if we truly and sincerely imitate his love, we cannot but imitate his
sufferings.

6. Let us not only look or admire at this wonderful act of constancy in our
blessed redeemers suffering, as if beholding it, or admiring were enough; those
behests of ours are dead actions, unless they bring forth imitation, in which is
the only truly beholding of Christ crucified; as now all those dolorous parts
do as it were sue unto us to have compassion on our own miserable estates, and
send forth beams of ardent love to inflame us, and set us forward in this
generous actio^ of constancy in fighting against our corrupt inclinations, so
shall they in the day of judgment change all those favorable aspects, and
shine like stars, threatening against us, Reg. 2.
if the feet of his Saints shall be kept, and the impious be silent; let us not
imagine that these thrice glorious feet shall be forgotten, but that every drop
of blood shall be recounted at that day, and laid before the impious man, who
in silence shall stand confounded.

The left Foot. CHAP. V.
AS we have noted in the right Foot Constancy in the love of our Savior; The
left foot resignation to the vvil of God.
so in this we will consider Conformity of our will unto God Almighties, which
is one of the highest Perfections we can seek after in this life; the which
although we can never ariue unto, in that perfection in which our Savior had
it, his will being the will of his Father: yet we are bound to aspire to the
highest perfection in it that can be attained unto by creatures; praying daily
to have the will of God here on earth performed as exactly as in heaven.

1. See with what readiness our Savior gives up his left foot, to be dealt
withal like unto the right, and seeing it to be the will of his heavenly
Father that the steps of each Foot should be alike, S Justinius in-dial. cu^
Tryph.
most mildly permits his Crucifiers to place it by the other and to pierce
it also with a nail. What torments thou have imagined to be in the other,
consider the same to have bin in this; and here see that of the Prophet
fulfilled: Foderunt manus me as et pedes meos, Psalm. 21.
dinumeraucrunt omnia ossa mea: they have dug my hands and my feet, they
have numbered all my bones.

2. Learn out of this painful experience which thy Savior would give thee of
his most perfect resignation, to conform thy self in all things to his blessed
will and to take all things as sent from the hand of a most loving Father, and
think not in this that thou do a matter of supererogation, for whether thou will or no, these and these Crosses will happen unto thee, of which it lies in
thy hands to make crowns of glory, or perpetual punishments. This resignation
of thine to the will of God, is but rationabile obsequium, Romans 12.
a service which stands with reason, unto which whosoever shall commit the
contrary, shall not show himself a reaso^able creature, but be like beasts
that have no understanding.

3. It is requisite the will of God be laid open unto us before we follow it,
our will being led by our understanding; but when that blessed will of our
Savior is known, then ^s it (as far as we are able) to be put in execution,
our wills serving as handmaids unto his. Prompt and ready was the Prophet David
in conforming himself to the voice of God: Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum,
Psalm. 128.
et lumen semitis meis: thy word (says he) is a lamp unto my feet, and a
light unto my paths; so that he attributes all the light he had unto the
inspirations of our Lord, to the which having an obedient ear he walked in
great light, and without danger of erring.

4. Laui ped^s meos, Cant. 5.
quomodo inquinabo eos? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? thus
says our B. Savior to the Espouse. Twice only we read of the washing of our
Saviors feet; once they were washed with the tears of his beloved Magdalen,
and here they were washed with his own most precious blood, both precious
bathes, the one of Penna^ce the other of Innocency, both of love: the one of
love recalled, the other of love consummated, both in a most fit time: the one
at the entering into the painful journey, of his passion, the other at the end
of it; and of these washings of his feet he speaks to the Espouse; and
considering they were cleansed with such precious bathes, he is loath to have
them defiled again, through the offenses of men.

5. Imitate thy Savior, and if it be not granted thee to wash thy feet in
blood, and to dye for him, yet wash them in tears of deepest Contrition,
wherewith those feet that are defiled in the ways of this world are only
cleansed: and having once purified them by this most sovereign bath, endeavor
to keep them so by walking the ways of innocence and purity. If unclean
thoughts endeavor to draw thee forth, and seek to make thee defile those feet
of thine (already made by the bath of tears more pure then snow,) ask them,
Quomodo inquinabo eos? my feet are washed, my ways are purified, how should I
defile them? Infinitely were thou blinded if being now pure, thou would
return to thine uncleanness, which cannot be washed again but by tears.

6. Think not with thy self that a bath of tears is easily purchased, How
hardly true tears are gotten.
and with conceit deluded make sleight of defiling thy steps, presuming easily
to purge and cleanse them again; nothing is more hard (assure thy self) then
to gain true tears of contrition; especially for him who is habituated in
sin. Christ never wrought a greater miracle then in converting the holy
Magdalen. Let us not look for more miracles to be wrought upon us, for if Gods
infinite mercy has given us now tears of true repentance, let us keep our
selves from defiling, and our souls from those wounds, which require so
precious a medicine, and so hard to be found.

And here the meditations end of the five glorious Wounds of our Savior,
which I have placed only as lights, to lead thee into further contemplation
upon them, out of which infinite comfort flows daily upon souls who are
devoted unto them. I will now set before thee the four last Ends which thou art
subject unto, which are most profitable for every good Christian to meditate
upon, being stays or props to keep us upright in our iourny in this world, in
which (were it not for them) we might easily be lost: Prou. 18.
Impius cum ad profundu^ venerit peccatorum, contemnit: the impious (says the
Wise man) when he shall come into the depth of sins, contemns. Least
therefore forgetting our selves we should go so far in the way of sin as to
come to the depth where contempt dwells, the Wiseman gives us these four
helps to call us back, if at any time we should step awry: Eccles. 7.
In omnibus op^ribus tuis memorare n^u^ssima tua, et in aeternum non peccabis:
In all thy works (says he) remember thy later end, and thou will not sin for
ever.

OF THE FOUR last Things.
Of Death. CHAP. I.
OMITTING the diverse explications which devout me^ have made of Death, let us
only consider that there is a good and a bad death, the one an entrance into
joys, the other into torments. Of those who dye a happy death, we have this
Beatification out of holy Scripture: Apoc. 14.
Beati mortui, qui in Domino moriuntur, Blessed are the dead who dye in our
Lord; where I would have thee note, that they are termed Blessed who are dead,
and afterward dye. Blessed are the dead who dye, not the living: whence we may
conclude, that it is a Blessedness to begin betimes to die to this world, and not
to be found living when death shall come. Of the other death the Royal Prophet
tells us what it is: Psalm. 33.
Mors peccatorum pessima, the death of sinners is the worst; and the reason is,
because sinners take upon them to live to much in this life, and neglecting the
memory of death, think there shall be no end of enjoying their pleasures. To
this effect the same Prophet says: Vidi impium superexaltatum et eleuatum
super cedros Libani: Psalm. 36.
et transiui et ecce non erat, etc. I have seen (says he) the impious man
highly exalted, and advanced as the Cedars of Libanus: and I passed by, and
behold he was not, and I sought him, and his place was not found; and indeed
happy it were for the sinner if after this life he had no place or being, since
both his place and being shall be so miserable.

1. Consider man's nature to be such that it cannot possibly avoid death it
remaining as a punishment for that sin which we all consented unto in our
first parent: therefore that thou may the better consider this death, imagine
thy self (who must once dye) to lie upon thy death bed, lamented by thy
friends, despaired of by Physicians, and expecting hourly to give up thy last
breath.

2. Then thou will easily perceive thy folly in spending so much time (which
was given thee to serve God) in the service of the world, in following thine
own unlawful appetites, and rejecting Gods holy inspirations. Then thou will
make many purposes of satisfying for thy sins, Make use of time.
of living a more exemplar life, of abandoning evil company, of resisting
foul sins and the like; but alas thy time is short, thou have many purposes,
but where is the time to perform them in? After this life there is no time of
satisfaction or of merit. Assure thy self that these discourses thy soul will
have at that terrible hour, therefore use time which is now so mercifully
given thee: De imitat Christ. lib 2. Cap. 25.
and do now, what thou would then have wished to have done.

3. This is the hour of indifferency in which thy eyes being opened, thou
shall see things as they are, not painted and falsely set forth by thy
preiudicate affection. Here what thou esteemedst in thy life time beautiful,
will seem foul; what then was most pleasant, thou will not now endure to
behold. Since by the consideration of death we grow so judicious, to esteem
every thing as it deserves, would to God we did always carry about with us
the memory thereof; how sincerely should we then serve God, and perform the end
for which we were sent into this world? how innocently should we live? how
charitably one to another? how dilligent in performing many good works, and how
strong in resisting sin.

4. Contemplate with thy self, being in this agony (thy life being more and
more despayred off) that saying of the Prophet: Et qui iuxta me erant, de long
steterunt, Psalm. 37.
and they who were near me stood a far of from me; even thy very friends
will leave thee, showing their greatest affection by shedding a few
unprofitable or faygned tears for thee: and being thus left of all, consider
what the friendship of this world is, which is ended by death, if it last so
long: make thy freindship therefore with the Saints and Angels, who will never
leave thee, but chiefly make freindship with good Works, gather as many
together as thou can, whilst thou art in perfect health, for they are those
who are to be thy chiefest friends, who will not fear to appear with thee
before that severe Judge, and alleging strong arguments for thee, will bring
thee to eternal happiness.

5. It is a matter of great moment to imprint in thy soul the consideration
for what place we were created. If we persuade our selves we were made for this
world, we are much deceived, for placing thy self as thou did before in
the point of death, thou shall see thou were created for an other world which
is to last for ever. It is but the body, the meaner part of thee, that dies
now, thy soul is immortal, The different condition of the sou^e and the body.
and must either joy or lament eternally If it depart from the body into
bliss, it is because it ruled the body, and made that sensual part obey unto
reason; but if thy soul departing from thy body be condemned to eternal
pains, it is because thy soul behaved it self like a slave, obeying her
servant, and permitting that to comaund, which was created to obey.

6. If the placing of thy self near unto death has made thee more capable to
understand the danger of thine estate, seriously think with thy self and
without any art of persuasion, that thou may be nearer thy death then thou
imaginest, from which thou art no moment free. There is no actio^, no place, no
time, in which death has not surprised men. Think seriously upon these things
for it may be these are the last good purposes that ever thou shall make, and
the last good work that ever thou shall do; and so think of al things
whatsoever thou do: Let us think every action to be our lost.
it may be this shall be the last Prayer that ever thou shall make, do it
therefore devoutly. In taking thy refectio^ think this may be the last time
that ever thou shall have need to feed that carcass of thine, do it therefore
with sobriety. In conuersing with men, think this may be the last tim that
ever thou shall discourse, let it be therefore of some virtuous subject; and so
deal with all thy actions, thinking they shall be thy last, and by this means
thou shall make them to be thy best.

After thou have contemplated upon these six points, and applied thy six Decade
unto them, earnestly beseeching the Mother of Grace to increase in thee the
memory of Death, and to assist thee in that agony; I would have thee peruse
this ensuyng table which will more fully inform thee of the nature of death,
and make the same more familiar unto thee.

OF DEATH.
1. The Necessity Proceeds from 1. Revelation. Natural reason. Experience.

2. The Uncertainty Proceeds from 2. The Time. The Place. The Manner.

3. The Terriblenes Proceeds from Proceeds from The Generality. The
Severity. The Peremptorines.

4. Our unwillingness Proceeds from 4. Ignorance of heaven. Our bad life.
Fear of future estate.

5. A happy death Proceeds from 5. Memory of dea h. The hate of sin. The
love of God.


Of Judgment. CHAP. II.
FOR the better performing of thy pious Considerations upon this point, imagine
thou see one newly departed this life and carried before the dreadful
Tribunal of Almighty God, there to be most strictly examined of all his words,
thoughts, and actions, done whiles he lived in this world, according to that of
the Apostle: We must all be summoned before the tribunal seat of Christ, 2.
Cor. 5.
and every man receive either good or evil, according as he has behaved
himself, whiles he lived upon earth. But our blessed Savior himself more
particulerly speaks of this Judgment in these words: Matthew. 12.
I say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of Judgment.

1. Consider that if so strict an account shall be made of all-things at that
day, and that so small a matter as an idle word shall not escape, but shall be
weighed in the balance of justice, what shall become of the sinner, who has
walked in the path of sin so many years together, and perhaps even from his
years of discretion; having committed so many, so vile and abominable
offenses? Oh how terrible will that day be unto him, when even the just shall
tremble.

2. All those offenses of his shall be laid open to the whole world, which must
needs procure a wonderful confusion, when not only his actions (which he did
so cunningly conceal in this world) but even his very thoughts shall be made
manifest to all: of what value will one satisfactory act of penance done here
be, The comfort of a meritorious action.
and how will his good Angel allege it for him, lamenting (as it were) that
he has no more to say for him. On the other side behold the enemy of his
soul, laying before the most just Judge the multitude of his offenses, asking
for justice, and comparing his many and greiuous sins committed, not only
against a Creator but also a Redeemer, with his own one only sin committed
but against his Creator.

3. All things being laid open and made so clear that he has no place for any
appeal, with infinite fear and trembling he expects the definitive sentence
which Christ Jesus now being a severe Judge, and no more a mild Redeemer, is to
pass upon him; Go thou accursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.
which was prepared for the D^uell and his Angels: for I was hungry, and thou
gave me not to eat, I was thirsty and thou gave me not to drink etc.

4. Turn thine eye from this woeful sinner, and for thy comfort behold a soul
who has bin a diligent servant of Almighty God in this world, and now ending
the course of life is brought also before this just Judge to receive according
to her deserts. To the confusion of the devils and triumph of this soul all
the good worckes that ever she has wrought, shall be laid open to the whole
world, and those frailties also for which due penance has bin performed in
this world, shall nothing avail the adversary who alleges them. Behold the
B. Virgin and Mother of God, the Angel Guardian, and all the rest of the
Saints unto whom this soul has bin devoted, recommending her unto the just
Judge to give her a crown according to her desert. Hear the upright Judge
giving his sentence: Mat. 25.
Come thou blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for thee from
the beginning of the world, for I was hungry, and thou gave me to eat, I was
thirsty and thou gave me to drink and.

5. What a strange alteration will the sinful Creature behold himself in, The
d fference of men in this world and in the next.
when he shall see him who was abject in this world, he who lodged meanly, fed
hardly, was apparelled poorly, and in all respects of this world was much his
inferior, to be exalted so highly, and to be termed blessed, and himself so
much debased, and to be cursed and condemned to eternal punishment. On the
other side what comfort will that other soul have when he shall thus arrive
into that haven unto which living in this world he aimed; then how sweet will
those sufferings seem when every action shall have his crown.

6. Beholding with thy self these two souls, and the differences of them,
with the diverse manner of the Judges proceeding toward them, and having seen
the true and real cause of the reward of the one and the punishment of the
other, resolve to lead thy life according as thou desire to be dealt withal
in this Judgment. If thou desire happiness, Make a worthy choice.
let thy life be suitable to thy desire, since according to our actions every
one of us shall be judged; according to that of our Savior himself, speaking of
the power of his Judgment: Marvel not at this (says he) because the hour
comes, Ioh. 5.
wherein all who are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they who have
done good things shall come forth into the resurrection of life; but they who
have done evil into the resurrection of Judgment.

Of Heaven. CHAP. III.
BY heaven thou art to understand nothing else but a place of complete
Happiness; In what consists happiness.
and as blessedness or happiness in this world consists in the exercise of
Charity and other virtues, so does it consist in the next in the vision of
Almighty God; and although this happiness in heaven be possessed diversely by
those most happy enioyers thereof, yet the difference proceeds not by reason
of the object, or that which is seen, which is Almighty God, the self same
unto all; but from the manifold ways of seeing it. It is true: Psalm. 35.
In lumine eius vid^bimus lumen, In his light we shall see light; but this
light beats not upon all with the like splendor, but moderateth it self
according to the capacity of the glorified soul who sees it. That all the
blessed receive their happiness by seeing and enjoying the self same thing,
Matthew. 20.
the holy Fathers gather out of that piece of money which the master of the
vineyard gave unto his workmen, beginning from the last to the first; where
they who came last, had the same given them which was given to the first which
shows that the object is the same unto all. And that the same is differently
possessed, we are taught also by our Savior telling us, John. 14.
That there are many mansions or dwelling places in the house of his Father.

1. Consider (as well as thou art able) the happiness of a soul in this place,
where, at the first arriual finding nothing but joys and such as it never yet
experienced or could conceive, being the most perfect that may be, free from
any mixture of sorrow, or fear of ending; it must needs be wholly ravished in
the love of him whom it possesses. O how will that soul magnify the goodness
of Almighty God, in giving it grace to ariue unto this infinite happiness, and
how will it rejoice in having cooperated with the same in this world.

2. Here it will reflect, with exceeding joy and contentment, upon the
afflictions it endured in this world, most clearly perceauing, Romans 2.
that the passions of this life, are not condign to the glory that shall be
revealed. And now this soul most evidently sees, with what great crowns
small actions are rewarded, how important it is to have served God Almighty, to
have contemned the world, to have kept in servitude the body, and to have fed
the soul with co^templation of heavenly things; oh how abject and vile will
all contentme^ts of this world seem to this blessed soul! how mad and
fencelesse will it esteem the^ to be who prefer these worldly fooleries
before those joys which are in heaven.

3. If it were possible for a soul in heaven, having bin showed those delights
which God has prepared for those who love him, to be taken thence again and
placed in this world, what would not that soul do to be brought to that sight
once again, although it were but to endure for one hour? If penance were the
means to obtain it, what would it not undergo? If abnegation of it self,
how perfect would it beco^e in that admirable virtue? If by exercising acts of
charity, how fervent would it be, seeking occasions to exercise it? If for the
enjoying of that happiness so small a time, a soul who had seen it, would
undergo so much, what should we do, unto whom the possession of these joys
is most certainly promised for ever? Blessed are they who believe before they
see, Ioh. 20.
since our faith increases our reward. 1. Cor. 2.
For neither has the eye seen, nor ear heard: neither has it ascended into
the heart of man, what God has prepared for them who love him.

4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Apoc. 21.
and death shall be no more, nor crying; neith^r shall there be sorrow any more,
because the first things are past. This will Almighty God do to all his
constant servants, who have suffered any thing for his sake in this world; as
soon as ever they are made partakers of this happiness, their eyes shed no more
tears, neither shall there be sorrow any more, because the first things are
gone, and past as a shadow, which vanishes away at the presence of light. All
things that are in this world, are short, and endure a small time: and as the
pleasure of it is short, which blind man so much seek after, so are the
pu^ishments which are inflicted upon the good; and this short, and as it were
momentary suffering is to end, and to be rewarded without end, according to
that of the Apostle: 1. Cor. 4.
For that our tribulation which presently is momentany and light, works above
measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory in us, we not considering the
things that are seen, but that are not seen. For the things that are seen
are temporal, but those that be not seen, are eternal.

5. Here consider (in the best manner thou can) the admirable estate of a
soul in blessedness: and as thou have seen before that this blessedness
consists in our understanding, which is most properly explicated by this
word, Vision: yet does it not so consist therein as that it excludes our will
which is made partaker thereof by the delight which a soul receaueth from that
divine vision of Almighty God. And to know what that delight is, and how great,
no understanding upon earth can conceive; the reason is because we cannot
possibly conceive what God is, from the sight of whom this delight proceeds.
Our best way is to make a comparison, though it be infinitely defective, with
the delights of this world, and those of heaven. If we delight in the
possession of any thing in this world, let us consider how many defects are in
the thing possessed, as also in the possessour, which hinder the completenes of
this happiness: both are changeable and subject to infinite alterations and
ends; never was there yet any worldly contentment so enjoyed, but that if it
were truly looked into, there was conjoined with it some corasiue that might
change the taste of the Enioyer. But in heaven both that which is possessed, and
the Possessour are most permament, and this fruition is not capable of any
alteration or end, this delight is complete, mingled with no sorrows, since
from God that delight flows, in whom there is nothing but delight.

6. When we have arrived by the contemplation of heaven unto the delights
therein, our understanding presently butteth upon Almighty God, who is a Non
plus vltra, and the end of all that we can think of, since in him all this
Beatitude is contained, as in a place inaccessible unto man's understanding.
Well may we, whilst we are in this world, go about this hidden treasure to
wit, the Nature of Almighty God, and by outward signs in his Creatures guess
somewhat at that which is included in him; but never can we truly comprehend,
and know what this infinite happiness is, Exodus 53.
till we see him facie ad faciem, face to face, and be partakers of that divine
torrent of pleasure. How fervently have all Gods Saints desired the enjoying of
his felicity! Phil. 1.
S. Paul desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, because he had seen
those things in his high ecstasy, which were not lawful for man to speak. S.
Peter having but seen a glimpse of Christ his glory which then was far
inferior to that with which he now shines in heaven; yet as having arrived to
the top of felicity, Math. 17.
he desires to remain there. And leaving the infinite number of Saints
between their time and ours whose desires were the same, let us behold the
blessed Father Ignatius de Loyola, who in his contemplations upon heaven cried
out with a true contempt of this world. In his life.
Quam sordet terra, cum caelum intu^or! how base and foul seems this earth,
when I behold heaven! Oh that we would imitate these great Saints, whose eyes
were truly purged, contemning this earth and the thorns that grow thereon; and
having their thoughts fixed in heaven, and upon true happiness, were ever in a
continual flame and desire to attain thereunto.

Of Hell. CHAP. IIII.
THE calling back of thy Understanding from the top of heaven, and leading
it to the Center and bottom of the earth where the damned souls are
tormented, must needs breed a great alteration in thee, and by it alone
persuade thee, that this world is full of changes, and that our Understanding
is as mutable as the same; the which although it work upon the best subject
that may be, yet does it require a chang. If we were comfirmed in grace, it is
certain the thoughts of heaven and of those high Beauties would be ever
profitable unto us; but being as we are lutea vasa, vessels of earth which are
easily broken, we must walk between love and fear, Joy and Sorrow. S. Paul
himself makes this clear: 1. Cor. 12.
Least (says he) the greatness of my revelations might extol me, there was
given me an angel of Satan to buffet me.

1. Consider therefore first the place where these unfortunate souls lie
despayring, who unmindful of the world to come, and eternity, Luke. 16.
receperunt bona in vita sua, enjoyed their pleasures in this world: and in the
midst of all their prosperity, when they least thought of it, Venit mors
super illos, Psalm. 54.
et descenderunt in infernum viuentes, death came upon them, and they descended
quick into hell. Frame to thy self an exceeding vast place, capable to
receive infinite millions of souls, which is rightly termed A land of misery
and dar^knesse, Ioh. 10.
where the shadow of death is, and no order, but everlasting horror
inhabitet^; where nothing is heard but weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matt. 8.
mingled with lamentable voices of despair, and intolerable blasphemies
against their just Judge, who deservedly condemned them for their demerites, to
that place of eternal punishment.

2. Reflect upon the torments inflicted upon these Caytiffes, and behold with
what malice those infernal Spirits, the instruments of Gods wrath, impose
those unspeakable torments upon men, taking this as a part of revenge against
mankind, for possessing their seats in heaven. Behold those souls how
diversely they behave themselves in these endless miseries, some sighing, others
weeping, some rauing and crying hideously by reason of their pains, others
blaspheming against God, and cursing most bitterly the hour of their nativity.
Behold others in all their pains out of very envy and malice silent, not being
able to express the hatred they bear to God, nor the miseries they endure. Oh
Christian soul who art yet living, and in a state capable to shun these
unspeakable pains of Hell; how can thou truly think of these things, and
yet commit sin so freely, by which thou art made subject to all these
torments?

3. Amongst all these afflictions two exceed (if they may not be termed all of
them to exceed) to wit the cogitatio^ of what they have lost, and the worm of
conscience, which are the greatest torments they have. All Deuines conclude,
that the pain of the sense which these souls feel, in the midst of these
most cruel and neuer-dying flames, is but dull in regard of the sharpnes of of
the memory of what they have lost, those fallen Angels informing every other
soul, for their increase of torment, what they have lost by loosing heaven.
Here the understanding of those joys procures intolerable grief, for joy
in it self delights none but those who either possess it, or at the least
are in hope to possess it; but these souls neither possess it, nor yet are
in hope ever to do, but are banished from the most blessed sight of God for all
eternity, being at the end of an hundred thousand thousands of years, as far
of from the end of this endless punishment, as now.

4. Consider the grief which proceeds from the guilt of Conscience, which
like a gnawing worm lies continually tormenting the heart of a damned
creature. Here is a continual war, and discussion of matters passed in this
life, of Graces rec^aued from the merciful hand of God Almighty, and of
rejecting the same, of the opportunity offered of leaving that sinful course,
and embracing a virtuous life; of so many purposes made of amendment, and the
deferring thereof. Oh how will this worm of Conscience tear the heart of a
sinner, when he shall see himself condemned out of his own mouth; and were it
possible for him to dye, this thought would end him; but these greifes are
endless, having a subject to work upon that never ends: here hearts may
wither but never dye, bodies burn but never consume.

5. If thou have seen in the Considerations of Heaven what a soul would
undergo to be made partaker of those joys, having once known them before;
imagine here on the contrary what one of these unfortunate souls would endure
to be freed from this damnation, if it might return to this life again; what
wonderful alteration should we see in that soul; former pleasures turned into
tears of penance, the former loss of time into an exact observation of
hours, and a most perfect employment thereof, all banquetings would be turned
into fastings, rich apparel into hayrecloth; what a strait guard would be
placed over all the se^ses; not so much as the least thought of rebellion in
the^ escaping without some severe punishment. Thus would this soul do if it
were to live again: but this cannot be heard, the irreuocable sentence is
passed, and the most just Judge will not recall it, but for ever and ever world
without end, this soul is to be tormented; and all such wishes a^e most vain,
and serve for nothing but for greater torment, since they can never be obtained.

6. Lastly return unto thy self (O Christian soul) and thinking seriously
upon these things, as those which most of al import thee, amend thy life, which
led in the offense of God, conducteth thee directly unto these endless torments.
If thou would examine thine actions by eternity it would make thee (no
doubt) a blessed Saint in heaven and free thee from the torments of hell.
Think with thy self (which thought may be made in a moment) when thou
undertake any action: does this action, this thought, or this word I am ready
to utter, deserve the love or hatred of Almighty God? if it deserve love,
rejoice with thy self, and go forward in it: if hatred, leave it, fly from it
as from a serpent, that would enthrall thee, and bring thee to this eternity of
torment O eternity, eternity that men would oftener think upon thee!

ANOTHER BRIEF WAY HOW TO SAY THE BEADS. Wherein is contained the whole life
of our B. Lady. Taken out of holy Scripture, and the Doctors of the Church,
applying to every Pater Noster, one of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and to
every Aue Maria, one of these ensuing considerations, or brief eleuations of
the mind.
I. PATER NOSTER. The gift of Wisdom.
1. AVE Maria. In the beginning of the world she is promised to mankind, A
w^m^n shall bruise thy h ad.

2. She is prefigured in many holy women, as in Judith, Hester and others.

3. She is foretold to her parents by the Angel: Conceived without Original
sin.

4. She is borne full of grace above all creatures.

5. Her Nativity rejoices the whole world.

6. After three years she is presented in the Temple.

7. She goes up the ^5. stepps of the Temple without help, beyond the ordinary
power of that age.

8. Praying in the Temple, she is often visited by Angels.

9. She gives example of all virtue to the Virgins who lived with her.

10. She is the first, who made a vow unto God of Virginity.

II PATER NOSTER. The gift Understanding.
1. AVE. The High Priest with the people pray, to deliberate about her now
mariageable, according to the will of God.

2. It is revealed by an Angel that she should seek her an Espouse.

3. She is espoused unto Joseph, of the family of David

4. God being pleased with her Humility chooses her to be the Mother of his
son.

5. The Angel of God tells her, she shall be mother of God, remaining a
Virgin.

6. Behold (says she) the handmayd of our Lord, let it be done unto me
according to this word.

7. Having conceived, she goes toward the Mountains to serve her Cousin S.
Elizabeth.

8. By her salutation S. Elizabeth and S. John Baptist were sanctified: the one
prophesying the other exalting for joy in the womb of his Mother.

9. Her spirit rejoicing, she sings M^gnificat etc.

10. A little before the birth of S. John Baptist, she returns joyful to her
house at Nazareth.

III. PATER NOSTER. The gift of Counsel.
1. AVE The Angel says unto Ios^ph, Fear not etc. because that which shall
be borne of her, is of the Holy Ghost.

2. She goes toward Bethleem with her Spouse to be enrolled, and to pay
Tribute unto Caesar.

3. Of her is borne our Lord: she wrapps him in clouts, lays him in the
manger, and gives him suck.

4. She rejoices that he is revealed unto the Sheepheards, she shows him
unto them, and meditating upon al these things, she keeps them in her heart.

5. The eight day she causes her Child to be circumcised: the name of JESUS is
given him, as it was ordained by the Angel.

6. She admireth the adoring of the Kings, and receaues their mystical gifts.

7. She presents her son in the Temple: and although most immaculate, yet
observes the law of purification.

8 She hears the prophesy of Simeon, who fortelleth unto her Grief, and to
Israel Redemption.

9. She flies with her son and S. Joseph into Egypt.

10. She endures in that banishment much hardness, for the love of her son.

IIII. PATER NOSTER. The gift of Fortitude.
1. AVE. By the admonishment of the Angel she returns into the Land of Judah.

2. Fearing Archilaus the son of H^rode, she retireth her self unto Nazareth.

3. She goes toward Jerusalem to the Temple, according to the custom, where
she lost the Child JESUS.

4. After three days she finds him in the Temple in the midest of Doctors.

5. Contemplate how such a mother conuerseth with such a son for those 30.
years in which he was subject unto her.

6. At the Marriage in Cana of Galilee, she said, Son, they have no wine,
whence followed the first miracle of water turned into wine.

7 She hears oftentimes her Son preaching.

8. She sees him work miracles, and rejoicing gives the glory unto God.

9. She hears the woman say, Blessed is the womb that bare thee.

10. Her son revealed unto her the most cruel death which he was shortly to
undergo.

V. PATER NOSTER. The gift of Knowledge.
1. AVE. Her son takes his last leave of her, going toward his death, he
comfort her, and gives her his Benediction.

2. She understands that her so^n is betrayed by Judas, and taken by the Jews;
and carried and drawn from tribunal to tribunal.

3. She behoulds him whipped, crowned with thorns, showed to the people:
Behold the man.

4. She hears the cry of the people, Crucify him, and free Barabbas.

5. She meets her son on the way, with his Cross upon his shoulders, who was
conducted in have to Mount Caluary

6. She sees (or at the least hears) the blows of the hammers with which
her son was crucified.

7. She suffers with her son, who between two thieves was lifted up on the
Cross, whilst she bears him company under the Cross.

8. She hears her Son saying; Woman behold thy son, to wit S. John, being
pure man, instead of the son of God.

9. She sees her son give up his last breath upon the Cross, his side being
opened with a lance after his death

10. Contemplate how she received into her arms the body of her son taken
down from the Cross, by devout persons, and with her tears she washes it.

VI. PATER NOSTER. The gift of Piety.
1. AVE. To her, first of all, as most worthy Christ appears, being
gloriously risen, accompanied with many Saints.

2. She is often visited by him in those 40. days before his Ascension.

3. She accompanies her Son with her eyes, and most devoutly with her heart,
whilst he ascends into heaven.

4. She expects the Holy Ghost with the Apostles, comforting, and confirming
them in their faith.

5. After the Ascension of her son she often visits those places in which her
son had bin, and there she renewes her grief.

6. Being arrived to the age of 63. years, her d^parture out of this life is
revealed unto her by her son.

7. Before she dies, she behouldeth all the Apostles present, she given them
her last salutation, and recommends unto them the Church.

8. Christ descends from heaven to meet and receive her, and she is carried
into heaven by Angels.

9. She is exalted above the Quiers of Angels, and crowned Queen of all
Saints.

10. Sitting at the right hand of her son in great glory, she prays for the
Church, appeaseth the wrath of God, whilst our sins provoke him to revenge.

VII. PATER NOSTER. The gift of the Fear of God.
1. AVE. Next unto God the Father, she is most potent.

2. Next unto God the Son, she is most wise.

3. Next unto God the Holy Ghost of most goodness, and of most ardent Charity.

Laus Deo, B. Q. V. M.
FINIS.

