COR VNVM VIA VNA
The right honorable Sr William Cecill Knight, Baron of Burghley Knight of ye
honorable Order of ye Garter Master of Her highness Ward's and Liueries one of
the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Counsel and Lord High Tresorer of England.



PRECEPTS, OR, Directions for the well ordering and carriage of a man's life,
through the whole course thereof: left by William, Lord Burghly, to his Son,
at his death, who was sometimes Lord Treasurer of this Kingdom. Also some
other Precepts and Advertisements added, which sometimes was the Jewel and
delight of the right Honorable Lord and Father to his Country, FRANCIS, Earl
of Bedford, deceased.

In two Books.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Jones, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Strand, near York House, 1636.

To the Right Honorable, Richard, Lord Buckhurst, eldest Son and heir
apparent to the Right Honorable, Edward, Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain to
her Majesty, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of
the most Noble order of the GARTER.
My good Lord:
MVltiplicity of words begets multiplicity of errors: especially in those whose
tongues were never polished by Art. It is true, I have much Learning, but that
is in my Shop, and it is as true that I am ignorant, having not the happiness
to be bred a Scholar. Non cuiuis homini licet adire Corinthum. This little
Book (my Lord) being formerly printed, has received good entertainment: and
now that it goes under your protection* I doubt not, but it will be much more
welcome. The cause of this dedication is to express part of my thankfulness
for the goodness I have received from the Noble Earl your Father, the right
virtuous Countess your Mother, and your Honorable self, for which the height
of my ambition is only to be styled

Your Honors most humbly devoted to serve you Tho. Jones.

THE INDVCTION.
BEloved Son, the many religious and moral virtues inherent in your
matchless Mother, under the wings of whose prudent and Godly government, your
infancy has been trained and guided up, together with your Education, under
so zealous and Learned a Tutor, put me rather in assurance then hope (as
Tullie sometime exacted from his Son, from the only hearing of Cratippus his
Master) that you are not ignorant of that summary bond, wherein you stand
obliged to your Creator and Redeemer, which is only able to make you happy,
both here and hereafter, in life and death: In mentioning whereof, I mean not
only a bare and Historical knowledge, but with a real and practical use
adjoined, without which, though with a seemly assumption, you could express
to the world in a former habit and living portrayture, all Aristotle's Moral
virtues, and walk that whole book in Life and Action: yet are you but a vain
and wretched creature, the fairest outside of the miserablest inside, that
ever was concealed by Toombe, or shadowing: And although I nothing doubt, your
youth being guided, and your green vessel seasoned by such wholesome documents
and instructions, derived from so all-sufficient Teachers, that you are not
unfurnished of such needful helps, as may be furtherers to your life and
conversation: yet that I may the better retain and express the zealous
affection, beseeming a Father to his Son, or that you should be forced to
derive your stay and advice, rather from the rule of strangers, then from him
from whom you are produced, and brought forth.

Out of these foregoing considerations therefore, thinking it not unmeet, I
have essayed from the affection of a Father, to give you such good
advertisements and rules for the fitting and squaring of your life, as are
gained rather by my long experience and observation, than by much reading or
Study, being such (in my hope) with that good assistance, that shall season
your Youth like the deaw of Age: to the end that you entering into this
exorbitant and intangling World, may be the better furnished to avoid those
harmless courses; whereinto these dangerous times, and your experience may
easily ensnare you: and because I would not confound your memory, I have
reduced them into ten Precepts, which if next to Moses Tables, you imprint in
your mind, you shall reap the benefit, and I the end of my expectation and
content. And thus they follow.

The Contents of this Book.
Precept 1. FOr choice of your Wives. 2 The education of your Children. 3 For
household provision, and the choice of Servants. 4 How to entreat your Kindred
and Allies. 5 Advises to keep some great man to your friend: and how to
complement him. 6 How and when to undertake suits. 7 Advertiseth for
suretiship. 8 How to behave a man's self. 9 How far to disclose a man's secrets.
10 Advises not to be scurrilous in conversation. An addition of some short
Precepts and sentences, not impertinent to the former. An addition of some
fourefold short remembrances, which every man may experience daily in his life.
A Conference between a Philosopher and a Justice. A handful of short
questions, with their resolutions. The genealogy of Pride.
BURGHLEY HOUSE From the Gardens.



PRECEPT 1. For the choice of your Wives.
FIrst, when it shall please God to bring you to Man's estate, making you
capable of that Calling, use great providence and circumspection, in choice of
your Wives, as the root from whence may spring most of your future good or
evil: For it is in the choice of a Wife, as in a project of War, wherein to
err but once is to be undone for ever: And therefore be well advised before you
conclud^ ought herein; For though your Error may teach you wit, it is
uncertain whether you shall ever find time to practice it: Therefore the more
securely to enter herein, First, well consider your estate, which, if in a true
survey, you find firm and settled, Match near home, and with deliberation:
but if otherwise crazie and Rented, then far off, and with quick expedition:
be informed truly of their inclination, which that there may be a more equal
Sympathy; compare it with your own, how they agree: for you must know, that
every good woman makes not for every man a good wife, no otherwise then some
one good Dish digesteth with every stomach. After that, enquire diligently of
her stock and race, from whence she sprung, and how her parents have been
affected in their youth. Let her not be poor, how generous so ever: For
Generosity without her support, is but a fair shell without her kernel,
Because a man can buy nothing in the Market without money.

And as it is the safest walking ever between two extremes, so chufe not a wife
of such absolute perfection and Beauty, that every carnal eye shall be speak
you injury: neither so base and deformed, that breed contempt in others, and
bring you to a loathed bed.

Make not choice of a Dwarf or a Fool, for from the one you may beget a race
of Pigmeyes, as the other will be your daily grief and vexation: for it will
irke you so often as you shall hear her talk, and you shall continually find
to your sorrow, that feel that Cross, that There is nothing so fulsome as a
she-foole.

Touching the government of your House, let your Hospitality be moderate,
equaled to the measure of your estate, rather bountiful then niggardly, yet
not prodigal, nor overcostly, for though some who having otherwise consumed
themselves with secret vices, have endeavored to color their riots upon their
virtue, yet in my observation, I have not heard nor known any man grow poor,
by keeping an ordinary, decent, and thrifty Table.

Banish drunkenness out of your Houses, and affect him not that is affected
thereunto: for it is a vice that impaires health, consumes wealth, and
transformes a man into a beast: a sin of no single rank, no ordinary
station, that never walks unattended with a train of misdemeanors at the
heels: besides for the credit thereof, to induce a man, I never heard other
commendation ascribed to a Drunkard, more then the wel-bearing of his drink,
which is a Commendation fitter for a Brewers horse, or a Dray-mans back, than
either for Gentlemen or Serving-men; for especially, the latter being taken
tardy herein is thereby doubly divorced from himself; for, being first sober,
he is not his own man, and being drunk, he falls short by two degrees.

Beware thou spend not above three of the 4 parts of thy revenue, nor above one
third part thereof in your house: for the other two parts will but defray
extraordinaries, which will always surmount your ordinaries by much: for
otherwise you shall live like Beggars in continual wants, and the needy man
can never live happily, nor contented, being broken and distracted with worldly
cares: for then every least disaster makes him ready to Morgage or sell: and
that Gentleman that sels an Acre of Land, loses an ounce of credit: for
Gentilitie is nothing but ancient Riches: So that if the Foundation do sink,
the Building must needs consequently fall.

PRECEPT 2. For the Education of your Children.
BRing your children up in obedience and learning, yet without too much
austerity, praise them openly, reprehend them secretly: give them good
countenance, and convenient maintenance, according to your ability: for
otherwise your lives will seem their bondage, and then as those are censured,
that defer all good to their end: so that portion you shall leave them, they
may thank death for, and not you. Marry your Daughters betimes, lest they
marry themselves.

Suffer not your Sons to pass the Alps: for they shall exchange for their
foreign travel (unless they go better fortified) but others vices for their
own virtues, Pride, Blasphemy, and Atheism, for Humility, Reverence, and
Religion: and if by chance, out of a more wary industry, they attain unto any
broken Languages, they will profit them no more, then to have one meat served
in diverse dishes.

Neither by my advise shall you train them up to Wars: For he that sets up
his rest to live by that profession, in mine opinion, can hardly be an honest
man, or a good Christian; for, Every war of it self is unjust, the good
cause may make it lawful: besides it is a Science no longer in request then
use: for Soldiers in Peace, are like Chimneyes in Summer, like Dogs past
Hunting, or Women, when their beauty is done. As a person of quality once
noted to the like effect, in these Verses following.

Friends, Soldiers, Women in their prime,
Are like to Dogs in Hunting time:
Occasion, Wars, and Beauty gone,
Friends, Soldiers, Women here are none.
PRECEPT 3. For Household Provision, and of the choice of Servants.
LIve not in the Country without Corn and Cattle about you: For he that
must present his hand to his purse for every expense of household, shall as
hardly keep money therein, as it is for one to hold water in a Sive. And for
your provision, lay to buy it at the best hand, for there may be sometimes a
penny saved, between buying at your need, or when the season most fitly may
furnish you.

Be not willingly attended, or served by Kinsmen or Friends, which will seem
to be men, as it were entreated to stay: for such will expect much, and sted
little, neither by such as are amorous: For their heads are commonly
intoxicated. Keep rather too few, then one too many, feed them well, and pay
them with the most, so may you lawfully demand Service at their hands, and
boldly exact it.

PRECEPT 4. How to entreat your Kindred and Allies.
LEt your Kindred and Allies be welcome to your Table: grace them with your
countenance, and ever further them in all their honest actions, by word,
liberality, or industry: for by that means you shall double the bond of
Nature: be a Neighbor to their good, as well as to their blood: By which
reasonable deservings, you shall find them so many Advocates, to plead an
Apology for you behind your back, so many witnesses of your virtues,
whenever others shall seek to deprave you: but shake off the Glo-wormes, I
mean, Parasites and Sycophants, who will feed and fawn on you, in the Summer
of your prosperity, bnt in any adverse Storm, will shelter you no more, then a
Cloak of Taffatay, or an Arbor in Winter.

PRECEPT 5. Advises to keep some great Man to your Friend, and how to
complement him.
BE sure you keep some great Man always to your Friend: yet trouble him not
for Trifles: Complement him often, present him with many, yet small gifts, and
of little charge.

And if you have cause to bestow any great gratuity on him, then let it be no
Chest commodity, or obscure thing: but such a one as may be daily in sight,
the better to be remembered: for otherwise you shall live but like a Hop
without a Pole, or a Vine without her Elm, subject to injury and oppression,
ready to be made a Football, for every superior insulting companion to spurn
at.

PRECEPT 6. How and when to undertake suits.
Undertake no suit against a poor man, without receiving of great wrong, for
therein you make him your Competitor: besides that, it is held a base Conquest,
to triumph upon a weak adversary; neither undertake law, against any man,
before you be fully resolved you have the right on your side, which being once
so ascertaind, then spare neither cost nor pains to accomplish it: for a cause
or two being so close followed, and well accomplished, may after free you from
suits a great part of your life.

PRECEPT 7. Advertiseth for suretiship.
BEware of suretiship for your best friend: for he that pays another man's
debts, goes the way to leave other men to pay his, and seeks his own
overthrow. Therefore if he be such a one, that you cannot well say nay, choose
rather then, to lend that money from your self upon good bonds, though you
borrow it: so many you pleasure your friend, and happily secure your self.

In borrowing of money, be evermore precious of your word: for he that has a
care to keep day of payment, is Lord commander many times of another man's
purse.

PRECEPT 8. How to carry a man's self toward his Superiors, and Inferiors.
TOward your Superiors be humble, yet generous; with your equals familiar, yet
respective; toward your inferiors, show much humility, with some familiarity,
as to bow your body, stretch forth your hand, uncover your head, and such like
popular complements: the first prepares way to advancement: the second will
make you known for a man well bred: the third gains a good report, which once
gained, may easily be kept; for high humilities are of such respect in the
opinion of the multitude, as they are easilier won by unprofitable courtesies,
than by churlish benefits: yet do I not advise you, overmuch to affect or
neglect popularity.

PRECEPT 9. How far to disclose a man's secrets.
TRust no man with your credit, or estate: for it is a mere folly for a man to
inthrall himself further to his friend, than that he needs not fear him being
his enemy.

PRECEPT 10.
BE not scurrilous in conversation, nor Stoicall in your wit; for the one makes
you unwelcome to all companies, as the other pulls quarrels on your head, and
makes you hated of your best friends.

Jests, when they do savor of too much truth, leave a bitterness in the
minds of those that are touched. And although I have already pointed at these
inclusive; yet I think it necessary to leave it to you as a caution, because I
have seen many so prone to quippe and gird, as they had rather lose their
friend than their jest: and if by chance their boiling brain yield a quaint
scoff, they will travel to be delivered of it, as a woman with child: but I
think those nimble apprehensions, are but the froth of the wits.

An Addition of some short Precepts and sentences, not impertinent to the
former.
GO as thou would be met, sit as thou would be found, wear thy apparel
in a careless, yet a decent seeming: for affectednesse in any thing, is
commendable in nothing; and endeavor to be so far from vainglory, that
thou strive in any thing rather to be in substance without show, then in show
without substance.

2 Strive not to enrich thy self by Oppression, Usury, or other unlawful
gain: for, if a little evil gotten, shall not only melt away it self like
deaw against the Sun, but shall likewise consume with it self that which was
more lawful: how then shall it have without stay, when all the whole lump is
corrupted? Surely, (if experience fail not) with a swifter speed, than either
by the prodigal hands of a third or second Heir; and for such a one that
ungodly dies rich, well he may have mournens to his Grave; but shall be sure
to find few Comforters at his judgment.

3 Be industrious and studious in thy youth, knowing, that if by thy Labor
thou accomplish any thing that is good, the labor passes, but the good
remains to thy comfort, as if by the contrary for thy pleasure, thou shall
do any thing that is evil, the pleasure passes, but the evil remains to
thy torment: and withal, because it is a less pain to be studious in thy
youth, than a grief to be ignorant in thy age.

Corrupt company is more infectious than corrupt air: therefore be advised in
thy choice: for that Text of thy self that could never so be expounded, thy
companion shall as thy commentary lay open to the world, and withal, because
we see it by experience.

That if those that are neither good nor evil, accompany with those that are
good, they are transformed into their virtue.

If those that are neither good, nor evil, consort with those that are evil,
they are incorporated to their vice.

If the good company with the good, both are made the better, if the evil with
the evil, both the worse.

For according to the Proverb,

Such as the company, such is the condition.

4 Whatsoever good purpose thou intendest at thy death, that do in thy life:
for so doing, it shall be more acceptable to God, and commendable to man: for
he that gives when he cannot hold, is worthy of thanks when one cannot choose:
besides, in so doing, thou shall see thy intent brought home to thy aim, and
nere craze the Conscience of Executor or Over-seer to pervert it thou deceased,
to some sinister respect or private end.

Whatsoever thou shall purpose, be silent in thy intentions, lest by the
contrary thou be prevented and laughed to scorn.

6 Strive to subdue the affections of thine own heart, which are oftentimes
harder than to conquer a Kingdom: and forbear whatsoever is dear unto thy
body, being any way prejudicial unto thy soul.

7 Abuse not thy body in youth by surfeit, riot, or any other distemper, through
an overweening ability of strength: for youth and nature pass over many
infirmities that are growing till their age.

8 Live virtuously, that thou may dye patiently, for, who lives most
honestly, will dye most willingly: and for thy longer days, and better health
upon earth, afflict not thy body with too much unnecessary Physic; but furnish
thy mind in time of plenty, to lay up for it self and others in time of want:
for surely that man's end shall be easy and happy, that death finds with a
weak body, but a strong soul.

6 Nor be thou dismayed though thou groan under the hand of sickness, for as
sometimes it purges the body from nocent humors: so does it often times the
soul from more dangerous security: and the rather with this thought, that by
the Physicians own rule, and our too common experience, there is no perfect
health in this world, but a neutrality between sickness and health, as no
absolute pleasure is more, than to avoid pains, according as one thus writes
to the same purpose.

There is no health, Physicians say, that we at best enjoy, but a Neutrality:

And can there be worse sickness than to know,

That we are never well, nor can be so?

10 The eyes are the instruments of lust: therefore make a Covenant with them,
that they betray not thy heart to vanity.

11 Be ever diligent in some vocation: for continual ease, as it is more
dangerous, is more wearisome than labor, and it is no freedom to live
licentiously, nor pleasure to live without some pain.

12 Indifferent superiority is the safest equality, as the sobrest speed is the
wisest leisure.

13 He is worthy to fall that tempts himself: and therefore shun occasion of
Evil, and thou have half overcome thine enemy.

14 Labor to keep a good Conscience to thy Comforter: for he that is
disfurnished thereof, has fear for his Bedfellow, Care for his Companion, and
the sting of the guilt for his torment.

15 In all thy attempts let Honesty be thy aim: For he that climbes by privy
deceit, shall fall with open reproach: and forget not in thy youth to be
mindful of thy end: For though the old man cannot live long, yet the
Young Man may dye quickly.

16 The waste of Time is a dear expense, and he that seeks for means to
pass it unprofitably, spurs a forward Horse without reason, to the overthrow
of his Rider: for whosoever wastes many years, and purchases little
knowledge, may be said to have had a long time, but a short life. And
whatsoever thou do, do it wisely, and forecast the end: For who thinks
before he do, thrives before he think.

17 Use such affability and convenient complement, as common Civilitie, and
usual courtesy requires, without making thy self too dear to thy Friend, or
thy Friend too cheap to thee.

18 Be steadfast in thy promise, and constant in a good resolution, and if at
any time thou have engaged thy Word, perform it, (being lawful) though to thy
loss: So shall thy Promise be as forcible as another Bond, thy Word as
another Oath: For it is the Man that gives credit to his Oath, more than the
Oath to the Man.

19 Ask confidently that thou requirest: For he that asks doubtingly,
teaches the way to be denied.

20 Make not Law thy practice to injury, or instrument to uphold thy spleen
against any man without due occasion, lest in the end it prove to thee no
greater refuge, than did the Thicket of brambles to the flock of Sheep, that
driven from the plain by Tempest ran thither for shelter, an^ there lost
their Fleeces.

21 Though I think no day amiss to undertake any good enterprise, or
business in hand; yet have I observed some, and no mean Clerks, very
Cautionarie, to forbear these three Mundayes in the year, which I leave to
thine own consideration, either to use or refuse, viz.

1 The first Monday in April, which day Caine was born, and his brother Abel
slain.

2 The second Monday in August, which day Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed.

3 Last Monday in December, which day Judas was born, that betrayed our Savior
Christ.

An Addition of some fourefold short remembrances which every man may
experience daily, in his Life Time.
Use four things so much as you can, So shall you please both God and Man.

Praying, Reading, and Hearing, and in good works laboring.

Use four things as little as you can, So shall you please both God and man.

Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and to spend much time in trifling.

There be four causes* for the which a Man is borne into the world: and the
first is chiefest of all.

To serve God and his Country, his Parents and his Friends.

There be four virtues, which we must strive to attain.

That is, to be Just and Constant, Wise and Temperate.

There be four vices which a man must earnestly shun and avoid.

Sloathfulnesse and carelessness, vain curiosity, and niceness.

There be four things in this world earnestly desired, and never obtained.

Mirth, without mourning. Health without Sickness. Travel without
wearisomnesse, and all goodness without evil.

There be four things to be greatly desired, and earnestly followed.

In Behavior, soberness, in Promise, steadfastnesse, in Conversation,
meekness, and in Love, contentedness.

There be four things most needful, and the same most harmefull.

Wit, and Words, Drink, and Company.

There be four things much worth, and little weighed, Time, and Health, Truth,
and Quiet.

There be three things Saint Austine was sorry he lived not to see.

First, Rome in her flourishing Estate.

Secondly, to see Christ in the Flesh.

Thirdly, to hear Saint Paul preach.

Plato gave thanks to Nature for four things, and what were they?

1 That he was a Man, and not a Beast.

2 That he was a Man, and not a Woman.

3 That he was a Grecian, and not a Barbarian.

4 That he lived during the Time of Socrates.

There be four things of the most, most desired, and unto many most dangerous.

Authority and ease, Women, and delights.

There be four things greatly sought, dangerously gotten, fearfully enjoyed,
and justly repented.

Unlawful Lust and Lucre, immoderate Wealth, and Revenge.

There are four kind of people (according to David,) that are most indebted
unto God for their lives.

1 Those that have escaped from a Dearth.

2 Prisoners their Bonds.

3 Those which are preserved from a mortal Sickness.

4 Seafaring Men, that are neither among the living nor the dead.

There be four thoughts, by the which a man may best reclaim his careless
and dissolute life.

1 By thinking, that if one must give account of every idle Word, what exaction
shall be required for his idle deeds?

2 That if those shall be condemned who have done no good, what shall become of
those who have done nothing but evil?

3 That if those shall not be held guiltless, that have not given their own
goods, where shall they appear, that have wrongfully taken others?

4* That if Ignorance without zeal, shall not be pardoned, where shall
knowledge with neglect be condemned?

There be five thoughts which should ever be in the mind of every good
Christian.

First, to think of pleasure, to despise it.

Secondly, of Death to expect it.

Thirdly, of judgment, to escape it.

Fourthly, of Hell, to prevent it.

Fifthly, of Heaven, to desire it.

There be four things very easy to do often, but very hard to do well.

To desire, to command, to counsel, and to judge.

There be four things better to give than to take.

Pardon, Physic, Allowance, and Rewards.

There be sour as great evils in the world unpunished, as those that are
punished.

First, Untemperatenesse: secondly, Unshamefastnesse: thirdly, Unfaithfulnes:
fourthly, Unthankfulness.

There be four things we cannot but set by, and yet can hardly be sure of.

Health, Wealth, another love, and our own life.

There be four things the poor man has equal with the Prince.

Health, Sleep, Thought, and lasting life.

There be four things we may be grieved with, but should not grudge at.

The Ordinance of God, the Will of a Prince, the sentence of a Judge, the
finding of our faults.

There be four things which cannot well be demanded with reason, and therefore
may be denied with honesty.

A Masters message, a Lovers affection, a Friends Counsel, our own thoughts.

There be four things good to use, but naught to need.

Law, Physic, our friends purse, and our own patience.

There be four servants of the heart, that show the disposition of their
Master.

The Eye, the Tongue, the Foot, and the Hand.

There be four things best matched, but not oftnest married.

Gratiousnesse with Greatness, Discretion with Learning, Beauty with
Chastity, Wit with Virtue.

There be four sorts of people, that fear is never long from.

The Ambitious, the Vicious, the Covetous and the Jealous.

There be four things the more you take, the more you leave.

Light of a Candle, Instruction of the Learned, Wit of the Wise, and Love of a
Friend.

There be four things, fit for all those that desire a quiet life.

Busily to find no faults, Contentiously to lay no Wagers, Disdainfully to
make no comparisons, Wickedly to maintain no opinions.

There be four mothers bring forth four very bad daughters.

Truth, Hatred; Prosperity, Pride; Security, Peril; Familiarity, Contempt.

There be four Joys to be desired, and the last is above all.

Secure quietness; Quiet Ioyfulnesse; Joyful blessedness, and blessed
everlastingnesse.

A Conference between a Philosopher, and a Justice.
Philosopher. What Goddess art thou?


Just. Justice.


Philo. Why look thou with so stern a Countenance?


Justice. Because I know not how to be bowed with words, or moved with tears.


Phil. From whence descended?


Justice. From Heaven.


Philosopher. What are thy Parents?


Justice. Faith and good Conscience.


Philos. Why have thou one ear open, and another shut?


Justice. The one lies open to Truth, and the other is shut to her Enemy.


Philosopher. Why bear thou a Sword in one hand, and a pair of balances in
the other?


Justice. With the one I mete out right, and with the other I punish her
opposers.


Philos. Why walk thou alone?


Justice. Because good Company is scarce.


Philos. Why art thou in so poor a habit?


Just. Because he that covets to get much riches, can never be just.

Upon whose Conference one inserted these Verses.

In old time Justice was portrayed blind.


To signify her strict impartial Doom:
And in her hand she held a Scale, to find
By weight, which part did most remove the loome.
She is blind and deaf, yet feels apace.
Her Scale now weighes the Fees, and not the Case.
A handful of short questions, with their Resolutions.
Question.
Why are Citizens commonly of less stature than other men?

Ans. Because they live most in the shade.

Q. Whether the Egg or bird was first?

A. The Bird, for the first course of creatures were immediately from God
without secondary causes.

Q. What waters of all others ascend highest?

A. The tears of the faithful, which God gathers into his bottle.

Q. Of all fishes in the Sea which do our Naturalists observe the swiftest?

A. The Dolphin, which swimmes faster than either Bird or arrow flies; which
Fish is most dangerous to Mariners.

Q. What breaks the shell at the coming out of the Chicken?

A. By the ordinary time of sitting upon, the shell becomes very tender and
brittle, so that the least stirring effects it: but the principal reason is,
the defect of nourishment, which at the end of that time is wasted in the
shell, which the Chicken missing, exposes her self to find, and so breaks
it.

As likewise the defect of Nutriment is the natural cause of all other births.

Q. Christ bids us be wise as Serpents, wherein consists their Wisdom?

Answ. 1. That in the Spring, she casts off her old skin, to invest her in a
new.

2 That she will defend her head above all things.

3 That carrying Poison in her mouth, she ever puts it out before she drink.

4 That she stoppes her ears at the voice of the Charmer.

Q. What is that that is too hard for one to keep: enough for two, and too
much for three?

Answ. Secret.

Qu. To whom may a man best commit his secret?

Answ. To a common Liar, for he, though he disclose it, shall not be believed.

Quest. What were the Names of those two Thieves that were crucified with
Christ?

Ans. The Scripture nominates them not: Yet some Writers give them these names:
Dismas and Gesmas; Dismas, the happy: and Gesmas the unfortunate: and according
to the Poet:

Gesmas damnatur, Dismas ad Astra levatur. Qu. How may a man drink much wine,
and strong drinks, and not be drunk?

An. By eating before some bitter Almonds, whose nature is to suppress the
strength thereof downwards.

Q. Aristotle being demanded, what was the fruit to himself of al his study
and Philosophy?

Ans. Answered, to do those things out of a natural willingness, that others
do by compulsion.

Q. Why cannot the heart of a man be filled, although he should enjoy the whole
World?

Ans. Because the whole Globe of the World is round, and Man's heart a Triangle
receptacle for the Trinity: For as one says: Cor Camera Omnipotentis Regis.

Qu. By what means may a man best withdraw his affection where he loves, in
spite of his hate, and cannot choose?

Ans. By striving to divide it with some other at the same time: for he that
loves over-many, never loves overmuch.

Qu. By what means may the coals of Beauty be best quenched, that they burn
not to unlawful desire?

Answ. By this highest contemplation, that if the picture be so amiable, needs
must the pattern be most admirable: and if the lesser so please, how would the
greater Content; which unlawful pursuit of the one here, may justly exclude
from the other hereafter.

Q. Why is Homo, a common name for all Men?

An. Because it is a Synonyma to Humus, the earth: the common matter all men
are made of.

Q. Whence is the derivation of Cadaver, a dead carcass?

Ans. Of Caro data vermibus.

Qu. What three Letters are those that make us both Bondmen and Free?

Ans. They are EVA, which inverted, are Ave, the Angels Salutation.

Qu. What two Letters are those that your Infants first cry out upon?

An. They are E. and A. according to our note.

Clamabunt E. A. quotquot nascuntur ab Eva.

Qu. Whether the current or the stay of Farthing Tokens have been more
beneficial or prejudicial to the poor?

An. This question shall be answered by the blind beggar of Saint Giles in the
next Edition.

Q. What strumpet of all other is the most common prostitute in the World?

Ans. Lingua, that common-whore: for she lies with all men.

Qu. What Lady is that that may be kissed, and handled, but not clipped?

Ans. Lady Pecunia, by whose favor all these may be yours.

The genealogy, offspring, progeny, and kindred, the household, the family, the
servants and retinue of Pride, cum tota sequela sua, with all her train and
followers.
1 Self-love, selfe-liking, self-pleasing, self-will, singularity.

2 Covetousness, unlawful desire, Concupiscence, inordinate lust, barbarous
unlawful getting.

3 Ambition, climbing aspiring affectation.

4 Hatred, malice, envy, disdain, haughtiness, contempt, scornefulnesse,
scoffing, unkindness.

5 In wrath, fury, madness, outrage, hastiness, fretfulnesse, eagerness,
wildenesse.

6 Frowardness, wilfulness, waywardness, elvishnesse, impatience
unrulinesse, untowardnesse, disobedience.

7 Stateliness, lordlinesse, loftiness, high looks, surlinesse, sternesse,
vengeance, revenge.

8 Cruelty, tyranny, domination, usurpation, oppression, wrong, injustice,
iniquity, rashness.

9 Profaneness, irreligion, atheism, contempt of God, foolishness,
disobedience.

10 Error, heresy, superstition, schism, sects, pharisaisme, puritanisme,
idolatry.

11 Contention, discord, division, brawling, scolding, railing.

FINIS.
A GLASS Wherein those enormities and foul abuses may most evidently be seen,
which are the destruction and overthrow of every Christian Commonwealth.

Likewise the only means how to prevent such dangers: by imitating the
wholesome advertisements contained in this Book.

Which sometimes was the Jewel and delight of the right honorable Lord, and
Father to his Country, FRANCIS, Earl of Bedford, deceased.

LONDON, Printed for THOMAS JONES, 1636.

The Contents of this Book shows those Abuses which are the destruction of
every Christian Commonwealth.
1 A Wise man without works. 2 An old man without devotion. 3 A young man
without obedience. 4 A rich man without charity. 5 A woman without
shamefastness. 6 A Master or Ruler without virtue. 7 A Christian man full of
contention 8 A poor man proud. 9 A wicked and an unjust King. 10 A negligent
Bishop. 11 A people without discipline. 12 A people without law.
A Glass wherein those blemishes and abuses may be perfectly seen, which are
the destruction and overthrow of every Christian Commonwealth.
The first abuse.
Chap. 1. A wise man without works.
AMong those several maimes and blemishes in any estate whatsoever, the first
that presents it self, is a wise man or a Preacher without good works: that
is to say, such a one as does not work according to his teaching, and to the
wisdom which he delivers with his own tongue. For the hearers do despise
the good and wholesome doctrine, if they perceive that the works of the
Preacher do differ from his teaching. And the authority of the Preacher shall
never be good, except (by example of good life) he fasten it in the heart of
the hearer: especially when the Preacher himself is fallen into the love of
sin, and will not apply the wholesome salves of other Preachers to his own
wounds. The Lord therefore willing to instruct his Disciples both in doctrine
and good works, taught them how they should take heed thereunto, saying. If the
salt be unsavory, wherein shall it be made savory? that is to say, if the
Preacher be out of the way, and do not as he ought to do, what Preacher shall
bring him in again? And if the light that is within thee is become darkness,
how great then shall the darkness be it self? If the eye have lost the use
and office of sight: what man can require that same service of the hand or
foot, or any other member of the body? Therefore let Preachers take heed, that
they incur not a sharper vengeance, if they be the greater occasion to many
that they do perish.

For Solomon himself, while he did transgress, and work contrary to his
great wisdom: was the cause, that by his salt only, the kingdom of all the
people of Israel was divided. Wherefore those persons to whom many things are
committed, have the greater los^e if they bestow not that well, which they have
received of their head and Governor: and therefore he that has the greater
charge, shall make the greater answer and reckoning. For the servant which
knows the will of his Master and does it not, shall suffer sharp scourges and
bitter punishments.

The second abuse.
Chap. 2. An old man without devotion and godly fear.
THe second stain and shameful abuse, is an old man that has no holiness in
him: but when the members and parts of his body be old and feeble, the lims of
his mind, that is to say, of the inward man, are nothing the stronger. It is
decent and comely, that old men should give themselves to more perfect
holiness and devotion, than other men, whom the flourishing time of this world
has not as yet forsaken. The example may be gathered in wood, that even as the
Tree is accounted naught and evil, which after it has blossomed, brings
forth no good fruit: so among men, he is a wicked and evil person, who when
the flower of his youth is past, does not in the old time of his body, bring
forth ripe works of good fruits. For what thing can be more ridiculous, than a
man's mind not to endeavor to attain strength and perfection, when all the
parts of his body (by age) are come to defection and end? When his eyes wax
dim, his ears hard of hearing, his head bald, his cheeks withered through
lack of blood: when he begins to want his teeth, to have his breath strong
and earthly, his breast stuffed with phlegm, evermore troubled with the cough:
and finally, when his legs do fail under him as he goes, by age, and
swelling with diseases: the inward man that feels no age, being also pained
with the self same diseases. And all these sicknesses and infirmities
rehearsed, are signs and tokens before, that the house of this body shall
shortly decay.

What have we to do then, while the end of this life draws so fast on? but
that such as are old, should desire to covet nothing else, than how they might
soonest obtain the felicity of the life to come. For to young men, the end of
their life is always at hand and uncertain, but unto old men it is more ripe
and natural, as also agreeable to their age.

Wherefore a man must take heed of two things, which never do wax old in his
flesh, and do draw the whole man unto sin: that is to say, the heart and the
tongue. For the heart is always imagining of new thoughts, and the tongue is
evermore swift in speaking whatsoever the heart does imagine or think.

Let old men therefore beware, that these young members do not bring the whole
harmony of their bodies out of tune: causing the other parts of the body (which
do show gravity) to be laughed to scorn. For every man ought to take heed,
what becomes the age which he bears, that he may do those things which
shall cause, that neither his life, age nor behavior may be touched with
despising.

The third abuse*
Chap. 3. A young man without obedience.
HEre must we entreat on the third eyesore: namely, if a young man be found
without obedience, whereby the world is brought out of good order. For how does
he think to be reverenced when he comes to age, that in his youth will show
no obedience or reverence to them which are old? And therefore it is a common
saying among old men, that he can never play the Master well, who has not one
way or other declared himself serviceable and obedient to some other before.

For the which cause, our Lord Jesus Christ, in the time of his being upon the
earth in his flesh, till the lawful time and age of a teacher, that he should
teach: did serve and minister obediently to his Parents. Likewise then, as
gravity, sadness and perfect godly manners, are looked for and beheld in old
men, so to young men belongs (of right) humble service, subjection and
obedience.

Wherefore in those precepts and commandments of the Law, which appertain to
the love of our neighbor, the first is the honor of Father and Mother, being
commanded unto us: that although the carnal father be not alive, or is
unworthy, yet you must to some other which is alive, show obedience and give
honor, till such time thou come to an age, worthy to be honored thy self.
For this word Father is taken four manner of ways in the Scripture, that is
to say, by nature: by the nation or people: for counsel: and for age. Of the
natural father, Jacob speaks to Laban, saying. If the fear of my father
Isaac had not been here, thou would have taken all that I have. Of the
father of the people, it is said, when the Lord spoke to Moses out of the bush.
I am the God of thy Fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of
Jacob. Of the father for age and counsel, it is likewise written. Ask the
Father, and he shall tell thee; and the Elders, and they shall show unto thee.

Wherefore, if thy natural Father be dead, and so not worthy to be obeyed, if
any other old man do give thee good counsel, thou must show the obedience of
a young man unto him. For how shall he be honored in his old age, which
refused to follow the good lessons of obedience, when he was a young man
himself? Whatsoever a man does labor, that shall he reap and gather. In like
manner, all discipline (at the first) seems to be unpleasant and painful:
but afterward it shall give to them that have exercised themselves therein, the
most pleasant and quiet fruit of right and justice. For like as there is no
fruit found on that Tree, which first did bear no blossoms: so in age, that
man shall never have the due honor to age, who in his youth has not first
been exercised with some discipline. And which way can discipline be without
obedience?

It follows then, that a young man without obedience, is a young man without
discipline: for obedience is the mother of all discipline. It requires great
exercise: example and rule whereof, it has taken by our Lord Jesus Christ, who
being obedient unto his father, yea to the death, and that to the death of the
cross, took upon him gladly ignominy and rebuke.

The fourth abuse.
Chap. 4 A rich man without charity.
NExt ensues the fourth argument of evil, which is a rich man destitute of
alms deeds or charity: such a one as does hide and lay up till the time to
come, more than is sufficient for him, distributing nothing to the poor and
needy, and so while he uses so great diligence, in keeping the goods gathered
on the earth, he loses the treasure which is everlasting of the heavenly
Country. Whereto our Lord Jesus called the rich young man, who demanded of him
the way to perfection, saying to him. If thou will be perfect, go and sell all
that thou have, and give it to the poor, and come and follow me, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven. Which no man ever can have, except he comfort
the poor.

Let not him therefore sleep upon his riches, which may do good unto the
poor, for although a rich man have gathered together great store of goods, yet
can he not enjoy them all alone, in respect the nature of man is sustained with
few and small things. Then what greater folly can there be in the world, then
for the excessive feeding and clothing of one man, to lose all the pleasures
of the kingdom of heaven, and so to purchase the everlasting pains of hell,
without hope of any comfort or help?

That thing therefore which of necessity thou must once forsake, in hope to be
rewarded again everlastingly, do thou distribute willingly and cheerfully.
For all things which we behold with our eyes, are temporal, but those which we
see not, are eternal and everlasting. For so long as we are temporal, things
of like quality do us service, but when we depart from this earthy abode,
everlasting joy shall attend upon us, and felicity without limit or ending.

What reason have we to love those things which we cannot always have with us?
when we evidently behold, that the lands and substance of a rich man, do
declare him to be without wit and judgment, because he loves those things
with the desire of his whole heart, which never do render him love again. For
if a man love gold, silver, lands, dainty fare, fine meats, and bruit beasts,
the natural course of things do teach us, that none of these can yield him
love again. What thing is then further from all reason, than to love that
which cannot love thee again, and to neglect that, which gives to thee all
things with love? For that cause, God commanded us to love, not the world, but
our neighbor, since that he can render love again for love: which thing
worldly goods cannot do, it is well known. Even so God commands us to love
our enemy, that the same love may make him of our enemy, our friend.

Let every covetous rich man therefore, who would have everlasting riches,
distribute (while he is here) to the poor and needy, those riches which are
but temporal, and do not continue for ever. For if a man will not sell that
thing which he loves, how can another man buy that thing which he coveteth?
and therefore the covetous men are called cursed of the most righteous Judge,
because they which past by them, did not say unto them: The blessing of God be
upon you, and we do bless you in the name of God. Therefore the covetous men
are cursed and unhappy: who for transitory goods do go to everlasting
damnation.

But on the other side: Blessed are the pitiful, for they shall find mercy
and pity. Happy is that man that is merciful, for so much as God (in this
virtue) does not look upon the substance and riches: but upon the affection
and heart of man.

The fifth abuse.
Chap. 5. A woman without shamefastness.
PRoceeding to the fifth notorious kind of abuse, I find it to be a Woman
without modesty or shamefastness. For even as wisdom does both get and keep
good manners in men, so in Women, shamefastness does bring forth, nourish and
keep, all honest and good works.

Shamefastness keeps them chaste and pure, it plucketh in wary respect of
life, it refraineth from strife and debate, it asswageth anger, it quenches
the desire of the flesh, it does moderate the desire of the mind, it chastneth
wantonness, it banisheth drunkenness, it makes few words, it bridleth the
greedy desire of the gut, and utterly condemns theft, what more? It brideleth
and tameth all vice, it nourishes all virtues, and whatsoever is before God
and man acceptable.

A life which is unchaste, is neither praised of men in this world, nor rewarded
of God in the world to come. But the contrary, which is a chaste life, is well
spoken of among men, and rejoices also in the hope of the bliss to come. It
does win the love of men which are living and do perceive it, and to them
which come after, it leaves a goodly example of imitation, being a pleasant
and a godly memory. It delights always in good manners, and agrees unto them,
evermore refreshing the soul with continual reading and meditation of the
holy Scriptures. And besides this, it keeps the examples of good which are
gone, being always acquainted and joined in company with them that are perfect
and honest.

The exercise of shamefastness, consists in two things, that is to say, in
the outward behavior of the body, and the inward affection of the mind. In
the body, by giving good examples before men, as the holy Apostle says: and in
the mind, before God we do provide and begin good works. For the
shamefastness and chastity of the body is, not to covet other men's goods, and
to fly all uncleanness: not to eat and drink but in time: not to be a
gigler and a provoker of other men to laughter: no speaker and teller of false
and vain tales: to be soberly apparrelled, all things being set in comely
order, according to godliness in all parts of the body, as well in the hair
on the head, as in the raiment. Not to company with the ungodly, neither to
look proudly or disdainfully upon any man, nor yet wantonly to cast up the
eyes, to the evil provocation of other: not to go nicely and tripping in the
street, having a pace like as it were a game or a play, to be seen, and to
tempt other therewith.

To be also inferior unto no man in good works, to be occasion to no man of
reproach or shame, to blaspheme or slander no man: to hate none that is good,
nor to scorn such as are old, not to meddle with those things which thou
know not, nor to contend or strive with thy better: and finally, not to blab
abroad all things that thou know. These things do make a man loved of his
neighbor, and acceptable in the sight of God.

The shamefastness and chastity of the soul, is to do those things which thou
do, more for the sight of God, than to be seen of men: to stay the desire of
evil thoughts: to esteem every man better than thy self: not to infect thy
judgment with false doctrine: to agree with them that are of the Catholic
and universal faith: to cleave only to God: to presume nothing of thy self,
but to commit all thy doings to the help of God: to be always humble in his
sight: to offer to our Lord Jesus Christ, the chastity of thy inward mind:
never to make an end, or to cease from good works during thy life: and with a
strong heart to despise the present tribulations of thy mind: of things
worldly, to love nothing but thy neighbor: to set and lay up the treasure of
all thy love in heaven: and finally, to be assured, that for thy well doing,
thou shall not lose the reward in heaven.

Shamefastness is a goodly ornament of noble persons. It exalts those which
be humble, making them noble. It is the beauty of them that are feeble and
weak: the prosperity of them which be sick, the comfort of them that are in
heaviness, the increase of all beauty: the flower of Religion: the defense and
buckler against sin: a multiplier of good deeds: and to be short, it is the
only paramour and darling of God the creator of all.

The sixth abuse.
Chap. 6. A Master or a Ruler without virtue.
IN this place follows the sixth abuse: namely, a Lord or Master that is
without virtue. For it profits nothing to have power and authority, or to
rule, if the Master have not in himself, the direct and orderly sway of
virtue. But this virtue consists not so much in the externe and outward
strength of the body, which is very requisite and necessary for such as are
worldly Rulers, as it is to be exercised in the inward strength, in good and
virtuous manners. For often times a man does lose the might and power to rule,
through the negligence of the inward part: as it appeared by Eli the Priest,
who while he punished not his children with the rigorous and strait rod of
justice, when they did sin: God, (as one that would be revenged for their
wickedness upon him) sharply punished him, as one that consented to their
naughtiness.

Therefore it is necessary, that Rulers have these three things in them, that
is to say: terror to be feared, good governance, and love. For except the
Governor be feared and loved, his ordinance and rule cannot stand. Therefore
through his goodness and honest familiar conditions, let him procure to get
the love of them which are under him, and also by just and discreet punishment.
Not that he would or should appear to revenge his own quarrel or injury: but
that the transgression or breaking of the Law of God, might be punished, and so
to be had in fear.

Wherefore, while many persons do depend and hang upon him, he himself must
altogether depend and hang upon God, and cleave only to him: who has set him
in that rule: who has established him, and made him to be a stronger man,
whereby to bear the burdens of many. For except a beam be laid fast and sure,
upon a stronger thing which is able to bear it, all that is laid upon it shall
fall down: yea and it self also, through the very bigness and weight of it
self, shall fall to the ground with the burden thereof. So a Prince or Ruler,
except he stick fast to his maker, both he himself, and all that is with him
does quickly perish.

There be some, who after they be set in authority, do become better men, and
do cleave more near to God, than they did before: and some are contrariwise
thereby made the worse.

For Moses after he was made Governor of the people, he had communication with
God more familiarly than he had before. But Saul the son of Cis, after he was
King, through his pride and disobedience, highly sinned and offended against
God.

King Solomon, after he sat in the seat of his Lord and father King David,
God increased and made him rich with the gift of wisdom, to govern over
innumerable people. And contrariwise, after that Jeroboam the servant of
Solomon, had usurped part of the kingdom of the house of David, he turned
ten Tribes of the people of Israel, which were in the part of Samaria, from
the true and right worship of God, to the wicked and divellish worshipping of
Idols.

By which examples, it is apparent and manifest, that some men when they do
come to dignity, do grow more perfect and better: and some again, through
pride of their advancement and rising up, do fall and wax worse. By both the
which is to be understood, that they which increase in goodness, do it by the
virtue and godly disposition of the mind, even by the only help of God: and
the other, that they do fall by the weakness of the mind, through the
negligence and small regard they have to virtue, which no man can have without
the help of God.

The man that has many things under him, whereof he has charge, and has not
the strength and virtue of the mind, is no way able to fulfill or perform
what he should do. For many things do bring with them many troubles and
vexations.

Therefore let every man that is a Ruler, procure first with all industry of
his mind, that in all things he may be sure of the help of God. For if in his
doings he have the Lord and governor of all Lords and Governors to his
helper, no man can set light or despise his ordinance and rule, because there
is no power but of God. He lifts up the poor and needy out of the very
dunghill, and makes him to sit with the Princes of his people. Likewise he
casts down the mighty from their seat, exalting them which are meek and
lowly: that all the world might be obedient unto God, and his glory only
exalted.

The seventh abuse.
Chap. 7. A Christian man full of brawling and contention.
A Most irksome and pernicious thing is this seventh abuse, which now we have
in hand: to wit, a Christian man full of contention, who by faith and baptism,
being a partaker and a bearer of the name of Christ, does (against the sayings
and mind of Christ) delight in pleasures of the world, which are transitory,
and do daily fall away. Because all manner of things for which a man does
strive, do cause the same strife, either for the love that is borne to them,
being a covetous desire for himself, or for the love of some other thing,
which lies hid under an odious and hateful matter.

As for example, war, although it be odious and an hateful thing, yet is it
holden and maintained on both sides with a bold and fierce courage, for the
love and desire which men have to win the victory, and for the purchasing of
liberty. In like manner, many other things are desired and sought after, with
contention, who may have them first before another: by no less hateful and
painful labor, yea and fear, than the other which are got by most
detestable war.

And therefore a man may perceive, there is no contention but for that which is
loved, that is to say, for a loving and a friendly reward, which follows to
their mind after it is ended. Whosoever therefore striveth for any manner of
thing of this world, shows evidently and plainly, that he loves this world.

How then does the holy Ghost by the mouth of Saint John, forbid that this
world should be loved? to whom he says, Love not the world, nor the things
that be in the world. For the love of God, and the love of the word, cannot
dwell together in one heart: even as the eyes of a man cannot behold the heaven
above; and the earth beneath, both at once with one look.

But let us search and see, whether there be in the world, any thing indeed
that is to be loved, and what is the world which the speech of God forbids
us to love. We are not commanded to love the earth, nor the things which come
out of the earth, but only our neighbor, for whose sake all things are made.
Him thou art commanded to love: for all other things which do perish and fade
away, cannot go up with us to heaven. But our neighbor is heir (as well as
we) of the kingdom which shall never fail: and therefore we must love
together one another heartily.

For so much therefore as we shall not continue always in the world, but shall
fail also with the world: we are commanded not to love the world, but our
neighbor, because (yea, being on earth) he is a part and portion of the
heavenly kingdom, although he be among these low Elements, which makes him
worthy to be loved of all such as are desirers of the heavenly bliss:
forasmuch as in the high Country, which is the kingdom of heaven, he shall be
heir with his brethren for ever. For this cause God does forbid us to love
this world: lest he which so loves, be separated and made a stranger from the
love of God. That thing then should not be striven for, which a man may not
love, because a man bearing the name of Christ, must see that he have also the
selfsame or like manners in him, that Christ had. For no man can worthily be
called a Christian man, except he agree with Christ in manner and good living.
As touching Christ, the Prophet does write of himself these words. Behold the
child whom I have chosen, mine elect, my soul is well pleased in him: I will
send my spirit upon him. He shall not strive, he shall not be an outcryer, nor
extend his voice in the street.

Behold, Christ does not strive or cry out: therefore if thou do covet to be
like him in manners, strive not, lest thou appear to do nothing, but abuse
the name of Christ in the Church. For God commands them which follow him,
saying. Be not ye called Masters, for there is but one your Master, who is in
heaven. And call ye no^ father upon the earth, for ye have one father which is
in heaven. For ye are altogether brethren: whom he commands to make common
supplication, and prayer after this manner. O our father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name, etc.

He then contendeth and labors in vain to have a father in earth, when he
professes, that both his Country and father is in heaven, which Country no man
can possess and enjoy, but he that refuses to set all his care on this world,
as one passing not for it.

The eighth abuse.
Chap. 8. A poor man proud.
TO behold a poor man proud, may worthily in this place stand for the eighth
abuse: because although he have nothing, yet is he puffed up with an high
aspiring mind, which thing, even they that are rich men are forbidden to do:
That they should not be high minded. What thing is more foolish, than that he
who through great poverty and extreme misery is brought low, and as it were to
the very ground, because (that in respect of that consideration) he might
behave himself lowly: should in this mean estate bear a proud heart against
God? For this fault, even they that were created in the high habitacle of
heaven, were dejected and thrown down from thence.

Wherefore then will he be proud and high minded here on earth, as though he
were a man of exceeding great power: who (before all other men) should carry
and behave himself both humble and lowly?

But that the poor people shall not bear their poverty heavily, with
sorrowfulness and sadness of heart: let them hear what they shall receive of
God, he says. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven. For the merciful Judge does handle all things so indifferently, that
to them to whom he has not given the riches of this world, he gives the
kingdom of heaven, that he may be a rich man in that glorious place, who on
earthly things has not set his care or delight.

Poor men therefore must take heed, lest while in poverty and need they pass
over the pleasure and kingdom of this world: they should (through the lack of
wisdom) lose also the kingdom of heaven. For although by the order and
dispensation of God, they do live in earthly poverty, yet they may endeavor
to be poor and meek in spirit. For the kingdom of God is not promised to all
poor men, without exception indifferently: but to them only, in whom the
humble and lowly meekness of the heart, does accompany the want and lack of
outward riches. Because an humble poor man, is called poor in spirit, who
when he is outwardly poor and needy, does not inwardly extol himself with a
proud heart, for the lowliness of the mind shall do more to the attaining of
the kingdom of heaven, then the temporal poverty and lack of worldly riches.
For meek and lowly men possessing riches, may be called poor in spirit:
whereas those that are proud, and yet have nothing, without doubt are
dispossessed of the blessing, which is promised to the poor in spirit.

Of both these sorts, the holy Scripture speaks on this wise. Some make
themselves rich, although they have nothing, and some make themselves poor,
albeit they have never so great riches.

The rich man then being poor in spirit, is as a poor man notwithstanding all
his riches: and the poor man that is proud in heart, is as a rich man although
he be naked and poor. It follows, that humbleness of the mind, is a noble
and glorious poverty, and the proud stubbornenesse of the heart, a foolish
kind of riches. Therefore poor men must have in mind what they are, and
because they cannot obtain in worldly goods what they would have, let not their
hearts be puffed up with pride, as though they had all that they cannot have.

The ninth abuse.
Chap. 9. A wicked and an unjust King.
NOw come we to a capital abuse indeed: namely, an unjust or a wicked King or
Prince: for a King must not be wicked or unjust, but correct and punish the
wicked, and in his own person defend and maintain the dignity of his name.
For by the name of a King, is understood, that he may rule well all his
subjects which are under him.

But how can he correct and rebuke other, who does not amend his own manners,
if they be wicked? For in the righteousness and justice of a King, is his seat
exalted: and in the fidelity and truth of a Prince, is his government and rule
established and made strong.

The righteousness and justice of a King, is to oppress no man wrongfully by
power: to judge and give sentence between man and man indifferently, without
affection of any person: to defend strangers, Orphane children, and widows:
to see that robbery and theft reign not in his Realm: to punish straightly
adulterous and fornicating persons: not to promote and exalt such as are
wicked: to give no living to such as are unchaste persons, and makers of
vicious pastimes, to destroy out of his land all that are wicked against God
and their Parents: to suffer no murderer or man queller to live, much less
such as do kill either father or mother: to defend the Church: to comfort the
poor with deeds of charity: to take heed that his Officers under him be just
and good men: to have of his Counsel, ancient, wise, and sober men: to give no
ear to Soothsayers, Witches, or Enchanters: not to keep anger in his
stomach: to defend his Country justly and valiantly against adversaries: to
put his whole trust and confidence for all things in God: not to be the prouder
in heart, if things do succeed after his mind, and to bear the contrary
patiently: to keep steadfastly the Catholic or universal Faith: not to suffer
his children to do wickedly: to bestow certain hours daily in prayer, not to
eat and drink out of season. For woe be to that Land, (as the Prophet says)
whose King is a child, and whose great men do rise up early to eat and
drink.

The keeping of these things, makes a kingdom in this world to be prosperous,
and afterward brings the king himself to a more excellent and royal
kingdom. But he that rules and governs not his Kingdom after this
prescript, does maintain, suffer and bear many evils, inconveniences, and
adversities in his Realm, whereinto it falls for the lack of good rule.
Because oftentimes hereby, the peace and tranquillity of the people is broken,
and the Realm evil spoken of, the fruits of the ground are diminished, and
the ground made bare, and finally, it causes the people to be negligent in
doing their duty.

Many and sundry sores do infect a Realm, and hinders the prosperous weal
thereof. The death and loss of friends and children, do bring sadness and
heaviness unto men's hearts, for when enemies do invade the Country, they
waste and impoverish the land on all sides, they slay up the Cattle great and
small. Again, troublesome weather and great winds, do hinder the growth and
increase of the ground: it makes also the Sea as troubled and unable to do
service, yea, often times blasts and lightnings wither the corn on the ground,
and blossoms on the trees. But above all things, the unrighteousness of a
King, does make dark and clowdie the face of his whole Realm: being the cause
often times (through his iniquity and wicked government) that his Nephews,
yea, nor his children after him, do inherit the Crown of their Father.

The Lord for the offense of Solomon, divided the kingdom of the house of
Israel, out of the hands of his children. Behold what great goodness comes
of a righteous and good Prince: there is none so blind but they may see if
they will. Of him comes the peace of the people, he is the defense of his
Country, the safeguard and liberty of his people, the strength of the whole
Nation, the remedy of all sorrows, the joy of men, the temperatenesse of the
weather, the stillness of the sea, the fruitful increase of the earth, the
help and comfort of the poor, the sure heritage of his children, and finally,
to himself it is a certain argument and hope, of eternal felicity to come.

But yet let every King take this lesson with him, and mark it well: that as
among men he is set highest in his throne, so (if he minister not justice) he
shall be deepest in pain. For in this life, as many transgressors and
offenders as he had under him, so many in the time to come shall he have above
him, to his extreme sorrow and pain remediless.

The tenth abuse.
Chap. 10. A negligent Bishop.
THe tenth abuse, is a negligent Bishop, which gapeth ambitiously to be
honored and reverenced as a Bishop: but does not the office, ministration and
duty of a Bishop in the sight of God, whole message he is commanded to do.
Therefore let us first demand and enquire, what is meant by the name and
vocable Bishop, which is a Greek word, and is as much to say, as a man set in
a high place, to look far off and round about him, as out of an high Tower.

But the cause why he is made a watchman, and what is required at his hand,
the Lord himself does open, when by the mouth of Ezechiel the Prophet, he
teaches a Bishop the reason and cause of his office, speaking on this wise.

Thou son of man, I have made thee a watchman over the house of Israel:
wherefore when thou have heard what words I do speak unto thee, thou shall
show them to the people, and tell them that I spoke the words. When I shall say
unto the wicked, thou shall surely dye, and thou give him not warning
thereof, nor speak to admonish the wicked of his evil way, and so to live:
then shall the same ungodly man dye in his own unrighteousness, but his blood
will I require at thy hand. Nevertheless, if thou give warning to the wicked,
and he yet turn not from his ungodliness, and from his wicked way, he shall
dye in his wickedness, but thou have delivered thy soul.

It becomes therefore a Bishop, that is set to be a Watchman over all, to
look well upon offenses, and when he knows them perfectly, then to cause
them to be amended: if he can, with words and godly counsel, if he cannot,
then after the rule of the Gospel, to avoid them out of the fellowship and
company of the godly, for the Lord says in the Gospel. If thy brother do
offend against thee, rebuke him between thee and him: if he will hear thee,
thou have won thy brother. If he will not hear thee, take one or two with
thee, that in the mouth of two or three, all words may be ratified. If he will
not hear them, tell the Church. And if he will not hear the Church, take him
as an Ethnicke and a Publican.

After such an order must he be driven out, which will not obey the Bishop and
teacher: and he that is thus expulsed, ought not to come in company either of
Teacher or Bishop. For it is written of the Priest in the Law: Let him not take
a wife that is a whore, or polluted, nor put from her husband: for such an one
is unholy unto his God. Therefore he that does join to him in company such a
body, being excommunicated by a faithful Minister, without the consent of him:
breaks the Law of holy Priesthood, which is an elect kind of Christian men.
After this fashion must a Bishop behave himself, over them to whom he is a
watchman: but what manner of man, he must be himself, the Apostle Saint Paul
shows in this wise. A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife,
watching, sober, comely apparrelled, a lover and maintainer of hospitality, apt
to teach. Not given to overmuch Wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre:
but gentle, abhorring fighting, abhorring covetousness. One that rules well
his own house, having children in subjection with all gravity and cleanenesse
of life. Not a young Scholar, lest he, being puffed up, fall into the snares
of the devil. He must also have a good report of them which are without, lest
he fall into the rebuke and snare of the devil, that he may show in work,
that thing which he teaches in doctrine. Therefore let negligent Bishops take
heed; for in the time of vengeance, the Lord complains by the mouth of his
Prophet, saying; My Pastors have ground my people to powder, the sheepheards
did not feed my flock, but they did feed themselves.

But rather let them whom the Lord has set over his family, procure to give
them meat in due season: a measure of Wheat, that is to say, pure and true
doctrine, that when the Lord comes, they may deserve to have these
comfortable words. My good and faithful servant, because thou have been
faithful over a few, I shall set thee over many, enter into the joy of the
Lord.

The eleventh abuse.
Chap. 11. A people without discipline.
Coming now to the eleventh blemish in this life, it is comprehended in these
words: a people without discipline: who when they do not practice obedience in
their living to good and godly doctrine, do choke themselves with the common
snare of perdition. For they do not escape the wrath of God, except they
earnestly follow those things which they are taught. And therefore the Psalmist
says to the people which will not receive discipline: Apprehend and receive
discipline, lest God be stirred to anger.

Discipline is a manner of teaching, which leads men to the amendment of
evil and naughty manners: it is also a keeping and following of the rules and
lessons of our Elders, whereof Saint Paul speaks, saying: Abide and continue
in discipline, God offers himself to you, as to his children. But if ye be
out of discipline, whereof ye are made already partakers, then are ye
advouterers, and not his children. They therefore which are gone from him, and
be out of discipline, do receive no inheritance of the Kingdom of heaven: but
if children do receive and bear the correction of their fathers discipline,
let them not despair or doubt, but they shall receive in time to come, the
inheritance of the Father.

Of this discipline Esaias speaks, saying: Cease from doing wickedly, and
learn to do well. And the like sentence is found in the Psalmist, who says:
Decline from evil, and do good. Wherefore that man is very miserable and
unhappy, which throws from him discipline: for he is bolder than the
Soldiers which crucified Christ, and did cut out his garment, for he does cut
the discipline of Christ's Church. And likewise as the coat does cover all the
body saving the head, even so is the whole Church clad and defended with
discipline, saving only Christ, who is the head of the Church. And as that
coat was whole without any seame, so is this discipline given to the Church
whole and sound.

Of this discipline, the Lord when he should ascend up to his Father, after
he was risen from death, spoke to his disciples, saying: Abide ye here still
in the City of Jerusalem, till ye be clad from above with power. Then the
discipline of the Church is the coat of Christ, and he which is not within
this discipline, is out of the body of Christ.

Let us not therefore cut that coat, but let us cast lots who shall have it:
that is to say: Let us break nothing of the commandments of GOD, but every
man whereunto he is called, therein let him constantly abide with the Lord.

The twelfth abuse.
Chap. 12. A people without Law.
THe last of this Catalogue of abuses, is a people without Law, who while they
despise the sayings of God, and the ordinances of his Laws: do run through
diverse ways of errors, into the snare of transgression and breaking of the
Laws.

As concerning those ways of error, the Prophet (under the person of a
transgressor) does lament and bewail mankind on this wise. We have erred
(says he) and gone astray like sheep, every one after his own way.

Of these ways it is spoken in the Book of Wisdom, by the mouth of Solomon,
saying: Many ways appear good and strait unto men: but the last end of their
ways, brings them to death. And truly there are many ways of perdition,
when men do not regard the Kings high way, which is right and straight out,
turning neither on the right hand nor on the left: the which way, our Lord
Jesus Christ (who is the end of the Law, to the justification of all that do
believe) plainly shows us, saying. I am the way, the truth, and the life, no
man comes unto the Father, but by me. To which way he calls all men
without respect, saying: Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will refresh you. For there is no exception of persons before God, with
whom there is neither Jew nor Greek, man nor woman, bond nor free: but Christ
is all things in all, and all are one in Christ Jesus.

For so much as Christ is the end of the Law, those which are without the Law,
are without Christ: then the people that be without the Law, are likewise
without Christ.

It is a great abuse, that in the time of the Gospel, any people should be
without the Law: for so much as the Apostles were commanded to preach to all
Nations, and the thunderclaps of the Gospel, were heard over all the parts of
the earth, and the Gentiles which sought not after righteousness, have
received it. And finally, considering that they which were far off, were made
nigh in the blood of Christ, and they which sometime were not a people, are now
made the people of God in Christ: being now a glad time, and the day of
salvation, the time of comfort (...) ^he sight of the Highest.

And since that every Nation has a witness of the resurrection, yea, since the
Lord himself bears witness thereunto, saying: Behold, I am with you always
to the end of the world. Therefore let not us be without Christ in this
transitory life, lest Christ be without us in the world to come.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Jones, 1636.




