A New Book of Mistakes.

OR, Bulls with Tales, and Bulls without Tales.

But no lies by any means.



Printed at London by N. O. 1637.

To the Reader.
GEntlemen, and Readers, of what Humor or Condition soever; there are diverse
sorts of Language, to which custom bath given sundry ^ames: There be Quips,
Taunts, Retorts, Flowts, Frumps, Mockes, Gibes, Jests, Jeeres, etc. some tart,
some pleasant; some sportive, and harmless, others galling, and bitter, and
all (for the most part) tasting as they are taken: There are moreover, other
simple mistakes in speech, which pass under the name of Bulls; but if any man
shall demand of me; why they be so called, I must only put them off with this
Woman's reason, they are so, because they be so: Now for these here related,
they claim no Kindred from the black Bull in Bishopsgate street, who is still
l^o^ing toward Shorditch, to see if he can spy the Carriers coming up from
Cambridge; nor from the branded Bull at St. Albons, who would tell all
Travelers, if he could speak, There you may have Horse-meate, and Man's meat
for your Money; nor from the White Bull at the Beare-garden, who tosseth up
Dogs like Tennisballs, and catching them again upon his Horns, makes them
to garter their Legs with their own Guts; nor from the Red Bull in Saint
John's street, who for the present (alack the while) is not suffered to carry
the Flagge in the mainetop; neither have they any Alliance e^ther to
Cow-crosse, or Cow-lane: But these are such as have Teeth, and bite not; and
Horns, yet butt not.

Those Bulls that have Tails, wear them only to defend them from the Breez,
and with no worse purpose, than Gentlewomen use their Fannes, or Butchers Wives
their Fly^flaps; and those which have no Tails, can neither cast dust, nor
dirt in any man's Face and Eyes.

Courteous Reader^ accept them (such a^ they be) in good part, lest censuring
them with too sup^rcilious a brow, some or other may say of thee, thou look
as big upon them, as if thou had eaten Bull-beefe. Vale.

Bulls with Tales, and Bulls without Tales.
Of an Usurer, and a debauched gallant.
A Penurious Fellow, who lived altogether upon Usury, pinching both back and
belly to serve himself, and enrich others, came into an house where
Puddingpyes, and such like commodities were to be sold, and to make a saving
Dinner, called for a Can of sixshillings Beer, and a Pudding-pye, (for by that
his good Husbandry he intended to save Bread) a young Gallant without money,
and yet not wanting a good stomach, coming into the house, and observing him
to sit in one of the common rooms, saluted him, and asked him how he did? His
answer to him again was, Very well, I thank you Sir, but indeed I know you
not: the Gentleman replied unto him, therefore Sir, I am desirous to drink
unto you, upon our better acquaintance, and withal ^ooke up the Can of Beer
which then stood before him, and drank it ^uper naculum; which the other
observing, looked ^omething blankely upon ^im, and desired him to ^ell him his
Name, which ^he young man did: to whom he replied, and said, ^our Name I very
well ^emember; for one so cal^ed, once cheated me of a ^ood Guelding, for which
(...) could have hanged him: ^ow says the Gallant^ ^id^t thou know that
Gentleman? I can assure thee, he was of mine acquaintance, and cared no more
for the stealing of an horse, than I do for the eating of this Pudding-pye,
which said, he ^^a^cht (...) up, ^ate it, and ^eft the Usurer (hungry as he
was) to pay for his breake-fast.

Of a Puritan and his friend eating of a Pudding.
A Puritan and his friend coming to a victualling house to break their Fast^
concluded betwixt themselves to have a black^ Pudding, which was accordingly
provided, an^ brought with Bread and Beer, to accomade it up to the Table
smoking: which as soon as the Puritan saw, he clapped his Hat before his face,
and lifting up his eyes, began (as their custom is) a very long and tedious
Grace, praying against black sins, blew sianes, red, green, yellow, tawny, and
indeed, all kind of colored sins; but in the interim, whilst he was at his
prayer, the other had eat up the Breake-fast: who, after he had uncovered his
eyes, and seeing what was done, looking somewhat heavily and hungerly upon the
business, demanded of his friend, why he had took that advantage, to serve
him so an ^n neighbourly a tricke^ who again, made him this short Answer,
Truly I ho^d it fitting, that from henceforth you either provide your self of
a shorter Grace, or of a longer Pudding.

Of a great Statesman, and a Cardinal.
A ^reat man, (and though it be not common) yet witty withal, traveling into
the Country, in his second days journey came to a thick and shadowy Wood, or
Forest, to which the entrance was something narrow, and being about some
Italian League, (which is an English Mile in length) he wondered, that being in
so ^erene and clear a day, that all that time he was shadowed from the sight
of the Sun: But his journey being over, and some ten years after riding
the same way, when he came to the same place which he had before so seriously
observed, and missing all those goodly trees, he called to his Carochman, and
some of his servants, and told them, that doubtless they were out of their
way: but they affirming the contrary, and asking his Lordship what should be
the reason of his error, marry says he, because, when I came this way last,
I saw a goodly and brave Forest, with many Trees growing here, and now I spy
not one: To whom one of his Gentlemen replied, that true it was, but since the
Cardinal or Bishop had cut them all down, and having occasion to use money,
had sold them for Timber: who answered him again, it could be no other than a
Church-mans work, I acknowledge him for a great scholar; for this was a dark
place, and he has now explained it.

Of a Grasier and a young Scholar.
A Rich Grasier drivi^g two fair and fat Oxen before him toward the market,
led his horse down an hill; (as having for his better ease alighted) at the
foot of which he met with a young Scholar, who exp^est his poverty in his
thin and thredbare habit, who desired of him some small piece of money to
relieve him in that his present necessity: The Grasier, whose name was Gualter,
casting a commiserating eye upon him, and having been in his youth a pretty
Grammar scholar, thought to prove him whether he were a counterfeit or no,
told him, that before he should taste any fruits of his Charity, h^e would
make try all of his learning, which the poor Scholar desired him to do:
Then, says Gualter, I will begin a Latin verse, which if thou ca^^t,
instantly and without pause, make a perfect and true Hexameter, or Heroyicke
verse, I will give thee this yoke of Oxen, which ^hou see I drive before me,
to make thy best of them: To which the young man willingly assented, as being
wondrous glad of the motion: When the Grasier putting his foot into the
stirrup to get upon his horse, said, thus then I begin my verse: Nunc scandit
Gualter; to whom ^he young ladde suddenly ^eplyed, Meus est Bos unus and alter:
Which speedy and witty answer, when ^he Grasier heard, he put^ing his hand
into his ^ouch drew out a French Crown, and cast it unto ^im, and said,
gramer^^ Scholar, drink that for my sake, which I freely give thee to release
me of my bargain.

Of one Parkins a boon Companion in Essex who dyed of the rising of the Lights.
Poor Parkins, now percust here lie^,
Light hearted, till his Lights did rise.
Lights of the Body, are the Bellows,
And he, one of the best goo^ fellows
That Essex yielded, (all we^ kn^w)
And breathed, till they did cease to blow.
Of a rich Bachelor, who by no means could be persuaded to marry: and h^s
Fool.
A Great rich man, and of a good family, who altogether aff^cted a single life,
kept a fool, and made him as familiar with him, as if he had been his sole
Mistress; for he seemed to take delight in no woman's company at all: yet it so
happened, that one of his servants (whom he used to employ in the like offices)
had conveyed a pretty woman privately into his Chamber^ and so closely, that
none of his family took the least notice thereof, these two lay very lovingly
together, and being in the Summertime, and the weather hot, tossing the clothes
very carelessly, fell fast asleep toward the morning: when the Fool (as his
custom was) coming toward his masters chamber to give him an early visit,
and finding the door left only by a negligent la^ch, he entered, and casting
his eyes toward the lower end of the bed, spied four bare legs, at which
being amazed, and not looking so high as up to the pillowes, he ran down
hastily, and called all the people of the house together, and told them, he
would show them such a wonder as their eyes had never beheld til then: they
de^irous to understand the novelty, grew very importunate to know what it was;
who replied, mary I will tell you, my Master and yours, whom we all saw go
toward bed but with two legs, has since yesternight got four legs, and
withal bid them go up and see. They not suspecting any thing, (in regard they
knew him to be a Batcheler) followed him up close into the Room to be
spectators of the prodegy; to whom the Fool said, look you here, (my
Masters^) and see if I lye^ who well perceiving what the business was, went
down blushing, and some of them whispering amongst themselves, in regard the
^oore was left so carelesly^ said, they knew not which was the greater Fool,
the Idiot, or their Master.

Of an House that should f^ll.
ONe coming with a very pleasant countenance into the company where his
friends were merrily drinking, one of them said unto him, you are very welcome,
and the rather, because you look so cheerfully upon us: who again replied;
marry I thank God, and I have reason; why what is the news ^aith he: the other
answered again; I married an Orphan, and came but now from the Court of
Aldermen, and they have promised me the next horse that falls: O but said
another; if your case were mine, I had rather they had promised to me the next
unto it that stands.

Of Water-mens Hall.
ONe would not believe that the society of the Watermen had any Hal; to whom
another who was friend unto him replied, Truly Sir they have, and the better
to resolve you, I went this day to Westminster in a pair of Oars, and the one
of them told me he was this year chie^e Churchwarden of the Company.

A mistake in the Senses.
TWo friends meeting in the street, one demanded of the other from whence he
came? who replied again: From a place, where I have spent my time better than
you have done in any other this two days: and where was that said he? marry
says he in the Church, where I have been to see a Sermon.

Another in the like kind.
ANother coming from a place where a great Tumult and clamor had been, being
demanded by a friend of his, from whenc^ he then came? whence said he? I
protest from a place where I saw such a loud and horrible noise, which has so
deafr me, that I am scarce able to hear what you now speak.

A Verse in Virgil thus construed.
Silvestrem tenni Musam meditaris avena.
MEditaris, id est, Thou well remembrest^ te^ui, that I once had, Musam
^ilvestrem, (...) Country Wench, avena, upon an oaten s^eafe.

Another Verse as simply construed.
A Schoolmasters in the Country, put one of his young Scholars new ^ntred
into his Grammar, to construe this Ver^e: Est modus in rebus, sunt certi
denique fines: And withal bid hi^ to do it suddenly: The Boy ta^es the Book^
in his hand, and insta^tly made this Construction: Est m^dus in rebus, There is
mudde in the Rivers, sunt certi denique fines, and certain other little Fishes.

Of a Captain, and his God^son^e.
A Captain, who could neither write, nor read, amongst other of his Friends,
came to give a visit to one of his Gossips, to whose child he had been
wit^esse, and found him to be a pretty Lad betwixt two and three yeere^ of age,
who, after he had made much of the chi^de, asked her, if she did not intend to
bring him up to be a Scholar? To whom she answered, O, yes by all means; for
sh^e kept him a^ School, and he took his Learning very pretily: at which the
Captain seemed to be much pleased, and so after some ^ind congra^ula^ions,
parted; he promising within few days to see her again, which he accordingly
did, and brought with him a Friend o^ his, one of his Fellowsouldiers: After
salutation, ^alling into discourse, the Lad came from Schoole^ upon which the
Captain took occa^ion to commend him to his friend, and tell him what a
hopeful Scholar he was like to prove: Nay (says he) to make my words good,
come hither my pretty child, and let me hear thee say thy Lesson which thou
ha^t learned to day, and withal took him betwixt his legs, and with the
Fescue pointed him to the Letters in his Hornebooke, and began thus, What
Letter is this? T, says the Boy, and what Letter is this? H says he, and what
Letter is this? A says the Child, and what this? T says the Lad, very good
says the Captain; and what spells THAT? From says the Boy: well spelled my
^rave Lad said the Cap^aine; if thou proov'st not (...) Scholar indeed, I Will
not ^eleeve there is a Scholar ^n Christendom.

Of a Iakes-farmer working in the night.
Certain o^ those people, whom for mode^ties sake, we call Goldfinders, being
empting of an house of office, and their Carts, with their stinking Tubs,
blocking the Streets, some Gentlemen, not ^ble to endure the smell, and were to
pass that way flung their cloaks over their faces, which one of them
observing, said, If you would always keep your tayle^ shut, you should not
now have occasion to stop your noses.

Of two Women scolding.
TWo Women bitterly scolding, says the one unto the other, thou lie worse
than a Whore, or a Thief; to whom the second replied, and thou lie worse
than he that made the last Almanacke.

Of an ignorant Scholar.
A Young Scholar, whom his father sent unto the University, before he could
construe good Latin, spending his hours more in his pleasure, than at his
Book, having wasted all his allowance before the Quarter-day, and being quite
destitute both of money or credit, not knowing any other means to draw Coin
out of his Fathers coffers, writ him a Letter under his own hand, to certify
him that himself was dead, and desired him to send him up money to pay for his
Funeral.

Of Bulls and Cowes.
ONE, whose House stood near to the fi^lds, where Cattle were wont to graze,
hearing some of them to clamor aloud after their kind, before a s^orme, or a
tempest, s^id ^^to his Neighbor, i^deed yo^ scarce believe wh^^ ^omfort and
pleasure I ^a^e i^ the night, when I ^ee ^he Kine to low so loud, and the
Bulls to bellow.

Of a young Deacon, the first time he came into the Pulpit.
A Young Scholar having newly took Orders, thought the better to embolden
himself to practice first amongst the Clownes in the Country, and had
prepared himself to that purpose: and coming into a plain ParishChurch,
desired that he might give them a Sermon, for which he had not only leave,
but many thanks; and coming into the Pulpit, having never been in the like
place before, seeing such a m^ltitude of Rusticks about him, he was so much
abashed and daunted, (his memory failing him) that he could not proceed one
word further; when making a necessi^ous pau^e, and not k^owing how to com^ off
with credit, he suddenly bethought himself, and s^uffling with his Nose,
said, Dearly beloved br^theren, I would willingly proceed in my Sermon, but I
smell such a strong sent of Fire, that indeed, it is ready to stifle me: which
he had no sooner spoken, but every of them (making it his own case) not
knowing in whose House, or Barn it might happen, all of them ran tumultuously
out of the Church to quench it; which he seeing, came quietly down out of the
Pulpit, and so by that means alone saved his credit.

A Word simply and ignorantly mistaken.
IT happened that an upper ground, whose foundation was seated upon Sand,
either by the washing of the rain, or continuance of time the foundation grew
so unstable, that the weight of the higher ^arth moved by degrees, and quite
covered the lower; which happened in a part of the County of Hereford, the
strangeness and novelty thereof being related unto one that had bin an
eye-witnes thereof, one that stood by, instantly replied, sir, indeed you speak
of a wonder, for in all my time, I never heard of such an Inundation of earth
before.

Of a^ mad fellow in the Country, who paid a Reckoning to his Hostess with a
Song.
A Pleasant, or rather a cheating fellow in the Country, willing to eat, and
having at that time no money in his purse, came to a Victualling house, and
asked his Hostess, what she could provide for his Breakfast^ who told him
such, and such things, and named them all^ who bad her provide what he found
best agreeing with his stomach; which with all possible speed was prepared,
and set before him: he feeding upon them to his full sa^ety, put up his kni^e,
and withal, demanded of he^ what he had to pay, who presently brought him an
honest and conscio^able reckoning, of which he seemed well to approove; but
asked her withal, if she would take a Song for her money: to whom she gave a
modest answer, that she would, so he would si^g such a one as might satisfy
and content her: Say thou so Host^sse, quoth he, gramercy for that, and song
first one, and then another, and asked her how she liked this, and how that, but
none of them all would please her: at length putting his hand into his pocket,
he draws out his purse, in which was no better coin than plain Counters, and
shaking it in his hand, began to sing aloud to this purpose.

The Song.
WHat course shall I take,
Due payment to make
For all this good meat I have eaten?
To have boyld and roste,
And all of free cost,
I worthy were then to be beaten.
Come forth then I say,
My Coin to defray,
(That never has yet been for^poken)
Lay down to an hair,
For all thy^good fare,
And bate not thine hostess a token.
And withal began to open his purse, and asked her, how that Song pleased
her? who answered him, very well, for now he sung to the purpose: Then Hostess
says he, fare yo^ well, you are paid you^ reckoning.

Of Women going down by Water to Braineford.
Diverse honest, and substantial women went to make merry at Braineford with
their Husbands leave; and amongst the rest a Vi^tners wife, who was honest, but
a plain and simple man; a familiar friend of his coming into the Kitching,
and missing his wife, asked him where she was^ who replied, that she was gone a
Gossipping to Brainford with such a man's wife, and such an ones (all which his
neighbor well knew) and they must needs go by water too: (says he) but to
learn them more wit hereafter, I could wish they might all be drowned, so
they might have no harm.

Of the same Vintners Wife.
THe sa^e woman was very famous in the place where she lived for ma^ing of
dainty Marrowbone P^ddings, at which indeed she had scarce her fellow in the
City; and they two ^etwixt them had got a very fair estate: Being in very
earnest discourse with a neighbor of his, they fell into talk about their
means that God had bl^st them wi^h: says this neighbor to him, you by your
industry have got a fair and competent estate; he answered him again, yes
indeed I have, and whatsoever I possess^, is come unto ^e^ by the grace of God:
which his wife coming by, and hearing, made reply, come, come says she, you
ta^ke that what you have got came by the grace of God, bu^ I know what I know,
I am sure it came by my making of Puddings.

Of a Tradse man that was a Good Fellow.
IT was the Phrase of a good fellow that I knew, and frequent in his mouth,
whenever he came into any Alehouse or Tavern, come, come, call in for the
other pot or quart; a groat is ^oone got, but long in spending.

A witty answer of a civil Gentlewoman.
A Modest Matron sitting at door in a Summer evening, a Ruffinly Gallant came
unto her, and asked her bluntly, if she nev^r had been a Whore^ to whom she
suddenly replied, indeed sir never but once, and that was when a Ruffinly young
Gallant like your self, she being then my companion, begat you of your mother.

Of a cheating fellow and his Hostess.
A Mad fellow, which had no money, traveling by the way, called in at an
Alehouse for a deep^ reckoning, but when it came to be paid, he made ^o long a
pause, that his Hostess desired to see i^ discharged, for she had other
guests to look to^ but he desired her to stay, and still, the more she
importuned him, his answer^ was, Good Hostess stay^ well says she, stay me
no stays, either lay me my money down, or I Will presently go fetch the
Constable; and withal stepped out of the door into the street: he followed
her close, and began to tak^ him to his heels; which she perceiving, cried
after him, Stay fellow, stay fellow; to whom looking back, he replied, by no
means good Hostesse^ thou would not stay for me, and now will not I stay for
thee.

Of one Banes, a Scholar in Westminster.
ONe Banes, a witty Lad of Westminster School, having committed some fault or
other, was to be whipped: now the Master (whilst h^e stood bare to his mercy)
knowing him to be ingenious, lifting up his Arm, with a smarting Rod in his
hand, said, I ask the Banes of Matrimony betwixt the Rod in my hand, and the
bare breech before me, if any one can show any reason, why these two may not
be lawfully joined together, let them speak now, or never, for this is the
last time of their asking; and withal being ready to strike, the Boy cast his
head back, and said, Marry I forbid the Banes: The Schoole^ma^ter replied, but
sirrah, you must show me some reason why^ who answered him, Because Sir, upon
my knowledge the parties are not agreed: for which witty answer he was for
that time pardoned.

Of two Neighbors traveling by water.
TWo Friends traveling by Water, and the Winds being somewhat hie, and the
billows rough, though they were both very fearful, yet one of them seeming
more timorous than the other, his Neighbor began to cheer him up, and said,
Doubt nothing Friend, but be of good comfort; for God is as strong by Land, as
he is by Water.

A Question about a great, or small number.
A Witty conceited Gentleman meeting with a plain Countrey-fellow, after some
other discourse, thinking to sport himself with his simplicity, began to
question with him about Arithmeticke, and amongst other interroga^ories, he
asked him, whether he thought three or ^oure to be a small num^er or a great^
to whom ^he plain fellow replied, that he thought them to ^ee but a small
number: how ^aith the Gentleman? ^hen I put this further que^tion unto thee: if
thou had three or four wives ^o keep and maintain, would not thou think
them to be a great num^er? yes truly; (answered ^e) for to speak my
con^cience, having but one, I have enough, and too much of her, and therefore
three or four are a great number indeed: How? (replied the Gentleman) but say
thou had but three or four hairs upon thy head, would thou not think
them to be but a very small number? at which the poor fellow grew blanke, and
was not able to make him any further answer.

Of a young Gentleman that married a crooked maid.
A Gentleman of good quality, and (...) prop^^ man withal, married with a
Gentlewoman of a great dower, but sheew as very crooked, a friend of his
coming to visit hi^, and observing upon what manner of creature he had
bestowed himself, taking him aside, after some other discourse, demanded o^
him, why he, being so handsome a Gentleman, and in his prime of youth, could
match himself to a woman so misshapen? who smiling, replied; friend, if thou
had sent me a piece of gold out of the country, and bowed it for a token, it
being weight, should I have despised it, and sent it back again to thee,
because it was somewhat bent and crooked^

Sundry m^stakes spoken publicly upon the Stage.
IN the Play of Richard the third; the Duke of Buckingham being betrayed by his
servant Banister, a M^ssenger coming hastily into the presence of the King, to
bring him word of the Dukes surprizall, Richard asking him what newes^ he
replied: My Liege, the Duke of Banister is taken,
And B^ckingham is come for his reward.


A like to the forme^.
ANother in the Play of Edward the second; though being often taxt of the
error, yet could never deliver one line otherwise, than thus: Like to the
harmless
Lamb, or sucking Dove.


A third.
A Third making a Proclamation, in the stead of fifty foot, commanded that no
man, upon pai^e of death, should come within fifty Miles of the place of
Execution.

A fourth.
ANother made this comparison.

Like to so many Cannons shot from Bullets.

A fifth.
ANother bringing word from the General, that the Soldiers should sink all
their boats, and begone; told them, that they must bore their holes full of
Boats, and instantly march away.

A Man of a low stature.
ONe that was of a very low stature, and being often jeered for that: One time
above the rest, it being cast upon him, he said, you talk of Dwarfes, and the
like; but I protest, I was the other day in company with three or four of my
acquaintance, when (no man being so high as I) I was the tallest man amongst
them.

Of a Soldiers wife in the time of Auri^olar Confession.
A Soldier having a cursed ^hrew to his wife, and very untractable, yet
pretending to be very religious, used ^o go often to Confession: but still
when she kneeled before her Ghostly Father, in stead of ripping up her own
sins, she troubled his ears, with telling him what a bad man she had to her
husband, and spared not to brand him with the worst things that either ^e could
possibly do, or she could imagine to be done: The Confessor meeting with him
by chance, gave him a gentle admonishment, persuading a Comingall Atonement
betwixt them, and told him how necessary it was for his souls health, to have
a perfect and an unfeigned reconcilement made, that they might live in peace
and unity; and to that purpose told him how needful it was, that he should
also come oftener to Confession, which he had before so much neglected. These
words seemed to take great impression in him, insomuch, that he appointed him a
certain time for that purpose, and kept his word accordingly; and being upon
his knees, his Confessor having given him a serious exhortation, to confess
all those sins whatsoever he had committed, that he might be absolved of
them: he made him answer, that it was altogether needless, and to no purpose^
for whatsoever I have done, nay more then ever I had a thought to do, my wife
has confessed unto you before hand: and so left him.

Of one that bought an Horse in Smithfield.
A Gentleman cheapened an Horse in Smithfield, and agreed for the price, which
was Ten pound: but coming to pay down the Money, he had but eight Pieces
about him; but said to him that sold him, here is so much money in hand, and I
will remain Debtor unto you for the rest; who seeing him to be a man of
fashion^ and having inquired his name, and residence, did accept thereof, and
so for that time they parted. The next day he found him out at his Lodging, and
demanding the Two Pieces which he left unpayd, he answered, that he did him
great wrong to claim any such Sum, for it was contrary to their bargain: I
pray Sir says the other, how can you make that good^ Marry thus said the
Gentleman: Ten Pieces were the price for your Horse, Eight I paid you down in
hand, and promised you to be your Debtor for the rest, and so I am^, and will
remain still; for otherwise I should break both my word, and bargain.

A Prophecy of the Year ensuing.
THere is like to be such a defect in the Nobility, that even Rusticks, if they
be rich, will strive to become Noble, and such a penury among the Jews, that
many, nay, too many Christians shall turn Usurers: One Day shall be longer,
and one Night shorter than another: Men shall be more glad to receive Money,
than to pay it: Some shall rather desire to ride, than to go on foot; he that
cannot compass Wine, shall be glad to drink Ale, or Beer: Man and Wife shall
live in quiet, till they fall into quarrel: Black Cowes shall this year give
white Milke^ many shall be more glad to go to bed late, than to rise early:
Rich men shall dye as the poor do, and no man shall be valewed according to
his Wisdom, but his wealth, etc.

Of a Flatterer.
A Flatterer that had extolled his Lord beyond all reason or modesty, before a
great company then present, impatient ofsuch Adulation, in regard it was so
palpable, could not contain himself, but^ rising from his seat, fell upon
him, and gave him diverse blows; who feeling the smart, said unto him, Sir, why
do you beat me^ to whom he answered, Sirrah, why did thou bite me^^

A witty retort of a learned Bishop.
A Bishop going to visit through his Diocese, was entertained at a Parsons
house, where he had very great and good cheer, but his wine was stark naught;
which he ^asting, said to the Parso^, Domine Person^, hoc non ^st bonum vinus:
To whom he replied, if i^ please your good Lordship, I think you speak
incongruously; to who^ he answered, it is true M^ster Parson, I know it well,
but if you could tell how to mend your Wine, you should quickly find, that I
would mend my Latin.

Of Usury.
ONe asking whether Usury were any way lawful? it was answered him again,
that it was; the other demanding how? who replied again, so that a man lends
his money only to such, as he knows are not able to pay back the principal
again.

Of a great Prelat^ i^^ Rome.
A Great Prelate in Rome, being at a su^ptuous and delicate ^east, where was
plenty of all varietie^, and nothing was wa^^ing, saving Mustard, looking
about, and spyi^g none, said aloud; O quanta patimus pro Ecclesia: which a
Scholar, who was then at his Elbow, hearing, said, Sir, by your favor, you
should have said patimur; to whom he replied, what telst thou me of patimus
or patimur, is it not all one? for I am sure they are both of the Genitive case.

Of an unlearned Parson in the Country.
A Parson in the Country, who was no scholar, spying the word Epiphania in the
Calendar, by the red letters finding it to be a Festival day, gave out in the
Church, that the next week, upon such a day, they were to keep the Feast of
Epiphanie, but whether it were of a man or a woman, he could not resolve them
for the present; but howsoever, he desired that they would come to the Church,
and keep it for an Holyday.

A Vintner and a Poet.
A Vintner meeting (...) Poet in the streets^ saluted him, and desired^ him of
better acquain^tance: who asked him o^ what profession he was? who told him
that he was a Vintner, and proceeded further, and said, I know you by sight,
and I make no question but that you know me too: To whom he replied, no
indeed, for to my knowledge, I never saw your^ face before; I pray you where
dwell you? marry (says he) at the Rose, by the Poultry Counter gate; to whom
the Poet answered again, friend^ how horribly art thou mi^tooke! why, I tell
thee, I never durst walk that way this seven years.

Of a Land Poet, and a Water Poet.
ONe being asked what difference there was betwixt a Land Poet and a Water
Poet? made answer; even just so much as there is betwixt a Scholle^and a
Schuller.

Of a Knight which wa^ made a Master of Art.
WHether it be by the Kings prerogative^ or by the courtesy of the University
I know not, o^ whether both couplin^ together; but so it was that a Knight, a
Nobl^ Gentleman, being with the Kings Majesty at Cambridge, had so much grace
as to be made a Master o^ Art, to add to his forme^ Title: upon which honor
having drunk somewhat stiffely over night, an^ coming to tender his service
to his Majesty, he (knowing him to be no Scholar) asked him, how much he
had profited in his learning, since he had took that degree? who answered him
again, with a protestation, that since his coming to the Accademy, he had
gained so much Latin, that the last night he had scarce one word of English
to bring him to bed.

Of a Reader in on^ of the Innes of Court.
A Very eminent Gentleman, who was at that time Reader, having feasted the
house very bountifully in his last Lecture, or taking of his leave of these
exercises, did it in these or the like words: Gentlemen, I have read to you,
and I have feasted you, but if you have not profited so much by my reading, as
by my feasting', I conclude thus: You have been better fed than taught.

Of a Goldsmith, his Wife; and his youngest Pr^^tise.
A Goldsmith, fearing the danger of the Sickness, was persuaded by his wife,
which was a pretty handsome Gentlewoman, to remove out of London, and take an
house in the Country, and to furnish it, caused his younger Prentise to take
an in^entory of all such household commodities, as he went to conveigh thence,
which he did punotually, and set down every particular thing as they were
delivered: but when he came to his Mistress Linen, and finding, that for
haste sake, ^ome were washed, and some not, he writ after this manner: Item, so
many of my Mistress her smocks white, and so many parcel guilt, and so gave up
his account; which the young Gentlewoman reading, grew into a violent rage, and
persuaded her husband to beat the Lad, or bring him before the Chamberlain,
but howsoever, to have him soundly corrected: to which he answered, wife, by
no means, the boy suites his phrases properly to his trade, for you know we
have white plate, parcel guilt, and guilt al over.

Of Paul's.
TWo Gentlemen that were of familiar acquaintance meeting, the one demanded^ of
the other, what news? marry ^aith he, strange new^s, have you not heard it?
his friend being importunate to know what it was: why says he, Paul's is
preparing, either to go, or to ride into the Country presently; the other
replied, what probability can there be for that? what probability? (answered
he again) why, do you not see he has sent all his Trunkes away before hand?

Of a great Courtier and a Citizen.
A Citizen of good quality, having business with a Lord of the Court, as
having vented upon him diverse commodities, the Lord upon a time, being merrily
disposed, desired to resolve him one question, who told him he would, if it lay
in his power to do it: then says he, I prithee tell me what should be the
reason, that so many Citizens should be Cuckolds? who answered him presently,
troth my Lord I know none, but our foolish imitation; for we can see a fashion
no sooner come up in the Court, but they will never be at q^iet till they have
it in the City.

Of a Mayor in the Country, and a pleasant fellow riding through the Town.
THe Mayor of a thorowfare Town, sitting at his door in discourse with some
of his neighbors; one that tired his horse, could not by any spurring make him
go forward; but when he came just before the Inn door, where the Mayor sat,
stood stone stil^, and would not stir one foo^e further, at which they fell
all on laughing; (for he was ^nowne to them all) at length says mistress
Mayor, friend, how far are you to ride to night? tro^h, an^wered he, I am
afraid I am at the farthest: will you fell the B^ast you ride on, says the
M^ior? if I would, answered he, I could wish you not to buy him, for one foul
fault that he has: and what is that, says the other? he replied, marry
because he never looks upon any paltry Mare, but (as I have observed it) this
jadish trick comes upon him.

The answer of an old Fool.
ONe asked an ancient Idiot, what made him to look so gray? my hairs said he.

Of one Neighbor inviting another to Dinner.
ONe Neighbor inviting another to dinner, said unto him in these words, good
friend, will it please you to dine with me to day? and if it please you to send
in Meat, saving for Bread and Drink, I will put you to no other charges.

Of a North country ^^n, who told a Lie in London.
A Plain Northern fellow coming up to the City, told a palpabl^lye^ and
added further, that he bad the Divill take him if it were not true; but
presently re-calling himself, said, I cry God mercy, what have I done? one
asking him the reason of his la^t speech, and what relation it had to the
former, who answ^red, marry faith he, because I ^now not of what condition
your Devils are, here about London; but in our Countr^^ I might have said, the
Devil take me a hundred times together, and I am sure none of them all would
have hurt me.

A pretty mistake in the marrying of a couple.
A Plain Vicar in the Country came ^o marry a young man and a maid, who were
his p^rishoners, and both well known to him^ and when he came to the joining
of their hands, he said to him, John, what is your name? to whom the fellow
said, what need you ask me that? it seems you know it as well as I do my
self.

Of the blind man of Ho^^way.
THe Blind man of Holloway coming about some ^usinesse to London^ and
especially to speak wi^h a Citizen in Frydaystreet, with whom he had some
trading, came unto his shop, and asked one of the boys, if his Master were
within? who told him, that he was above^ I p^ethee then tell him that I am
here, and desire to speak with him; who presentl^ went up, and told his
Master, that the blind man of Holloway, was come to see him: ^s he says his
Master? tell him, I will come down unto him presently; for I know he would be
ver^ glad to see me.

Of a Quask-salver, who did undertake to cure one of the Gout.
ONE lying long bedrid of the Gout, which by laziness, and too much ease, grew
more, and more upon him, a Quacksalver came to him, and took upon him to cure
him, but finding that he could give him no ease at all, but that the cure was
above his cunning, knowing that his patient had a Guelding in the Stable, on
which he sometimes rode, when he was not able to go, he watched his
opportunity, stole him, and rode with him quite away: Now the man, having
neither Physician to help him, nor Horse to ^ase him, was forced to forsake
his Bed, and to try his feet; by which means he was suddenly recovered, by
stretching out his shrunk veins, which before were contracted. Those that
knew it, gave out, that the Horse was the best Physician of the two, and that
the Quacksalvers knavery had done more than his cunning.

Of a Maid who dyed suddenly.
A Kitchin-mayd, who was providing a great Dinner, where diverse persons were
invited; as they exp^cted the meat to come up, sudden newe^ was brought to
them, that the Cooke-maide was f^l-len down dead in the Ki^chin^ and was past
all recovery: at which, all the Guests, with the owner of the House, and the
r^st of his Family, made speed out of the house, le^t the meat at the fire,
lo^^t up the door^s, and a^^y they went. O^e re^a^i^g this to a ^riend o^ (...)
that the^ were (...) such a ^^are, (...) no living (...) i^ the house saving
^h^ maid, who lay de^^ in the Kitchen.

Of a Mass Priest in Queen Mary's days.
IN Queen Mary's days, when all the Service was in Latin^, a simple, silly
Priest in the Coun^rey, (for there were few other in those days) was entreated
to come to the next Parish to Christen a Child, but not having his own Book,
he was so newhat puzell'd; at length he spied at the foot of a leaf written,
Sa^taper tri^, that is, skip, or turn over three leaves at once; which he
mistaking, and thinking it had been the fashion of that P^r^sh^ when he came
to those w^rd^, to give th^ee (...) about the Fo^^ (...) w^lli^g ^o bre^k
Cu^t^^es^ h^^ presently fetc^et^ thr^e ^^iskes and vagaries, tumbling the
Midwife one way, the Godfather another, and had almost thrown down the
God-mother that held the Child; at which, they all thought him to be mad, and
laid hold on him: but a Gentleman s^anding by, who had overlookt him in his
reading, spying the Error, put him into the right way, otherwise the Child
had been borne thence, not half Christened.

Of a (...) and a pleasant (...).
A M^^y f^^low having (...) ^o ca^ry^d^w^e (...) ^rea^ ^u^ntity of wa^er ^n^o
(...) (w^i^^ (...) seeme^, (...) ^o much note of) c^ye^ (...) Fire, fire; the
neighbors coming, and aski^g where? He told them, in the Vint^ers C^llar:
They beat against the door, up comes the Master, and tells them, all is well
within, demanding who had abused him in that kind: the Author is found out, and
produced; who being asked why he had done him that injury? answered, who would
have thought, but that the Cellar had be^ne a fire, that had seen him carry in
so much water as I did?

Of a Doctor not used to ride.
A Doctor that was seldom on horse-bak, being to ride a Journey, ^ame to take
horse with no spurs upon his heels, which one, that was to ride with him,
espying, said, Master Doctor, do you mean to ride without spurs? who
looking down toward his fe^te, said, ^Tis true indeed, I have none; but I had
thought verily that my man had put them on.

Of shooting at Buts.
ONE that stood looking upon a Match that was shotat Buts, when all hadshot
very near, the last Arrow clapped into the white, at which, he said aloud, He
has wone all, if it were a Mile to the bottom.

Of taking Tobacco.
ONE looking upon one that used to take much Tobacco, said to his friend that
stood nex^ him, Do you not observe that fellow? he takes Tobacco like a Fish.

Of a Pocket-musket.
TWo Citizens speaking of their Arms, the one having a handsome short M^sket,
said to the other, I think I have the best Pocket-musket about the Town; at
which the other laughing, he replied again, and why not a pocket-musket, as
well as a pocket-dagge.

Of two that fell out.
TWo young fellows falling out, began to grow into very violent and bitter
terms: at length said the one to the other, well, for thy Mother, I know her
to be as honest a woman, as any is in England, but for thine own part, thou
art no better than the son of a Who^e.

A harmless mistake.
A Chimny being on fire, one meets his man with a Musket i^ have, and asked
him whither he carried that C^imny? marry, says he, to scour the piece.

Of a sudden afright.
ONe familiar friend spying another, whose back was toward him, came ^uddenly
behind him ere he was aware, and shook him, so that he gave a great start,
and looking, when he saw it was his friend, he said, now I beshrew your heart,
you have made all the guts in my belly rise into my face.

Of a Iacobus piece.
ONe spying in the hand of his friend a very fair twenty two shillings piece,
and desired him to let him poyse it in his hand, which having done, he
presently returned it to him back, and said, it was as fair an Harry Iacobus,
as ever he saw.

Of one that was supposed to be in a Consumption.
TWo friends meeting together, the o^e asked of the other, when he saw such a
man, who was well known to them both? who made answer with a great sigh, that
he could not be long lived, he d^manding the reason, he said, he could not
ch^se but be in a Co^sump^ion, for his doublet was grown too short wasted.

Of going by Water.
TWo coming to take Water at Westminster st^ires, were plied by diverse Oars:
the one would go with a Waterman of his old acquaintance: but the other having
dependence upon the Court, no ^aith he, we will go with him that has M. R.
upon his coat, for that stands for Maria Rex.

A G^^s^-Pye.
ONe seeing a c^rious fat Swan at the Poulterers Stall, said to his friend that
walked along with him, O what a dainty Goose-pye, would that Swan make.

Of Col^urs.
IT being demand^d of one, what colors he thought was fittest for a
Tradse-man to wear? was answered, O your Carnation black is the best wear
for a Citizen.

Of a Ge^tleman in Plu^h.
A Gentleman being very gallant, and all in Plush, walking along the ^treet^
two Tradsem^n following him, the one who knew him, s^id to the other, do thou
know ^im that is so brave? no says he, what of that^ I Will tel^ thee then,
replied the other, thou see him now al^ in Plush, bu^ ten to on^ within th^se
^ew days thou shall meet him in a broune-stuffe.

A quarter of L^^be.
THree or four goodfellowes mee^ing, went to dine at a Cooks in Pie-corner,
and bespoke a quarter of Lamb, which when they came to cut up, they found to
be very tough, insomuch, that they could scarcely tugge it asunder with their
teeth; at length says one of them, now on my con^cience, this Lamb is seven
years old at least.

A simple Marketmaid.
A Silly Market wench being sent to the Butchers, inquired at Saint Nicholas
Shambles along, for a breast of mutton with a ru^pe upon it.

Of buying a Sword.
TWo Gentlemen meeting, the one of them had a very fair new Sword, which the
other observing, said unto him, in^eed you have got a very handsome Sword, I
pray you is it your own, or did you buy it?

Of two Neighbors talking.
TWo neighbors meeting, the one having lately bu^led his wife, the other
began to comfort him for the loss of his good wife; who answered him again,
that ^he was a good woman indeed, but he was sorry for nothing so much, as his
poor ^^therlesse children at home.

A very improper Comparison.
ONe complained to his friend, and said; I am so troubled here with a Blister,
that is risen upon my arm as passes, and I assure you, it is as sore as a
Wall-nut.

One set upon by a Mastiffe.
TWo fellows meeting, the one told unto the other, that he was set upon on
the way, by a huge fierce Mastiffe, having nothing (says he) in my hand but
this cudgel which thou see, and yet for half an hour by the Clock, I kept
him in play hand to hand, and in all that time he was not able to get within me.

Of Dancing.
ONe seeing a Gentleman dancing very loftily, and nimbly, and comely withal,
said to another, that stood next him, do you observe that man? does he not
handle his legs most daintily?

Of three or four being late in a Tavern^.
THree or four good fellows being merry at the Tavern, till it was past
eleven a Clock at Night, some of them having a great way to their Lodgings,
says one of them to the rest, Nay, now Gentlemen, it is even hi^ time for us
to part; for I will assure you, the longer that you ^tay, the farther you have
home.

Of a Message simply delivered.
A Widdow-woman being dead, a Messenger was sent to a Gentleman, a Kinsman of
hers, to entreat him to contribute something toward her burial, who
delivered his message after this sort: Sir, such a woman is dead, and commends
her unto you, desiring you to send her Forty shillings to bury her.

A silly protestation.
I Heard one, speaking of the honesty of his Wife, protest, that in his
Conscience she was as virtuous a Maid, as any was in all the Parish.

Another like foolish pr^testation.
ONe being urged to confirm a Truth, having at that time a ^eaker brim'd in
his hand, said, (being ready to drink) That which I have spoken, is most true,
or else I wish this Beaker may never go through me.

A Cow-pigge.
ANother instead of a Sow-pigge, went up and down the Market to ask for a
Cow-pigge.

Of one coming from a Sermon.
ONe that had not been often at Church, one asking him what the Preachers Text
was? who answered him again, I know the Text as well as the Mother that bore
thee, and he t^oke it out of Ieronimo.

Of a Picture.
ONe looking upon his friends picture, which was drawn in a very curious
Table, began much to commend the workmanship, and said, The Double^ was as
like him, as if it had been made for him.

Of a pleasant fellow, his Confessor, and a Gamm^n of Bacon.
A Pleasant fellow coming to Confession, his ghostly Father demanded, what
great and grievous sin he had lately committed, since his last absolution?
who fetching a great sigh, said, that the la^t^Le^t he had a goodly gammon of
bacon ^ent him out of the Country, but because of the strictness of the time,
he had cast it down into the house of Office: The good man chidde him for it,
and told him, that it was a great ^^n indeed so to contemn any of Gods good
creatures, h^ should rather have kept it, or given it toward the relief^ of
some poor people, who stood in need thereof; or says he, if none of these, it
had been less offense in thee to have eaten it: Truly Father, says he, I
thought so and therefore not to dissemble with you, I did eat it first, and
sent it down into the house of Office after.

Of a fellow ^anged for stealing an Halter.
ONe meeting another with whom he was well acquainted, asked him for an old
companion of his, whom he had not seen of long; O says he, he is gone the
wrong way^ why, what is become of him says the other? who told him again, he
was hanged, the other replied, hanged! for what? marry says he, for stealing
a rope; a small fault says he; ey but answered he again, there was an horse
tied to the end of it.

Of two fellows that were t^ ride a journey.
TWo crafty Knaves, but one more subtle than the other, were to ride a
journey, and to hire an Horse betwixt them, and to ride by turns; now when
they both had laid down their money, says the one of them, take notice of the
bargain that is betwixt us, is it not thus, That when I ride, you shall go on
foot; and when you go on foot, I shall ride? It Is right said the other; of
which the first taking notice, got up into the Saddle, and made his friend ^ro^
on foot the whole j^urney.

Things that cannot be revoked.
YOuth, Time, a word spoken, and a Maids Virginity.

Another to the like purpose.
HE that at twenty years of age is not fair, a^ Thirty, strong^ at Forty,
wi^^; at Fifty, rich; it is too late for him to exp^^t any of these after.

Of one that was to fell an Hog.
IT has been a cu^^o^e in the Country, that when any man killed an Hog,
he was to invite all his neighburs to ^ate part thereof, and so they went
round by turns: now one more penurious than the rest, willing to save that
charge, asked counsel of his neighbor, what he were best to do? who told
him, that the only way for him to save both his purse and his credit, was to
give out the next day, that his Hog was stolen that night, who depar^ed from
him very well satisfied, and resolved. Now it so happened, that his Hog was
that night stol^e indeed, which he missing in the Morning, ran open^mouth'd to
his Go^sip, with a loud acclamation, and told him, he was quite undone, for his
Hog was stolen out of the Sty; who smiling made answer, It Is very well Gossip,
yo^ ^arry the business even so as I instructed you: To whom he replied with
an Oath, Ey but Gossip, I tell you, he is stolen indeed: who answered, better,
and better; for if you remember, I told you, your neighbors would not believe
you without an oath: at which words being more ve^ed, he stamped, and stared,
and rapt out Oath after Oath, that what ^e said, was true; the other still
smiling, said, if that passion would not carry it current amongst his
neigh^ours, sure nothing would; and so he left him derided, as well as deluded.

Four things kill a man before his time.
A Sad Family, immoderate ^urfeit, corrupt air, and a fair wi^e.

Of two calling for a breakfast.
TWo Gentlemen taking a room in a Tavern, having called for Wine, asked the
Drawer what they might have to breakefast, who told them, there was nothing,
but a piece of Beef in the Pot, and that was not half sod; ^o ^aith one of
them I am ^ery hungry, I prithee ^hen, till thy Beef be rea^y, let me have a
slice of ^oft-meate cut from the ^pit.

Of three things to be bewared.
THree things all men ought to beware of: Not to be inquisitive into other men's
secrets, for it may breed thee danger; to ^ouch nothing in a Smiths ^hop, le^t
thou burn thy ^ingers; and to ta^te nothing when thou art at the Apothecaries,
le^t in the stead of a preservative, thou lightest upon poison.

Of one that came reeling from the Tavern.
A Gentleman that came reeling from a Tavern, and indentering all the way, (it
being late in the night) the watch came about him, and began to to lay hold of
him: who startling at their sudden approach, as new waked out of a dream,
asked what was to pay? They perceiving he came newly out of a Tavern, told
him, that it was not likely, that a Gentleman of his fashion, would leave the
house without paying the reckoning; who answered them again, If the reckoning
be paid, why then do you bring me these Bills.

Of one dancing upon the Ropes.
A Mere natural Fool, coming by chance into a place where one was dancing
on the Ropes, whose foot failed him, and he fell to the ground, at which, all
the spectators fell into a great laughter; one Fool put finger in the eye, and
wept, and being demanded the reason thereof, made answer, Marry because they
call me a Fool, that have the wit to keep my feet upon the ground, and
took him for a wise man, who dancing in the Air, is at every step he takes,
ready to break his neck.

Of one that bought a Mare in Smithfield.
ONe bargaining for a Mare in Smithfield, and being a man known, paid down
hal^e his money in hand, and promised him ^to be a de^tor unto him for the
rest; the seller, some two days after, meeting with the buyer, demanded his
money; who told him, he had in all things punctually kept his bargain; for,
says he, if I should pay you the re^t of the money, I am then no more you
debtor.

An old Proverb.
IT has been an old Proverb, and for the most part true, Those men,
undoubtedly, grow rich, whose wives dye, and whose Bees pro^per.

Things that cannot be hid.
LOve, the Cough, Fire, and grief.

How one saluted a Gentlewoman.
ONe meeting a Gentlewoman in the streets bare brested, and naked half way to
the waste, came to her, and whispering in her ear, as he laid his hand upon
her breasts, asked her, if that flesh were to be sold? who in a great anger
answered him, no; no, says he: then sweet Lady, I could wish you to ^hut up
your shop windows.

Of an Hare-^^nder.
A Fellow that used to find Hares for gentlemen in the Country, related this
for a truth, that as he was pacing over the Fallowes, he spyed a hare sitting
in her Furme, whose nature is, that she will not rise, whil^^ you fix your
eye steadfastly upon her; which he did, and stooping on the one side to take up
a stone, or something to strike her where she sat, he suddenly caught hold of
another Hare, that was furmed at his foot, and casting her at that which he
spyed first, took her just in the rising, and broke both their necks. Believe
him who li^t.

In what things women must not be believed.
IN these things women (as I have heard from the mouth of a woman) are not to
be credited. First, if she she weep; for she has Tears at her will: next,
if she ^eigne her self sick; believe her not, till thou ^eest her quite dead:
last, if she eat not at the Table, think, either she has before broke her
fast, or else reserved some choice bi^ for her self after dinner.

Of a Farmers wife in the Country.
A Plain Country Farmer, having never been called into Office before, was
made Constable; and taking it to be a great addition to his reputation, against
the next Sunday he bought his wife a new gown, with a lace on every seame, the
like of which her mother had scarce worn before, with other accowterment, in
which she was ^o show her self the next Sunday; but coming late to Church,
(for she was long in making her self ready) just at the time when all the
people rose up at the reading of the Gospel, she thinking they had done it in
reverence of her, said to them all aloud, I thank you good people, even with
all my heart, and I will so order the business, that this kindness shall be
requited before my husband goes out of his Office.

What makes men keep home.
A House kept sweet, want of company abroad, Adversity, and a Wife that is
w^ll conditioned.

Of a Gardner, who brought a Present of Fruits to his Landlord.
A Gardner had planted, or ^rafted too sorts o^ Kentish Pippins, and when the
time of their ripeness came, he brought some of either, and presented them to
his Landlord, and said, Sir, taste that Apple, it is the best that ever grew
upon the ground; and when you have done, taste this, for it is better than the
other.

Of a Countrey-fellow.
A Countrey-fellow in Bartholmew Faire-time coming something late through the
Charterhouse, when it was but almost night, spied a mellow Pear before him,
which some had scattered; which tasting, and finding it to relish well i^ his
mouth, he imagined that it had dropped from one of those Trees, and having a good
cudgel in his hand, he so belabor'd the poor Elmes, till the people that
passed by, and perceived the error, laughed him to scorn.

Things that trouble a family.
A Hen without Eggs, a Sow without Pigs, a Cow without Milk; the Daughter a
wanderer, the Son a gamester; the good man that loves his Maid, the Wife
that robs her Husband.

Of a young Wench ^omming to confession.
A Young Girl coming to Confession, told her Gho^tly Father, that she had
been with a young man in the Hey: Ey but said he, what did you there^ To whom
she answered, what an old Fool are you, that have lived to these years, and
know not what a young ^ellow and a Wench cannot find themselves to do in an
Hey-loft?

Of two Women scolding.
TWo women scoldi^g, the one called the other Whore; who answered her again,
it is tru^, and thou woul^st be one too, but that thou art so ugly, that no man
will have to do with thee.

Of things which scarce can be avoided.
A Young Wen^h without a Sweetheart, a Fair without ^heeves, a Jew without
Wealth, an old Barn without Mic^, an old Garment without Lice, an old Goat
without a Beard, and a^ old Usurer without the Devil.

Of a simple fellow that bought an Almanacke.
A Simple fellow would needs go in Paul's Churchyard to buy an Almanacke, and
when he came home, he looked for this Holy day, and another Holy Day; a^
length he finds out Easter Day, and says aloud, O strange, says he,
Easter Day falls upon a Sunday this year.

Of Ralph Urbin.
RAlph Vrbin being a very excellent and skillful Painter, upon a time hearing
two Cardinals, (with whom he was very familiar) to reproove and find fault
(only for to anger him) with a certain Picture of Saint Peter, and Saint
Paul, which he had very ar^ficially painted, and finished; saying, that the
Pictures faces were too high-colored, and too red; without further studying,
he gave them this answer (...) My Lords, m^rvaile not hereat, for I have
purposely so painted them, as they are now in Heaven, and not as they were upon
Earth; for this Redness comes unto them, blushing even for very shame, to
see the Church so ill governed, and out of repair, by such and such, li^e as
your Lordships.

Of a Scrivener.
A Petition was brought upon a time to a Scrivener, to see how he liked the
form of it, whereupon he answered, and said, that he was a Goose that drew
it; for said he, I ^py twenty, and twenty faults in this Petition, which he
has left out.

Of a silly fellow.
THere was a man of no little account, which was brought before a Judge of a
Court, to take his Oath to such, and such Articles, as he shouldbee examined
upon; and when he was gone, he asked one of his Neighbors, if that were all,
to lay his hand upon a Book, and kiss it? I said the other; it is then no
matter, said the fellow, as long as I did not swear by God.

Of a poor man in Prison.
THere was a poor man which had ^aine long in Prison upon an Execution; a
friend came to him, and would ^aine have had him out of the Prison to the next
Tavern to drink with him; no said he, I cannot go out, why, said his friend?
because ^aith he, I am impaled with a Brickwall.

A witty Answer of a Parson^
A Certain Ecclesiastical man having but one Benefice, envyed most sharply
against chose that were Non R^^idents: It came to pass by tract of time, that
he happened to join one Benefice to another, and as he was reprooved for it
by some of his friends, who oftentimes had heard him speak, and preach against
it, and had known him alwa^es to be of a contrary opinion: he gave them this
answer, I crave pardon for it sirs, for it was but for want of sight; for he
that has but one eye, seeeth not so clear, as he that has two* My Benefice
which I had first, was but one eye, wherewith I did see, but now having two
eyes, I perceive things more apparent than before.

A witty answer of a man to his Wife.
A Certain Gentleman having married a young maid, which had a good portion;
after two or three days he neglected^sporting and playing with her, and fell
to his accustomed use of reading, and studying; after a while, his wife not
liking he should read and study so much, came unto him, and said, O husband,
I would I weere a book, then I know you would love me, and look in me, and
turn me over and over: would you be a book, said he^ yes said she, what book
said he? any book said she, then said he, I would thou were an Almanacke,
that then I might have one every year.

Of the Archbishop of Colen.
A Certain Labourer, as he saw upon a time, the Archbishop of Colen riding
all in arms, accompanied with a great troop of old soldiers, did heartily
laugh at it; hereupon, being demanded why he did laugh^ answered simply, that
he did but smile, marvailing, that St. Peter, Christ's Vicar, (being himself
very poor) had left his Successors thus rich and wealthy, and were ^ther
accompanied with Soldiers and Courtiers, than Churchmen: The Archbishop
willing to instruct hi^ better in this point, tol^ him, that he was a Duke by
birth, and an Archbishop by calling, and that he, at that present, as Duke,
went thus in arms, and guarded with soldiers; but when he had occasion to be
in the Church, that then he used himself as a Bishop: My Lord, (quoth the
Laboror) I would to God then you would tell me, that if the Dukes grace,
should happen to fall to the Devils share, what should then become of my Lord,
the Archbishop.

Of John the eighth Duke of Britain.
John, the eighth Duke of Britain, wi^ling to marry his son Francis unto
Isabel, daughter to the King of Scots: the young Prince inquired what she was
for a Lady; answer was made him, that she was a very fair D^mosell, well
favored, comely of body, and well disposed for to bear children, but that
she wants utterance: She ^s such a one as I desire, quoth the Duke, for I
ac^ount a woman wise enough, when she can make a difference between her
husbands shirt, and his doublet; and to know his bed from another man's; and to
keep her out of the rain.

A witty answer of a Gentleman.
A Young Gentleman, whose mother being a long time a widow, and lately dead,
did mourn for her, and being seen^ upon a certain time in the Kings Court,
mounted on horseback, with his foote^cloth of Crimson Velvet, the Ladies, and
other Gentlewomen of the Court, laughed him to s^orne; saying, that they found
it very strange, to see his horse decked with a foot-cloth of red Velvet,
whe^eas he himself did mourn for the death of his Mother: My Ladies,
(replied the Gentleman) you have herein some reason, but yet ye ought to
consider likewise, that the mother of my horse is not yet dead, as that he
should mourn for her.

Of a Gentleman buying a Horse in Smithfield.
A Gentleman being upon a Market day in Smithfield to buy a horse, and liking a
Stone-horse very well, asked^ what price? the fellow told him, and withal,
said the fellow, he is as good a Stone gelding, as any is in my Lord Maio^s
house.

Of a French Lawyer.
A Certain French Lawyer, having in his lifetime gathered together great
riches and wealth, and having no kind^ed to whom he might be queath his wealth:
as ^ee lay upon his death bed, he disposed all his goods to be employed in the
building of an Hospital, whereinto, no other diseased persons should be
received, but such as were mad and lunatic, allowing every man a large and
ample portion to their maintenance, and willed, that upon both the fore-gate,
and back-gate of the Hospital, these words should be written, in large golden
letters, Of mad men I got it, to mad men I leave it.

A good Lest of the Duchess of Bourbon.
THe Duchess of Bourbon having in her Court a certain waitingmaide, who for
love had forgotten her self, and so was gotten with child: and being chidden,
and reprooved for her fault, said, to excuse it, and to save her honesty, that
a Gentleman of the house had forced and deflowred her against her will: The
Gentleman hereupon being called for to appear, and clear himself before the
Duchess, she finding him guiltless, took his Rapier, and gave it to the
Gentlewoman the accusant; and holding the Scabbard in her own hands, bid her
to put the Rapier into it again: and as she endeavored to do it, the
Duchess stirred her hands up and down, inso^uch, that the Gentlewoman was
not able to put the Rapier into the sheath: Whereupon the Duchess address^^^
her self to the Gentlewoman, said unto her, Go to no^ good Huswife, if yo^
had done as you have seen me do with the S^^bbard, you would never have
fal^e into this inconvenience, wherein you are at this present, by your own
fault and folly.

Of a fellow which robbed a Vestry.
A Wicked Fellow for robbing of a Vestry, was brought before a simple Justice,
and when they had accused him, and that he had nothing to say, to excuse
himself, the Justice said, Alas poor ^ellow, he did it for mere want, and
for hunger; did not said the Justice^ yes said the fellow; let him go, let
him go said the Justice, he has herein but saved the Churchwardens a labor.

Of a Gentleman, and a Farmer.
A Gentleman coming to a Countrey-farmers house somewhat late, to buy some
Oats, and it chanced that he was a bed, and all his household likewise; the
Gentleman still knocking at the door very earnestly, answer was made, what
lack you? I pray, said the Gentleman, le^ me speak with you; no said the
^ellow, I cannot speak to yo^; for here is no body at home but I, and m^
wife, and some other that ^re asleep, and another that is not well.

Of a silly Gentleman.
A Silly Gentleman that met a Gentlewoman, who newly before had buried her
Husband, asked her where he was, she answered, in Heaven; I never heard of it
before, and that he was very sorry for it.

Of a Countrey-fellow.
A Countrey-fellow going along the street in London, it happened that a
masty-dogge ran upon him, he stooping to take up some stones to fling at him,
cried out, that he never knew stones tied, and dogs loose.

Of a Lady, and her Tenant.
A Lady in the Country, invited at Christmas, diverse of her Tenants, and
friends; and having alittle before gotten the victory in a suite of Law of her
adversary, said, that she was glad it was ended, for she had now gotten her
will of him, besides great costs and charges of suit: one of her Tenants starts
up, as they were set at Table, and said, he was very joyful of it; for he knew
that he had a wrong sow by the ear.

Of a Soldier.
A Soldier marching on his way, after a troop of horse, casting his eye upon
the ground as he went, found a horseshooe, and stuck it at his girdle, and so
went still forwards; at length a bullet came and hit him there; whereupon he
said, a little armor will serve turn, if it were put in the right place.

Of a couple of Tailors.
A Couple of Tailors working upon a shop^boord together, about nine of the
clock, the maid of the ^ouse brings them an egg^ to breakf^st; so one ^ooke
the point of his needle, and so did the other also, and began t^ eaten at
length, on^ thought he did not tak^ up enough at a time, turne^ the ey^ of the
needle, an^ eats with that, which the other presently espye^ swears a great
oath, wha^ you rogue, do you eat with a malt-shovell.

Of three Soldiers.
THere were three soldiers which had not a penny of money, and were very dry,
and could not tell what to do^; one above the rest, goes into an Alehouse, and
bids the other two come in with him, and then he calls to the man of the house,
to give them three penny loaves, and when they were br^ught, one of them said,
what do you thin e^ine Host that we are Tailors? give ^s three pots of Beer
for them; so the man brought them three Cans of Beer, and when they had drank
them up, they were going away; the Host said, who shall pay for the Beer? why
good man Rogue, said one of them, had not you three penny loaves for them? yes,
said the Host, then said his man, pay for the bread; why you Rascal, said the
other, had not you the bread again? so they went their way, laughing at the
poor Tapster.

A cunning trick of a Friar.
IT happened about Lent time, that a cunning Friar going up and down to preach
in ^ownes and Villages; and being^ in his Sermon, he begged of the poor people
their charity^ and told them many strange stories what he had endured, at
length he said, i^ they would give something largely, in the afternoon he
would show them such a Relic that they never saw; and that should be a
^eather of the Angel Gabriel: in the afternoon all the people flocked
together, and offered store of money^ now the Friar had got in (...) box, a
feather of a Peacocks tail, which he^ would have perswade^ them, to have bin
the Angel Gabriels: Now his Hos^ of the house, having formerly looked in the
boxe^ and saw that it was nothing but a Peacocks tail, too^ it out, and put in
a handful of small cooles, the Frye^ making ha^te to go t^ Church to get the
mone^ nere looked into the box but put it under his Gown and went his way; and
being in his discourse, he told them, that he had brought what he had
promised; so all the people fixed their eyes on him sted^astly; then he opened
the box, and seeing nothing but small coals, told them, that he had^
mistaken the box which he intended, bnt he would show them a greater Relic,
and that was some of the coals which Saint Lawrence was broyled upon; so the
people went away satisfied; and the Host hearing this Knavery, told the Friar,
unless he would give him some of the money, he would discover it; which he
did agree to, and s^ they both laughed at the simple people for believing him.

Of a blind man, and his ^oy.
A Poor man being stricken blind, an^ not able to live, hired (...) Boy to
lead him from on^ friends house to another to get food; and it happene^ at one
place they gave him both roast meat and boiled meat; the boy gave the blind
man the boiled meat, and kept the roast for himself; at length his Master
said, Sirrah, I smell ^st meat, surely you have ^me, but you cosen me,
because I cannot see, but have a good nose said the ^oore man: at length the
^oy had eaten all of it, and ^s Master th^eatned to ^eate him for so doing;
^hereupon the boy makes ^o more a do, but led ^im on a good round pace, ^here
in the midway ^ood a whipping post, ^ainst which the poor ^an hits his face
a very ^re knock; what says the ^oy, can you smell roast ^eat^, and cannot you
^ell the post?

An answer of a wife to a Neighbor.
A Couple of special friends meeting, di^ salute one another i^ the ^^reete,
and one o^ them had his Wife with him; and the other, which had not his wife to
accompany him, says, Friend^ your legs grow very little me thinks in the
calfe and are shrunk up; hi^ wife made answer, yet he^ has out-growne all h^
night-caps.

A witty answer of a Gentlewoman.
A Ge^tlewoman coming into Paul's Churchyard among the Trunke-makers, to buy a
^lose stool, and the Trunke-maker asked a ^reat price for it, and she ^ound
fault with the rate which he set upon it; then said the Trunke-maker, it ^s a
very strong one, and ^t was better worth by two ^hillings more, by reason of
the Lock and spring it ^ad: the Gentlewoman ^nswered, there was no great need
of a Key, for ^hee would put nothing into it, but what she cared not who stole
i^ out.

Of an entertainment.
A Citizen riding into the Country to take pleasure, and coming to his
friends house, and finding him at home, he made him v^ry heartily welcome, and
desired him to stay all night; ^or he should be sure to have a flock-bed
stuffed full of feathers, and you shall have it to your self, and I will lie
with you.

Of a little Boy.
A Gentlewoman at the time of Christmas, invited to dinner diverse of her
neighbors, and when they were all come, and ready to sit down, she called
her son, which was a little boy, and bid him have a care that he did not
beg at Table, for if he did, she would whip him; the boy waited at the Table
a great while, and had nothing; he being very hungry, and seeing the Pyes
almost eaten, says, pray Mother give me some Pie, and I will not beg.

Of two Country fellows.
A Couple of Countreyfellows going to market together, began to ^ell stories;
one says, I did see a naked boy with his pockets full of Nuts, kill a dead Sow
with a Crossebow; the other said, I shall have a Fustian Doublet made of as good
Holland, as can be got for money; then said the other, I must buy some merry
book, (...) a lamentable tune: when shall I see that book said the other^ to
morrow morning in the Afternoon said he; then said the other, I will tell you
a strange thing, there was a woman living in our Town, which had at five
births ten children, and every one was a Girl, and a Boy.

Of a Co^ntrey^boy ^^tching P^ddings.
A Good hu^wi^e upon a time made Puddings, and when she had put them into a
Kettle, and set them over the fire to boil, she called a little boy which was
her son, to watch them, that when they began to leap, (as Puddings will do
when they are sod) to call her^ the boy still looking in the Kettle, saw them
stir, yet never called his mother^ at length the Puddings skins burst, and
did swim about; the which the boy perceiving, cried out, mother, mother, come
away, the Puddings begin to leap, for their Jerkins were off.

Of a jealous man, and how be served his Wife.
A Man being jealous of his Wife, supposed that she had made him often a
Cuckold, yet he could never prove it; and she still denied it: At length he
was persuaded by a friend of his, to use some trick to make her confess it;
the project was invented, and then he put it to tryall^ he told his wife, by
his skill, and some other advice, that whatsoever he prayed for, he should
obtain; that is well said she, I like that with all my heart: Then said he,
Wife, pray tell me whether you did ever make me a Cuckold, yea, or no; never
said she; so he went in, and made as if he kneeled down to pray, and having in
his pocket little tips of Horns, clapped them upon his forehead with a little
glue, and so ^ame forth, and said, look wife, I prayed, if ever thou made me
a Cuckold, that I might have a horn, and you see, I have it; she at first not
knowing what to say, began to cry him mercy, and told him, it was a great while
ago; it was when they we^e first married^ well said her Husband, never but
that time did you? No indeed said she: well said he, I will try once more; so he
went in, and did as he had done before, and came out with another Horn on; how
now wife said he, I think I shall find out the truth: then she began to
bethink her self, and said, she did partly remember, that being at a Tavern
one night, and having drunk too much Wine, forgot her duty, and never since
did it, nor never would again: Then said her Husband, I will try once more;
then he went in again, and did as before, so he came out with a third Horn,
which she seeing, fell down upon her knees, and desired pardon, and withal,
to go in to pray no more; for if he did, his head would be full.

Of three cheating fellows.
THree notable shirk^s went into a Tavern to dinner, and had as much Wine and
Meat, as came to six shillings; so the reckoning being brought up six
shillings, they swore they had but two shillings to pay; the drawer swore they
had six to pay; so they called for the Master of the house, and told him, how
is servant abused them, in saying they had six shillings to pay, and they had
but two shillings; so a w^ger was laid, that they would prove before any man
whatsoever, that they had six shillings to pay, and being come to try all,
they told him, that they had but two shillings amongst them all; so they won
the wager, and left the rest to pay.

Of a very silly fellow.
THere was an ignorant fellow brought before the Lords grace of York, for
having been in the society, or company of Brownists; and having nothing to say
for himself, a Warrant was making to send him to Prison; which the fellow
perceiving, fell down upon his knees; saying, Good my Lord, my Lord, pray your
Worship, good your Worship be good to me; one of the Archbishops men that
stood next him, spoke softly to him, and told him, he must say, your Grace, and
not your Lordship; then the fellow cried out, The eyes of all things look up
and trust in thee.

Another of a silly Woman.
IT happened that the good man of the house fell sick of a Consumption,
whereupon, the Doctor of the Town was sent for to have his advice, and being
come, he advised him to take good comfortable brothes, and to drink Asses
milk and Sugar every morning, and if he could get none about the Town, to
send to him, and he would help him to some, and so the Doctor went his was;
now as soon as the Doctor was gone, the man's Wife said, Husband, pray tell
me, does master Doctor give suck?

A mistake of the Mayor of Quinborow.
UPON the death of Queen Elizabeth, the Mayor of the town, had a Warrant sent
down from the Council to guard and make safe the Castle; he being at a
stand, called for the rest of his brethren, and being come into their Hal, or
place where they keep Court^ he stood up upon a Hassocke, and made this
speech, saying, Brethren, here is an arrant (he meant a warrant) come down,
and therefore I thought it convenient, that we should despair to this place;
and here being dissembled together, we might consult of our posterities; for
the Queen is dead, and we doubt, we must have another King or Queen, and I
stand in great fear, the Commons will be unrude, and cause a strange
Resurrection, and so then will all our Monarchs (he meaning Monuments) be
quite undone, and our Town having been of that lascivious government,
(meaning civil government) be turned of the other side o^ the water, and so
our re^ scarlet gowns will be^ wet; if we be forced t^ swim, for my part,
I ca^ swim no more than (...) Goose.

Upon a Sailer.
A Sayler riding between Dover and Gravesend, and having got a stumbling horse,
which had thrown him diverse times; at the next Town he buys a basket, and
filled it full of Stones and gravel, and ties it to his horses tail, which his
company espying, asked him, what he meant by tha^ ^he answered, That he did it,
beca^se his ^^rse went too m^^h a head.

Another of a Country fellow.
IT happened, that at Christmas time, a gentleman, who used to keep a
bou^tiful horse, having invited many of his friends and Tenants to dinner, one
one amongst the rest, stayed two or three days, because he came a great way;
at his departure he thanked his La^dlord for his good cheer, and went away;
as soon as he got home, they inquired what welcome he had; O said this
fellow, great plenty of every thing, the like he had never seen; and
especially, said the fellow, to me he showed such love, for he commanded
half a^ Ox to be killed a purpose for my staying.

A witty one of a Justice of Peace.
A Silly fellow being brought before a Justice of Peace, for ^tealing of some
sheep; the fellow denied it; at length witness came against him, and
justified, that they saw him drive away six sheep; O said the Justice, were
there no more of them? no said the Witness: the fellow still denied them,
which the Justice hearing, said, Fellow, if thou had come to me, I could have
given thee a Warrant to have stolen ten, but if you steal no more than ten,
it is no matter^ no indeed, said the fellow, there were but four which I had,
but if I had known before, that your Worship would have given me that
liberty, I would have come to you: The Justice whispering his Clerk in his
ear, bad him make his Mittimus: well, said the Justice, I will give you a
Warrant ^o s^eale ten, and no more ^t a time; now the fellow ^hought that the
Clerk ^ad been making him ^uch a Warrant, the fel^ow stepped to him, and ^poke
softly to him, and ^ntreated him to put in a ^ittle Bullock in the Warrant
likewise: so the ^ellow was committed to ^rison, and the J^stice high^y
commended for his ^lot.

Of a coup^e walking together.
TWo neighbors going to take the air in the fields, and coming into the
highway, one spyed a company of sheep, the other commended them because they
were so fat, and large; the other said again, I would I had one of them: what
would you do with it said the other? I would invite some of my best friends to
supper, and make a venson pasty of it.

Of a Wel^h begg^^
A Poor Welch-man coming toward London to get preferment, and having got a
way of riming, or je^ting, came ^o a Widows house, which ^tood on a Green, and
because she would give ^im nothing, he would make verses to scoff her, which
were these.

There^dwelt a Widow upon agreene,
She^ ^ad a nose like to a Swine;
She had feet like to any Geese;
I tr^w you had now better given some Cheese.
Of a Cook of a College.
THe Cook of a College, by s^^lding o^ brewes for the Scholars, and having a
sp^nd-thri^^ ^onne, built a fair house, with an intent to leave it to him as a
competency; (...) Scholar observing it, wrot^ upon the Door these Lines, D'
ye see this House? 'twas grease that (...)
But ere't be l^ng the (...) will m^^^ it.
ler? I tell thee boy, it is a Mill: the boy replied, I thought it had been a
prison, because my mind gave me, that I should see a Thee^e look out.

Of a Countrey-Iustice.
A Country Justice, somewhat imperious amongst his neighbors, had offended a
Neighbor in such a way, that he knew not how to right himself: whereupon this
man, with another very loving friend of his, complotted an irremediable revenge
upon the Justice, insomuch that this man should give his friend a box on the
ear, which was done, and withal, by virtue of the Justice his Warrant should
be sent for, which was also performed: The Warrant being se^ved, they both
immediately appeared; the Justice glad of such an opportunity, spoke very
powerfully, and asked him why he had broken the peace, in striking his
neighbor? To which the other answered not at all: The Justice threatened him,
that i^ he would not answer, he would lay him by the heels: nevertheless
the other would not answer a word; insomuch that his Mittimus was made, and
delivered into the Constables charge: But as he was going out, the Justice
recalled him, and bid him answer for himself; and withal asked him, why he
would not speake^ He answered, that he durst not; why man said the Ju^tice?
your Worship looks so like a Lion; when did thou see a Lion said the
Justice? the other replied, I saw a Butcher the other day, carry two on
horseback, bound by the legs: the Justice replied, away you are both Knaves,
and so dismissed missed them, without any more words.

Of a silly Painter.
A Countrey-painter being employed according to direction, to write some things
upon the Church-wall, a Gentleman came into the Church, and perceiving the
Painter not to write true English, called to him, and asked him, why he wrote
^ot true English? The Painter answered, Truly Sir, the Country will not go to
the charges of the writing true English.

A mistake of a Countryfellow.
A Countrey-novice co^mi^g to London, and coming to his lodging late in the
night, he met with a Bulker, alias, a Wascotiere, and courting her according
to his countreyconscience, somewhat Butcher-like, he asked her what it was
she had, that was so stubbed? what said she? It is my Nunquam sat is: How
quoth he, a Nun and a Papist? If thou be a Nun, I cham sure cham no
Papist.

Of a Thatcher.
A Thatcher being on the top of a Barn at his work, the Barn being on the
highways side, a drunken Coachman driving without fear, or wit, swept away
the Ladder that the Thatcher was at work upon, ins^much that the Thatcher
seeking to save himself by catching hold, but to no purpose, came tumbling
downwards, and still said, Lord, what shall I do? but when he came to the
Eaves, and saw that he must fall, swore a great Oath, what a fall shall I have
now!

Of an old Fiddler.
AN old Fiddler having been over-watcht, and drunk withal, having need to
make water, the rest of his crew performing their duties, going down to that
intent, mistook his way, and instead of going backwards, went forwards into
the street, and bestriding the Ke^nell, Colossus like, he boldly turned the
Cock, and let his water run freely; the people passing by, checked him for it,
it being toward noone: He answered them, saying, Peace you fools, peace, we
do not know our own Happiness: What a Gracious Prince have we, that will
suffer his Subjects to stand and piss in the streets.

Of a Country man that lost his way in London.
A Country man of good estate,
His way had lost, it being late,
And meeting with another man,
Said, tell me good sir, if you can,
The way to Newgate; I would know
The ready way, I pray you show:
Cut a purse, says he, and you shall ^^nde
The ready way, though you were blind.
Of a young Merchant and a Fiddler.
A Young Merchant man coming home from Sea, being merrily disposed at a
Tavern, amongst his friends, called for Muficke, and amongst other of their
course discourse, some was about Women's unconstancy; the Merchant would
undertake to win the good will of any woman in few hours; the Fiddler
replied, that he had such a woman to his wife, that he durst presume, she
would not prove false unto him: the Merchant replied unto the Fiddler, that he
would lay his ship, and all her lading (which was bnt newly come home) against
his fiddle, that he should find to the contrary^ well, a bargain is a
bargain, quoth the Fiddler, a ma^ch, quoth the Merchant, and with the license
of the Fiddler, away he went to court his new Mistress, how he ^sed her I know
not, but the Sequel shows he was not unkind: In the mean time comes the
Fiddler with his croude, and su^g this to his music.

Fiddler.
Hold out sweet Kate, hold out,
Hold out but these 2 hours;
If thou hold out, there is no doubt,
^ut the ship and a^^ is ours.
Kate.
In truth sweet Robin I cannot,
He has caught me about the middle;
He has me won, thou ^rt undone,
Sweet Robin thou have lost thy Fiddle.
Of a Puritan, and a merry Fellow.
A Company of Neighbors being merry together, by accident one of them was a
Puritan, and one of the company by chance sneezing, as it is the common
custom, some of the rest said, God bless you^ The Puritanes zeal being
heated, told them, they spoke in vain, for they should have spoken before he
had s^eezed: A mad merry fellow hearing him say so, cried out, O I sneeze, I
sneeze, Christ bless you, quoth the Precissian, with that the man routed out
an ^gly Fart, whereat all the company laughed heartily, but the Puritan was
forced to get him gone.

Of a Citizen and his Son.
A Citizen having invited many of his neighbors to supper, his son being one
of the servitors, by chance reaching o^ a glass of Wine over his fathers
shoulder, his father leaning suddenly backward, made his son to spill the
Wine, and being very angry, gave his son a god box on the ^are, his son
standing in a maze, yet recollecting his spirits, suddenly with his fist stroke
one of his neighbors that sat next to his Father; whereat the man amazed, so
likewise all the company, demanded the reason, the youth readily replied, let
it go round I pray you, and it will come to my father anon.

Of a Gentleman and his Tenant^
A Gentleman in the Country, sitting in a Tavern with other Gentlemen, espied
one of his Tenants in the streets, and beckning to him, to have him come to
him, telling the company, that they should see him put a good jest on his
Tenant: well, in comes the old man, the Landlord took a cup of Wine, and
drank to him, saying aloud, here is to you, and to all the Whores, Witches,
Bauds, Knaves, and Rogues in the whole Kingdom; The poor deaf man, with his
hat in his hand, answered, I thank your good worship (making many Legs) I pray
you remember your Father and Mother, your good brothers and sisters, your
pretty Children, and all the rest of your kindred; whereat all the company
laughed heartily, but the Gentleman bit his lip for very anger.

Of a fellow that stole a Pig.
A Country fellow being deaf, having stolen a Pig, the Pig as their manner is,
cried pitifully, but the deaf man seeing him only gape, as he thought, it
makes no matter, said he, gape so long as thou will, so that thou do not cry,
but they that owed the Pig followed him, hearing him say so, told him, that if
he used such tricks, it would spoil his gaping, and so took the Pig from
him, and beat him soundly.

Of two th^eves in Newgate.
TWo Thieves being brought to Newgate for theft, the one had stolen a Watch,
the other a Mare, and having taken up their lodgings, the one of one side, the
other of the other side, and being merrily disposed, says he that stole the
Mare, thinking to put a trick on the other, calling aloud, Jack, Jack, what is
a Clock by your Watch^ the other quick and wittily replied, It is almost time
Tom to water your Mare.

A witty answer of one in Newgate.
ANother mad companion being brought to Newgate for some riot by hi^ committed,
and some of his old companions seeing him there, asked him, Why how now Will,
with a vengeance how camst thou here? by my troth honest Ned, said he, any
blind man might as easily have come here, as well as my self, for I was led.

Of a Countryman coming up to London in the Tearm^ time to end a suite in Law.
A Country Farmer having been long in suit of Law, and put off from Term to
Term, coming up at Mi^haelmas Term, thinking to end his business, was
suddenly affronted by one of his neighbors, who asking him how all matters
stood, the other answered, he hoped al^ would be ended this Term: I am very
sorry said the other, I shall tell you ill news; what said the other? why,
your Cause is remooved to Leichfield: Let them remoove it to the Devil, chill
have a Lawyer to follow it.

Of two stammerers, by chance meeting together.
THere dwelt a Gentleman in Shropshire, that had a great imperfection in his
speech, that when he had strove most to speak, he could not utter his words,
but stammer much: This Gentleman going a hunting, by chance lo^t his Game, the
Har^, and the Dogs, and meeti^g with a Countrey^man that stutred as fast as
he, asked him if he did see, see, see, s, s, s, the Hare? the other striving
to answer him, made such a many faces, striving to s^eake, n, n, n, no, no; the
Gentleman out of his fury thinking he had mocked him, fell a beating him
soundly; but there was such stutring, and such faces betwixt them, that either
thought the other did mock him: At length there came a neighbor of the
Gentleman's by at the present, and perceiving the mistake in both of them, and
very well knowing them both, told the Gentleman, that the poor man meant no
hurt, and could speak no otherwise than himself: the Gentleman perceiving
that it was the truth, craved pardon, and to the Ale they went, where they were
made great friends; the Gentleman ever after remaining a very good friend to
his fellowstammerer.

Diog^nes his wish concerning Women.
IT is written that Diogenes the Philosopher, did so much hate all Women, that
one showing him where a Woman hanged her self upon a Tree, because she was
jealous, find^ng her Maids smock on ^he ^edge by her husbands ^hirt, Diogenes
answered, ^errily laughing, I would that all trees did bear such ^ruite.

Of a Welchman and an Englishman.
ONe thinking to mock a Welsh man, because one of his Contrymen was hanged
that day amongst other Englishmen, hit him in the teeth with it; it is true
quoth the Welchman, but there were ten Englishmen hanged with him; and we ca^
well afford one Welch-man out of the way, as well as you can so many English.

Of a Lawyer, and his Clyent.
A Merry conceited Lawyer thinking to break a jest upon one of his Clyents who
had a rich face, called unto him, saying, you with the copper-nose, what say
you to me? truly answered the man, I say nothing but this, that I will not
change my copper-nose for your brazen face.

Of a poor widow, and her son.
ONce upon a time there was a poor Widow, whom her Husband had left very
poor, and in Deb^; having one Son, a very untoward boy: the Quarter-day
coming on, she could not tell how to make shift to pay her Rent, at la^t
bethinking with her self what to do, she had three Kine, one of which she
meant to sell; and therefore called her sonn^ Jack Spy, (for that was his
name) bidding him to go to the Market, and sell such a Cow, at such a price at
least; Jack did as his Mother commanded him, but by the way, as he was
driving the Cow, an old man asked him where he was going, Jack replied, to the
Market; Oh says the old man, if thou will give me the Cow, I will bestow on
thee such a gift, that whatsoever thou bid'st stand, it shall stand still, till
thou bidst it do the contrary: Jack thinking himself a brave fellow to do
such prankes, agreed, and so ^et the old man have his Cow: returning home to
his Mother, telling her what brave things he could do, and all taught him for
his Cow, the poor woman was almo^^ out of her wits for this her sons
idleness; ^yet hoping that he would not serve her so any more, sent him away
the second time with another Cow; Jack hasts him away to the Market, and going
on singing, met with his old Chapman, which asked him, saying, How now Jack?
whither art thou going? Jack said, to the Market, to sell my Cow: Oh says the
old man, if thou will let me have thy Cow, I will give thee the bravest Rat
that ever thou did see, and if thou do bid her go, and bite him Rat, she
shall do it presently; besides, she shall show a great many more tricks to
procure laughter; Jack was very unwilling, remembering how he was served for
the last fault; yet, seeing such pretty tricks of the Rat, Jack thought once
more to ve^ter his breech, and so let the man have the Cow, and home he comes
to his Mother, thinking to please her with his Rats tricks: the poor woman
heereat was almost out of her wits, not knowing how to pay her Landlord, who
was a very cruel man, fell about her son, and belabored his J^cket^ yet all
this was nothing to her Rent, that sh^e must have, or else be turned out of
doors: she had one Cow left, and calling her son Jack to her, first
rebuking him for his idleness, allead^ing her poverty, and how he and she
were utterly undone.

Of a Countrey-fellows ho^esty.
A Young man who lived in the Country, came up to London, which was the first
time of his being there; and having ended his business, departed from thence,
and when ^e came near home, he met with his friend, telling him, he had
been at London, and seen the Lord M^^or; Ey but said his friend, did he take
any notice of thee? none at all said he, only I put off my Hat to him, and he
did his duty to me.

Of a Puritan.
ONe of the Tribe coming into Newgatemarket to buy a Cheese of a
Cheese-monger, and after he had seen two or three several Cheeses, the Ma^ter
of the shop desired him to taste of them, to see which he liked best; and
putting the taste of the Chee^e to his mouth, he put off his Hat, and began a
long Grace, which the Cheese-monger seeing, ^n^tched up his Cheese, and said,
Nay sir, since you, instead of a taste, mean to make a dinner of my cheese,
you shall buy none of me, for I did not buy it after that rate.

Of a Mayor of the Town of Quinborow.
THe Mayor of the Town, would needs one day desire his brethren to accompany
him to hunt the Hare; and as ^hey were at the sport, one of the Hunt^emen came
to the Mayor, and asked him, how he liked the Cry of the Hounds? a pox take
the dogs says Master Mayor, they make such a bawling that I cannot hear the
cry.

Of a Fiddler.
Diverse Gentlemen being a^ ^s^ington to make merry, called for the Fidle^s^ it
ha^ned that one of ^he Fiddlers were blind, and staying so ^ewhat late at night,
at last, they going away, one amongst the rest, called for the Tapster of the
house to light the blind Fiddler down the stayers; to whom the fellow said,
Sir, the Fiddler is blind; thou rogue, said one of the company, he has need
of the more light.

Of a Sailer on Horseback.
A Sailer riding one day between Rochester and Gravesend, and being not used to
ride, the horse being all on sweat, and being to pass through a river; offered
to water the horse before he rid him in so deep as the footlocke; one of
his company s^eing him, and knowing the danger which might come to ^he horse,
called upon him ^o ride in de^per; the other not knowing the reason, made him
this answer, First stay til he has drunk off all this, and then I will ride
him in farther, where he may have his belly full.

A Parish Clerks mistake.
AN honest man, a Parish Clerk, and a Free man of the City o^ London, and by
profession a (...) being bidde^ b^ ^h^ Preacher, before h^ w^^^ into the
Pulpit, (...) he found himself at the present not well t^ s^^g a Psalm of
some ^ength, I will, said he, an^ ^hus spoke aloud: I intreat^ you good people,
to sin^ the Lamentation of a Skinner.

Another of the like.
IN some parish Churches, there be two Clerks, and it happened they fell both
asleep in the Sermon time, the Sermon being ended; one that stood by them
awaked them; presently one of them perceiving the Sermon done, spoke with a
loud voice, and desired them to sing All people: the other Clerk hearing him,
starts up, and says, Hang all people, sing me the hundred Psalm.

Of a silly Mai^r.
A Mayor of a Corporation in the NorthCountrey, just upon the Death of Queen
Elizabeth, took an occasion to call his br^thren together in their Towne-hall,
and to make a speech, what a good Queen they had lost, but wished them to take
comfort: for Pompey and Alexander were dead, and all the Nine Worldlings were
dead, but none of all these were so good a Queen as she: and moreover, as
Master Schoolmaster calls it, where there are no Justices of peace, and that
no Officers have any power, but Majors, Bailiffes, and Constables, by reason of
which many Scabal-croes and varlets take opportunities to commit diverse
outrages, and mu^inies, hoping to escape unpunished; but says he, if all other
M^gi^trates will take that stri^t order that I purpose to do, there shall none
of them all have the least hope of a resurrection.

Of a^ ignorant fellow.
ONe having occ^sion to ride forth into the Country, to see some of his
friends and acquaintance, chanced to meet with one of his friends servants,
and demanded of him how his Master and Mistress did? they are both in good
health said he, and where have thou been? Why quoth he, my Master has a Sow
to be guelded, and I have been with my Co^zen S^arpe, to know when the Moon
changed, and he told me, to morrow, at Eleven a Clock in the afternoon, at
whose ^implicity the other laughed exceedingly.

Of an Apple-pye.
ONe being a^ongst a company of good fellows, and espying a Cost^rmonger that
passed by, being very desirous to play with him for his basket of Pears,
called him back, the Costermonger being more forward than wise, and having
more Dice i^ his pockets than Crowns in his purse, willingly pulled them out,
and after some play, lost al his pears; the other had not so soon won them,
but as willingly distributed them: a friend of his being in the presence, was
angry with him for parting from them so slightly; Why, says he, what should I
have done with them? what should you have done with them, replied his friend,
you should rather have taken them home to your wife, that she might have made
some Apple-pyes for you^ Children.

Of young Urbanus going into the Country t^ receive his Wifes P^rtion.
YOung Vrba^us being newly married, and having never been in the country,
would needs take a journey to fetch his wifes portion, leaving her at home to
look to his house and servants; on the way, he chanced to meet with one, who
unknown to him, had formerly bore good will to his wife, and hearing she was
newly married, was going to her to make a revisit; Vrbanus glad to see one
coming toward him, gave him the time of the day, and being overjoyed to hear
the birds sing so sweetly, made him break out into these words; O Sir, I am
almost ravished to hear these sweet and melodious tunes, which proceed from
yonder pretty birds, wondering much, likewise, that they have so much wit to
observe the time and season of the year; it is no matter of wonder, said the
other, to hear them so pleasant in the spring, but you being a stranger in
these things, do well to apply your ^are so diligently to their sounds, which I
hope may be so profitable unto you; that your self may learn to sing Cuckoo
in your return.

Of three Contrymen being come up to London, and their usage there.
THree Contrymen having occasion to come up to London to the Term, when
there was but a small sickness, they were yet somewhat afraid where they
should lie when they came, and calling to mind a Gentleman that had been
somewhat beholding to them a little before, when he was in those parts, thought
it not amiss, if they could, to get a lodging at his house; this resolved on,
they no sooner came into the City, but by chance met with him, and after their
salutation, one of them thus began: Sir, the danger of the time, and fear of
the sickness, makes us doubtful where to lodge, being strangers; but if we
may desire so much favor of you, as to help us to some place convenient fer
our short stay, we will not only be thankful i^ words, but study to deserve
it in deeds: The Gen^leman hearing this, (yet did expect nothing) took them
home with him, and entertained them with much respect; at length when they had
done what they could in the Court, they were willing to dismiss themselves and
return homeward; so taking their leave of the Gentleman; nay, says he, I will
^bring you to the Towns end, and would gladly show you some sights, if you
stayed longer, but now Hcan show you none, without your hinderance, only in
your way, I can show you a couple of Baboones and a J^ckanapes, they being very
desirous to s^e the sight; whereupon, he pulled out a Looking-glass, and bad
each of them look into that.

Of three Country men coming to the Royal Exchange.
TWo or three Country people being at London, and being brought by some of
their friends to see the Royal Exchange, they staring up, saw the Kings and
Queens round about them, and wo^dring what they should be, asked one of their
acquaintance which came along with them, what those were? He made answer, and
told them, that they were all the Kings and Que^nes, that had ever been in
this Land: I says the other, then I do intend to put off my hat with all
speed, for fear I should be suspected of Treason, being, as I think in the
Presence Chamber.

Of Country men that went to see sights in London.
THree or four plain Fellows coming to see sights, desired to see the
Tower, one of their friends told them, I will go with you, and you shall see
the Lions too; when they entered, the room smelt very strong; one of them said
pre^ently, I think this pl^ce be invincible, why so said the other? why
neighbor says he, do you think that ever such creatures as these, will yield
up to the ^nemy?

Of a silly fellow that saw the ships lie at Anchor.
ONe coming to the Thames side, saw many^lusty ships lie at Anchor, and having
never seen any before, wondered with himself what they should be, and at last
asking a fellow that stood by, what they were? to whom he answered, that they
were the Merchants Forest, or wood; it may very well be so indeed, says he,
but ^e tell you Si^, I have often mused what became of the great Forest in our
Country, and now I see that our ground was too dry to nourish them, and ^o
belike they have set them to grow here.

Of two or three conferring together.
THree or four Gentlemen meeting together, they were discoursing busily about
the Fast, being a Wednesday: What says one, there will be a Sermon on
Wednesday at St. Paul's; no, ^aies another, not so, because it is contrary to
the Procl^mation; Tush, says another, what if GoodFry day should fall upon a
Wednesday, should we not then have a Sermon think ye? nay says the other I
cannot resolve you of that point Gentlemen; faith says the third, for ought I
know, if the Sickness continue, we are not like to have a Passion Sermon,
because the Fast is very like to be on that day.

Of a Countrey-fellow selling an Horse.
A Countrey-fellow having an Horse to sell, one came to him, and did ask him
how old he was, and of what price, the other answered, that he was eight, and
his price was Twelve pound; says the other, is he as good as you say he is,
and no older? Faith says the other, he is as good an Horse as ever wore s^ooe
of leather, and I know him to be better now, than h^e was Nine yeer^s ago.

Of two or three going to hear a Sermon.
TWo or three coming into a P^rishChurch in London, a Puritan being to preach,
to hear (...) Sermon, the one said to the other, let us stay all the time, for
he that preaches, is a worthy zealous Teacher: well, staying a while to hear
P^ayers, and marking how he minced it, and did not read half of it, away went
he, his friends wondering at his departure; he told them, how is it possible
that he should preach so well, when he can pray no better? but the other told
him, that he did not care for the book of Common prayer, because he thought it
to be Popish; the other answered, nor I for his Sermon then, because I think
it will be foolish.

FINIS.

