CERTAIN PRECEPTS, OR DIRECTIONS, For the well ordering and carriage of a
man's life: As also oeconomicall Discipline for the government of his house:
with a platform to a good foundation thereof, in the advised choice of a Wife:

Left by a Father to his Son at his death, who was sometimes of eminent Note
and Place in this Kingdom.

And published from a more perfect Copy; than ordinarily those pocket
Manuscripts go warranted by.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HEART, 1618.

TO THE READER.
AGainst good Counsel who will shut his Ear,
At easy Rate may buy Repentance dear.
THE INDVCTION.
Beloved Son, the many religious and moral virtues inherent in your
matchless Mother, under the wings of whose prudent and godly government your
infancy has been trained and guided up, together with your education, under
so zealous and learned a Tutor, put me rather in assurance than hope (as Tullie
some time exacted from his Son, from the only hearing of Cratippus his
Master) that you are not ignorant of that summary bond, wherein you stand
obliged to your Creator and Redeemer; which is only able to make you happy,
both here and hereafter, in life and death: In mentioning whereof, I mean not
only a bare and Hystoricall knowledge, but with a real and practical use
adjoined, without which, though with a seemly assumption, you could express
to the World in a former habit and living portrayture, all Aristotle's Moral
Virtues, and walk that whole Book in Life and Action, yet are you but a vain
and wretched Creature, the fairest outside of the miserablest in side, that
ever was concealed by Tomb, or shadowing. And although I nothing doubt, your
youth being guided, and your green vessel seasoned by such wholesome
documents and instructions, derived from so all-sufficient Teachers, that you
are not unfurnished of such needful helps, as may be furtherers to your
life and conversation: Yet that I may the better retain and express the
zealous affection, beseeming a Father to his Son, or that you should be
forced to derive your stay and advise, rather from the rule of Strangers, than
from him from whom you are produced, and brought forth.

Out of these foregoing Considerations therefore, thinking it not unmeet, I
have essayed, from the affection of a Father, to give you such good
aduertisements and rules for the fitting and squaring of your life, as are
gained rather by my long experience and observation, than by much reading or
Study: being such (in my hope) with that good assistance, as shall Season your
Youth like the draw of Age: to the end, that you entering into this exorbitant
and intangling World, may be the better furnished to avoid those harmefull
courses, whereinto these dangerous times, and your inexperience may easily
ensnare you. And because I would not confound your memory, I have reduced them
into ten Precepts: which, if next to MOSES Tables, you imprint in your
mind, you shall reap the benefit, and I the end of my expectation and
content. And thus they follow.

The Contents of this Book.
Precept I. FOr choice of your Wives.
II. The education of Children. III. For House-holde Provision, and the choice
of Servants. IV. How to entreat your Kindred and Allies. V. Advises to keep
some great man to your Friend: and how to complement him. VI. How and when to
undertake suites. VII. Aduertiseth for Suretieship. VIII. How to behave a man's
self. IX. How far to disclose a man's secrets. X. Be not scurrilous in
conversation.
PRECEPT I,
For the choice of your Wives.
FIrst, when it shall please God to bring you unto Man's estate, making you
capable of that Calling, use great providence and circumspection, in choice of
your Wives, as the root from whence may spring most of your future good or
evil: For it is in the choice of a Wife, as in a project of War, wherein to
err but once, is to be undone for ever. And therefore be well advised before
you conclude ought therein: For though your Error may teach you wit, it is
uncertain whether you shall ever find time to practice it: Therefore the more
securely to enter herein, First, well consider your estate, which, if in a true
suruay, you find firm and setteled, Match near home, and with deliberation:
But if otherwise, crazie and rented, then far off, and with quick
expedition: Be informed truly of their inclination, which, that there may be
a more equal Sympathy, compare it with your own, how they agree: for you must
know, that every good woman makes not for every man a good wife: no otherwise
than some one good Dish disgesteth with every stomach. After that, inquire
diligently of her stock and race, from whence she sprung, and how her
parents have been affected in their youth. Let her not be poor, how generous
soever: For Generosity without her support, is but a fair shell, without her
kernel, Because a man can buy nothing in the Market without Money.

And as it is the safest walking ever between two extremes, so choose not a
Wife of such absolute perfection and Beauty, that every carnal eye shall
bespeake you injury: Neither so base and deformed, that may breed contempt in
others, and bring you to a loathed Bed.

Make not choice of a Dwarf or a Fool: for from the one you may beget a race
of Pigmeyes, as they other will be your daily grief and vexation: for it will
irke you so often as you shall hear her talk: and you shall continually find,
to your sorrow that feel that Cross, There is nothing so fullsome as a
shee-Foole.

Touching the government of your House, let your Hospitality be moderate,
equalled to the measure of your estate, rather bountiful than niggardly, yet
not prodigal, nor ouer-costly: for though some, who having otherwise consumed
themselves with secret vices, have endeavored to color their riots upon their
virtue, yet in my observation, I have not heard nor known any man grow poor,
by keeping an ordinary, decent, and thrifty Table.

Banish Drunkenness out of your Houses, and affect him not that is affected
thereunto: for it is a vice that impaires health, consumes wealth, and
transformes a man into a beast: a sin of no single rank, no ordinary statio^,
that never walks vnattended with a train of misdemeanors at the heels:
besides, for the credit thereof, to induce a man, I never heard other
commendation ascribed to a Drunkard, more than the wellbearing of his drink:
which is a commendation fitter for a Bruers horse, or a Dray-mans back, than
either for Gentlemen or seruingmen: for especially the latter being taken tardy
herin, is thereby doubly divorced from himself: for, being first sober, he
is not his own man: and being drunk, he falls short by two degrees.

Beware thou spend not above three of the 4. parts of thy revenue, nor above
one third part thereof in your house: for the other two parts will but defray
extraordinaries, which will always surmou^t your ordinaries by much: for
otherwise you shall live like Beggars in continual wants: and the needy man can
never live happily, nor contented, being broken and distracted with worldly
cares: for the every least disaster maks him ready to morgage or sell: and that
Gentleman that sells an acre of land, loses anounce of credit: for
Gentilitie is nothing but ancient Riches: So that if the foundation do sink,
the building must needs consequently fall.

PRECEPT II,
Teaches the Education of Children.
BRing your Children up in obedience and Learning, yet without too much
austeritie, praise them openly, reprehende them secretly: give them good
countenance, and convenient maintenance, according to your ability: For
otherwise your lives will seem their bondage, and then as those are censured,
that defer all good to their end; so that portion you shall leave them, they
may thank death for, and not you. Marry your daughters betimes, lest they
marry themselves.

Suffer not your Sons to pass the Alps: for they shall exchange for their
foreign travel (unless they go better fortified) but others Vices for their
own Virtues, Pride, Blasphemy, and Atheism, for Humility, Reverence, and
Religion: And if by chance, out of a more wary industry, they attain to any
broken Languages, they will profit them no more, than to have one Meat served
in diverse Dishes.

Neither by mine advise shall you train them up to Wars: For he that sets up
his rest to live by that profession, in mine opinion, can hardly be an honest
man, or a good Christian: For Every War of it self is unjust, the good
cause may make it lawful: Besides, it is a Science no longer in request than
use: for Soldiers in Peace, are like Chimneyes in Summur, like Dogs past
hunting, or Women when their beauty is done. As a person of quality once noted
to the like effect, in these Verses following: Friends, Soldiers, Women in
their prime,
Are like to Dogs in Hunting time:
Occasion, Wars, and Beauty gone,
Friends, Soldiers, Women here are none.


PRECEPT III,
For House-holde Provision, and of the choice of Servants.
Live not in the Country without Corn and Cattle about you: For he that must
present his Hand to his Purse for every Expense of Household, shall as hardly
keep Money therein, as it is for one to hold Water in a Sieve.

And for your Provision, Lay to buy it at the best hand, for there may be
sometimes a penny saved, between buying at your need or when the season most
fitly may furnish you.

Be not willingly attended, or served by Kinsmen or Friends, which will seem
to be men, as it were entreated to stay: for such will expect much, and stead
little: neither by such as are amorous; for their heads are commonly
intoxicated. Keep rather too few, than one too many: feed them well, and
pay them with the most, so may you lawfully demand service at their hands,
and boldly exact it.

PRECEPT IV,
How to entreat your Kindred and Allies.
LEt your Kindred and Allies be welcome to your Table: Grace them with your
countenance, and ever further them in all their honest actions, by word,
liberality, or industry: For by that means you shall double the bond of
Nature: Be a Neighbor to their good, as well as to their blood: By which
reasonable deseruinges, you shall find them so many Advocates, to plead an
Apology for you behind your back, so many Witnesses of your Virtues,
whenever others shall seek to deprave you: But shake off the Glow-wormes, I
mean Parasites and Sycophantes, who will feed and fawn on you, in the Summer
of your Prosperity; but in any adverse Storm, will shelter you no more than
a Cloak of Taffatie, or an Arbor in Winter.

PRECEPT V,
Advises to keep some great Man to your Friend, and how to complement him.
BE sure you keep some great Man always to your Friend: yet trouble him not
for trifles: Complement him often: present him with many, yet small gifts, and
of little charge. And if you have cause to bestow any great gratuitie on him,
then let it be no Chest commodity, or obscure thing: but such a one as may be
daily in sight, the better to be remembered: for otherwise you shall live but
like a Hop without Pole, or a Vine without her Elm, subject to injury and
oppression, ready to be made a Football for every superior insulting companion
to spurn at.

PRECEPT VI,
How and when to undertake suites.
Undertake no Suit against a poor man, without receiving of great wrong, for
therein you make him your Compeditor: Besides that, it is held a base Conquest,
to triumph upon a weak Adversary. Neither undertake law against any man, before
you be fully resolved you have the Right on your side: which being once so
ascertained, then spare neither cost nor pains to accomplish it: For a Cause
or two being so close followed, and well accomplished, may after free you from
Suits a great part of your life.

PRECEPT VII,
Aduertiseth for Suretieshippe.
BEware of Suretieshippe, yea for your best Friend: For he that pays another
man's debts, goes the way to leave other men to pay his, and seeks his own
ouer-throwe. Therefore if he be such a one, as you cannot well say nay,
choose rather then, to lend that money from your selves, upon good bonds, though
you borrowe it: so may you pleasure your Friend, and happily secure your
selves.

In borrowing of Money, be evermore precious of your word: For he that has a
care to keep day of payment, is lord-commaunder many times of another man's
Purse.

PRECEPT VIII,
How to carry a Man's self toward his Superiors, and Inferiors.
Toward your Superiors be humble, yet generous: with your Equalles
familiare, yet respective: toward your Inferiors show much humility, with
some familiarity; as to bow your body, stretch forth your hand, uncover your
head, and such like populare complements: the first prepares way to
advancement: the second will make you known for men well bred: the third
gains a good report, which once gained, may easily be kept; for high
humilities are of such respect in the opinion of the multitude, that they are
easilier won by unprofitable Courtesies, than by churlish benefits: Yet do I
not advise you, overmuch to affect or neglect popularitie.

PRECEPT IX,
How far to disclose a Man's Secrets.
TRust no man with your Credit, or Estate: For it is a mere folly for a man
to inthrall himself further to his Friend, than that he needs not fear
him being his Enemy.

PRECEPT X.
BE not scurrilous in conversation, nor Stoicall in your wits; for the one
makes you unwelcome to all companies, as the other pulls quarrels on your
heads, and makes you hated of your best Friends.

Iestes, when they do savor of too much truth, leave a bitterness in the
minds of those that are touched.

And, although I have already pointed at these inclusiue, yet I think it
necessary to leave it to you as a Cantion, because I have seen many so prone
to quippe and girde, that they had rather lose their Friend than their Jest:
And if by chance their boiling Brain yield a quaint Scoff, they will travel
to be delivered of it, as a Woman with Child: But I think those nimble
Apprehensions, are but the Froth of the Wits.

FINIS.

