A SERMON PREACHED AT SNARFORD IN LINCOLNSHIRE AT THE FVNERALS of Sir GEORGE
SANCT-PAVLE Knight and Baronet, December the 9. 1613. By JOHN CHADVVICH Doctor
in DIVINITY, AND ONE OF HIS Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

TOGETHER WITH A BRIEF and true RELATION of his virtuous life and holy death.

ESAIAS 57. v. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart: and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.

Woodcut printer's device of a mask with rings (McKerrow 379, lacking the
letters A. H. below)

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for William Barret, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the three Pigeons. 1614.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SNARFORD IN LINCOLNESHIRE AT THE Funerals of Sir GEORGE
Sct. PAVLE Knight and Baronet, the ninth of December 1613.
THE TEXT.
PSALM. 37. v. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the just: for the end of
that man is peace.


THe saying is old and true, that those things which are differing in their
end, do most oppositely disagree. Dives and Lazarus were of some likelihood
whilst they lived in the world: They were both made of one mould, informed
with one specifical form, breathed in one air, moved on one and the same
earth: yet if we observe their conditions in their ends, we shall find as
great odds therein, as is betwixt felicity and misery, death and life,
heaven and hell; which are such contraries as cannot be reconciled nor made at
one.

David was much troubled to see the prosperous estate of the wicked, and the
mean and troublesome condition of the Lords children. But God who will not
leave his servants in erroneous conceits, nor under the wearisome burden of
fainting discontent, counsels his kingly Prophet not to be disquieted though
he see the workers of iniquity to flourish like a green bay tree, and the
righteous to undergo much fear and trouble: for if he mark but their ends,
he shall behold the wicked which draw out their sword, and bend their bow to
slay such as be of upright conversation, that their sword shall enter into
their own heart, and that like the grass they shall soon be cut down, and
like the green herb they shall wither away. But for the man that has the
law of his God in his heart, his steps shall not slide. For mark the perfect
and upright man: he neither fades nor rotteth in his name, nor falls nor
fails in his profession and hope: for finis illius pax, his end and vpshot is
peace. Which point when David had learned in Gods Sanctuary both by direction
and observation, he does not keep the knowledge thereof unto himself: but
being established in the truth, endeavors to confirm others in the same, by
exhorting them to observe the conclusion of good men, wherein they shall find
such matter of desired comfort, as may encourage them to pass through all the
difficulties which this present evil world can oppose against them.

The words now read contain two parts. The first part shows what be the
properties of a good man. The second part sets down what the end of a good
man is; to wit peace.

The properties, they are two, which I may call the essential parts of a
Christian: The former is perfection: the latter righteousness. For as man
consists of two parts, the soul and body; so a good man is composed of two
constituting properties. And as by the motions and actions of the body we
conclude, that it is informed with a living soul; so by the works of
righteousness we prove, that there is an inward perfection of holiness in the
soul. And on the contrary side, as the soul is said to be flowen away when
the body does putrify and corrupt; so we may infer that the souls inward
beauty is gone, when the works of justice are not to be found. For says the
Prophet, When the Kings daughter is all glorious within, her garments without
are of wrought gold; and therefore obserua perfectum and vide iustum, by the
latter know the former as a true demonstration thereof. The end of a good man
thus described is peace. Which words I confess are diversely understood: but I
follow the last and best translation, which is most agreeable to the original.
And thus having broken the words into their natural parts, let us see what
nourishment we may get by every several cantill: for sure I am that there is
not a crumme in any parcel of these words, but it contains good meat for a
Christian soul to feed upon.

Obserua perfectum.
Irenaeus says, that he is perfect which was not made: Perfectus infectus.
and that is only true of God, who is that Exodus 3.14.
I am that sent Moses to Pharo, who is that Genesis 17.1.
all-sufficient that spoke unto Abraham, that Reu. 1.18.
Alpha and Omega, as S. John calls him. For as Justin Martyr says, the
perfection of God is to be of himself and of no other, (...).
and whatsoever tends to perfection is from him, as the Author and James 1.17.
giver of it. Which being true, what then should our Prophet mean to call any
man perfect, of whose weakness and wants, besides the report that the sacred
word does make, which is both fidei and morum norma, our daily experience does
let us see, what lamentable defects are in all the seed of Adam. To soil this
doubt, I answer, that there is a perfection in every Christian, which is that
excellent form, by which he differs from all the sons of darkness, and
out of which issues streams of a virtuous conversation. But this perfection
is not in an absolute freedom from sin, but in our union with Christ, in
Coloss. 2.9.
whom does dwell all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and through whom all
believers are made partakers of the godly Nature, as Saint Pet. 2.1.4.
Peter speaks, and out of whom they receive grace for grace, as says John
1.16.
S. John. The greatest perfection that man can attain unto, is, suae
imperfection is cognitio, the knowledge of his wants: and therefore almighty
God out of his infinite love appointed a high Priest, even Jesus Christ, the
Mediator of the new covenant, to make that perfect which by none other could be
done. And therefore Epiphanius says, that the perfection of a faithful man is
in cognitione Christi, whom truly to know is John 17.3.
eternal life, as our blessed Savior witnesses. But to come to the point.
The two first are attained in this life. The last is partly attained in this
life, and more fully in the world to come.


The perfection of a good man is either quoad 1. parts, 2. veritatem, or 3.
mensuram.


For the first; those that are regenerate of water and the holy Ghost, as the
Evangelist speaks, are by the Apostle called newborn Babes. Now as every
child so soon as he is borne is a perfect man, because he has all the parts
and lineaments of a man, howbeit he cannot show any perfect action of a man:
even so those that have received the immortal seed of Gods truth, and Pet.
1.2.1.
hunger after the sincere milk of Gods word, that they may grow thereby, are
perfect in him who is the Col. 2.10.
head of principalities and powers; perfect (I say) in respect of all the parts
of sanctity and true holiness, though they want such excellent use thereof,
as those have which are of riper years. And therefore the Gal. 6.
Apostle calls all believers new creatures, both because they are the
workmanship of God, and secondly, because they have the stamp of perfection
upon them, as the creatures which God did make, of which it is said, he saw
that they were good.

And hence appears the love of God toward the weak ones in faith, that they
are by him respected and accounted of as perfect in their weakest infancy:
much like a loving father, who though his child can perform no duty of a man,
yet does he provide meat to nourish him, clothes wherewith to cover him, means
to preserve and keep him, yea a portion and an inheritance for him.

Secondly, as Gods tender love appears hereby: so is man's happiness seen
herein. Who though he be feeble and weak, to any thing that is good, either
for the helping of himself or others: yet is he cared for and esteemed of, as
though he were perfect in the performance of all duties of a sonne-like
obedience, and lacked nothing. For which cause you shall find it often in the
Scriptures, that when a good man considers of his own estate, he wants
neither matter to complain of, nor time of repentance. Yet when God looks
upon Ioh. 1.47.
Nathaniel under the Fig Tree, upon Job. 1.1.
Job in the East country, upon Luke 1.6.
Zachary and Elizabeth: he speaks of them as though they were void of all
defects and wants: for so clear is the crystal glass of his love, through
which he beholds his own image in man, that howbeit S. Paul cries out
against his own Romans 7.24.
wretchedness, yet God assures him, he being in Christ, that nothing can Romans
8.1.
condemn him, nor separate him from eternal happiness. And thus much for
perfection Quoad parts.

The second is perfection Quoad veritatem. Whilst man does dwell in the house
of clay, he has faith, but with some doubting; hope, but with distrust; love,
but with dislike. Yet because his faith is true faith, God accounts of him as
complete: for when the new man of righteousness, and Ephesians. 4.22.
holiness of truth, is put on, as S. Paul speaks, there is the perfect
object of Gods love. And hence is that of S. Bern. Veritas liberat, saluat,
lauat, It freeth a man from the intanglements of sin, it saves him from
running with hypocrites into the pollutions of unjust and dissembling
behauiours, yea it will wash him from the swinish fashion of those who hold the
verity of God in unrighteousness. The Scribes and Pharisees made a glorious
show of virtue: but because it wanted truth, therefore all their pomp came to
the ground, and they had their Matthew. 6.2.
reward. For their actions wanting the aduerbe, were to them like the Apples of
Sodom, nothing but dust and corruption.

That word which Vatablus translateth in my Text perfectum, others have
converted veritatem, and some simplicitatem, and others integrum, and all to
teach us, that simplicity and truth, in the profession of holiness, gives a
man the name of perfection in Gods account. For he only is a Homo quadratus.
tetragoule and a foure-squared Christian indeed, who does toto pectore Deum
colere, endeavor to honor and serve God with a sound heart void of
hypocrisy: I know the best child of God finds in himself the law in Romans
7.23.
his members, fighting against the law of his mind: is he therefore destitute
of the truth of Gods grace? not so. Is wine no wine, because there be many Lees
in the same? Is water no water, because it is cumbred and troubled with mud? it
were an unreasonable speech to say so. And it is no less disagreeing from the
truth, to think and say, that a man is no child of God, because he is
troubled with the incombrances of sin. For the Lord beholding in whom there
is true faith, hope, and brotherly charity, which is vinculum perfectionis, as
Col. 3.
S. Paul speaks, esteems them for perfect, who are simply plain and
plainly simple without hypocrisy.

The third perfection which I named to you in the beginning, is perfection
quoad mensuram: what? to a measure without defect or want, that is impossible
to be attained in this world. The perfection then which we must look for in
the third place is, to Phil. 3.13.
strive forwards to that which is set before, and not to be weary of well
doing, till we come to a full measure of sanctity void of sin, which only is
attained in the world to come. The Apostle says, Quotquot perfecti sumus ita
sentiamus. S. Augustine upon those words thus speaks, Quotquot perfect
currimus, hoc sapimus quod nondum perfecti sumus, and illic perficiemur quo
perfect currimus. So many as run perfectly understand thus much, that as yet
they have not attained perfection, but shall be made complete there whereto
they manfully run. Be you Math. 5.48.
perfect, like as your heavenly father is perfect, says Christ, that is, says
Augustine, ad perfectionem contendite, aim at perfection as the mark,
whereupon you set your eyes in all your Christian attempts. For as the heavens
and the earth are said to be perfect, because they move and abide to that end
whereunto God did appoint them, as Moses speaks: so he that is borne not of
the John 1.13.
will of the flesh, but of the will of God, is said to be perfect, because he
imploieth the parts of his body, and the powers of his soul, as Romans 6.
weapons of righteousness, till they come to the Psalm. 16.
fullness of joy; and neither stands still, nor turns back, but goes on
until he have finished his course, and have the end of his faith, which is the
Pet. 1.1.
salvation of his soul. In this world we see in part, we know in part; and
the greatest measure to be attained in comparison of that which by hope is
expected, is but like a drop of water to the Ocean, or a sand by the seashore
to a mighty mountain. But there will be a time when we shall come unto a
perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13.
and unto a measure of the fullness of the age of Christ Jesus: and when that
that is perfect is come, 1. Cor. 13.10.
then that which is imperfect shall be abolished. The conclusion then of this
point is this, that howbeit absolute perfection is only in the author of all
things, yet the true members of Christ have received the first fruits of
perfection, and are said to be perfect both in regard of their integrall parts
of sanctity, and in respect of the truth of holiness, and lastly for that
they enjoy a measure of perfection in the kingdom of grace, which shall be
made complete and absolute wanting nothing in the kingdom of glory. For then
our knowledge which was mixed with ignorance, shall be so excellent, that we
shall know as we are known: then we shall see him, not in a glass, but
clearly and without all defect: then our faith shall be turned into fruition,
hope into having, love shall abide without dissimulation, and in a word we
shall be like him says John 1.3.3.
S. John, and see him as he is. Now as this excellent knowledge is afforded
unto us out of these words: so the Pelagians have gathered deadly poison from
the same, to wit, That man may come to such a height of perfection, as to be
deuoid of all sin in this world. Against whom S. Hierome writes. The
Valentinians, as Irene reports, have taught the like, and that they have
seed of election in them: The Manichees thought that renati, such as were
regenerated, came to that perfection in this life, that they could not sin
any more, si maxim velint, howbeit they did much desire it. Against all these
do but apply the distinction of perfection before handled, and set down, and
we shall see how vain and idle, yea how blasphemous these opinions are. But
to leave this to the wise discretion of the hearers, let us see what may be
said against them.

First, the Scripture tells us, that we are all the seed of uncleanness:
Job. 15.15.
and in reason no clean thing can come from that which is polluted. Again,
the holiest men that have lived did complain of their wants, and have been
subject to Romans 6.21.
death, which is the wage of sin, as S. Paul speaks. And has not our
Savior taught all his Church continually to pray, forgive us our debts? (...).
which petition were needless in case we had already attained perfection.

Add to this, that perfection consists in a certain excess, from which the
best is so far in this life, that as S. Bern. says, Nemo perfectus est qui
perfectior esse non appetit. And if he hunger and thirst after righteousness,
it is manifest he has no superfluity, either to lay by, or to afford others.
Now if it be objected that our Savior says, whosoever drinks of the water
that he shall give them, shall never be more a Which words are understood of
the estate of a true believer in this world.
thirst; the answer is ready, that thirst is not opposed to further desire of
the increase of grace, and of the blessed Image of God, which is not fully
restored till we possess heaven, (...).
but to a total and final falling from grace, which the child of God shall
be free from, howbeit he find many wants in himself, and feel many
oppositions against him whilst he is clothed with the house of clay. Not to
proceed further in this point, the saying of S. Augustine is good: Si qua
fidelium hic esse potest perfectio, in eo consistit, vt se imperfectos esse
agnoscant: If there be any perfection in this life, it is to know our wants,
and to desire a supply out of the rich treasure of Gods goodness. And where
this is truly in any man, it will be seen by the practice of righteousness,
which is the second property of a good man.

Behold the just.
Where integrity and soundness of faith is in the heart, it is like fire,
which yields either heat, or flame, or both. Let David's heart be hot within
him, words of grace will issue from him. For as the spirit of man is not idle,
so the spirit of grace in man is ever working the thing that is holy, either by
suppressing evil, or acting good: wherein is the life of true justice and
righteousness. But to come more nearly to the point. This just man which
David would have us to behold, must be considered in his four dimensions. The
first whereof is his altitude, and that is in his ability to know the rule of
righteousness, and to take the true height thereof. For what likelihood is
there for a man to do justice, and to be ignorant of the boundaries that he
must use in the practice thereof? Whence is that saying of S. Ambrose; Male se
rectum putat, qui regulam summae rectitudinis ignorant: He that understands
not the rule of equity, is very like to be defective in all duties of
righteousness. I grant that an ignorant man may do right to another: but it
is as the blind man hitteth the mark, or at the least as he who saw men
walking like trees: and I am sure the former may as well miss as hit; so the
latter does notoriously mistake the matter.

The second dimension is his latitude, which extends to the profiting of
others as well as himself. Of this our Prophet speaks in this Psalm, when
he says, that a good man is merciful and lends: which act of charity is
for the good of borrowers more then of the lender, who oftentimes loses both
his goods and the love of his borrowing friend. Iustus magis alijs quam sibi
prodest, says S. Ambrose: A just man is more helpful and gainful to others
then himself: and herein he resembles the eye in the body, which sees all
but it self; and the Lion-like Sun in the firmament, which sends out
beams of glorious light to all but it self.

The third point in the just man is his longitude: and that is, to be
contented only with that is a man's own, and to stretch out the length of his
desire and endeavor to nothing that belongs to another man, no not so much as
in a wish. For as an ancient Father says, Iustus nil alienum vendicat, sed
cuilibet dat quod suum est: The just man claims nothing but that is proper to
himself, and gives to every man that belongs unto him: to God his due, to
Caesar his own, and that with a willing and a ready mind. And salvation is
then come to Zaccheus house, Luke 19.8.
when he carries this mind.

The fourth thing to be considered in this just man, is his profunditie in the
practice of righteousness, which will not suffer him to damnifie his
neighbor, nor to use any nimble shifts, whereby to increase his estate; but to
build all his fortunes (as men usually speak) upon honest and plain dealing.
And hence is that saying, A good and just man will neither damno afficere
quenquam, nec aliquid dolo annectere rei suae, tricks and shifts are odious to
a righteous man, yea though he might gain Kingdoms thereby. Such a one was just
Job, whose greatness was a veil to protect the poor, and no privilege to
set him on work to prey upon the distressed and needy, as in our days it is
(too common) wherein, alas, many make themselves great by using tricks and
shifts: and some use their greatness amongst their poor neighbors, as a
means to maintain their own prodigal and sinful courses, or to make rich
their lewd posterity, who spend all amongst harlots and varlets, which
themselves have wretchedly gotten by keeping back the laborers wages,
skinning of the poor, and grinding the face of the needy; a sin that in
these days and in this country cries for vengeance. But I speak of a just
man, who is far from this behavior; and the lively representation whereof we
may see in these particulars: that he understands the ways of equity, that
he lives not as borne to himself, but for the good of others, that he is
content with that he has, and lastly, that neither with Absolons lying
flattery, nor with Gehesies covetous briberie, nor with Achitophels subtle
policy, nor with the Lyonlike might and power he will add one cubite unto his
stature; but still keeping an upright heart inward, and holding himself within
the confines of righteousness outwardly, he passes on in this world until he
come to the appointed period of his life; and mark him then, for finis illius
pax, his end is peace.

His end is Peace.
David does not say his life is in peace, but his end; for, for the most part
the best men bear the heauiest crosses, and are troubled with most
oppositions, being in this world like a Lilley amongst the Thorns, and have
their dwelling where Satan's thrones are set up: and this is their portion,
which notwithstanding they patiently undergo that they may finish their course
with joy.

The Hebrews understand by this word Peace, al happiness; the Grecians a
settled quietness of the soul, in which, as in a sure harbor, it rests in
much joy and true content: agreeing to which is that of S. Augustine, Pax est
serenitas mentis, tranquillitas animi, and this peace is either with God, whom
we never saw, and yet love him and believe in him; or peace of conscience; or
peace with men: the first is from the assurance of our Romans 5.1.
justification by Christ Jesus: the second is grounded upon the former; for
from the knowledge that David is at one with God, is David's Psalm. 4.
in pace accubabo pariter and dormiam, I will lie down in peace and rest,
because thou Lord art my safeguard: the last is from both the former; for who
so is at one with God and himself, will seek peace and ensue it, as Genesis 14.
Abraham did with Lot. The first, which is peace with God, gives a man
boldness to come to the Throne of grace, with an assured Heb. 4.16.
confidence to find favor in the needful time of trouble. The second is the
brazen wall of man's defense, within which there is a Pro. 15.8.
continual feast and domestical joy. The third is so good a blessing, that,
as Cass. speaks, it is imago angelicae conuersationis, the lively image of the
Angelical behauior. But me thinks I hear some man saying unto me, That it is
impossible a good man should be at peace with the ungodly; for what peace, so
long as the witchcrafts and whoredom of Iesabell remain in great abundance?

I answer; Pax est concordiam habere cum moribus probis, litigare cum vitijs,
true peace is to be at one with men's good behavior; but always to stand out
at the swords point against all sinful and wicked attempts: and therefore when
we see the just and upright to be at odds with the workers of iniquity, it is
not in any dislike of their persons, but of their conditions. And out of all
this appears a great difference betwixt the sons of God, and the children
of Belial; for to the former there is a true quietness of mind, but to the
latter no Esa. 57.21.
peace. For either they understand not their own misery, and so seek not for
Gods mercy, the feeling whereof brings true peace; or else they see their
faults so fearful that they fly in despair from the presence of God (as
Caine and Judas did) and so have nothing but unspeakable disquietnesse and
horrors in their souls. And lastly for peace with men: they think all men
hate them, Timuerunt ibi vbi non timor.
when, God knows, they are hunted and pursued by their own hearts, which
will not let them be at quietness with others, because they are at continual
iarring with themselves; and therefore even upon suspicion (they know not of
what) they grow false and treacherous to all ^hey deal withal.

The conclusion then is, That true peace, either with men, or with our selves,
and with God, is not in nor with wicked men; and on the contrary side, Mark
the just, and consider the upright man, for his end is peace. Thus much shall
be sufficient for the meaning of the words of my Text. Now give me leave in a
few words to point at such instructions as naturally arise out of them.

The first proposition is, That the ways of a Christian are obvious to the
view of men, and his actions are such as may be scanned and marked, and are not
confined within the cloisters of obscurity; but like a light set upon a
Candlestick that shines to all that are in the house: and therefore we are
bidden to mark both the perfection and the righteousness of a good man. I
know one point of Christianity is contemplation; but that wants life when
practice does not follow: and therefore it is no ill conceit of him that called a
holy man Mary Martha. For as S. Gregory speaks of Love, that the touchstone
thereof is in the works of charity: so Iam. 2.
may I say with S. James of true faith in whomsoever it is, that it ought to be
showed, and is demonstrated by the fruits thereof. Shall I say that a Minister
is a good Pastor, which nothing resembles his Master the great Bishop and
shepherd of our souls, in feeding and helping the distressed? And can we
think a Magistrate to be a good Ruler, when in the execution of his office no
man can see, obserua and vide, either for punishing of sin, or advancing of
virtue? but rather behold and see how he boulstereth up, or slily passes over
all impious and Idolatrous profaneness. And do you hold them a good people,
which make no conscience to show the virtues of Christ whom they profess? No,
no. By their fruits you shall know them, is an Evangelical rule. And mark and
behold; for where virtue is, it may be felt, heard, and understood.

The second proposition which generally arises from these words, is, That we
may not give doom of any till his actions be duly considered: for they are
Herralds, to proclaim who, and what he is. A good man is not to be condemned,
because a crew of sinful wretches that look through the mirror of their
misinformed minds, cry out crucifige: neither is any ill man good, because
the multitude of sinful drunken wretches prefer him before Christ: then
obserua and vide, will be a good ground whereon to build our determinations,
and then shall we judge righteous judgment, and neither suffer our selves to
be beguiled with supercillious looks, nor condemn the just whose end is
peace.

The last point I entreat you observe in the observation of my Text, is, That a
good life is graced and blessed with a happy death. August. de doctrina
christiana, non male moritur qui been vixerit and vix been moritur qui male.
We have only one example of a man that lived ill and died well, and yet his
repentance is set down with the fruits thereof (as short time as he had): but
we have no example of any man that lived well, and died ill; which Balaam did
understand, when he wished to die the death of the righteous. Of these
Baalamites there be no few, who dedicate their lives to vanity, and yet
forsooth (if wishing would prevail) they would have heaven for their
inheritance. But be not deceived, my brethren, for since they sow in the flesh
they shall thereof reap corruption; and who so sows in the spirit, shall of
the spirit reap life everlasting. Labor therefore my brethren, to spend the
short time of your life which remains, in the truth of holiness, without
hypocrisy; in righteousness without sinful uncleanness: so shall your end
be peace in your selves, peace with men, and peace with God, which passes all
understanding. And thus you see the whole of a Christian man, both in the
premises and conclusion; the premises two, perfection and justice: the
conclusion well suting both Mayor and Minor, finis illius pax.

A Demonstration of which truth, give me leave to set before you in the life
and death of that honorable Knight and Baronet: for the solemnizing of whose
direful obsequies, we are at this time met together; of whose life and death
if I should say nothing, I might justly be accused of unthankfulness to God
for passing by such excellent virtues, as I know the Divine Majesty had
bewtified him withal. And if I shall say much, I fear the ordinary aspersion
of flattery, which blacke-mouthed envy spitteth out to disgrace virtue
withal, may perhaps be cast upon me: and therefore to avoid Silla on the one
hand, and Caribdis on the other, I will speak nothing but that I dare avouch
for truth before the Angels in heaven, and which many in this place can
witness of their own knowledge, before men upon earth. My regard of this
honorable Knight while he lived was not mercinarie, and my report of him at
this time is not in hope of reward: and therefore without any further Preface,
thus much in the Front of my speech I may say, That he was a Gentleman of as
ancient and honorable continuance as any in this Kingdom, and therefore not to
be blamed that he was desirous (being resolved that in law and conscience it
was equal (as himself confessed he was) to uphold the honor of his house in
his name, which for nine descents has continued at this his house at Snarford.

This truely-honoured Knight and Baronet, if you please, may be remembered in
the gifts of nature, of art, of grace, or in the practice of them all. In the
first, he was for person and natural endowments very complete; and by the
second the former were so well disposed, that in his behavior, Adamant-like he
drew the hearts of many people to affect: and to speak plainly, the eyes of
the inhabitants in this Country was set upon him, as upon a worthy object in
his place and calling. In the gifts of grace, this may I report; that he knew
the truth: We were ever graced by him, and in whose company he took great
content.
so do many wicked men. He loved the truth, and the instruments that published
the same: so do none but the good. He was courageous for the truth: and so are
none but Gods secret ones; and from his knowledge the ground of his faith, and
from his love the fruit of his belief, and from his courage the pledge of his
sanctity; he had the ground of S. Paul's reioicing, which is a good conscience.

For the practice of all these graces, let me entreat you consider him as a
husband to a wife, a Master of a family, a friend to his acquaintance, a
Magistrate in his country, and a Christian in all.

For the first: he dwelled with his wife as a man of knowledge, free from
inhumane austeritie on the one side, and void of fond and idle complementing
indulgence on the other; which wise and Christian behavior, was answered by
his virtuous Lady.

For the second, as he was a Master of a Family: whilst he was a father
(though God knows) that was but for a short time; he used that blessing as
though he had not possessed it. And as he was a Master over servants, this was
his care; that all under his charge were bountifully rewarded for their
service, and wanted no means (though to his great charge) to know God. Such as
were virtuous wanted no encouragement: such as were less tractable to
goodness, in the spirit of mildensse he used all good means to reclaim them.
In brief, he was to his servants a fatherly Master, in authority, in care, in
counsel, in countenance, in love, and in bounty; I say in bounty to them
whilst he lived, and in his large portions he has cut out of his estate for
them after his death: so that if any that followed him be irregular like
Gehesie, anointing his fingers with bribes, or ryoting with the evil servant
in the Gospel; I say no more but this, They have not so learned Christ, neither
by precept, nor by their Masters practice.

For the third point, as he was a friend: let inquiry be made when ever he
failed any that had occasion to use his help; and for true affection, he was,
as often he said of a friend (alter idem) or as Solomon speaks, one that
loves at all times: rather with Mordach enquiring how his friends did, and in
what case they stood, then staying till he was sought unto for his help; and
more rejoicing to do good to those he loved, in case they wanted his help, then
fawning upon such as were happed with the thick clay of worldly prosperity.
He was a right and true-hearted Jonathan, and such a friend may I say he was,
as I fear I shall never find till my soul rest with his.

For the fourth point, which concerns him as he was a Magistrate: If Iethro
were living he would have called for him, as one fit to assist Moses. He
wanted no courage for a good cause, and to outface and resist the wicked
attempts and practices of unjust and unlawful disorders: his fear of God and
soundness in Religion, was never questionable: his upright dealing void of
partiality or personal respect, may be witnessed in that general lamentation
taken up for him by the people in this Country: and for his hating of
covetousness, and especially in the executing of his office, his name shall
not die whilst any that knew him is left alive. Who ever knew that he made use
of the countries money, or was unwilling to come to any account for collected
money, committed to his charge for the countries behoof? he was a man very
much employed with the right honorable the Lord Willoughbie, as Deputy
Lieutenant under that most worthy Lord Threasorer, and most wise Counselor,
the Lord Burley. And when in the days of our late renowned and never to be
forgotten Queen Elizabeth (the mirror of Christendom) there was great
employment for men and money, to keep under the superstitious and rebellious
Irish, besides the extraordinary pains he took, and the great cost he was at
to further that service; he disbursed payments out of his own purse for the
country, till Sessments could be conveniently made, and the money collected.
And this can all you his fellow laborers witness, that neither fear nor
favor, affinity nor consanguinity, did ever hinder him from going on in an
upright course to do service to God, and our gracious King. Neither was he
void of compassion in the execution of Justice: No, no, when he dealt with
Papists, or had to punish hard-hearted Atheists (which some refused to meddle
withal) this was his rule, that he would Lapidare peccatum, but saluare
hominem: yea such was his compassion, that I know some Recusants that could not
be persuaded by arguments (for usually reason cannot prevail with them) were
moved and won to come to the Church by his mild, merciful, and loving
persuasion that he used unto them; and such as he could not reclaim, he did
greatly bemone and pity. In the case of Meum and Tuum, this was his rule; qui
iudicat part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus iudex. In
brief, thus did he spend thirty years of that his life, which was in the
whole but one and fifty; never refusing any pains or endeauours, though to
the spending of his estate, the weakening (yea, as many here know, and
especially my self) to the wearying of his body and the empayring of his
health. And let me not forget, that the last journey that he took was for the
service of God, the safety and peace of the King and Country; wherein his
behauior was so commendable, and his speeches so good, as were it not that
these my lines would swell unto too great a quantity, I would set them down as
his Swan-like song within few days before his death. But to leave these
things, the last consideration is of his Christian behauior, which was either
more public; and herein observe his humility, his charitable mercifulness:
or more private, as his unseen devotion and charity. For the first, I may
truly say of him, That he made himself equal to those of low degree, ever
abhorring himself with Job (in the service of God) in the ashes of true
humility; an argument of a sanctified heart, and of a mind fit to receive
further grace from God.

For his mercifulnes, enquire after that amongst his Tenants: and if they
speak truly, they will confess that they have been used so, as few of their
neighbors were dealt withal. Who ever knew him take the forfeiture of any
Lease, or when fines and rents were unpaid at times agreed upon, to use any
extremity to get the same? Nay, what Tenant ever desired forbearance for a
time, either of Rent or Fine, that had to his demand a denial? The desolate
Widows and Fatherlesse-Orphanes, that lived under him, were both regarded and
provided for by him. Secondly, inquire of his hospitality, not only to the
better sort of people, but especially to the poor; and you shall hear that
their souls did bless him whilst he lived, and are now sorrowful for his
death. Indeed this I confess, that in his hospitality he judged
drinking-banquets fitter for profane Baltasar with his companions, then to be
used in Christian meetings. Thirdly, if you list to hear more of his
mercifulnes, I doubt not but many have tasted of it, in his daily lending of
money without pawnes or pledges, or ever taking interest, or forfeiture of bond
(the crying sins of this age.) If any unknown to him have made use of this
his mercifulness, like brodging Brokers, I say to such a one as Peter said to
Simon Magus; for sure I am that he was free in lending to all sorts of people,
both in this Country and some other parts within this Kingdom, Carendo potius
quam fruendo: His virtue in this kind both to Clergy and Laity will appear
after his death. But I am yet in the Suburbs of his merciful dealing. Now let
meenter within the walls thereof; and the first thing that presents it self
unto my view is his liberality to poor Scholars and places of learning: and
herein I might name unto you six learned and profitable Preachers, which were
brought up in the Universities at his cost and charges. Some now at this time
in those places taste of his bounty, and many both in Church and
Commonwealth, toward their education have received exhibition from him till
they were fitter for better fortunes. But to leave persons, and to come to
places: Magdalen College in Cambridge, the famous Library in Oxford, and
Corpus Christi College in the same University, where he was seasoned with the
grounds of learning by the now reverend President of that house, Doct. Spencer.
whom he deerly loved; can tell you that he was a good benefactor to those
places in his life time: and I must tell you that he has given a large
quantity of inheritance by year for ever unto Corpus Christi College in
Oxford. I need not relate unto you how he has endowed the free-Schoole in
Market Raison, with an yearly pension to maintain a Schoolmasters: and that
he has given an yearly maintenance for the planting of a Preacher at Welton
one of his neighbor Towns, where I hear by the Parishioners there was never
settled Preacher in the memory of any man, nor scarce twenty Sermons this
twenty years, except by his means; and yet the Parish is great, and the law
of our Church, thanks be to God, has commanded otherwise. Neither may I let
pass, since I am naming these things, what great care he had to further
Religion, how free he was in bestowing those spiritual preferments that were
in his gift, looking at nothing but how to provide for the good of Gods people;
far differing from the practice of many Patrons, that let nothing pass
without What will thou give me? But he was so free from this sin, that I have
heard him often earnestly wishing, that a law might be made by which the
Patron should be sworn of his free gift, as well as the presented of his free
entrance, without any contract either directly or indirectly. Shall I go on to
tell you of other deeds of mercy? how for these thirty years he gave ten
old and poor men gowns and money every year, and of late added twenty more
to the number: how Market Raison had four pounds yearly toward the relief
of their poor, besides a hundredth and sixty pound that was given to help the
poorer and younger sort of tradsemen by good sums, to pass from one to
another as there was need; and now by his Will has given a great sum of
money to build an Hospital, and a large yearly pension for ever to relieve
such as shall be placed in it: besides the relieuing of ten poor men with a
certain pension, and gowns for ever, that shall be chosen out of the Towns
near adjoining to his house at Snarford. In brief, of late he has been at
extraordinary charge to build, finish, and furnish a house fitting his place
and calling: and I have observed that since the laying of the first stone of
that house, which is seven years past, his charity has increased in his large
sums he gave to the poor in this Country, as though he meant to make sure
the foundation of his house with the works of charity, or hasted to provide a
Mansion for his soul in heaven, before his earthly house was finished. Now for
his private bounty to poor Scholars and others, of which he now finds the
comfort; as it was known to none better then my self. Only this I will say
according to Salomons direction, He cast his bread upon the waters; and as our
Savior says, his right knew not what his left hand did: for many a poor
Scholar that never saw his face, has tasted of his love; whose prayers to God
for him, though unknown, like harbingers have entered into heaven, to take up
room for his comfort in the saving grace of God. Now for his private devotion,
besides his daily reading in the book of God, and his pains he took in
other books, especially in the writings of Bishop Jewel, which he greatly
esteemed, having found singular good out of them, as upon the day of his death
he did acknowledge: This one thing I cannot omit, that every Monday in the
morning he did in his private study recall to mind what he had learned upon
the Sabbath day, and what use he was to make to himself of the same. And then
his manner was to pray, That all the week and the whole time of his life after
he might show the fruit of that his learning, and so he addressed himself to
the works of his calling: a custom worth imitation by all you Gentlemen, and
all other Christians that mean to attain the happiness he now enjoys. If
any shall ask me, how I knew these things: I answer, not by the sounding of a
Trumpet, or the ringing of a Bell, when he went about these private duties of
piety; but by a private conference I had with him of late: in which, as he
asked counsel touching some needful questions that concerned his comfort, so
he did open himself in this matter to me, not with a desire it should be
known, but in humility to be further directed, as in other points which I will
not name, so in this one, Whether it were lawful in his private prayers,
wherein he was to disclose and confess the secrets of his heart to the
Almighty, to kneel upon a Cushion? by which question in what a base account of
himself he appeared before God, it is manifest to all that shall well consider
thereof. And withal it does much condemn the proud behavior of many, which
in public and private prayers dispose themselves as though they did contest
with God, and stood not sighing and crying for mercy and pardon for their
treacherous rebellions against the Almighty; but with the proud Pharisee, were
bragging of their deeds. And thus he spent his life; in which he was an
instrument of much good, a faithful friend to the well-disposed, a merciful
Judge of offenders, and a worthy example of virtue where ever he came. Now for
the time of his sickness and death.

His sickness was seven days: in all which time, howbeit his pains were
often extreme, yet never was he heard to utter any impatient speech. Little or
nothing did he sleep either day or night: and yet this was Gods mercy to
him, that he never uttered any offensive word, that might argue either leuitie
or impiety. For the most part of five days and nights I was with him, Whose
calling was much honored by him in all his procedinges, and to the meanest of
whom he was a worthy Patron aganst all oppositions
and so were many of his good friends, and diverse reverend Ministers, in whose
godly speeches, and devout prayers, and good company he much rejoiced, and did
acknowledge Gods goodness, that those he loved in his life, should be with him
at his death. I confess he was diverse times and ways assaulted by the
Tempter, who usually came and iniected temptations into him when he should have
taken his natural rest: against all which he made resistance by the Word of
truth. And acquainting me with the particulars that were laid to his charge,
when I showed him what spiritual armor he might use to quench those fiery
darts, he would pause for a time, as meditating of what I had said; in the end
he did still break out into these words: Lord Jesus strengthen my faith, and
Lord I believe, help my unbelief. He was much in meditation, often in private
mental prayer, and often he did tell me, that thinking of death he did find no
fear of it, as formerly in his flesh he had done. Upon Wednesday in the
morning I perceiving his strength to decay, and his pains to increase,
entreated him that he would set his house in order, and determine of his
worldly affairs; and he looking cheerfully upon me, thus spoke: Now I know
you love me, as I am sure you have done long, in that you wish I might die in
peace, which (said he) I assure my self I shall do: and for my worldly
estate, I have made my Will, I have disposed of my land, though not as you have
often wished, yet so as I hope it shall stand, and I will impart the same unto
my brother Wray, which shortly after he did. All that day he was in great
pains, often desiring me to pray for him, and sometimes greeuing that his
bodily pains would not give him leave to make a vocal prayer; yet once upon a
sudden with lifted-vp eyes and hands, he powered out his heart in such a
heavenly manner as might assure the hearers that Gods spirit spoke in him. Upon
Wednesday in the night about ten of the clock he fell into a slumber, in which
he continued but a while, and, as he said when he awaked, all my bodily pains
are gone away, but my mind is much troubled with cumbersome thoughts; against
which he made resistance by private prayer, and by conference with one of his
servants that attended him. About two of the clock in the morning I came to
him, and he told me what combats he had with his enemy: and I giving him such
counsel against the same as God gave me wisdom to do; he received it so
hungerly as I was much comforted with it. Presently he desired we might pray
together, that, said he, I may have a feeling comfort of that you have spoken;
which we did, and at the end of prayer he concluded with repeating this word
thrice, Amen. Immediately after he made an excellent confession of his faith,
and of the hope that was in him touching his salvation; concluding that his
confession with a prayer, that God would strengthen him in that faith unto the
end and in his end. After the end of which prayer he lifted up his eyes and
hands to heaven, and uttered these words: Now is my comforter come, and hell
gates shall not prevail against me, and by the power and comfort of thy
spirit I know I shall finish my course with joy, and after receive the crown
of life: from the end of which prayer and confession he was never troubled
with any temptation. Then he being quiet for some half hour, I asked him,
whether he could call to mind that ever he dealt hardly with any man, and if
he had so done to make restitution? he smilingly answered, I thank God I never
took nor got any goods unlawfully, or uncharitably, and I thank you for
putting me in mind of this point. Once more he made a confession of his faith,
uttered his dislike of Popery, professing that he had often studied to see if
he could find any comfort out of the Popish doctrine; and confessed he could
not see any thing in the Popish Religion but ambition, humane policy, and
Heathenish superstition. He often made his prayers to God by himself and with
others: he gave most heavenly counsel to his friends, and to his servants;
and where he thought the love of the world had taken too deep hold in any, he
dissuaded from the same: verifying that truth, That he that is converted
himself will strengthen others. The speeches that he uttered that day were
many, and most comfortable: amongst which I noted these which follow. O my
soul trust still in God, for he is thy rock and defense; I find it is good to
hold me fast by my God. O Lord I have none in heaven nor earth besides thee,
and therefore only into thy hands I commend my soul, for thou art my God and
my redeemer. O God thou have kept me from the womb until now, forsake me
not, but let my soul, my tongue, and all that is within me praise thy holy
name. As the Heart breaths after the water brooks, so my soul thirsts
after thee, O Lord, in this barren and dry land (and clapping his hands upon
his heart, he spoke further) here where no water of comfort is, but that thou
have powered into it only through thy son Christ; and therefore to thee be
honor and praise for evermore. Thus he continued and spent his time, to the
great comfort of al beholders, until his senses external decayed; which he
perceived so sensibly, that he did tell when the parts of his body did die, as,
when his leg, his right eye, his right hand, and other parts were dead: he
would say, now is such a part dead. The use of his tongue God gave him till
within half an hour before his last breath, with which he uttered many holy
speeches, whereof these were the last: Forsake me not, O Lord, Be not thou far
from me, O my God, Have thee to help me, O my Lord my salvation; And now Lord
what wait I for? My hope is only in thee, and into thy hands I commend my
spirit; Lord Jesus receive my soul: and always he concluded his prayers
which himself uttered, or which were made by others, with these words, To whom
be praise and glory for evermore. Yea, when his speech failed we might
perceive him to pray, though he could not utter perfect words, and so to
continue, concluding his prayer with the same thanksgiving, till he
pronounced this word Amen in this sort; A me me en, as though his soul, before
it went out of his body, had been keeping a part in that heavenly Anthem with
the four and twenty Elders, which sing to him that sits upon the Throne,
and lives for evermore. And thus he continued, till with much comfort and
peace his life ended, and his soul entered into the Kingdom of glory (which
now I assure my self he does enjoy, and whereto the God of heaven bring all his
Saints in his appointed time) which was about four of the clock in the
afternoon, upon the eight and twentieth of October, when he had lived one and
fifty years, seven days, and some odd hours: too short a time, if it had
pleased God otherwise. What can the removing of him out of the house of clay
prophecy, but that God threatens some punishment upon us the suruiuors, when
so worthy, so wise, so virtuous, so religious, and noble a Gentleman in the
strength of his manhood is taken away? of whose life and death I have spoken
the more largely, first, to let the Papists see that we preach not, nor our
good hearers practice not fleshly liberty, as they falsely accuse us: secondly,
to let you Gentlemen and Justices know what an example of virtue and
uprightness you have lost. For though I doubt not but there be many good ones
left yet, I am sure you will all confess he was the Bell-Wether in the flock:
thirdly, I would have him whom this worthy Knight has appointed and adopted to
succeed in his house, and the greatest part of his estate, to imitate him in
the course of his life, to whom he is so much beholding for the love of his
name, which has caused him to cast such extraordinary fortunes upon him, lest
perhaps it be said, O domus antiqua quam dispari iam dominaris domino, or
lest he hear Non domus Domino, sed Dominus domo: Fourthly, let it not be
wondered that servants which have lost so worthy a Master; and Country which
have lost so good a Governor; do take up a great lamentation. And for his
worthy Lady, who Rachel-like will not be comforted; do not condemn her: for
the consideration of the comfort she is deprived of, amongst the wise that did
know her happiness in the enjoying of such a husband, will in some sort make
her excuse, and work pity and compassion for her sorrow. Howbeit withal I
must confess, I know none that has more cause of comfort, in respect of that
assurance she may have of a husbands happiness then she. Lastly, for my
self; if mournful tears, or astonishing thoughts could recall him back
again from the grave, I would think my self bound, for the loss of so
worthy a friend, to wish that my head were a fountain of tears, to lament day
and night for the fall of so good a man in Israel. But I have not so learned
Christ; and therefore thus much only will I say: Remember his life as an
example worth imitation; Remember his death: by the sight whereof I do confess
I was better instructed how to die then by all the precepts that ever I read of
that argument. And so mark his life, for it was good and holy; and his end,
for it was peace. And so in peace, I leave him enjoying an eternal surpassing
weight of glory; assuring my self withal, that upon earth semper honos,
nomenque suum, laudesque, manebunt.

FINIS.

