A fruitful Sermon, upon the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. verses of the 12. Chapter
of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans: Very necessary for these times to
be read of all men, for their further instruction and edification, in things
concerning their faith and obedience to Salvation.

GOD IS MY HELPER.


AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue. 1584.

The chief heads of the Sermon.
AN interpretation of the beginning or enteraunce. page 2. Wisdom and
discretion obtayneth credit and auoydeth suspicion page. 3. English ministers
must imitate it, either voluntarily, or by compulsion. page 5. The ministry
is a grace, page 6. It must not be abused: this water must not be stopped. page
7. The persons commanded all go generally. page 9. Magistrate, people,
minister, must come under it, to approve their consciences, and stop the
adversaries mouth. page 9. 10. The law and two applications* page 10. 11. 9
etc. The exposition and excellency, worthiness and profit proved out of the
3. of Numbers page 11. etc. God nor only did institute it, but punished the
breakers as Azaria, Vzza, Corah. page 14. It serves under the Gospel 1. Cor.
7. page. 15. Objection, answered, so ordain I in all Churches. 1. Cor. 7.
therefore every one must keep it, none break it. page. 16. He wishes for
this law. page 17. The want is the cause of all disorder in the land and
evils, page 18. The contrary to the law is: pride, ambition. page 19. Brazen
wall* page 19. Ambition hurts both the common wealth and Church. It is the
cause of discord in the church. page. 20. Diotrephes. page. 21. Scribes,
Pharisees. page. 22. James and John move their mother. page. 22. Preach to add
affliction. page. 22. It hurts common wealth. page. 23. Histories divine,
Moses, Joshua, ibidem. Human in England. 24. Exhort to mortify them. ibidem.
Exhort magistrates to root out evil, and to establish the law. page. 25. 26.
As the Lord has dealt, etc. the exposition. page. 27. 28. etc. The abuse
tends to the hurt of the body: it is shevved in the natural body. page. 28.
29. It is applied to our Church. page 29. Ignorant ministers dishonor God.
page. 30. Discredit the Gospel, confirm adversaries, incorage rebels. page.
31. All magistrates must look to it and ministers. page. 32. The similitude
containing four. 1. Cor. 12. page. 33. First rule: many members. 1. Cor. 12.
what a member is, how named, nothing wants. page. 33. 34. Applied to the
Church which wants her members: every particular has but two members, the
pastor and the sheep. page. 34. She has too much by Archb. Lordbish. as is
now espied. page. 37. Two rules: distinction of gifts. 1. Cor. 12 page. 30.
Ob. ans. in person distinguished, applied, and showed in our Church, desired to
be reformed. page. 39. 40. 3. Rule one head: union: he the vine: the cause of
union Christ, by the ministry of these, we are lead to the unity of faith:
to have trial, rule, government, for and in Christ, not by Pope, Archb. or
Bish. page. 41. 43. Appeal to their honors. page 45. Protestation of the
author, and in the name of the Godly brethren, of their love toward her
majesty. page. 45. Every member must serve others. page. 46. There must be love
to perform duties. page 46. To approve and like one of another. page 47. The
maimes of our Church great, and no man lamenteth them. page 49. A special
law appertaining to some. page 50. The rule known. page 51. Perpetual, and
not to be broken. page 51. A commandment to keep them. page ibid. They are
given of God. Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 12. 52. Graces given: two notes concerning them
1 Every calling must have a grace. page ibi. 2 The gifts, are the graces of
God. page ibidem.
Proportion of Faith, what it is. page 53. A prophet what. page 56. Office
how taken. page 56. A Doctor what. page 57. The proof of every part. page
57. Canonical Scriptures only to be read in the Church. page 58. A Doctor must
teach purely and continually to his own Scholars. page 59. An object:
concerning the doctors office. pa. 60. The answer. page 60. Pastor, what.
page 60. Of all the parts. page 61. Note the vvisdome and mercy of God. page
64. These gifts given in the day of Christ's coronation page 65. Deacon what,
and the proof. page 65. Elder what. page 67. They must be obeyed. page 68.
They are necessary. ibid. To prevent offenses. ibid. Difference betvveen the
elder and the deacon. pa. 69. Shewer of mercy what. 70. Many dye and perish for
lack of these offices. page 71. Good statutes inacted, but because they are
besides the word, they do no good. pa. 72. Want of al these, the cause of al
evils. page 72. The fruit of this government. 73. Enemies to the realm, to the
common wealth. ibid. Secret devises against all good, might be easilye
known. ibid. Prodigal maintainers of popish honor. page 74. Prevented
conspiracies. ibid. Good laws should be kept. ibid. Pastors, Doctors more
fruitfully discharging their duties. 75. Their duties. ibid. Reasons to prove,
that the offices appointed in the primative Church, are perpetual. page 77.
They are sufficient. page 78. The conclusion. page 79.
The parts and order of the Sermon.
These six verses, necessarily inferred of the former, contain a perpetual
law, touching the government of Christ's Church; the continual keeping whereof,
as it is the safety of the body, so the breach of it, is the destruction
thereof. The same is either General, appertayning to all the members of the
Church, declared by two familiar arguments. One of the contrary unto the law,
for the clearer understanding thereof, verse. 3. joined in the same sentence with
the Law. The other, of a similitude, wherein as in a glass, we may see the
truth and necessity of this law, taken from the natural disposition of the
body, verse. 4. 5.
Or it is special belonging only to public persons; that is, either to 1.
Prophets, the disposers of the word and secrets of God, whom he divides
either into 1. Doctors: as in the latter end of the 7. verse. 2. Pastors, as in
the beginning of the 8. verse.
2. Officers occupied about other necessary duties, divided into, Deacons,
Rulers, Attenders on the po



A Godly Sermon made upon the 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. verses, of the 12. Chapter
of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans.
3 For I say, through the grace which is given unto me, to every one that is
among you, that no man presume to understand, above that which is meet to
understand: but that he understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith:

4 For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not one office:

5 So we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one, one an others
members.

6 Seeing then that we have gifts that are diverse, according to the grace that
is given unto us, whether we have prophecy let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith.

7 Or an office, let us wait on the office: then he that teaches on teaching:

8 Or he that exhorts, on exhortion: he that distributeth, let him do it with
simplicity: he that rules with diligence: he that shows mercy with
cheerfulness.


THese six verses, necessarily inferred of the former, contain a perpetual
Law, touching the government of Christ's Church: the continual keeping
whereof, as it is the safety of the body, so the breach of it, is the
destruction thereof. The same is either general, appertaining to all the
members of the Church, declared by two familiar arguments. One of the
contrary unto the law, for the cleerer understanding thereof, verse. 3. joined
in the same sentence with the law. The other, of a similitude, wherein as in a
glass, we may see the truth and necessity of this law, taken from the
natural disposition of the body, verse. 4. 5. Or it is special, belonging
only to public persons; that is, to Prophets, the disposers of the word and
Secreates of God: whom he deuideth either into Doctors, as in the latter end
of the 7. Uers. Pastors, as in the beginning of the 8. verse. and officers
occupied about other necessary duties, divided into Deacons, Rulers, Attenders
on the poor.

This general law, thus inferred necessarily upon ye former exhortation, as a
most ready way and ordinary mean whereby to have certain experience and
trial, what the good, acceptable and perfect will of God is, teaches the
duty and way of all Christians, wherein they ought to walk continually without
weariness. The giver whereof is, not man, but God. For albeit Paul writ those
words and this Epistle to the Christian saints at Rome, yet he was but only
the pen man of the Lords indictment, or (as Moses was) the writer of the
Lords law and commandment. For he says not, I by mine own authority, or
by any gift and grace in me: but I say thorough the grace that is given to me;
meaning, no doubt, that grace of his Apostolical authority, Acts. 9.
which he, being a blasphemer, had received of God, to publish by word and
writing, his will and counsel to the Gentiles, that their faith and religion
might not be grounded and builded upon the weak sand of human traditions,
but upon ye commandment of Christ, the strong rock and everlasting
foundation. Where it is said; I say, it is all one in effect, as if he should
say, I command. For this Uerbe Lego in Greek, as also the Hebrew verb
equivalent to the same, especially being joined to the infinitive Mood without
an article, is often used in that sense, importing not a bare saying or
affirmation, but (as here of necessity it must, seeing the Apostle shows not
what has been, is or shall be, but what ought to be) a flat law and
commandment. So that for a more plain demonstration of the truth, it may be
thus expounded and resolved: for I Paul, by the authority of my Apostleship,
being a singular grace received by the free gift of God, give unto every one
of you this general law, in the name of him whose Apostle I am, inuiolablie
and perpetually to be kept, even to the coming of Christ.

Thus the Apostle makes his entrance unto the law with great wisdom and
singular discretion: for in that he shows his law not to proceed from
himself, or any other mortal man, but only from the lord of hosts, whose
apostle he was; it does not only purchase great reverence and credit unto it:
but also remoueth al just occasion of envy, whereof he might have bin suspected,
and of usurped authority, wherewith the enemies of ye gospel might have charged
him, if he should not thus have do^. But now considering this law is his, who
only is the lawgiuer, which is able to save and destroy: no man can justly
contemn it, or think it of small importance. Also, seeing the minister hereof
was called and commanded of this lawgiuer to write and preach it: no man can
safely envy and contemn him, or suspect him arrogantly to have usurped any
unlawful authority over the Romans, or the Church of God. Now then, if Paul
who was not in any spiritual gifts necessary for his calling, inferior to the
chief Apostles, thought it a necessary point of wisdom and Christian duty,
both in respect of him self and of the Church, here and else where, plainly to
declare, as well who was this lawgiuer, as the author of his function and
Apostleship: how much more necessary (dear brethren) ought you to think it is
for the Ministers in our time, whose gifts in comparison of Paul's are very
few and small, to let us see, both the author of their doctrine and laws, and
also of their particular function? For, if they command us any thing, having
not received it from this Lawgiver, by whose spirit we must live in all
obedience of his will, why should we obey? Nay why may we not cast it from us,
as a vain and fond tradition of man? Again, if they cannot show us the
author of their Ministry, and the grace they have received for the godly and
acceptable discharge thereof: why may we not justly judge them to be either
proud usurpers of unlawful functions invented of man, or covetous intruders of
them selves into the lawful callings for the which they are unmeet? I would
all those which have any public place in the Church of England, seeing they
will not voluntarily follow this wisdom of Paul, might be compelled by the
godly wise Magistrates, to show the proof of their ministry out of ye word,
and the gifts which God has given them, meet for the discharge of their
calling. For the^ I assuredly persuade my self, that the Lord injustice and
mercy would so direct their sword, that it would cut off not only the head,
shoulders, arms, legs, and all the rotten members of popish religion: but
also shred of from the true Church of God, and the beloved spouse of Christ,
all ignorant, idle, wicked, and hurtful hirelings, with all the relics of
Antichristian usurped power, which now to the great and present peril of the
Lords Uineyarde, do occupy the place and room of most faithful and painful
workmen. But a fitter place for this matter shall be offered hereafter.

It is not to be omitted that Paul terms his Apostolical function, A grace
given of God. For herein he gives the Romans and us in them to understand,
that if they shall reject, or lightly regard his function, and the precepts he
gives to every one of them, by the virtue thereof: That then they openly show
themselves reiectors or light esteemers, not only of him and his word, but
also of the grace and gift of God which after this manner appears in him for
their salvation. The which cogitation might breed in them a reverent opinion
of his person, being the Ambassador of Christ, a godly care diligently to
receive, and lovingly embrace the grace of God given him, and by him offered
unto them. Here then we learn what to judge of those functions, with their
gifts which Christ has given for the perfect building up of his Church: to
wit, as of the excellent and singular graces of God. For the office of the
Pastor, and Doctor, and Elder, the Deacon, the attender upon the poor and
impotent, together with this of the Apostle, are all Streams, flowing from
one spring or head, by the which the manifold graces of God, and waters of
eternal life are conuayed into his Church, that every member drinking thereof,
should never thirste again, but have full fountains issuing out of him to
eternal life. Wherefore let all men of what calling or authority soever they
be, take heed least by them selves, by others, or by any other mean, they stop
and damme up these heavenly streams of waters, which should run into the
Lords vineyard to water it: or else least they defile and corrupt these waters
with casting into them, and mingling with them the dregs and filthy puddle
waters of man's inventions, and popish traditions. For assuredly all the
ordinarye graces of God given to us, are such, and so, yt they cannot abide
either addition, detraction, or change: Such also is the giver hereof, yt as he
is ielous over them, so he will most severely revenge him self of all those
yt shall add, detract, or any manner of way corrupt his gifts against his will
and written word. Thus we see what profitable instruction may be gathered out
of this former part, touching the person of Paul, the minister or publisher of
this general Law, as also of that special which follows. Now let us hear to
whom this general Law was given. To every one of what estate and vocation
soever, that was among the christians at Rome, and in them, to all that then
were, or are now of the household of God. For he says, To every one that is
among you: Which is as if he should say, whether you be pastors or Teachers,
Elders, Deacons, or prouiders for the impotent and sick, Fathers, Children,
Masters, Servants, bond, free, Jews, Gretians; public or private persons: I
give unto all in general, and to every one in particular this general law and
rule of life, charging every one in the sight of God, to keep it undefiled to
the coming of the Lord and Savior Christ. Hereby it is manifest, that the law
or Precept following is general, not special: appertaining to al, not only to
some: necessary and profitable for all times, not only convenient for that
present estate of the christian church at Rome: and therefore perpetually to
he taught and practiced of Gods Ministers, learned and obeyed of his people,
urged and established by the power and authority of the Magistrate his
heavenly ordinance. And in so doing the Magistrate, the Minister, and the
people shall by their humble service and subjection unto God, both approve
their pure consciences, their sound and unfeigned faith to all that fear God:
and also stop the mouth of the adversary which speaks evil of the truth,
because many which outwardly profess it, either have not learned, or will not
obey this commandment of the Lord. Now, seeing we know the commandment is
from God, and that the Minister hereof, is the chiefest Apostle that ever was,
and that as it concerned the Romans, so now (they being a sleep in the Lord)
it appertains to all and every one of us, which are here assembled: let us
mark first what this general Law is, then according to the Apostles order,
what is the special derived out of the general, and to whom it is given.

The Law is this, Phronein eis to Sophronein, that is, as if he should say, I
command, in the person of God, every one that is among you, to the wise, or to
understand according to sobreity, as it is translated. As for the words that
go before these, and that follow in this verse, they are no part in this law,
but rather a more full and familiar declaration thereof. For whereas it is said,
That no man presume to understand, above that which is meet to understand, it
is a manifest prohibition by a negation of that which is commanded by an
affirmation. Again, where it is said, As God has dealt to every one the
measure of faith, it is certain, the purpose of the holy Ghost is, more
plainly to declare and express, the meaning of his Law and general
commandment. But first of the Law it self, then of those which serve for
the farther declaration thereof. The Greek Uerb which is here translated
understand, does properly signify to be endued with a reasonable mind or
Soul: wherein because Wisdom and knowledge is, and because she has as it
were, her mansion house in it, it signifies also, to be wise: in which
signification it is used in this place: and for so much as Wisdom principally
consists in a discreet moderation and comelye order of all actions and
works, I take it here to signify by a trope of the cause, for the effect, the
moderate and sober exercise of Wisdom and true understanding. The word
translated sobriety, properlye signifies to have a sound mind, not troubled
with any diseaze, in which signification it is here used. So that the whole
commandment expressed in these two words, appearethe plainly to be this: I
command every one which is among you, truly to understand, soberlye to
esteem, soundlye to judge, and modestlye to use the gifts he has received
of GOD, being fullye contented and satisfied therewith. Wherefore let us
consider, I beseech you, the excellencye, the dignitye, the profit and use of
this general Law. For what can be more excellent, then for every member of the
mystical body of Christ, truly to know his proper gifts, and wisely and
soberly to esteem and use them? What can be of greater dignity and
worthiness, then for all the people of God scattered thorough the Face of the
World, having so diverse gifts and offices, being so far distaunt in place,
by an humble, sober and discreet judging of their gifts, ability and
callinges to serve and worship in the unity of spirit and truth, and in the
bond of peace, one true and immortal King of glory. Finally, what can be more
profitable for the Church of Christ our mother, then that all her Children
according to their age, strength, gifts, place and callinges, should without
hatred, envy, or any neglect of duty, love, relieve and maintain every one
an other, as becomes the dearly beloved children of God? This law well
learned, and diligently practiced, brings with it all these and many mow
commodities. Therefore it is not only in this place, but in many other places
of the scripture most faithfully registered. In the book of Numbers chap. 3.
Number. 3. 38.
we may read and see plainly, how that the Lord did not only by precept,
distinguishe between the calling of the Levites and people, but threatens the
transgressors and inordinate walkers with death. For the Levites were either
called Priests, or by the common name of Levites. If Priests, then either the
high Priest, as Aaron and Eleazar after him: or such as were under him over the
rest, as Eliazaph the ouerseer of the Gershonites, or Elizaphan the ouerseer of
the Coathites, Number. 3. 32. 4. 16.
and Zuriel of the Merarites. Their office was publicly to teach, to pray, to
offer sacrifice, to keep the vessels of the sanctuary. The office of the other
Levites was, to minister and serve the Priests in all things belonging to the
discharge of their necessary duties. And this is the distinction between the
office of Priest, and the office of the Leuite. Hereby therefore it appears,
that the Lord allotted unto every one his several office, to be as it were his
standing place, out of the which he should not step one foot, either to the
left hand, or to the right, neither dislike his place: but fullye content him
self therewith, without envying of any, that were in more excellent rooms.
And as the Lord knew this order of distinguishing offices, to be very
expedient and good for his Church: so he has revenged himself most severely
upon the breakers hereof, of what calling soever they were, or with what
affection or intent soever they did transgress this established order of
government. King Azaria, as we read in the second of the Chronicles the 26.
Chapter, otherwise called Vzzia, was stricken with an incurable leprosy,
because lifting up his heart, he usurped the office of the Priest, and went into
the Temple to burn incense upon the Altar. 1. Cron. 13. 9.
Vzza, for supporting the Arc, which was the only office of the Levites,
notwithstanding his good intent (for the Oren did shake the Arc) was strike^
with sudden death. Number. 16. 2.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, because they presumed above their vocation, went
down alive into the pit: for the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up
with all that they had. All which ought to teach us; how acceptable this order
of several callinges is to God, and to breed in our hearts, both a care and
conscience to keep it, and a fear and terror to break it. But least any
should imagine this distinction of vocations to serve only for the law, having
no use or profit under the Gospel: let us search the new Testament. Was there
no difference (I pray you) between John Baptist, and his Disciples, and the
Disciples of Christ? None between them and other Christians, that were
Baptized and followed Christ? None between the Prophet and Apostle, between
the Pastor and the Deacon? What were all Apostles? Were all Prophets? Had all
the gifts of healing? Were all Teachers? Or did all interpret? What was the
body one member? No, no, the Lord has ordained in his church many members,
yet but one body. Whereby it is certain, that as it pleased God under the law
to establishe this distinction of callinges in Israel: So has he done now
under the Gospel in the new Jerusalem. For our Apostle in the 12. 1. Cor. 12.
to the Corinth. the first Epistle, straightly charge every one to walk in
that calling, wherein he is. His words are these: Let every man abide in that
same vocation wherein he was called. Again a little after, Let every man
wherein he was called therein abide with God* In which words he teaches that
the most excellent gifts of a Christian, which we by faith receive of Christ,
and the eternal feed of regeneration, can not, neither ought to move us, to
loath our former calling be it never so low or base, neither to desire to step
into any other, till it please God to offer unto us some just and necessary
cause of change, and to ad unto ye common gifts of a Christian, some special
which are proper and peculier, for that lawful calling whereunto our desires
are wholly and only carried, and the Lord effectually calls us. But least
any should object that this general law, is not so straightly to be kept of
all: besides that the words of this text will confute him, he may read the 17.
verse of the 7. Chapter to the Corinthians. Or if he proceed and say, it is
no ordinance established, or not in all Churches, the very words of the Text
there will overthrow him. But as God has distributed to every man, as the
Lord has called every one, so let him walk, and so ordain I in all Churches.
Then we see in effect, what this general Law is: Namely, that as Soldiers
in War have and keep every one his standing place in the sight of their
Captain: so every Christian should have and keep his several calling in
the presence of the Lord of life, who has in wisdom and mercy called them
thereunto. For if they do not, as experience teaches in war and in peace,
then they must needs tumble and endanger them selves, vere and grieve others,
hurt and disquiet the church, whose peace and felicity, all her Children ought
to redeem, even with the loss of blood and life. O that this Law were
deeply printed and graven in the hearts of all Christians, and were as easily
to be learned and seen in our lives, as it may be in this precept, then we
should see with no small joy, the Church our mother with cheerful countenance
to lift up her head, which now, to the grief of many, hangs very low, and
whose heart lamenteth the looseness, security, the aspyring and unquiet
minds, and ye continual disorder of her children, which had rather do any
thing, then that which principally concerns them. For, if it be demanded from
whence comes all this disorder, at home, abroad, in public and private
persons, in common wealth, and in the Church, in towns, in Uniuersities, and in
Cities: the cause is evident no man can deny it: father and child, husband and
wife, master and servant, rich and poor, magistrate and subject, Pastor and
people, have broken and transgressed this general Law and commandment of God.
They know not truly their gifts and callings, they have not humbly and
soberly esteemed of them, they have not wisely, discreetely, and with a single
eye judged themselves; they have not with care and conscience discharged their
duty to God. Finally, they have broken out of their standing places, and
burst asunder the lists of their callings, and cannot, neither will be bound
to order and obedience, no not with the bonds of the Law of their Creator.
The causes of all this disorder in all degrees shall appear, and be declared
in their proper places next following, as also the remedies whereby it may be
removed, and good order (the health of both the bodies) restored and brought
again into the Church and commonwealth.

It follows in the text: That no man presume to understand above that which
is meet. Paul declares this general Law, first as you see by the contrary,
that we might the better understand and see by this negation, what he meant by
the affirmation: and also that we might wisely collect the cause of the former
disorder, whereof I have spoken. A wise and usual order in exhorting, observed
of the Prophets, having regard not what ought to be first in knowledge, but
first in practice; not respecting the perfection of order, but the corruption
of our nature. For we being full of pride, self-love, vain-glorie, arrogancy
and ambition, it is necessary that this hard and brazen wall, made and grounded
upon the hard brazen pillars of original concupiscence, should first be cast
down and dug up, with the groundwork thereof, before we can see and feel
the sweet grace of God, and the comfortable presence of his Spirit, in humbling
our proud hearts, and working in our minds a sound judgment. We must
therefore, for the better keeping of the general Law, cast off these two
burdens yt press us down; ouerweening of our gifts, and ambition, which make
the mind not content with her own estate and calling. For as darkness and light
cannot dwell in one place at one time: so pride and humility, ambition and
godly contentation, cannot dwell in one man. So long as pride yt blinds our
eyes, and a disliking of our estate possess the heart, there is no place for an
humble and sound judgment, no room for an affection contented to rest in yt
portion, which God has allotted unto us. The blessed apostle seeing this,
charge ye Romans to put out and dispossess their hearts of those two enemies:
wherein, albeit they had their abode since the fall of our first Parents, yet
being usurpers, they must be thrust out, that Christ whose we are, and he
ours by the eternal covenant, may dwell in us, and we in him for ever. They
be strong men, and therefore will not be dispossessed by any weak power: only
they will give place to the force and powerful hand of a stronger: that is to
the spirit of God, which fills up the low valleys, and casts down the
high mountains. As they be strong to keep possession, so they be strong to
strike, to wound, to slay and destroy, both the Ecclesiastical and Politic
bodies of the Church and Common wealth. For from these two pestilent fountains,
self-love and ambition flow, enuiyng of the good, bitter contention and
striving with the equal, disdain and contempt of the inferiors. Hence it is,
that the governors of the Church think too well of them selves, not humbly
begging the direction of Gods spirit, but expound the word according to their
own fancies: that they desire to rule as they list: devise new offices:
confound those which the Lord has wisely distinguished: challenge unto
themselves new titles, new names, princely prerogatives, and unlawful
jurisdiction over their brethren. All which vices, as they sprung up first in
the Church of Rome, (notwithstanding this admonition of Paul, for the
preventing of them) so having now deadlye wounded the body, and wholly
destroyed and defaced that Church, they have spread their bows and branches
into many places of the Lords Uineyarde, wherein they have taken such deep
root, that it is to be feared, that as they now do ouershadowe the tender
plants of the Orchard of God, so they will in time consume and destroy the
whole growthe, with the poison of their corruption, except they be plucked up
by the roots. For my part, examining the matter with an indifferent mind, I
can see no other root whence these rotten and unnatural bows should spring,
then this high and lofty mind, whereby men do presume to think of
themselves, and of the treasure of grace which they have, more then they ought
to do. Why would not Diotrephes receive John and the other faithful ministers
of the word? Wherefore did he prattle with malicious words against them? Why
would he neither him self receive, nor suffer others to intertain the
brethren? Was not this the only cause? because he loved to have the
preeminence in the Church? 3. John. 9.
Read the third epistle of John. What caused the Scribes and Pharisees to
contemn and disdain, ye base estate and low degree of Christ and his poor
Disciples? they loved the cheef places at feasts, and desired the chief seat
in the assemblies, and greeting in the markets, and to be called of men Rabby,
Rabby: was not this because they were highminded? Why did James and John, and
their mother, moved by them, desire to be cheifest in the kingdom of Christ?
Or why did the other disciples disdain at this request? Was it not only because
their hearts were puffed up with pride, vainglory, and ambition? Why did some
preach to add affliction unto Paul's bonds? Was it not because they thought
better of themselves and their gifts, then of him and his gifts? and by
envying him troubled the Church? O therefore how necessary is it for us that
be of the Church, to beat down this brazen wall of pride, presumption, and
ambition, which cause all these disorders among us, that God may rear up in
our hearts the new fortress of a sound, discreet, humble and sober mind,
and so make us sincere obseruers of this general Law. All these things I have
spoken do sufficiently teach, how some Churches have been, and are at this
day sore wounded, others destroyed by these two horrible monsters, of pride and
ambition, which will not be subject to any, nay which will, if they be suffered,
lift up their heads into the throne of the Lord. Now to the Comman wealth,
wherein if we shall ask the wisest men of all ages that be past, either
religious or profane, they will tell you yt which by long and certain
experience they have learned: namely, yt this proud and ambitious surprising of
gifts, disliking of men's proper dealings, have been ye disturbers, I might say,
ye destroiers of families, tribes, towns, cities, kingdoms and empires. So
Moses, Iehosua, David and the prophets, have left in their writings this to be
learned of such as will read the^. The profane writers both Gretians and
Romans, which have registered ye diversities, cha^ges, ouerthrows and ruins of
common wealths, do teach the same better then the time will suffer me
perticulerly to rehearse. But to omit the ancient monuments and histories of
the old time, and to come to our own country: did ever any man harden his
heart here in England against lawful regiment, which has not been full of
pride and ambition? Can the sober minded man, resting and taking his felicity
in his base and low calling, lift up his hand to pluck the regal crown, from
the head of the lawful governor? No, no, dearly beloved, no more then a heavy
stone, can ascend into the highest region of the firmament. It is the light
head and the aspiring mind, which through pride and ambition, flies into the
Princes palace. Seeing then yt these two vices of pride and ambition, do not
only eternally co^denm such as are infected with them (which is most fearful)
but also wound and destroy the society of the saints, and the policy of
kingdoms: seeing that the Lord by his Apostle here, does so straighty forbid
them, as the most dangerous enemies unto this general Law: I am to charge
you in the name of Christ, from the highest to the lowest, to throw down your
selves before the majesty of God, craving earnestly ye grace of his spirit to
mortify these evil affections, so yt they may have in them neither poison to
kill the soul, nor power to hurt ye Church or common wealth. And for you that
are ye ministers of God, and our governors, if you will learn how to establishe
this general law, and to remedy all the abuses thereof, behold this must be
your wisdom. First pluck up by the roots thorough the ministry of the
word, and the authority of the swoorde, all proud and high looks, arrogant
and ambitious persons: set before your eyes the Godly zeal of David. Him
(says David) that has a proud look and high heart, I can not suffer. Again,
Betimes will I destroy all the wicked in the land, that I may cut off all the
workers of iniquity from the City of the Lord. O that all her maiestes
counsel and all other Magistrates in this land, had kindled in their breasts
such a zeal of Gods glory, such a hatred of all sin, namely of pride and
ambition, and such a love of his sober and sound judgment, which breeds
humbleness of heart, and a mind fully contented with any estate, whereunto the
Lord calls us. Secondarily above all things, it behooves you that be the
Lords servants in magistracy, to establish every one within his charge and
jurisdiction, this general law; providing that every man have wherein to occupy
himself and his gifts, according to the tenor of this law, in his own
standing, place and vocation: and that he do discharge it according to the
measure and proportion of his gifts, which he has received for that purpose.
For none in the Church and house of God must want his office: none must walk
inordinately: none must be idle in his calling, or unprofitable. As therefore
you know your enemies, and how to vanquish them, and also the law of the Lord,
how to establish it: take heed unto your selves, and dallye not in the Lords
matters. For if you shall not betimes by the sword of justice, cut off all
that deserve death by the law, not suffering your eye to take pity upon any,
and also correct other malefactors according to their desert, without
partiality: know for certainty that the just God will require their blood at
your hands. Again, if you shall prefer your own policies and devises,
before the establishing of this general law of God, assure your selves, that
your Lord and Master, whose person you sustain will never suffer such
contempt of him unpunished. Therefore as you hate these vices, and all other
sins, as you love this undefiled law of the Lord, let your hatred be showed
in abolishing the one, and your love declared in establishing the other. It
follows.

As God has dealt to every one the measure of faith. This sentence shows
what it is to be wise according to sobriety, or to have such understanding
that a man may sou^dly judge. It is as if he should say, hereby ye shall know
what it is to be wise according to sobriety, if you mark and consider yt God
has given to every one severally a certain proper and peculier measure of
faith, that is, of any heavenly gift diverse from ye gift of regeneration, which
ought to be employed to the increase of your mutual faith. For here the
Apostle gives no precepts how those Christians should best provide for their
own safety (for that he has done, and does hereafter more particularly) but
how they may best provide for the safety of the church and every member
thereof: which is done by keeping our selves, within the compass of the gift
which God has given, neither esteeming it of greater value then it is, neither
desiring to stretch it farther, and to a more excellent high calling, then it
is given for: neither yet by not seeing, or too abiectly thinking of that gift
which we have, or else envying others which have the same gift in greater
measure. Then the proper sense is this: look what certain and proper gift of
grace God has given to any of you, not for your private profit, but for the
public good and benefit of the body, in humble judgment, discreet wisdom,
and soundnes of mind, consider and think upon it, be thankful for it, let
that be your sober wisdom, let that content and satisfy your hearts, not
extending it further then it can reach, not ouerpressing it, nor thinking too
basely of it: not envying others which have either other greater gifts, or the
same gift in greater measure. For, seeing God in his excellent and
incomprehensible wisdom, has disposed both diverse gifts to diverse men, and the
same gifts in a diverse measure, to the profit, peace, and preservation of his
people: as the misliking of this heavenly and wise dispensation proceeds of
great folly, insolency, and want of judgment; so the disordering,
confounding, and corrupting these gifts, must needs tend to the ruin and
utter overthrow of the Church. For, consider I beseech you (dear brethren)
if every member of our body should either stretch his gifts farther then
they can reach, as if the hand would needs see and direct the body, if it
would speak, etc: or if the head would go: again if the hand should think it
self of greater excellency then the head, or if through envy of the greater
gifts of the eyes, which are more excellent, it would deny to do the office
of the hand: or finallye, if the left hand, having the same gift which the
right has, would envy it, because it is more apt, quick and ready in the use
of the same: would we not cry out of this confusion, as most unnatural and
monstrous, and such as without all doubt, would utterly destroy the whole
body? Nevertheless we see it in the Churches of England, which profess them
selves parts of the whole, and are not astonished. We have seen it a long time,
and yet we cannot be unfeignedly grieved: we cannot be persuaded to fear and
tremble, at the present peril which hangs over our heads. For alas, must we
not look for the heavy hand of the Lord, when we see many ignorant men, not
only void of all skill in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues, in Logic,
Rhetoric, and other Arts: but also (which I am ashamed to speak,) both void
of the knowledge of the doctrine of repentance, and also wicked and lewd in
life; who are yet so bold, so impudent, of so hard faces, that they dare
present themselves to the learned Bishops, and so extend and stretch out, I
will not say their gifts, which they have not, nor the shadow of a gift, to
take upon them the high embassage of their God: to carry to his people the
glad tidinges of salvation, which Christ has purchased for them, with his most
precious blood. O shameless impudency! Shall he take upon him to hold the
helm, that is scarce worthy to sit in the sincke? O damnable boldness, O
covetous Patrons, that for gain present such unworthy men to the Bishops! O
foolish men that will commend the^ whom they ought to dispraise! O miserable
Bishops, that by laying on of their hands, lift up those into Moses chair,
who ought rather to be thruste to the tail of the plow. What does more
dishonor God, discredit the Gospel, confirm the adversaries of the truth,
and encourage the rebel in his treason, then this ignorance and impiety of
the Ministers? For I beseech you tell me; can the honor and praise of Gods
wisdom, be commended by the folly and ignorance of his Minister? Can the
inestimable treasure and riches of the gracious Prince, be seen in the
beggarly nakedness of an ungracious and base Ambassador? Can the adversaries
of the grace of Christ, by looking upon an idol, which has nothing but a
show of that it is not, be diswaded from the worship of Idolles? Can he
bring men from error, which can teach no truth? Can he that is traitorously
affected to Magistracy, become a loyal subject, and never hear his Pastor
prove by the word of God, that all must be subject, not only for fear, but
for conscience sake? Finally, can the carnal minded man, and the blasphemouse
Atheist be persuaded, that Christ is the redeemer of the world, whose
Ministers these be? Therefore as all Christians, are privately to look unto
them selves, their gifts and callinges, that they tie and bind their judgment
and affection to the measure of that faithful grace they have received: so all
Magistrates are by the sword of their authority, which they bear not in
vain, to keep and hold their Christian subjects within the compass of their
limittes.

Now follows the last reason of the general law. For as we have many members
in one body, and all members have not one office: so we being many are but
one body in Christ, and every one, one another members. This last reason taken
from the mutual disposition of the body, is by the Apostle applied, not only
to the Saints at Rome, but also generally to the whole Church of CHRIST,
which, as it teaches an unity of body, a multitude of members under one
head, a variety of duties, and a diversity of gifts: so it shows
manifestly, that this destinction in the body, whereof arises the government of
the whole, making for the safety of the whole and every part, is most
necessary, most profitable: and therefore perpetual and immutable. In
consideration whereof, I will lay out the parts more plainly, least any
should take upon him through presumption, a greater charge then he can
sustain, or the measure of his gifts permit, and the rather, for that there
are in these two verses 4. similitudes, albeit at the first vewe, there seems
to be but one. The first is, as we have in one natural body many members: so
we have in one catholic Church many members. The second, as all members of
the natural body, have not one office, so all the members of the Church, have
not one office. The third, as many members in the natural body have one head,
wherein they are: so many members in the Church have one head, wherein they are.
The fourth and last, as in a natural body, every member is another: so in the
Church, every member is another. Al which particular similitudes are
necessarily collected out of the Apostles words, in the 4. and 5. verses, as
you may plainly see. The same similitudes, though not in the same words, yet
to the same purpose, our Apostle uses in the twelfth Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, saying: As the body is one, 1. Cor. 12. 12.
and has many members, and all the members of the body, which is one, though
they be many, yet are but one body, even so is Christ, that is, the church of
Christ. He prosecuteth it farther, as we shall hereafter see. But first, let
us somewhat more diligently consider according to these four similitudes, of
the state, condition and regiment of the Church of Christ here in earth: for
hence arise four most excellent and worthy rules, touching the spiritual
government of the mystical body of Christ. The first is this: There must be,
and ought to be in the church of Christ, many members. The first similitude
teaches this: the 12. to ye Corinthians does conclude and determine it: for
the body is not one member, 1. Cor. 12. 14.
but many: again: if they were all one member, where were the body? but now
there are many members, yet but one body: therefore there must be many members
in the Church. By a member he means, such a part of the body, as has
received from the head, some particular and necessary gift, fit to help and
benefit the whole body, and every member thereof, as it appears by the last
similitude, and by the enumeration of the parts immediately following.

Now if you ask me, how many members there be in the body: what they be:
and how they be named and called: and what be their duties and callings: the
Apostle him self will answer plainly in the next verses, and perfectly and
fully determine all these questions, saying: These members are either Doctors
to teach, Pastors to exhort, Elders to rule, Deacons to distribute, Attenders
upon the poor strangers and the sick, or else the people and Saints, which
are taught, exhorted, ruled, and receive alms and relief. These are al: no
mo, no fewer. So the necessity of ye relation plainly proves, and these are
such as are able to execute and perform, any duty belonging to the perfect
building up, and adorning of the mystical body of Christ, as shall hereafter
appear more at large in the particular handling of every several office.

Now I beseech you, let us judge indifferently of ye body of ye Church of
England, whether it be perfect or no, having no want of any necessary member,
nor any part unnecessary. For if nature lack any one, be it never so base, if
it be but one toe she is sorry, she is grieved, she lame^teth, she iugeth her
self maimed: yea, she would redeem it with the peril of loosing the rest: such is
her love and desire to appear in her beautye and perfection. The Church of God
in England (dear Christians) which is the beloved spouse of Christ, which
desires to appear most beautiful and perfect in the eyes of her lover, she
wants her Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons and her Attenders upon the
poor, therefore she hangs down her head for heaviness, her eyes be bleared
with tears, her cheeks be defiled with the water of her eyes, her heart is
heavy with sorrow, her bones are withered with dryness, her whole body is
clothed in sackcloth, she lies in caves and dens, being almost ashamed to
show her face, having so deformed and maimed a body: Cant. 5. and 6.
Which ought to be as bright as the Sun, and as fair as the Moon: yea, of
ten thousand the chiefest. Again on the other side, if nature do epsy in the
body any superfluous member, as if she have three hands, three feet, or six
fingers, by and by she mislyketh her self, she hates the superfluity, she
laboreth to cut it off, because she is contended with her self, desiring no mo
parts then she has: nay, hating if it be but a knob of flesh, that is more
then needs. She would have many members, but not too many: she would have all
her members, she would want none, least she should appear either monstrous,
which is fearful, or maimed, which is hateful. Even so is it with the Church
and spouse of Christ in England. For, as she is grieved for the lack of those
parts which are wanting: so she abhors and loatheth such as are abounding:
as namely, the callinges of Archbishops, Bishops, deanes, Archdeacons, Deacons,
Chauncellers, Commissaries, Officials, and all such as be rather members and
parts of the whore and strumpet of Rome, then of the pure virgin and Spouse of
the immaculate Lamb. Therefore she desires these (if they will needs be of
her body) to show that they be created of God, and united to her by Christ her
head. If they will needs be of the heavenly Jerusalem, let them show that
they came down from heaven, and who gave them from thence? For the Apostles
never knew them, Sion has not heard of them: Jerusalem which is above, will
not acknowledge them: the watchmen, no doubt, being a sleep, they have crept
into the City of the Lord. But now they are espied: now the Church complayneth
of them, both because they have no title, nor interest in it, as public
members: and also because by the length of their unlawful swoordes, they keep
out lawful members of the body. We therefore that are the Lords
remembrauncers, must never let him rest, till he have expelled them out of
Jerusalem, wherein they have no right to exercise such unlawful authority.
Therefore we humbly desire and beseech all that are in higher places, and have
access unto her excellent Majesty, that they would for the love they bear to
the Church of Christ, in tender compassion look upon our Church, which makes
so just a complaint: that they would send for the Preachers of the word,
enquire what is lacking, and what is too much, and so repair and build up the
walls of Jerusalem, the praise of the world.

The second rule is, that the members of the body must have but one office:
that is, every one his several and distinct office. For God is not the author
of confusion, but of good order, and necessary distinction. So says Paul:
There are diversity of gifts and administrations, of operations: yet but one
spirit, 1. Cor. 12. 4. 5
one Lord, one God which works all in all. And least any should object that
this may be, and yet no let but that one man having many gifts may have
diverse offices; for though they be diverse one in respect of an other, yet they
may agree in one man: we must consider that the Apostle speaks here, of
diverse members of one body, and means yt every one must have his several
gift, yt makes a several office for the common profit of others. This several
and special gift binds to one several and special office. For the same
Apostle teaches, that those gifts are not only distinguished in nature, but
also in person: saying, To one is given the word of wisdom, 1. Cor. 12. 8.
unto an other the word of knowledge. etc. Therefore every person or member
of the Church, must have his own proper and several office, that he may use
it to the common commodity of all his fellow members. If the natural members
of the body do perfectly perform their several duties, then it must needs
go well with the body, and nature must needs delight and take great pleasure
in it: but if contrarily, one member do encroch upon the office of an other, it
must needs tend to the destruction of the body. So assuredly the estate of the
Church is best, and most flourishes, when there is neither too many, nor too
few members, according to the first rule, neither confusion of offices
according to the second. Seeing then (beloved) in our church the Deacon
encrocheth upon the office of the Pastor, (for he prateth openly and ministers
the Sacraments) women upon the office of men (for they baptize) private men
upon the office of public persons, (for one man does suspend from the
Sacraments and excommunicate): the Doctor upon the office of the Pastor,
(for both indifferently teach, exhort, and minister the sacraments) the
Ecclesiastical person upon the office of the civil Magistrate: and
contrarily, the civil upon the Ecclesiastical (for they interchangeablye
handle and discide civil and Ecclesiastical controversies,) seeing I say,
here is no distinction, but confusion: no contenting with one duetye, but
encroching upon many, no wise order in government, but a foolish and
pernicious shuffeling together of diverse duties, which the Lord has here
and else where, in sundry places of his word distinguished: have we not just
and necessary cause to beseech and pray such as be in authority, not to suffer
their eyelids either to slu^ber or sleep, til they have removed these
superfluities, supplied these wants, and reformed this intolerable confusion,
that the body of the Church may appear in her perfect beauty and health:

The 3. rule is, these many members must have but one head, to whom they are
most nearely and surely united, and of whom they must be only and perpetually
ruled. All the parts of the natural body, because they are by many iointes and
bands fitly and surely coupled to the head, they receive life, sense, power,
motion and strength to perform their duties, and mutually to help one
another, and all this is done by the virtue of this natural union. For if that
were not, no part were able to serve either it self, or any other: so that
being in this union they live, being severed they dye and perish. Even so it
fares with the members of ye Church: for they being by spiritual ioints and
hands, surely united and knit to Christ their head, he conuayeth into every
one by his spirit and faith, life to quicken them, wisdom to lighten them,
sense for feeling, and all other graces, and strength to defend them against
all adversary power, and to bring them to the perfect union and fellowship,
which is in himself. We are the tender branches, he is the vine: if we be in
him, we shall receive spiritual nourishment to life everlasting, and al things
that appertain to our health; if we be out of him, we can not but die, and
that eternally. He only is the vine whereinto we must be graffed: he only is
the band that binds us unto him: the branches that are not in the vine, must
needs wither and die: if he bind us not unto him self, we must needs
scatter abroad, and fall asunder one from an other. He only is the cause of
all union with him self, and among the members, to make all the members at one
with him, and with them selves. And also, to take away all difference and
discord, he has given not a Pope, not an Archbishop or Bishop, (for there was
perfect union before they were, though they falsely bear us in hand, that
these are for the mayntenaunce of peace and unity:) but Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Ephe. 4. 11.
Pastoures and Teachers, by whose ministry we may be fully lead to a perfect
unity of faith in Christ, and to the full age of the fullness of him. So that
he alone by his own gifts, must keep all the members of his Church in
perfect unity, and by them also remove all iarring in judgment, and all
discord in affection. The which harmony no Pope, Archbishop, Angel, or any
other creature can make. O that we might once hear this pleasant sound and time
of this harmony. The primitive church they heard it, yea, they so delighted in
it, that Saint Luke often repeateth it, as though the very bare repetition
thereof had wonderfully pleased: to wit, that the Apostles, disciples and all
continued together in one place, with one accord, with one judgment, with
one mind, with one heart. O heavenly harmonye and unity, before ever ye Pope
or Archbishop, or any such strange calling were hatched. Therefore we are to
beseech ye honorable Cou^sellers to labor night and day, till it be granted
unto us, yt we may have liberty, but once to make trial and experience,
whether we cannot only by the Lords gifts, and by those graces which descended
and came down from the head, set in time all the members of the Church, that
we may once again hear the first song of the first Church, planted by the
Apostles: the which if we can (as no doubt the Lord will give us to do) I am
persuaded, as he will prefer it before all other harmonies that have been,
so we shall rest in it without weariness, or desire of change.

Again, if all the members submit themselves to the government of the head,
and only follow it, then there can be neither desire of rule, nor breach of
any good order. But the admitting of two heads and diverse laws, as it makes a
monstrouse body, so a contrary government, both which nature and good reason
mislike and condemn. Yea though not altogether, yet in some part we see these
disorders in our Church. For what else is the sole authority of one private
man, to rule over his fellow-brethren, to chide them, to correct them, to
punish them, to suspende them from their office, yea and that which nothing
appertains to him, to imprison them. And I beseech you tell me, do they all
this by the Laws of Christ?

Surely (dear Christians) we must and will appeal unto their honors, from
these unlawful jurisdictions: if we teach false doctrine, let us in the
presence of her Majesty, and them all be confuted: if we have offended, we
refuse no punishment. We are called, nay we are slandered of the papists and
others, with the devilish sect of Puritans: we are thought to bear scarce good
will unto her Majesty. Well howsoever men judge of us, we are that we are by
ye grace of God, and for my self I will answer (and I am persuaded that all that be of my judgment are of the same mind) touching my love and affection
toward my Sovereign and gracious Prince: I protest here before God, his
Angels and you all, that to save her Majesty's life, I would give my right
hand: what said I? Nay assuredly as the Lord lives, to prolong her life but
one hour, I would power out all the blood in my heart, though it should run a
thousand year. And I persuade my self moreover, that if her Majesty should
hear and know the grounds of this doctrine, we should not long pray in vain for
the reformation of the Church.

The fourth and last rule is, every member must be one another member: that
is, having a peculier office, serving to the benefit of all the members, that,
by diligence and love must be employed for the preservation of the whole body,
and not for our own profit. For even the least, and basest member is
necessary, and therefore not to be neglected or to be despised. This rule, as
it requires a diligent and continual service of every member, so it
condemns all idleness, and neglect of duetye. If the members of the natural
body should fail in their several duties, would we not by and by judge,
that there were in them either want of love unto others, or inability in
nature, and also that this defect would tend in the end to the destruction
of the body? I am sure you will grant it. What shall we say then of the
members of our Church, which are so idle in their callinges, may we not most
justly condenme them for want of love? for love is the bond of perfection,
which binds together the hearts of the saints, by her labor and travel she
takes, in helping and releeuing them: she seeks not her own, she refuses
no pain, 1. Cor. 13. 5.
she fears no peril, she disdaineth no baseness, so yt the members and
saints of Christ, may be bettered by her. But alas, where is she in our
Churches? verily she comes not abroad into our streets, she shows not
her self in our assemblies, she appears not in pulpit daily, she is feign
to hide her self in certain corners of the Church. For seeing some preach
not at all, some seldom, some have mo charges then is possible for them to
discharge: some seek dispensations, some faculties, some sue for
commendations, some one thing, some for another: can we think yt they persuade
themselves to be members of others, servants to other members, and not to
themselves only? they have hands eyes, and ears, but they reach to themselves,
not to others: they see for themselves, not for others: they hear also, but
not for others.

Moreover, where it is said, that we are one another members: we must know
that in dispising others, we despise our selves and hurt our selves: for we
deprive our own souls of those benefits, which other should minister unto
us for our health and peace. We ought then rather to nourish and cherish them,
because we may reap great good of them. But such is the blindness and
senseless dullness of many in our Church, that they esteem nothing of the
members, that the Lord has given and ordained for their singular commodity.
God has given us in great mercy Pastors and Doctors to be our eyes, to lead
and direct us in the ways of truth and holiness: Elders, and Deacons to be
our hands, to keep us and hold us in the way, and also to reach unto us those
things we want: Attenders upon us, to be our feet when we are not able
otherwise to go. And yet (O Lord) we despise them, we deride them: nay, that
which is incredible, though they be the Lords own gifts, we will not be
persuaded, that they will, or can do us any good, or bring any ornament to the
body. The Lord for his mercy sake open our eyes, that we may see, and
mollify our stony hearts, that we may love our fellow members, and serve them
in tender compassion for ever. For alas, this is a misery, and a great
vexation of spirit, that many churches have neither eyes, nor hands, nor
feet: some have blind eyes and maimed hands, and yet no man lamenteth: no man
weepeth for the misery of Sion, no man goes about to restore her to her
perfect proportion, and comely beauty. Thus you see this general law what it
is, the two declarations thereof, the contrary and similitudes, how excellent,
how worthy, how profitable, how certain, constant, and unchangeable: for as it
is in ye bodi, so in ye church, keep all, preserve all, keep some, preserve
some, keep none, preserve none: change one, some, or all, then you break ye
Lords decree and ordinances established in his Church. Wherefore to make an
end of this part, it appertains to their HH. (as they will aunsweere before
God at the dreadful day of judgment) to root out all proud, insolent and
ambitious members from the Church and commonwealth, wisely and diligently to
plant, wise, modest, sober, and sound governors: in both to provide that every
one, according to the grace received occupy his talent: that in the Church
they shred of all such superfluous members, and supply the wantes out of the
word: that they avoid confusion, and preserve it from destruction: that they
seek for unity in one only head Jesus Christ, and in the continual practice
of his laws: finally, that they banish all idle persons from the City of God,
and compel every member by love to serve the whole body. If they do this,
then they shall see the Church of Christ to appear to be such a one as Christ
describes her to be in the Song of songs, and as she was in her young and
tender age in the time of the Apostles: if not, I am to conclude thus: O
England, England, yt thou knew those things which belong unto thy peace,
but now they are hidden from thine eyes. Thus much of ye general law
appertaining to al.

Now follows the special law appertayning to some: Seeing then we have gifts
that are diverse, according to the grace that is given unto us, whether we have
prophecy let us prophecy, according to the proportion of faith: or an office,
let us wait upon the office. This special law concerns only such, as be
public persons in ye church, whereas the former touched all in general. And
as by the former, all men were charged to content them selves with their
several callinges and gifts: so by this, public persons are charged to
abide in their several callinges, as in their several standing places,
without breaking upon the functio^s of others, or envying their gifts: and
therefore he does not mention any extraordinary, but only ordinarye gifts,
wherein men must abide to the coming of Christ, and which we must only desire.

Where he says, Seeing then: etc: we note that the Apostle takes it for a
certain and an infallible rule, that the lord had established and already
given these diverse gifts unto his Church. For he says, According to the grace
which is given unto us. And when he says, That whether we have prophecy, or
an office, let us abide therein: he gives a plain commandment, and a
perpetual law unto the Church, to retain and keep them for ever: to public
persons or officers, to serve ye church in them: to private me^, to make their
profit of the^. That God gave them, it is manifest also in other places. Ephesians.
4. chap. the 11. and 12. verses. Christ ascending gave some to be Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, to plant the Church, some Pastors and
Doctors to keep in for ever. Again, 1. Cor. 12. 28. verse. God has ordained
in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, both for a time, thirdly
Teachers, Helpers, and Governors to rule the Church unto the end.

Again Paul witnesses, that, for the adding of that which was wanting, and
namely for ordaining of Elders in every City, he left Titus in Creta: as he
also desired Timothy to abide at Ephesus, that he might be a means to bring in
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons and Widows: for else to what purpose should
he write of their offices: Therefore the Apostle, may well take it for a
received ground, whereof no man then doubted, that God had given diverse gifts,
for the continual and perfect government of his Church (for here he says
they had received the^ by grace): so that upon this ground he builds his
general commandment, which he applies severally to every particular calling
here mentioned. Where he says, According to the grace given me: observe two
things; first, that every ecclesiastical calling, must have joined with it,
some singular grace of God: secondarily, that every of these functions here
named, are the several gifts of the mercy of God (as the word signifies)
most bountifully bestowed upon the Church. Wherefore if any abuse these, he
abuses the liberality and bounty of God: if any take these offices upon him,
not adorned with that grace, which God has annexed to them, he dishonors
the giver, and brings the giver into contempt. If any be an enemy to these,
is he not an enemy to the grace of God?

Behold then, I beseech you, what we do when we speak of Pastors, Doctors,
Elders, Deacons and widows. Uerily, verily, we in the person of God in ye name
of Christ beseech you, whereas we have authority to command you, to receive
these gifts. If you consider the gifts, they be very necessary and profitable
for you; yea, they be the sweet graces of God: if you respect the giver, he it
is that has given him self for you: it is therefore no wisdom to refuse so
good gifts of so loving a friend: he gives cheerfully, and plentifully
powers his benefits upon us, if we refuse them, that shall be such
unkindness, as I am not able to express.

It follows, Whether we have prophecy, let us prophecy, etc. First he
reduces all the ordinary functions, which were ordained in the Church, and
which are perpetually to be retained, for the happy success and preservation
thereof, unto two general heads: that is to say, unto Prophets and Officers,
dividing either of them into their several branches, as shall appear more
plainly in the particular discourse. In that he says, Whether we have
prophecy, by it he means not any singular gift to foretell that which is to
come: but an ordinary gift of interpreting the writings of the Prophets, and
other Scripture, to the edification of the hearer. The Greek, Preposition Pro,
being sometimes in the place of Upon, the word does well admit that
signification, wherein it is used diverse times in the new Testament, I would
that ye all spoke strange languages, 1. Cor. 14. 5.
but rather that ye prophesied. And again, We know in part, and we prophecy
in part. Now, that here it is so to be taken in that signification, it
appears first, in yt he retains it among the ordinary gifts: secondly, in
that he tyeth and lymitteth it, to be moderated and ruled by the proportion of
faith: thirdly, in that he commands the Prophet to abide in that calling:
fourthly, in that immediately after, he divides it into the office of the
Doctor and Pastor: all which, can not agree with the gifts of foretelling
things to come. For that is not ordinary, not always limited, not always to
be retained, neither is it common to the Doctor and the Pastor, therefore it
must needs be thus expounded in this place, as we have said: so that the
meaning is: he whom God has called sincerely to interpret his word, to the
profit of his people, let him abide in that function. For albeit that word is
wanting in the Greek text, yet either that, or some other of the like force
must necessarily be understood, as the Greek Scholiast and other writers do
well note. But what is meant here, by The proportion of faith? To omit the
opinions of men, I take it to be the same which the Apostle before named, The
measure of faith: and the meaning to be, as if he should say: he that is
lawfully called by the church, truly and purely to expound the Scriptures to
the edification of the hearer: let him abide therein, according to the
proportion or measure of his gifts, which are given him to occupy and exercise
in faith: for God has given to some more, to some less: yea, and sometimes
blesses him that has less, more than him that has more. Therefore every man
being called, must abide therein, and occupy his proper talent and gift, with
all diligence and faith, to the edification of his own flock. Whereby we may
plainly see, what a Prophet is. A Prophet is a member or minister of the Word
of God, which abides in the true and sincere interpretation thereof, to the
edification of his own peculier flock. So Paul charge ye bishops at Ephesus,
to do. Act. 20. The word translated office, signifies here all other ordinary
functions, besides the Pastor and Doctor. In deed it is sometimes taken in
scripture generally for all Ecclesiastical functions, and sometime applied to
the civil Magistrate: but that it is not so taken here, it is manifest by the
disjunctive proposition, either of whose parts, cannot by any rule of reason
comprehend both. Wherefore as the Prophet has to handle the Word, so ye
officer has to handle not it, but other necessary duties, wherein he must
also continue with diligence and fidelity.

Let us proceed to the several branches. Or he that teaches on teaching. These
words as they show the office of the Doctor, wherein he must be continually
occupied, not breaking in upon any other civil or Ecclesiastical calling: so
they may teach us together what a true Doctor and Teacher is, how to define
and distinguish him from all other ministers in the Church. A Doctor or Teacher
is a Prophet, which truly, soundly, and reuetently expounding the Canonical
Scriptures, continues in teaching true doctrine to his own people, for the
establishing of their minds in the truth. If any doubt of ye truth hereof, he
may as well doubt of the Scriptures them selves, out of the which every part
hereof is drawn. For the Apostle here calls the Doctor a Prophet: and that
he must interpret ye canonical scriptures it appears: first by the fourth of
the 1. of Pet. Let him that speaks, speak as the words of God. Secondly,
because who knows not, that the Scriptures are given of the holy ghost, and
are sufficient to teach all truth, and that the Church is built upon this
doctrine: Lastly, Christ sends us to the Scriptures, which witness of him,
and teaches by them the truth, and confuteth errors. Therefore the Doctors
must only expound the canonical Scriptures, not the Apocripha, or any man's
writings. For the Lord will have nothing brought into his holy assembly, but
that which he has appointed. And therefore albeit there were great corruption
in the Synagogues of the Jews, yet the histories of the Acts of the Apostles
declare, that nothing was read and expounded in them, but the Law and the
Prophets, not so much as the Caldie paraphrast. For as the Prophets might not
in calling the people together, blow any trumpets, but those which were made
and set apart for that purpose, by the commandment of God. Numb. 10. 28: so
ought not the Ministers of God to expound or read openly in the congregation
any writings, but only the Canonical Scriptures, which the Lord has set
apart and sanctified for that use. That he must do it properly, purely, and
reverently, appears by Peter before cited, he must speak as the words of
God. Paul testifies yt he spoke as concerning Christ, as of sincerity, as of
God, as in the sight and presence of God. 2. Cor. 2. 17. That he must be
diligent and continue in teaching, the general law proves it. Last of al, yt
he must do it to his own people, the word it self proves: for there is a
necessary relation between ye Teacher and the learner, the Doctor and the
disciple. How can he teach except he have disciples? how can those be his
Disciples, which do neither hear him, nor learn of him? The reason why he
must do it diligently, to plant and establish his disciples minds in the
truth, is because we are very dull to conceive and learn: and although lecture
be upon lecture, doctrine upon doctrine, here a little and there a little, yet
we shall remain ignorant, and proceed slowly, if the truth be not soundly
beaten into our heads. Again, because by this means the Pastor shall have
more time in exhorting and applying his exhortation to the present necessity of
his people. But if any say, is this al to teach ye truth to his people by
expounding ye scriptures? must he not also confute errors, and stop the mouth
of the adversary? No doubt he must. But we must acknowledge here the wisdom
of the holy ghost, which means here, by teaching the truth, the confutation
also of error: for the rule of truth is also the rule of falsehood. For as
light expesseth darkness, so truth falshoode, and who is better able to
confute errors, then he that knows the true meaning of the word. Thus you
see what a true Teacher is, and wherein his whole function consists. There
remains nothing but to give him his scholars, and to set him on work: for
as the Doctor must continue in true, sound, and pure doctrine: so his scholars
must search diligently (according to the example of the noble men in the Acts
17) whether his doctrine be true or not: whether it be soundly and purely
gathered out of the word or not. As he is reverently to handle the Word, so
they must reverently receive it, as from the mouth of God.

The next branch or special, which Christ has given to his Church, is the
gift of exhortation, elsewhere called the Pastor: who as the Teacher is
occupied about the reasonable part of the mind, therein to plant true knowledge
and sound doctrine: so he is occupied about that part, wherein the affections
have their abode, to bring the heart and will to continual obedience of the
truth: which is so much more necessary then the other, by how much the Lord
is more delighted with obedience, then with naked and bare knowledge. The
description of the Pastor and his office, is this. A Pastor is a Prophet, that
upon sound doctrine grounded upon the sincere interpretation of the Scripture,
continues in exhortation wisely applied to the present use, necessity, and
edification of his people, and in the administration of the Sacraments: all the
parts whereof may appear in this sort. Doctrine is the ground, every
exhortation not builded thereon, is fruitless and weak, and vanishes away as
smoke in the wind, though it be zealous yet it is blind aad without
knowledge. As the Scriptures are able to instruct the Doctor with all knowledge
in teaching, so the Pastor in exhorting improouing and correcting. It is
certain that obedience is the end of exhortation, and that faith is the mother
of obedience, and that faith leans only upon the Word. Romans 10. Hebrews. 11.
4. 7. 8. 17. 27. 28. Moreover the Steward of the Lords house must be not only
faithful: Luke 12. 41. but also wise to give his servant their portion in
due time. The Lords children are not all of one age and strength, and therefore
their spiritual father must feed some with milk, and some with stronger
meat, according to their several necessity. The diuider of the word must cut
it aright. 2. Timothy. 2. 15 The Pastor being a learned Scribe, is like the
wise householder which has filled and furnished all his treasure houses with
all store new and old. Exhortation must be applied to all estates high and
low, rich and poor, bond and free, learned and unlearned. The Pastor must not
only lead his sheep into pleasant and holesom pastures, but also to heal the
sick, to bring home the strayes, to strengthen the weak, Ezechiel. 34. 4: that
all these duties are to be done continually in his proper place whereunto the
Lord has called him, it is manifest by the reason before used. Where should
the shephearde be occupied, but where his sheep are? where should the
watchman watch, but where his City and Town is? the spiritual enemies of our
soul are many, strong, mighty, malicious, vigila^t, subtle, and full of deceit:
ye sheep of the great pasture, few, weak, feeble, simple, dull, unwise:
therefore their keeper and defender had need always to be among them, to
know their ways, to see their going out, and their coming in. That he may
the better, going before them in all sound Doctrine and godliness, keep them
to Christ and defend them from their enemies; he must hearken unto the voice
of Christ, Feed, feed, feed. He must be instant in season and out of
season, and therefore continually abide with his flock: which to do, as it is
a most profitable duty both for the Pastor and the flock, so to leave ye flock
as many do, and feed and watch where they have no flock, is most hurtful to
both: and therefore all such rouing Pastors, are by cords to be tied to their
own people. As before, teaching contained the whole duty of ye Doctor: so here
exhorting (by a figure) signifies al ye duties of a Pastor. For he exhorts
the weak ones to take comfort by the sweet mercies and promises of God: the
good he exhorts to proceed, partly by the fear of Gods judgments, and
partly by the love of his mercies. The wicked he exhorts to repentance by
laying before them, the eternal and severe judgments and curses of GOD, and
the multitude and greatness of their sins. So that those are but means to
whet his exhortation, that it may pearce and enter in, even to the dividing of
the soul and the spirit.

Now I beseech you consider, first the wisdom and mercy of God, in providing
for the people. Man's soul has two parts, reason or the mind, the heart or the
affection. By the fall of Adam, there is in the mind darkness and ignorance
of the will of God: in the heart there is nothing but rebellion and enemity
against him: so that the Scripture has judged us to be by nature the Children
of darkness, and the sons of rebellion. Now, the Lord in wisdom and
mercy has given to his Church, remedies to cure these diseases. First a
Doctor, who by heavenly wisdom in interpreting the Word, is able (the spirit
working by his ministry) to translate us from the kingdom of darkness, to
the kingdom of light and knowledge: then the Pastor whom he has ordained to
subdue and tame the rebellious motions of our hearts, and make them obedient to
the will and truth of God. O the unspeakable wisdom and mercyes of God, who to
cast down the strong holds of ignorance and rebellion, which by nature
possessed our souls, has given the ministeries of the Pastor, and Doctor,
which being given of the king of kings, and prince of princes, in the day of
his coronation, when he led his enemies in triumph, to show the glory of his
kingdom, and his princely power, can neither be thought to be small, neither
lightly regarded, without great dishonor unto ye giver, who has not left us
destitute, as we see, of any gift necessary for our souls health.

He that distributeth, in distributing with simplicity. From the Ministers of
ye Word, he comes to other officers, which have charge either of a part of
the congregation, as Deacons and Attenders upon the sick: or of the whole as
Elders, showing yt these as they are diverse gifts from ye other, so they are
very necessary in their place and room. The first is the Deacon, called here
ye distributer, whereby appears his office and function what it is. For a
Deacon is an officer which continues in distributing ye common liberality of
ye Church, according to the necessity of all the poor members thereof. The
first part is plain in this text, yt he is a distributer of the Church goods,
appears in the 4. of the Arts and 6. where many brought the price of their
lands and houses which they had sold, and laid the money at the Apostles feet,
to be distributed to every man as he had need. Now the Apostles that they
might the better attend unto preaching and praying, were upon necessary causes
feign to give over this charge unto other called Deacons, whom the Church
elected: as it is in Act. 6. Therefore this is the Deacons office, herein he
must be occupied, to mark the necessity of the poor, and accordingly to
distribute. Whereupon yt follows, yt he must know therefore their estate,
their wealth, their charges, their custom of spending, whither it be much or
little, or moderate, their trade of life, whether they be painful or negligent
therein: that he may distribute with knowledge, wisdom, justice, fidelity,
simplicity, and without respect of persons. All men can not do this, and it is
necessary yt some should do it: therefore least the children of God should in
bestowing their liberality and alms behave them selves disorderedly, spilling
where they ought to spare, and holding back their hands where they ought to
bestow: it pleased our merciful father, to ease a great many, and to lay the
burden upon a few faithful wise men, full of the holy ghost, that all
things in the Church might be done orderly and uprightly in the sight of God.
Thus we see the necessity of these officers, by whose labor and godly care,
the sick, the strangers or other saints, unable to earn their own livings by
ye sweat of their brows, might be honestly maintained by the liberality and
bountifulnes of their brethren, unto whom God has given abundance for the
supply of their want, in such sort yt there should be, as it was foretold by
ye Prophet, and to be seen in the primitive Church, no beggar in Israel. He
that rules with deligence. By the ruler he means all those that governed
the Church, whereof some labor both in word and government, as the Pastors and
Doctors: some only in government as the Elders called by the common name, as
Paul in the 1. Tim. 5. 17. These Elders are Churche-officers or censors of
manners, who by correcting, and admonishing the unruly, and encouraging the
good, prevented offenses, and continued in ruling, and governing ye church
which depe^ded upon the^. Their office was chiefly in assisting the Pastors and
Doctors in admonishing ye unruly severally, by comforting the feeble minded, by
preventing of offenses, which otherwise might arise: in suspending ye unworthy
from ye Sacraments, in excommunicating of the obstinate, in absoluing the
repentant, in ordaining and removing church officers: finally, in handling and
deciding all such matters and controversies in doctrine or manners, as belong
and appertain to ecclesiastical government. The proof of al which particular
duties, I cannot (for lack of time) stand upon, only I will quote the places of
scripture. Math. the 22. chapter, the 24. and 25. verses. Mat. 18. chap. and
the 17. verse. 1. Timoth. the 4. chap. and the 14. verse. Act. the 15. chap. 6.
and 22. verses. Act. the 16. chap. and the 4. verse. Act. the 21. 18. and 20.
verse. 2. And therefore these being set over us in matters pertaining to God, we
must acknowledge and obey them, with singular love and reverence, because they
watch for our souls. 1. These. 5. I have much to say of the office and
necessity of these offices, how needeful they are for ye suppressing of
errors, schisms, sects, and heresies: for the brideling of the lust and pride
of life, for the correcting of the unruly, and the preferring of the worthy,
and in all wisdom, gravity, and vprightnes, as lights to shine unto the
Church, that they may ye clearer see, how to walk in the ways of ye just. But
a long treatise is scarcely sufficient for this discourse, and my time is
almost spent. I cannot stand here to show the difference between all these
offices, certain it is, that they are diverse gifts, and distinguished one
from another. Let men beware how they confound those things which God has
distinguished. For the Elder and Deacon (because yt will more show their
offices) they differ thus: the Deacon he is occupied only about the pore, the
Elder about all: the Deacon distributeth, the Elder admonishes: the Deacon
observes ye poverty of the saints in bodily things; the Elder notes manners,
and conversation: the Deacon searches how the Church goods received are
spent: the Elder notes how every one laboreth in his own calling. Whereby it
comes to pass, yt as the Deacons can make true report to the Church of the
state of the pore, so the Elders of the state of all. By which wise government,
it would in part come to pass, which the Prophets foretell, yt the polluted
should have no passage into the church: that no noisome beast should be found
there, that the redeemer of the Lord may walk in peace. Finally, the Deacons
take heed that no idle person be nourished in ye company of the poor: the
Elders care is, to see that no unclean person remain in the bosom of ye
church, whereof redoundeth no small commodity, both to the Church and
Commonwealth.

The last gift is, the Showing of mercy with cheerfulnes. This was the proper
office of those, which being relieved by the Church, were appointed to look
unto the poor which were weak and sick, and the poor stranger. So yt a
Shewer of mercy is he, or rather she (for the companies of such as executed
this duty consisted especially of widows) which by the governors of ye Church
and consent of the people, was appointed to help ye pore impote^t, and pore
strangers, in those duties wherein they could not well help themselves, having
neither friends nor kinsfolk to help them. A very necessary function,
especially in time of persecution or grievous sickness, when the Church has
many impotent persons, in which time such order is to be taken that none of the
members of Christ, for whom he has shed his precious blood, perish for
lack of looking unto, nor want any attending which they may have, and it is
meet they should. These ministers of the poor, their age, qualities, office,
and conditions, are declared of Paul in the 1. Tim. 5. By the deligent,
continual and cheerful performaunce of those offices, these whom the Lord
seems to have a special and singular care of (namely the widows and
fatherless, and all impotent persons) should be most charitably and godly
provided for. The want of these officers and merciful companies, is the cause
of the death and perishing of many a poor fatherless child, impotent
persons, and sick ones; who are ready often, even to dye in the streets, as I
my self have seen and heard credibly reported, and that, as to my grief, so
to the great infamy of all Christian professors of the Gospel: a matter
therefore of those that be in authority to be looked unto. I grant there be
many good laws and statutes enacted for the provision of the poor, but we
see by experience, that the Lord will not bless and give good success there
unto. For (notwithstanding these statutes) we have swarms of beggars pore and
impotent, till we have by authority established in every congregation these
eternal decrees of Christ, touching the government of his Church. For the want
of this government, as I take in hand to prove, is the chief and principal
cause of all the evils that are perpetually in our Church. For if it be
demanded, why there is in the land such gross ignorance of God? the answer is
at hand, we want Doctors and Teachers. Whence come such swarms of Athiests,
Idolaters, Papists, erroneous and heretical sectaries, of the Family of love
and such like? there are no Doctors to teach, nor Pastors to exhort. Now
comes it to pass, that in a Christian Church, professing newness of life,
and the doctrine of regeneration, there should be such a huge mass of old and
detestable works, of coniuring, witchcraft, sorcery, charming, blaspheming the
holy name of God, swearing and forswearing, profaning of the Lords sabboths,
disobedience to superiors, contempt of inferiors: murder, manslaughter,
robberies, adultery, fornication, couenaunt-breakers, false-witnesse bearing,
liars with all other kinds of unmerciful dealing one with another? Is not the
cause evident? we lack Elders and Governors of every congregation to admonish,
correct, suspende and excommunicate such noisome, hurtful, and monstrous
beasts, out of the house of God, without respect of persons. Why have we so
many poor, so many feeble, and weak ready to die amongst us? we want Deacons
and merciful men, which should faithfully distribute to the necessity of the
Saints, and willingly and cheerfully attend upon the impotent, which are
unable to help them selves. O what fruit might be reaped by these several
vocations, if they were set up and established in every congregation! Without
all controversies the benefits that would redound to us, and this land hereby,
are innumerable: no tongue can express them. For hereby her gracious Majesty
and her honorable Counsel, might truly know within a short time by name,
who and how many enemies there are (a very few subtle hipocrites excepted) to
religion, and the commonwealth. How many obstinate, malicious, and traitorous
Papists, how many Annabaptists, Libertines, how many of the Family of love, how
many Atheists, how many unruly and inordinate walkers, which the^ might be
punished according to their faults: whereas now Archbyshops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, Commissaries Officialls, having contrary to ye word of God,
pulled ye rains of government from ye Elders, ruin and destruction is feared,
but not avoided. Not one enemy of an hundredth is known of ye greater part, and
yet there be more secret enemies, then ye wisest and most provident can thinck
of. Hereby all the secret and mischievous devises against her Majesty's royal
person, against religion, and the whole state, might easily be tried and
searched out, by the diligent and wise search of ye Elders in every Church:
whereas now, did not ye Lord sometimes most wonderfully, for the singular care
he has over her Counsel bring the^ to light, we should have been often ear
now, swalowed up by these secret underminings of the common peace and state.
Hereby we should know certainly, who be those yt so prodigally maintain such
as have been blouddy butchers and murderers of Gods people, remaining as yet
enemies to the Gospel, and false hearted to her Majesty: where as now some of
them have securely boasted (as I am able to justify) judge you of the rest,
that they have had greater reuenews, being Prisoners in the Tower and other
places, then when they were Abbots and rich Prelates in the land: and yet no
man knows how they come by them, nor of whom they receive them. How much
then, think you, is all that is bestowed this way in one year, you may
guess by this annual receypte of some one man? Hereby might easily in time be
prevented all secret conspiracies. For whatsoever conspiracy were begun in any
Town or City, it would easily in the beginning, long before the flame thereof,
be espied of such wise and grave men, as now in some congregations may, and
after teaching and exhorting, might in many more be appointed: and such
attemptes either by ecclesiastical censure, or civil correction of the
Magistrate be altogether quenched: so that our gracious Prince, her honorable
Counsel, and the whole land might live in much more safety and security, then
now they do, and have greater assurance of the merciful protection of the
almighty, then now they have. Hereby all godly laws ecclesiastical and
civil, should either universally be kept of all, or else the breakers come
under such civil and Ecclesiastical punishments as they should deserve, which
were a singular mean to breed in the hearts of the Subjects, a pure fear and
love to their Prince and other Magistrates. Whereas now good laws are
transgressed and no man accused: the Lord is not truly worshipped, the Prince
of some not in unfeigned simplicie reverenced, nor with good will from the heart
beloved of them. Finallye, hereby the Pastors and Doctors should, having a
true relation from their Seniors, touching ye estate of their flock, be much
more fruitfully occupied in teaching and exhorting: for they might with all
knowledge and wisdom, deliver unto every one that which were fit most to draw
him to God, and his eternal salvation. Seeing therefore, that the establishing
of this gracious government of God, will bannishe and chase a way all noisome
beasts out of the Lords vineyearde: seeing it will be such a singular mean to
preserve and maintain the peace and security of the Commonwealth, and all
estates therein: finally, seeing it makes very much both for religion and godly
policy, and is a most dear friend to both, for the love of your
Commonwealth and the Church, I beseech you all to enterteine this Christian
government of ye church of Christ, whereof he himself is the author and no
man. Two things remain which I purpose to determine. First that this
government is perpetual: secondly, that it is only sufficient: wherein I
cannot, for lack of time be long, and therefore will briefly set down the reasons
of both.

For the first, I prove thus. First this special commandment, touching the
practice and exercise of these gifts, besides that it is the commandment of
God, drawn out of the general law: it charge al these officers to abide in
their offices, therefore they are perpetual.

Secondly, all these officers are called here the true members of the body of
the Church: therefore the Church being to endure to the coming of Christ,
these also must be of the same continuance, except you will say, yt Christ is
pleased better with a maimed body, then a perfect one.

Thirdly, Paul commands Timothy to keep this government unto the coming
of Christ. 1. Tim. 6.

Fourthly, all the things where-about they are occupied, as the ignorances,
and errors of the mind, the corruptions of the heart, the unruliness of men,
the poverty of the saints, and impotency of the poor, are always to be
looked unto and cared for. Therefore the offices of God appointed and ordained
for these purposes, are perpetual.

Fifthly, Christ the King and governor of his Church, must rule it till the
coming of him self by his own offices and laws, therefore this is
perpetual.

For the second. First we are commanded here to content our selves with these,
and to rest in them, therefore these are only sufficient.

Secondly, these do make the man and church of God perfect to every good work,
as it is in ye 4. to ye Ephesians and else where, therefore these only are
sufficient.

Thirdly, if these be insufficient, then Christ can not be glorified, as
perfect governor of his Church, neither his word is such, but that something
may be added, both which are absurd: therefore they only are sufficient: if
not, who dare add a member to that body, which he neither made, nor can make.

Fourthly, these functions only are sufficient, which have all the gifts
needful for the ministry of the word and Sacraments, and for the government
of the Church: but all these functions are sufficient for these ends: therefore
only these are sufficient.

Fifthly, if any erect new ministeries, he must either give new gifts, or
assure men that they shall have new gifts of God: but none can do thus:
therefore these only are sufficient.

Sixthly, if men may add, they may detract: but ye second is false, therefore
ye first.

Seeing then these things are so as has bin set forth, out of ye Word of God,
yt this is his order to which al ought to vow their backs, every one keeping
his proper place, and none intruding upon the right and interest of another:
seeing superfluous things ought to be cut off, and such offices as are from
Antichrist, ought to be abandoned: let us every one in our places, pray to our
good God, that he will pity this his poor Church, yt truth and righteousness
may kiss each other, that his scepter may flourish, that the stiff-necks of
the obstinate, and the Iron siniews of the rebellious may be bowed and broken:
to the end these confusions that appear every where: this pompous pride and
curssed ambition, enemy to all sincerity, good order, and true religion may
cease, and only the glory and victory of Christ, our only, King, Prophet and
Priest, may be established, to whom with the Father and the holy ghost, three
persons and one eternal God, be all praise, glory and honor, now and for ever.

Amen.

