A TREATISE AGAINST IVDICIAL ASTROLOGY.

Dedicated to the right Honorable Sir THOMAS EGERTON Knight, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council.

Written by JOHN CHAMBER, one of the Prebendaries of her Majesty's free
Chapel of Windsor, and Fellow of Eaton College.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA


Printed at London by John Harison at the sign of the Greyhound in
Paternoster Row. 1601.

(...) where must be not only good plants for fruit and learning, but also good
and battle ground for nourishment. Lastly, great pains and heed taken in
pruning and trimming that which has been well planted. As if also you
regarded nothing more then that the childrens bread be not given to dogs: the
honey to drones: nor the good ground and pains employed upon unfruitful
plants, or scroiles and wiledings; but such as may flourish in the house of
God, and bring forth more fruit in their age. If others, who are both in
conscience bound, and in duty ought, would but join with your Ho^our in this
so godly a care, how would religion and learning flourish at this day? Nay
farther, Si duo praeterea tales Britanna tulisset terra viros, that is, if all
England would afford but two mo such, what might we not then hope for, or
rather what might we not have had long ere this? For well knows your Lordship
that of the Poet to be most true, Sint Maecenates non deerunt Flacce Marones,
and that, Virtus laudata crescit. Instead of which now that rather most true,
Virtus laudatur and alget.

I will not here fall to lament and deplore the state and condition of this
age, which I might both easily, and justly do, but to your Honor at this time I
dare not, least I should be too tedious. Wherefore to continue that which I
have in hand, all men's eyes are upon you, all men's faces toward you, expecting
that you will hold on, that you will not be weary nor give over, though it
can not be, but that you meet with many discouragements in so good a course:
but from you men look that you should not faint at ordinary and common
encounters, remembering still that of the Poet, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra
audentius ito. But I should too much forget my self, and worthily incur the
censure of Sus Mineruam, if I venture to exhort you, as if I doubted any whit
of your upright and constant course, though exhortations in this and such like
cases are not so much signs of doubt and distrust, as notes of encouragement
and approbation, according to that, Qui monet vt facias, quod iam facis, ipse
monendo,
Laudat, and hortatu comprobat acta suo.
In this way of supporting and succouring good letters and learning, you have
showed a mind so free from that base corruption, which is the bane of all now a
days, neither practicing it your self, nor suffering it in others, that you
may worthily hear that of the Poet, Est tibi animus vindex auarae fraudis, and
abstinens ducentis ad se cuncta pecuniae. For this so honorable, or rather
heroical protection, and patronage in so dangerous times, both the present age
shall praise, and posterity shall adore you. And although praise and popular
applause be not the thing that you aim at, yet because it is due to so great
virtue, you must be content to bear it, neither can you well avoid it,
considering how true that is, Fugientem gloria sequitur. And in my conceit that
of Horace is not unfit, -- aut virtus nomen inane est,
Aut decus, and precium recte petit experiens vir.
Neither is this, as coming from a Poet, to be taken as a fiction, for even
great philosophers hold the same: namely Tullie lib. 3. de Rep. Vult plane
virtus honorem, nec est virtutis vlla alia merces. If this be well taken it may
be well said: for God will honor them that honor him. As for praise and
glory here, I will now say nothing, least I may seem to play doting Phormio
before valiant Annibal. Only my humble suit and petition at this time is, that
these my simple labors may present themselves unto the world, and pass under
the safe conduct of your most Honorable protection. Which thing if I may
obtain, though I be none of them that attribute most to the stars, yet shall
I think my self borne under a most happy star. So craving pardon for my
too much boldness, with hearty prayer for your Lordships Honor, that here it
may be such, as hereafter may be seconded with the true honor of Saints in the
life to come, I most humbly take my leave.

Your Honors to command, JOHN CHAMBER.

To the Reader.
Having now finished this treatise against Astrology (gentle readers) the
pains being past, and hope of ease appearing, I began to be perplexed afresh
with two new doubts. First whether I should proceed to the publication of
these my labors, or rather follow the counsel of him, that wills in this
case to proceed ad publicandum, as good judges are wont ad sententiandum, that
is plumbeis pedibus, and slowly, still keeping our labors by us, till we have
licked and relicked them into some good tolerable form, as the bear does her
deformed whelps at the first. For while they are by us, and in our hands, we
may alter, ad, diminish, put in, and put out at pleasure; but if they be once
out, and abroad, we may give the^ our good word, it is too late to repent: Nam
semel emissum volat irreuocabile verbum. Wherefore our words, are very fitly
termed of the poet, (...), that is, winged words; because, if they get loose
once, they fly amain. The author of this counsel Horace, whether he followed
it himself or no I cannot tell, but it seems some other did, as Cinna by
name. Who as appears by Catullus. lib. 1. epigram. 21. after nine years
study, set out a fine picked poem, entitled Smyrna: Catullus words be these:
Smyrna mei votis nonam post denique messem
Quam coepta est, nonamque edita post hyemem.
Although this of nine years suppression rely upon the precept of a wise man,
and example of a good poet, yet at this time for some causes, I have chosen,
rather by speedy publication to have the opinion, and judgment of others
quickly, then to stand plodding my self upon it many years alone. For by
this means the faults being quicklier found, shall be sooner amended. Now though
I may seem to expose and lay open my self too confidently to the censures of
men, yet I hope, they will deal with me ca^dide, as is seemly for men
professing learning, so that I shall have no cause to reply to any busy
censurer (ne suitor vltra crepidam) as did Appelles to the cranke Cobbler, that
would needs pass the shoo. For my part, I hope I shall be found so far from
partiality toward mine own, that I shall be ready to thank them that shall
correct me; correct me I say, and not control me. For friends do correct, but
enemies and adversaries control. If I should refuse or disdain a friendly
correction, I should show my self too simple, but to endure a presumptuous
controlling spirit can hardly any endure. And thus much for the first
perplexity. The second thing that perplexed me, was whether this slender work
should present it self to the view of all without my name: for at the first I
being desirous to have the judgments of others, thought there was no way
better, the^ by suppressing my name, knowing that by this means, men would
judge with less affection every way, I was not willing in a business of this
kind to trust my self, knowing how through a natural (...) all men are given
to flatter and coxe themselves in their own doings. Neither are we to think
that it fares otherwise with particular men, then it does with several kinds
of creatures, every one no doubt preferring, and admiring his own kind before
all others: so that nothing seems to an Ape pretier then his fellow Jack: or
to a frog then a todpoll: the horse and lion think no doubt better of their
own shape, then of the form of a man. Upon this conceit Tully lib. 1. de Not.
deo. said, that he durst not think himself a goodlier creature then the Bull
that transported Europa, for shape he meant, and feature of body. As this
self-liking prevails in every kind toward it self, so does it no less, but
rather more show it self in every particular, nature being optima
conciliatrix, et quasilena sui, the greatliest in love with her self that may
be. And therefore we find daily that most true, suum cuique pulchrum, and that
of Tul. Te tua, me delectant mea, who farther also lib. 5. Tuscul. says that
he never knew any poet, were he never so bad, but he thought himself the best
that ever was. Such is the folly of riming wits. Even Chaerilus so much
disgraced by Horace, yet as may appear by his contract with Alexander, thought
himself no babe. Of whom Alexander was wont to say, that he had rather be
Homers Thersites, then the Achilles of Chaerilus. Although I am not ignorant
that Eusebius, Clemens, and some other of the Ancients, make good reckening of
him: neither seems he to have bin so bad as he is made by certain verses of
his which are extant. But (to return) as Chaerilus did, who does not think
too well of himself? nay who is there almost, that is not so far gone this
way, that he is not in love with his own faults? which depraved blind judgment
toward our selves may easily overtake us, since we see that some have bin
blinded by reason of a foolish conceited love, even in the faults of others. As
for example Alceus, of whom is that, Naeuus in articulo pueri delectat
Alcaeum. a wenne in his body seemed a grace to Alceus. As he for love to his
boy digested his impefection: so we for the like affection to ourselves can
dispense with our greatest faults, as if they were none. Roscius was bleare
eyed. Q. Catulus much more either bleared or blinded, when he took him to
exceed By God in that place of Tully is meant the Sun.
God for beauty: but such is the nature of love, where it fasteneth, it will
find no fault, especially in our selves. In an old Greek Epigram it is said,
that love is nothing worth, nor to be counted of, when one loves a fair one,
for that every body does; to love a foul droile or blouse, this is love
indeed. Whence we may see how it fares with us, who think we never love our
selves enough, except we love our faults and all. Least therefore I my self
should fall into this confessed and detested vice of self love toward my own
faults and infirmities, I thought it my part to take the way, first to know
what they were, or before they be known, they will hardly be amended, and a
better or readier way to know them, I saw none, then by publishing my pains
without name: for so both others will more freely perhaps, and more uprightly
without partiality judge, and my self shall the sooner hear what scapes
shall be charged upon me. For this cause, and upon this reason, I had, as I said,
resolved at first to proceed without any name: but afterward upon some other
just and urgent occasions, I was forced to alter this course, and forsake my
former determination, and to hold the accustomed and ordinary course of
publishing by name. By which course, although I fail somewhat of my former, and
desired purpose, yet I hope the point will not be greatly material, or with
much disadvantage.

For the handling, and delivery of the matter, I acknowledge it to be most
simple and plain, quite void of that (...) and (...), which some perhaps will
look for. I have not sought after vain flourishes and rhetorications, nor had
any further care then this, that I may be understood. It fares with speech as
it does with a woman, the honester she is, the less care she has of her
attire: it is the trick of harlots to paint and besmeare; Simplex est
veritatis sermo. Plato says, that to be curious in words and phrases, is
(...), that is, base and servile: with whom also iumpeth Galen, saying that the
care of words, and contempt of matter came in together. Of which opinion also
was Clemens Alexandrinus, whose words are thus: He that cares for the truth
must not busy and trouble himself too much about words, but be content to
deliver things as well as he can, for they that are curious in words, often miss
of the matter. With this agrees that of Theodoret de Morib. Graec. lib. 1. pa.
10. Matter, says he, and truth is to be preferred before words and phrases:
for want of fair words is no hinderaunce or disgrace to the matter: the rose
grows not on the fairest tree, but on a prickly rude bush. As good broth may
come out of a wooden ladle, as out of a silver spoone. A great admirer and
reader of Ennius said, that when he read him, he gathered aurum ex
sterquilinio, according to that of an other, Ennius ingenio magnus, at art
rudis. If words will follow the matter they are welcome: but if they must be
studied for, fare them well: he makes small account of his time that spends
it about wind and words; and may be well compared to the dog in Esop, who
snatching at the shadow, lost the bone. Gay words without substance of matter,
are like a painted sheath with a wooden dagger, which will not cut, nor do
any office of a dagger: which I do not speak in commendation of mine own
dagger, as if it were such a cutter. I am not so far gone and past my self;
nevertheless I could wish, not only that it would cut, but also cut off this
uncouth kind of Figure-flingers, and starre-gazers, who are st^l tooting on
heaven, which belongs full little to them. Very wise men have bin very
careless in this point of words and speech. Porphyrie reports of Socrates,
that when he came to speak or write any thing, he was very ridiculous, and
that he did stutter like a babe. And Plato in his Apology testifies the same,
that in his speech he was without grace, or choice of words, with a rude
unlearned tongue. Now if Socrates did practice, and Plato allow, I hope no
body will exact or expect much of me: if any do, I must answer only that,
Quod decuit tantos, cur mihi turpe putem? Wherefore that I may conclude with
Socrates words in the same place, of you, gentle Readers, I request only thus
much, which me think stands with reason, that you would not weigh my phrase
and style, though peradventure it may please, and peradventure no: for
peradventure it may be better, and peradventure it may be worse; but that you
would weigh and well consider this, whether I speak to the purpose. Another
thing wherein I am to crave the Readers pardon is, if that any unadvised or
hard speeches have passed me, such as are incident to these contentious kind of
confutations, and are wont commonly to escape many in their earnestness, and
heat. How easy a matter it were for any in an argument of this nature to let
slip now and then an hard word, any may judge, if he list to consider the
grossness of the fault, the multitude of the offenders, and the negligence of
them that should be correctors. For my part I cannot deny, but sometime I was
moved with it: yet so, I hope, as that neither I forgot the counsel of him,
ammum rege, qui nisi paret, imperat: nor the good example of another, that
being moved to wrath, smote himself on the breast with a knock, adding these
words, (...). That is, Down great heart. In rhyme, Down heart, have done, for
long ere this,
Thou have indurde as bad I wisse.
Neither would I take it to be any great fault, to be a little moved sometime,
according to the indignity of the matter. For all heat is not to be
condemned: nay of some heat that is true, that it is cos virtutis: it gives
an edge to virtue and manhood. Neither is that amiss of Seneca, Quantum est
cuique irae, tantum est ingenij. But in respect of me, and my carriage in this
Treatise, I hope this Apology will be needless my speech is all in Thesi,
and general. I have spoken against Astrologers, but not against this or that
particular Astrologer. Though vehemency and heat be a perturbation and
grievous, yet it has such a commendome of delight with it, and is so delaied
and sawced with pleasure, that a man may quickly be drawn in, if he look not
better to it. But some perhaps will marvel, what pleasure can be in anger,
which does so torment and vex men, that it makes them stare like friends,
according to that, Iliad. 1. verse. 103.

(...). And in another place, verse. 200.

(...) But let them think that he was no babe that said, (...).
(...).
No honey sweeter can be, then
Is anger in the hearts of men.
I think there is scarce any whose carriage is such in these agonisticall
conferences, but that he may hear that some time, (...)?
What manner word has ouerpast
Thy teeth which should have kept it fast.
We are taught to season and relish our speech with salt, that it may afford
grace to the hearers: our speech must not be insulsus, unsavory, yet not so
salt that it fret and gall. This age has hit into a bitter inuectiue course:
whence it proceeds I know not, whether of the black ink, being made with
gall and Coppresse, two fretting ingredients, or of the pen descended from a
goose, or of both: sure I am that the moderation of a wise hand, and staid
mind, might be a great help to both. But I think best to stay here, least by
too solemn and ceremonious an excuse, I might seem to accuse my self, and
too much to distrust them, whose censure in this case I am to pass, and, for
good reason must stand to. Wherefore commending my self, the manner and matter
to the favorable construction of the discreet and loving reader, I take my
leave.

The sum of the Chapters cotaitained in this book.
CHAP. I. A just complaint against the long toleration of Astrologicall
superstition, of their titles how they be called, and of their profession what
it promises. CHAP. II. Divinity proofs against Astrology, first
authorities, then reasons, and that Christianity and Astrology cannot stand
together. CHAP. III. That the difficulties of this art by ignorance first of
the number of stars, then of the constellations, thirdly, of the birth hour,
are such as must needs spoil this Art, as also may appear by examples
brought. CHAP. IIII. That the division of heaven, the Astrologers noting of the
Horoscopus, and the relation of the birth hour, are all most deceiuable. CHAP.
V. That the birth time, and the time of observing the Horoscopus, must needs be
a precise time, and not with a latitude only. CHAP. VI. That they cannot be
very confident in their own art, as not knowing which to choose for their
work, whether the conception or the birth, where also are recited other times
of alteration, not inferior to the birth hour. CHAP. VII. Of an evasion which
they use, when they are urged with the examples of beasts, plants, and such
like. CHAP. VIII. Of the uncertainty, and falsehood of their predictions. CHAP.
IX. Of the subject of predictions. CHAP. X. Of the small use of predictions,
though they were true. CHAP. XI. The folly of predictions, confirmed by the
diversity of twins, who being borne both at once, dissent oftentimes in the
whole course of their life and actions, with an answer to Figulinus, Firmicus
and S. Thomas. CHAP. XII. Astrology by Philosophers, either condemned as
wicked, or neglected as vain and foolish. CHAP. XIII. Astrologers punished by
Emperors, and derided by Alexander the great. CHAP. XIIII. That none hearken
to Figure-flingers but fools, since God has reserved the knowledge of future
things to himself. CHAP. XV. The Astrologers wresting a place of Aristotle to
their purpose. CHAP. XVI. Who first among the Greeks gave themselves to
Astronomy, and how far. CHAP. XVII. Astrology compared with other Arts.
CHAP. XVIII. That Astrologers need no farther confutation then such as may be
drawn out of their own art since their elections and predictions can no way
stand together. CHAP. XIX. Four causes why Astrologers seem often to say
true, and that for their true saying, they are never a whit the more to be
trusted. CHAP. XX. Of the true use of stars, and study of Astronomy in the
judgment of Socrates and Bucer. CHAP. XXI. A Peroration exhorting to the
abolishing of Astrologicall blasphemy, with an encouragement of them that have
to deal in the reformation of that ungodly abuse. CHAP. XXII. An Appendix to
the 8. Chap. proving that their predictions cannot be true, as not being
comprehensible, by reason of these inferior causes, which being many, much
alter the working of the superior causes, which also is confirmed by abundance
of testimonies of the best Astrologers. CHAP. XXIII. The vanity of Critical
days, howsoever deduced, whether from Galens new month, Hippocrates numbers,
or Conciliators teiragonicall aspects.
A TREATISE AGAINST IVDICIAL ASTROLOGY.
CHAP. I.
A just complaint against the long toleration of Astrologicall superstition, of
their titles how they be called, and of their profession, what it promises.

ALthough I look for no great effect or reformation of that which I intend to
say against Astrologers: yet I hope I may freely use that ancient and
accustomed liberty of all ages, to talk and say my mind against them. For do
what I can, that of Tacitus will be still true, pronouncing them to be a
profession always condemned, and misliked, yet still retained and used.
Notwithstanding to speak for our selves, and for the present time, it may
seem strange, that in so long profession of the Gospel, so gross and
heathenish a superstition should go so current. I may well call it heathenish,
me think, since the Church in all ages, with Emperors, Doctors, Fathers, and
Councels, have ever condemned it. Witchcraft, because it touches our hogs,
and cattle sometime: finds now and then some hard entertainment, as it well
deserves. But this damnable superstition, which dishonoreth God, polluteth
heaven, deceives and seduceth men, goes without touch or check; the
Astrologer scaping, while the Witch is punished, may not that well be said?

Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas. Might not this egernesse, and
vehemence, which we have used among our selves about caps and copes, have been
much better bestowed upon this so profane an abuse? While we strain a gnat,
we swallow a camel: and while we build our own conceits and toys in the air,
we leave the house of God unbuilt. What should be thought, that so many
honorable and grave assemblies of parliament, and so many reverend conuocations
in so long time should not once go about the redress of an abuse so gross
and palpable, that even the offenders themselves are readiest to condemn
themselves. In so much that some of them of late have set out certain reformed
Almanacks, wherein they have not meddled at all with wind, weather, dismal
days, purges and such like: but only with changes of the Moon, Eclipses,
Festival days, both mouable, and immovable, and such like. When themselves
are ashamed of themselves, what reason have others to forbear them? No doubt,
as the great impostors of the world, so often as they meet, they are ready to
laugh one of another. These me^ are called by the names of astrologers,
prognosticators, almanack-makers, figure-flingers, wise men, wisards, and such
like. And in Latin Chaldaei, Astrologi, Mathematici, Magi, Planetarij,
Genethliaci, Babylonij, Diuini, Fatidici. In greek also they are termed and
known by the name of (...): and in derision, of some they are called (...) and
(...) Of S. Hierome they are sometime called Augures, and by a decree of Pope
Gregory the younger, Astrologers are anathematized under the name of Aruspex.
And S. August. in a book de natura daemonu^, shows that they which observe
days and hours in their business, are signified by the name Aruspex. So in the
old time they were not called by the name of Astronomers, Mathematiques, or
Astrologers: but for their judging by the planets, they were called Planetarij:
for casting natiuities, Genethliaci: and of the country that sent them out
abroad by swarms, they were termed Chaldaei. The quid nominis of this art is
as here is said, for the farther definition or quid rei, see Sextus ab Heminga,
who brings three diverse definitions of three diverse authors for the division
of it. Whereas commonly it is divided into four parts, he divides it into two
parts only, of purpose rejecting the other two, as derided by the astrologers
themselves. For the subject of Astrology, he deuideth it into two parts, active
and passive, making heaven the active part, and earth the passive. Where also
he relates a proper conceit of Cardan, that heaven is like the earth, and the
stars like mountains, and stones upon the earth. The active subject of heaven
he also deuideth into four parts. page 10. To discourse severally of those
points would but spend time: and therefore I thought best only to point to them.
These men being altogether ignorant of all good learning, not only in the
stars, which they profess, bear us in hand that all our actions and
enterprises depend upon certain constellations, and aspects of stars, and
reuolutions, extending this their skill to natiuities, questions, elections,
intentions, thoughts, and the foretelling of things to come: intermedling and
busying themselves even in the secrets of Gods providence. In which they do not
only most lewdly and impiously make many to give over al care of their life
and actions, as being forced by the stars, which they cannot resist, but also
most blasphemously impeach the divine providence. For if all our actions depend
of the stars, then may God have an everlasting playing day, and let the world
wag.

CHAP. II.
Divinity proofs against Astrology: first authorities, and then reasons, and
that Christianity and Astrology cannot stand together.

Because therefore the chief impiety of these me^ is against God himself, we
will first assault them with reasons out of divinity: Hieremie cap. 10. The
Jews are willed to give no credit to stargazers, nor to fear them a whit:
Learn not the ways of the Gentiles, neither fear the signs of heaven, as
they do, because the laws and ordinances of the people are vain. With Hierem.
agrees Esaias cap. 47. where he derideth Southsayers trusting in their
predictions, and observations. Let thy Soothsayers stand and save thee, which
gazing upon the stars, and counting the months, take upon them to foretell
thee what is to come. In the same chapter he says, there shall ill come upon
thee, but whence thou shall not know (that is, such as no constellation shall
forewarn) and calamity shall rush upon thee, which thou can not avoid, to
wit, by elections of hours, or other superstitious tricks of Astrology. And
cap. xliiij of the same prophet, God says: I am the Lord that do frustrate,
and disappoint the signs of wisards, making the Southsayers made, foiling
their wisemen, and making their skill foolish. Of them the Prophet Micha says
Chap. 3. verse. 7. that they shall blush at their lies, and hide their faces for
shame. With these three Prophets agrees Salo. Eccl. cap. 8. No man knows
that which is past, neither can any tell him that which is to come. Deuteron.
xviij. ver. x. it is said, that whosoever uses this trade is an abomination
to God, and that this was one of the chief causes, why God displaced the
nations, and banished them. And in the second book of Kings it is said, that
their vanity was the overthrow of the people of Israel; for there is said that
they applied Southsayings, which folly also is derided of Job in these words:
Do thou know (says he,) the order of heaven, and will thou reduce the course
of it to the earth? And again who shall declare the order of heaven? In which
place also is touched a double error of astrologers; the one, that they
ascribe many things to heaven, which belong not to it: another that even the
very effects of heaven, they cannot foresee by heaven. Upon these so plentiful
and plain places the church grounding, has not spared from time to time, to
censure these men most severely, as appears by many decrees, as you may
read, in secu^da part Decretorum cap. xxvi. the five first questions and in
the first Bracaren Council cap. ix, and x. and in the first counsel of
Tolledo. In which councels there is this Decree against Astrologers. If any put
his trust in astrology let him be anathema. Also in the first chapter de
sortilegijs, is provided that none shall listen to diuinations. In the second
chapter of the same title is concluded, that it was an heinous offense, that
one took upon him by the help of his astrolabe, to recover a stolen thing,
although he did it simply, and of good zeal. By a decree also of Gregory the
younger, Astrologers are accursed under the name of Aruspices, as I have showed
else where. What has bin the judgment of the fathers concerning these men you
may see, if you please to read, either Basil Hom. vi. in Genesin, or Chrisost.
and Gregorius Magnus upon the second chapter of Matthew, or Olympiodorus upon
the seventh and tenth chapter of Ecclesiastes, or Cassiodorus upon the 70.118.
Psalm. But especially S. August. lib. 2. upon Genesis ad literam cap. 17. And
lib. 2. De doctrina Christiana cap. 21. Saint Augustines authority is of the
more weight, because he confesses, that himself was of that damnable crew, in
the third book of confessions: and in the seventh book his words be these;
Now also I had renounced the false predictions, and wicked follies of
Astrologers: and (meaning the^ farther says) whom christian and true piety
expels and conde^neth. And in his book de natura Daemonum, he affirms,
that it is not lawful for any christian to cast natiuities. In his second book
de doctri. Christ he says, it is a great madness and folly to go about to
tell by the stars, the manners, actions and events of men. And in the same
book he says, Whosoever gives a penny to an Astrologer, go he never so free
unto him, he returns from him a bondsman. With these agrees Eusebius lib, 14.
cap. 4 de praeparatione Euangelica, and lib. 6 cap. 9. Athanasius also upon
those words to the Colossians. According to the elements of the world, and not
according to Christ, condemns al these Astrological observations of times.
Basil in his Hexam. says; It is ridiculous to confute Astrologers, yet
necessary, least others should be entangled by their cunning. Damas. in
theologicis sententijs, grants that there may be signs in heaven, of
rain, drowth, heat, cold, winds, but not of our actions. With these ancient
fathers agree also the schooleme^, as Aquinas in expositione symboli,
Bonauenture in 1 Centiloquij part, Petrus Tarantassius in 4. Conuentariorum in
senten. and John Gerson, and diverse others both papists and protestants.
Iulianus Apostata played but his part, when he would prove Abraham to be an
astrologer out of these words cap. 15. of Genesis. God brought out Abraham, and
said to him, view the heavens and number the stars, if thou can, for so shall
thy seed be. Notwithstanding confess we must, that Philo in his book (...),
attributes to Abraham great perfection in Astronomy: yet that shall no ways
help to excuse Julian, their minds wherewith they spoke it, being as different
as may be. Farther Iulia^ makes, or would make Abraham an Astrologer, but Philo
an Astronomer. Now what is the difference of Astronomy and Astrology, may be
plain by that of Cassiodorus upon the 118. Psalm. His words be these; Astronomy
is an art, which co^sidereth the course and figures of stars, and their
mutual aspectes both among themselves, and in respect of the earth. Which Art
our ancestors have not much rejected, so that it go no farther. But when men
erroniously glaunce into Astrology, thinking to pick the lives of men out of
the course of the stars, then they are abominable and stark blind, taking
upon them to foresee those things which the creator for good cause meant to
conceal from us. That Abraham was instructed and skilful in Astronomy Philo
proves out of the interpretation of the name Abraam, signifying (...) as if
one should say, a lofty or mounted father, this title of lofty, or mounted
father, being given him, because he lifted and mounted himself from the earth
by study of high and heavenly matters, searching what was the greatness of the
Sun, what was his course, how he does determine the seasons of the year, by
his coming and going to and fro, searching also concerning the moon of her
diverse lights, forms, waxings, wainings; of the motions of the other stars,
both fixed, and not fixed. For (says he) the study and enquiry of these things
is not base and barren, but of al other most liberal, and full of good fruit,
so that they be referred as they ought to be to the use of life and me^ding of
ma^ners. For says he, as trees are nothing worth, unless they bear fruit: so
Philosophy avails nothing, if it bring not forth godly life, as her fruit.
Insomuch that some co^paring philosophy to a field, have likened the natural
parts of it to the Plants; the logical part to the fence and hedges, but the
moral to the fruit, affirming that the hedges and fences round about, are made
only for the safty of the fruit, but the plants to bear fruit, so say they,
must the natural and logical parts of Philosophy be referred to the moral
part, wherewith is taught honest conversation and goodlife? By this place of
Philo, we see both how far Abraham waded in Astronomy, and to what end. Thus
having cleared him from the troops of the enemy, it remains, that we leave
him not so, but proceed in the pursuit. But first thus we reason against these
men. The hearts and ways of all men are in the hands of God, who does dispose
and turn them, as seems best to him, according to that, Pro. cap. 27. Homo
proponit, Deus autem disponit. If therefore no man know his own ways for the
time to come, much less can the Astrologers know them. Again, the devil
himself knows not certainly future causes, for if he did, he would never
have egged the Jews forward to crucify Christ, by whose death his tyranny
over mankind was to be abolished and dissolved: neither would he be so busy in
tempting and molesting the Saints of God, if he knew before he should be foiled
by them, and so increase their glory. But what do we speak of the devil,
seeing neither the Angels nor blessed souls of the faithful, who still behold
God, and see into the course of stars, as far as any Wisard, cannot
certainly know our actions before hand, without some special revelation from
God? What madness were it then to give that to the devil, which is denied to
Angels and Saints? Again, whatsoever belonged to Christ, or the state of his
Church, we see has been ever foretold long before by the Prophets most
distinctly and plainly; which things if they could have been foretold by the
stars and starregazers, then were the foundation of all true religion shaken.
Neither by this means is religion and Divinity shaken only, but also all
moral doctrine and philosophy: for whosoever is persuaded, that all depends
on heaven, and therefore thinks that all men's deeds and events may be
foreknowne and foretold by tooting upon the stars, he must needs think
withal, that the soul is mortal, and the providence of God not to be such as
our faith teaches, and that the mysteries and miracles of our religion, though
they be indeed supernatural, yet depend upon celestial causes and powers. How
ill Christianity and Astrology stand together, may appear by the fact and
practice of the Ephesians, Act. 19. who as soon as they were converted by the
Apostles preaching, bid farewell to figure-flinging, and flung their curious
books into the fire.

The speech of S. Augustine receiving a certain penitent figure-flinger into
the church, is very notable in these words after the exposition of the 61.
Psalm. This man being seduced by the enemy, was a long time a figure-flinger:
being seduced himself, and seducing others, he deceived, entised, and spoke
many lies against God, who has given men power to do good and not harm. This
man denied that his own will committed adultery, but Venus: and that his own
will committed murder, but Mars: and that justice was done, not by God, but
Jupiter: and many such blasphemies did he utter. And after a few lines
continuing the same speech, he says: This man was lost, but he has been
sought, and is now found and brought home: the books that would have burnt him,
he brings with him to be burnt, that they being cast into the fire, himself
may find refreshing. Epiphanius in his book de ponderibus tells of a Bishop
that was deprived for studying figure-flinging. Farther, all our religion,
faith, the coming of our Savior, the labor and pains of his Apostles and
Prophets in planting the Church, by this means should be in vain, unless
some perhaps will not stick to say, that the miracles of Christ, with his
death, birth, etc. depend upon constellations, and aspects of stars. And then
we may also go on, and say that we are by destiny called to Christ, and that
either there is no difference between good and evil, or that God is the
author of evil. Some of them say there is such virtue in Mars well placed in
the ninth house, that by our only presence we chase devils out of possessed
bodies.

Others by this art think they can judge of men's thoughts and consciences.
Maternus says, that they which are borne, Saturn being in Leo, shall first
live long here, and afterward go to heaven. Albumasar says, that he that shall
pray to God for any thing, when the Moon and Jupiter are joined in the head of
the Dragon, shall obtain whatsoever he asks. Of this Petrus Aponensis says,
that he had trial in himself. For in that conjunction when he had asked
learning of God, he perceived, he said, that he was thereby mightily furthered:
yet I think that many have had as much wit as he had, without asking: and of
those that have asked without the help of that constellation, no doubt many
have far passed him for all manner of gifts. Wherefore it should seem that
there be some constellations better for wit then this, for himself it was well
that he asked in pudding time, as they say; for if he had not, perhaps we
should have had a very wise man of him. But that it has bin always pernicious
and hurtful to the Church, may thence appear, because always the greatest
astrologers have made religion, as well as any humane or politic laws
subject to constellations. Ptolemy in the second book of his Centiloquium,
ascribes to the nature of celestial forms, and stars, that this motion
has one religion, and that another. And a certain greek interpreter of
Ptolemy attributes the miracle of Moses passing the red sea on foot with the
people, to the skill of Moses observing the flux and refluxe of the sea, as if
in the same water both Gods people were not saved, and Pharao with his
astrologers drowned, as if Iosue had not passed Jordan dry foot, where was
not flux nor refluxe to yield to him. Albumasar deriueth from heaven both our
religion and the Turks, and all other laws, and his interpreter Henricus
Macleuiensis found a ship in heaven, by which Noe framed his arc, which devise
Halliacensis admits with great applause. Abraham Iudeus very impiously and
ridiculously refers to diverse constellations the law of Moses, the
departing out of Egypt, and whatsoever else happened to that people. Guido
Bomattus also most profanely and madlie says, that Christ used elected
hours, when he answered the Apostles, desiring him not to go into Judea, that
there were twelve hours of the day. He made choice of an hour says he, in
which the Jews could not hurt him, as if we did not read in the same Gospel,
that he overthrew them, and passed through the midst of them unseen, even at
none day. Others think that when they read in Paul of the fullness of time,
and in the Gospel, now is your hour, and the power of darkness, and in an
other place my hour is not yet come, that by these places are meant their
constellations. For answer to them, I would gladly know of the^, whether they
think it eating time, when they are hungry, and drinking time when they are
thirsty how soever it fares with heaven at the same time. If they be not
stark staring mad, they will grant that every thing has a time, howsoever
heaven goes, according to the nature of the thing in hand, and the opportunity
of Doing. So divine miracles have their time, but according to the purpose of
God, not according to the constitution of heaven. The same Guido says, that
the Christian religion is the religion of Jupiter, and in the proems of his
Theorickes, against Gerardus, he writes that we must pray devoutly to
Mercury in choosing of a new Pope. Roger Bacon says, that Christians might
do well to keep Satterdaie holy day with the Jews, beca^se it is no good
day for work, as belonging to Saturn. With the like madness some of them
have said, that Venus gives felicity in this world, and Jupiter in the world
to come. These things therefore being thus, who does not see how Christianity
and Astrology will suit together? how a Christian and an Astrologer cannot well
mantle in one coat? But for heretics we know how well they have always bin
seen in these arts. Tertullian. Lib. 1. contra Marcionem says, that the
Marcionistes were commonly Astrologers, and in his book de Idololatria, he
inueigheth mightily against them. They think says he, that we are not to
seek after God, presuming that the stars reign over us, and force us with
an immutable decree. Epiphanius says of Manes, that he was good at such these
magical knacks, and studied them hard. S. Augustine tom. 1. Confessionum
says, that the writings of the Manicheans, were full of Astrologicall toys,
which they understood not themselves. As for Priscillian, all knew how
worthily he is condemned, for tying even our reprobation and election to the
course of heaven and stars. Of the Priscillianists says Saint Augustine cap.
70. de Haeres. They affirm also that men are bound with certain fatal
stars, and that our bodies are framed according to the twelve signs of
heaven, as do they which are commonly known by the name of Mathematiques,
placing Aries in the head, Taurus in the neck, Gemini in the shoulder, etc.
And a little after he says: These fables, vanities, and sacriledges does this
heresy embrace. Wherefore by Saint Augustines opinion, these men may well be
counted heretics; whom, of the 12. signs which they abuse, we may very fitly
call Dodeafemoriani.

Neither do I well see how that of Origin can be allowed: where he says, that
this science was permitted till the Gospel came, that as soon as Christ was
borne, none should cast natiuities by the stars, lib. de Idolol. Much better
is that said of him in the sixth Homely upon Iosuah: where among other shames
and reproaches of Egypt, he reckons up Astrology; and having named diverse, in
the end he infers thus: Which observations if thou admit, and entangle thy
self with anew, thou do doubtless plunge thy self into Egyptian reproaches, if
therefore, says he, at any time this curiosity tickle thee, by the
instigation of the enemy in thine heart, say to thy self: I do follow my
guide Jesus, in whose power are things to come, and what things so ever he
will, those things shall come. Though there be small hope, that we will hear
the dead, when we regard not Moses and the Prophets, yet for our deeper
condemnation in this point, let us see what the dead, that is, Heathen and
profane Philosophers will say: for mine own part I would be glad to take any
course for the overthrow of this monster: Fectere si Superi nequeant,
acherontamouebo,
Since God cannot prevail with fools,
I Will try the force of humane schools.


If any will perish wilfully in this Idolatrous impiety, to them I will
protest that Testor in occasu vestro, nec tela, nec vllas vitauisse vices.
Witness, I have not spared my blood,
Nor any thing to do you good.


CHAP. III.
That the difficulties of this Art by ignorance, first of the number of stars,
then of the constellation, thirdly of the birth-houre are such, as must needs
spoil this Art, as also may appear by examples brought.

FIrst therefore the ignorance of these Wisards shall be sufficient to
overthrow all their art: the greatest and grauest Philosophers are not agreed
of many controversies in heavenly matters. And Aristotle lib. 2. de Coelo,
text. 17.34.60.61. confesses himself in many of these points to be so far to
seek, that he is forced often in steed of sound arguments to use probabilities
and conjectures. And if it fared thus with Aristotle the prince of
Philosophers, what is to be thought of these companions, but even that which
is commonly said, who is so bold as blind Bayard? No doubt, there are in heaven
a number of stars, which, since because of their distance, no man can
discern, no man can know, which notwithstanding have their operation. If
therefore the stars, which cause the effects, be unknown, how can the
effects themselves be known, seeing every thing must be known by his
causes? Further, Astrologers confess, that they have no certain knowledge,
even of many of those stars which are seen: how then can these paltry
wisards, of a few stars, which they know, so confidently pronounce of things
to come: as if by the influence of those which they know not, the effects of
those which they know might not be hindered and altered? Unless perhaps to
this they will answer, that the unknown stars are without force or
influence: which were most sottish and absurd. Among Astrologers it is plain,
that in the eight Sphere are stars 1022. every one bigger then the earth;
wherefore their force and power must needs be such as the poor stargazers can
hardly apprehend, considering their art is bounded and limited specially and
principally, with the observations of Planets only, their spending and
occupying it self. But that the stars have no such force or power at all, is
plain, for if they have it, they must have it of God; but of God they never
had it, for then he would not have forbidden the use of them, no more then he
has the use of meats, fruits, herbs, etc. to which he has given power to
nourish and cure man's body. As we are bidden to take meat and drink with
thanksgiving: so no doubt he would have willed us to use the help of stars,
if there had been any such force in them. But now that he has forbidden
them, what shall we think? Again, to what end had he forbidden the tree of
knowledge, if he had left a star of knowledge. The Magi were led to Christ by a
star, but not by a figure. Hence it is plain that the stars do not perform
that which is said; for were there not stars enough before, but they must
have a new one to guide them? Will a figure mention the death of mean and base
people, and say nothing of Christ? where, when, and how he was borne, but we
must have a new star? Although indeed Julius Firmicus lib. 2. cap. 33.
seems to be of opinion, that certain persons are so great, that the stars
do not reach to their natiuities and actions: his words be these. Only the
Emperor is not subject to the course of stars, neither have the stars any
power in his destiny: so that Figure-flingers and wisards cannot certainly
foretell any thing either of the state of the commonwealth, or of the life of
the Emperor. If this be true, great reason it is, that Christ should be free
from the necessity of stars. Nevertheless some of them have been busy,
calculating and casting his nativity.

As for this star because it was directed immediately and extraordinarily by
God, let them not meddle with it, nor pollute it with their devilish art: if
they will needs be doing, let them rather meddle with those two stars, the
one mentioned by Marcus Varro, being Venus: which he says went before Aeneas
from Troy to Laurentum, and there left him: the other, which directed them that
found Saint Anthonies body, going before them till it came over his body: for
so Lilius Giraldus says it is recorded in the antitiquites of his country.
These be more fit for them to deal with, and so shall that be verified of
them, Like lips, like Lettuce. For Firmicus, as he here denies the force of
the heavens over excellent personages: so some others of this profession have
renounced it in base and mean creatures, as it is said hereafter: and shall we
believe them in a little remnant left in the midst? surely we would gladly
have somewhat to believe, that are thus ready to believe all their sottishness.

O curuae in stellas animae, and pietatis inanes! But does not Firmicus see how
by his opinion, one of their (...), or rather the very Palladium of their art
is quite ouerturned, to wit, that Nondum abiere Idus Martij. Was not Caesar an
Emperor, and therefore no starre-subiect?

About 22. years ago, 1578. was for half a years space together at least,
seen a new star in Cassiopaea, which by the judgment of all the best
obseruers of it, was out of the reach of Meteors, as being as high as the Sun
from the earth at least. In this case we must grant either that this star was
bred and corrupted in heaven (which being granted, it will follow that the like
may, and does happen in others also) or that there be more Planets then seven,
whose courses are unknown to us; or lastly that the fixed stars do not keep
their eighth orb, but have their several circuits and motions. Which doubt,
as it seems of old, troubled that famous Hipparchus, if we believe Pliny,
cap. 25. lib. 2. his words be these: That never sufficiently commended
Hipparchus, in his time observed a new star; whereupon he began to doubt
whether the like might happen often, and whether those which we call fixed, are
also mouable. And some (it seems) were of opinion, that all the stars were
not made at once, but some at one time, and some at another, as may appear by
that, that the Arcadians are more ancient then the Moon: and that of
Apollonius lib. 4. ver. 261.

(...).
Not all the stars were yet found out,
Which run the heaven round about.
Some were of opinion, that heaven without was compassed round about with fire,
and that the eighth Sphere was full of holes, through which the fire made show
of stars. But how this opinion can either help or hinder our new star I do
not see, and therefore I pass it over as most ridiculous.

Concerning the aspects, and positions of stars in natiuities, that must needs
be a brittle, and slippery point, very subject to error and mistaking. For
first, it must needs be very hard to observe the very instant, or moment of
times wherein one is borne. Secondly there is no less difficulty in marking
the aspect of the star which was at that instant. For both the midwife may
mistake the time, and the Astrologer may mistake the aspect, by reason of
interposition of fogges, or vapors, which may either happily quite take away
and hide, or at least darken, and obscure the aspect. Neither is that to be
forgotten, that often times the swifte revolution of the heaven causes the
constellation to be past before it can be noted, considering that every moment
the figure and face of heaven with the position of the stars is varied.
Notwithstanding, these wisardly wise Astrologers take upon them to tell every
man's Fortune, if they may once know the time of his birth.

Which time notwithstanding precisely and sufficiently for his purpose he
cannot know. For suppose one were borne such a year, such a day, such an
hour in the beginning or in the end of the same hour, yet that will not serve
the figure-flingers turn, who must not know in a certain latitude, but very
exactly the very moment of time, which he is not to hope to learn of either
midwife, or parents, who make their account so, that they think they come
near, if they miss not too too much. Farther we may doubt, how the birth is to
be taken, and considered, whether when the child first shows, or when it is
half out, or when it is quite delivered. Neither can we exactly fit the time
for any one of these. For either for the stoutnesse of mind, or strength of
body, or disposition of nature, or skilfulnesse of the midwife, the strength of
the child, or innumerable such like causes, every one of these times may vary,
to wit, both the time of pearing first, and the time of farther bearing, and
the time of full delivery. Because in the casting of these the Astrologers
fail, they can never hit right upon the hour of nativity, therefore though
they never so much profess to know the figure of heaven in the nativity, yet
by this we may see they do not attain to it, and so their Horoscopus, and
houses must needs go to ground. Again how will they find the hour of
nativity in such as may be thought to have had no nativity, as Scip.
Africanus, Manlius etc. who after their mothers were dead were cut out of their
mothers wombes. If the birth be nixus matris, or cum nixu, then these had no
birth, no more then they had many times after, when they were taken out of
their swaddling clouts. Joan. Schenchius reports lib. 4. obser. 189. of one
Burcardus comes de Lintzgroue, who because he was cut from his dead mother was
commonly called Ingenitus. If therefore they which come thus into the world by
art, can not properly be said to be borne, or to have a birth, how ca^ the
figure-flinger cast such natiuities, or tell their destinies. If the astrologer
had bin to cast the nativity of our first parents Adam and Eve, to tell the^ how
long they were to stay in Paradise, how they should be deceived by the serpent,
how many children they should have, and how long they should live in this case,
what would they say, what hour would they take, when there was neither
co^ception, nor nativity. Nay in Adam, by the perfection of his creation being
so full of all wisdom, and knowledge, in him I say, what an astonishment
would the very first sight of heaven have wrought, when looking up thither he
should have seen his own destiny in the stars? Diodorus Sicul. reports
that some Philosophers, among whom was Anaxagoras, and his scholar Euripides,
were of opinion, that the first men were made, as all other things were, by the
sun working upon the slime, and moisture which is found in the new made world.
This kind of breeding they confirm with that which is to be seen about
Nilus. For after Nilus has a good while ouerflowed all, and thoroughly soked
and moistened the earth, the heat of the sun coming upon it, by a kind of
putrefaction, it silleth all the cuntry full of mise. At this day says
Diodorus, are certain little creatures still so bred, as flies, and worms, but
not greater, as men, and Lions, see there the Cause. Of this opinion seems to
have bin Lucretius, and, which is to be marvelled at, even Auicen also, who
farther says, that even at this Day, a man might be framed out of the earth,
contrary to Diodor. to Lucret. lib. 5. you may add two poets more Ovid. lib. 1.
Metamor. Natus homo est etc. Horace. od. i6. lib. 1. Fertur Prometheus.

Addere principi limo coactus particulam vndique defecta^. If this were true,
how would the Astrologer do, or what shift and shufling would he make to get
the Horoscopus for the first man, who had neither conception nor birth, whereby
he might be guided?

CHAP. 4
That the Division of heaven, the Astrologers noting of the Horoscopus, and the
relation of the birth hour are all most deceiuable.

But for preciseness in this point, it will not be amiss to relate out of
Sextus Empiricus, how these Chaldeans were wont of old to take the true time,
and what course they took for that purpose Because the 12 signs are not
bounded, and as it were chalked out to them, but very uncertainly circumscribed
by the observation of Dispersed stars, they took this course to divide a
circle into 12 equal parts, marking some fair star in the Zodiake, and
filling a great vessel full of water, they let that water run into another
vessel, while that star going from his rising in the Horizon, went round,
and came to his rising place again, taking from point to point to be the full
revolution of a circle. Again they took the twelfth part of this water, and
considered in what time it did likewise run out of the same vessel, for in
that they held, that the twelfth part of the circle went round, and that part
of the circle to the whole circle had the same proportion, as had that twelfth
part of the water to the whole water.

By this relation to the twelft part, they noted the end by some fair star,
which they spied in the Horizon, whether it were North or South. By this help
and means they took upon them to determine, and point out the ascensions in
the Zodiake, which notwithstanding by no means are determinable, but so that a
sign which is not risen, may seem to be risen, and contrary a sign which is
risen, may seem to be not risen: neither will this way by water running so
much further and help them. For both the water it self, and the temperature
of the air, and things stopping the flux, will cause the time of the running
to vary and be unequal. For it is like, that the water will run faster in the
beginning, while it is clear, then at the end, when it waxes thick, and
muddy. For the air, it is like, if it be foggie and thick, it must needs
hinder the running by a sort of stopping it, but if it be clear and pure, it
will help and further it. Again the vessel will not run a like fast, being
full, and near empty, but sometimes slower, sometimes faster, the celestial
motions still continuing the same swiftness, by this means they
notwithstanding thought to get the true Horoscopus, and the ascending sign of
the Zodiake, in which how far they were deceived may appear, both by that
which has bin said, and more at large in Sext. Emp. cap. contra Astrologos.
But for the matter of the Horoscopus, which is the ground of the rest, it can
by no means stand. For when they say, that one sitting by the woman in travel
signifies the moment of the birth by the sound of the basen to the Astrologer
viewing the stars upon the hill top, where he marketh the sign rising: first
we say, that seeing the time of the birth cannot be limited, as has bin
proved, it will be hard to notify it by a basen, or such like. But suppose the
birth may be taken: yet the time cannot be taken and noted. For before the
sound of the basen can come to the hill top, will pass a good deal of time,
as for example, we see it fall out in the cleaving of wood, or discharging of
ordinance a far off: for a good while after the axe is down and the piece shot
off, we hear the sound, because the sound is long in going to him which
hears it. Therefore the Astrologer cannot perfectly take the time of the sign
rising, which is the Horoscopus. Again, not only passes much time, while the
sound goes between him which sits with the woman, and the Astrologer
tooting upon the stars, but even while he tooteth upward, and examineth in
what sign is the moon, and the rest of the stars, the face and figure of
heaven is changed before he can accommodate, and apply those things which he
saw in heaven to the birth hour. Farther, this kind of noting may perhaps have
some success in the night, when the Zodiake, and the stars in it may be
seen. But because many are borne in the day time also, when nothing can be
noted, but the motion of the sun, and many times scarce that, it follows,
that these figure-flingers may sometime hit, and some time miss quoad hoc. It
may be also that even in the night they may miss, if the night be misty and
foggy. But to grant that the Horoscopus, and their Centers, as they call them,
with the rest of their houses may be known: yet plain it is, that none of
these simple country-folkes, which come to the figure-flingers, comes with
the precise observation of time, as is fit. For there is more cunning in that
point then every poor country man can attain to, as has been showed before.
Because therefore the figure-flinger has not marked himself the birth-houre,
but takes it by the relation of an unskillful messenger, it remains, that no
certain prediction, but error, and deceit rather must ensue of this
fantastical and false art.

CHAP. V.
That the birth-time, and the time for observing the Horoscopus must be a
precise time, and not with a latitude only.

TO salve this, if they will reply, that they stand not so much upon the
precise and perfect point of time, as upon a time considered more laregely, and
in some reasonable latitude, then the elements and effects of their predictions
shall sufficiently refell and convince them. For of them that have been borne
together in the same time with some latitude of time, all have not led the same
life: but some of them, for example, have reigned like Kings: others have
rotted in prison. There were not many Alexanders, nor Platoes, nor Aristotle's
at once, although no doubt many were borne at the same time with every one of
them. For beside heaven, under which, as a general cause, both the
Philosophers of Athens, and the hogs of Boeotia were borne, Aristotle had other
more immediate and peculiar causes. For first he had both a good soul, and a
good body, but of heaven neither, but as of an universal cause; for his soul,
he had it of God, as he had his body of his parents. He gave himself to
philosophy, not forced by the heavens, but induced of his own will. He also
profited in Philosophy exceedingly, but that was by reason of his pains and
study: but many that studied as much, profited nothing like, that may be,
because he had a better master, and mo helps. But he passed all his
schoolefellowes and equals: for that no doubt he had a better wit, which he
received of God, not of any constellation. The like may be said for Alexander.
His victory against the Persians, and his good success against the Indians
were marvelous. They were so, yet such as no star but his princely virtues
did effect; for he excelled in courage and Art Military, he had a notable
Army trained up under his father Philip, which for his bounty and virtues
loved him most dearly. Again, he had to deal with dastardly people; so that
his uncle said of him, that he fought with women, not with men. Wherefore if
the figure-flinger give the birth-time some latitude, he can never certainly
say, that he which is borne at such a time, shall be fortunate and happy, since
many borne at the very same time, were very unhappy and miserable. Neither on
the other side can he pronounce him poor and needy that was borne in such an
hour, since diverse borne in the same hour, lived all their life long in
great abundance and plenty. Neither would it a little trouble the
figure-flinger, if one should retort the argument thus: If they which have the
same constellation, must needs have the same haps and events; then they which
have diverse constellations, must have diverse and different events and success,
which is false. For we see many, though differing in years, bodily form, and
many other ways, yet have come to the same end; to wit, either by fight in
war, shipwreck, fall of houses, or such like. Neither may they here reply,
that some one, whose destiny was to be drowned, was the cause that all the
rest were cast away with him. For why should this man's destiny prevail against
the destinies of all the rest? and why were they not as well all saved for some
one man's destiny, who was to perish by land? Lastly, some have gone about to
entangle them with a question or objection of bruit beasts. If the course of
life and effects be guided by constellations; if in the same constellation be
borne a man and an ass, they must both try the same fortune of life, and not
the man to be advanced in honor and ease, the poor ass in the mean time
carrying burdens, and his back full of stripes: therefore either our life is
not guided by the stars, or if it be, no body can tell how. Again, while the
child is in the mothers womb, it is subject to many diseases and quames, I
would ask the figure-flinger, if he can foretell the accidents; I would know
of him also, whether he can tell what day, and what hour the child shall be
borne: for these things depend as much of the stars, as any thing after it is
borne. These things and such like he must say either that he can, or cannot
tell. If he cannot, then we have our purpose: if he say he can, then we ask
him how: for the nativity he cannot be guided by, which is yet unknown to
him, the child not being yet borne.

CHAP. VI.
That they cannot be very confident in their own Art, as not knowing which
to choose for their work, whether the conception or the birth: where also are
recited other times of alteration not inferior to the birth-houre.

FOr this and such like causes, some have thought more reason to take direction
from the conception, which seems indeed to stand with much better reason then
the nativity, even by Ptolemies judgment in his Apotelesmata, in these words:
When the temporal beginning of a man is to be appointed naturally and
properly, that must be when the seed is received into the womb, but improperly
and accidentally, when the child is borne. Whosoever therefore shall understand
the hour when the seed was received, he ought rather to follow that hour, in
judging the proprieties of the body and mind, and to consider the figure of
heaven at that time. Hitherto Ptolemie: Who in this cause is the rather to be
listened to, because of all he is counted Captain in this kind: and as Homer
says of Chalcas, Iliad. lib. primo, verse. 60. -- (...),
(...).
But because he knew how hard a thing it is for the Astrologer to get the true
time of conception, for fear he might infringe their diuinations and
predictions by the birth, he straight way adds this color. But they that
know not the conception, they must whether they will or no fly to the
nativity. Haly in his book de Electionibus confesses plain, the effectual
way of telling destinies, to be in the co^ception: which because the
Astrologers know not, they are glad to take hold of the nativity. Moreover,
when the Astrologers are urged with the objections of twins, who though their
birth be all one, yet often have diverse and contrary events, they are wont to
answer, that the diversity of events in twins depends of their diverse
conceptions. Notwithstanding some of them will by no means admit the
conception, because no man is able to say, whether the conception went together
with the seed or otherwise. For it may be in a moment, as when we see grease
put into the fire, it by and by kindles; it may be also some good while after:
for the seed which is cast in the ground, does not by and by sprout, and take
root in the clods. And since there is some distance between the mouth and
bottom of the mother, where conception is made, the seed must have some time
for passing this distance; which time because our Chaldeans know not, they can
never rightly know the co^ception. And if, as some Physicians hold, there be a
kind of concoction, and preparation required of the seed in the mother, before
there can be any conception: seeing these great craftsmen know not how much
time is necessary and requisite to this preparation, they must needs be
ignorant of the time of conception. Farther, as in other parts of their bodies
women differ one from another, for the operations of the parts: so it is more
then probable, that they have the like difference in the operation of the
mother, whereby some are more quick, and some more slow in conception: and even
in one and the same woman, it may be that she is sometimes more easy, and
sometimes more hard to conceive, and sometime will not conceive at all. This
being so, by no means can we exactly attain to the time of conception, that
thereby we might set a figure. Neither can it be said, that the time of
conception can be known by certain signs, as by the straightness of the
mouth of the mother, by the staying of the menstrua, by their longing, etc. for
all these happen very commonly to them which have not conceived. But suppose
they did not happen very commonly, yet because they signify the conception,
when many days are past, they can never bring us to the true hour which we
seek. But the Astrologer to foretell the future casualties of anies life must
know the time not with a latitude, and guess, but the very instant, and
perfectly. Hence it is plain that the figure cannot be well framed by the
co^ception, as much may be said against the birth-time. But if they should
follow in these predictions the conception, then should they be quickly at a
stand, because the time of conception is much harder to obtain for the most
part. It is also to be noted, that beside the conception, the child has
diverse times of notable alteration before the birth, which might seem rather
to be regarded then the birth: for at the first it is called for six days
space (...), in which time it retains the name of seed, as you may read in
Galen (...). lib. 1. After that, it grows to a kind of fleshly substance,
making some confused show of heart, brain, and liver, at which time it is
called (...). Thirdly, the heart, head, and liver being perfected, and the
other members beginning to come, it is called (...). Lastly, when all the
members being finished, it begins to stir and move, it is called (...). To
every one of these four times, some, as Conciliator, and Aegidius Romanus, and
some others, have appointed a certain number of days, which I mean not to
stand upon, as being a thing not allowed by Galen. In conclusion, they add out
of Auicen. lib. 9. de Animalibus, that the time of quickening is double to the
time of forming; and the time of birth double to the time of quickening. As if
you would divide the whole time into seven equal parts, alotting one of the^
to the formation, which they account commonly forty days; and two mo to the
quickening which they reckon to be days 120, and the fourth left to the birth,
which put to the rest, makes in the whole 280. that is, in months 9, or there
about. These times being thus notorious, and so limited, might seem to give as
much direction as can be looked for of the nativity: yet because none of them
can be obtained certainly, all men leave them and fly to the nativity: in which
they think they have great vantage, though it be far otherwise, as has been
showed.

Again, that which has bin said of the diverse times of the child in
formation, may generally be prosecuted thus. Of things which perfected in time,
not in a moment, or instant, the destiny must needs be doubtful: of the which
hour notwithstanding they pronounce as definitiuely, as if there were no
doubt. For that may be taken for the fatal hour, either wherein the efficient
cause begins the thing, or in which the thing is consummate and perfected.
Farther, we are to consider, that diverse parts have their diverse beginnings,
which are not finished all at once, but one after another in order, which in
general, as I said, we may hold to be true in all things. Now in a man how
many and how diverse fatal beginnings, as they term them, may there be? As
First, when the man and woman lie together, then with the seed which is
admitted into the womb. Thirdly when the seed works the woman's excrement
into a child: as when milk is curdled with the earning: Fourthly when the
child is covered over with membranes and vilmes: Fifthly when the heart first
appears: Sixthly when the soul comes to it, which is the fittest time of
all: Farther when it begins to be a man then it consists of matter, and
form, which accomplish the full substance of it: The last time of al, and the
least to be regarded is the birth-time. Notwithstanding this time as being no
subject to sense, have the Astrologers preferred and chosen as most fit for
their predictions: but how wisely, may easily appear; seeing time does neither
begin, nor make nor perfect a man, but only show him to the world, being
already made and perfected. For this cause no doubt Ptolemy attributes more to
the conception then to the birth apotelesm. lib. 3. as has bin alleged before.

But their unsettledness, and wavering in their own art, may best appear in
sick men, whose recovery or Death they profess to foretell. For that being a
point depending upon the nativity as much as any one thing: yet they leave
that commonly, and instead of it take the hour, when the sick man first
begins to be sick, upon which beginning they make diverse and doubtful
disputes: some taking it for (...), the first assault of the disease, which will
not serve their turn, as being (...), without latitude, nor partible, which
slippeth away before the figure can be set: others taking it for the space of
three or four first days: others determining it by signs of concortion, but
all these ways they seeing to lie open to many exceptions, some of them fly ad
horam decubitus, when the sick man first takes his bed: which conceit in my
opinion is the deceatfullest of all. For suppose two fall sick at once, the
one of the plague, the other of the gowt, following this way they must needs
both dye, or both escape, although we see how many die of the plague, and how
few of the gowt. Again, if this way were good, what an advantage had the
figure-flinger of all the world, who by taking his bed, when he list, might put
off death for ever, if he would. For if he saw an ill hour, he might take
another time sooner or later as he pleased, and so play boe peep with death.
Here belike is true the meaning of that, Sapiens dominabitur astris, a wise man
is above the stars. If such wisards may govern the stars, and heaven, we may
well pity them in those words: O domus antiqua quam dispari dominaris domino?
O heavenly house hard is thy case, by masters such to have disgrace. Are not
the stars wise to give wisdom against themselves? Farther, if the hora
decubitus differ in two persons, belike the one shall escape, and the other shall
die: and if the hora decubitus differ in three, the^ one shall escape, another
shall die, and what shall become of the third? And if the case be put of more,
then the doubt will be greater, Ita male instituta ratio exitum reperire non
potest; so hard it will be to come clearly out of an absurdity.

CHAP. VII.
Of an evasion which they use, when they are urged with the examples of beasts,
plants and such like.

As was said before, a great question might be moved, whether for men the
conception, or nativity were to be taken, and for other things the same doubt
is greater. For example, in a chicken are three notable times, the hatching,
the laying of the egg, and the first conception of it. If a figure-flinger
should be asked the destiny of an hen, whether she were to die at shrouetide,
or by the fox, or to be thrashed to death: to answer the question which of
these three times would he take for setting his figure? Again, the hen
hatching all her young ones at once, let him answer whether they must all have
the same fortune; how many of them should fly away with the kite, how many die
of the pip or otherwise. In sowing of corn, though it all fall into the ground
at once, in the same position of heaven: yet you shall see it prove diversely:
of some will come good wheat: of some, darnell, of some smutty gear: and of
some, that which we call solders, which could not be, if the figure of heaven
prevailed. Farther I have heard of some husbandmen, that one and the self same
grain shooting out from his root diverse ears, will yield some of them good
wheat, and other some smutty. To these and such like objections they are wont
to answer, that their art exte^deth no farther then men, it does not reach to
cattes, worms, flies, herbs, and such like. To this their answer we may well
reply that of S. August. lib. 2. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 17. Quid autem insulsius,
et hebetius, quam cum istis rebus conuincuntur, dicere ad solos homines sibi
subijciendos fatalem stellarum pertinere rationem? What can be more senseless,
or sottish, then, when they are urged with these things, to say, the stars
have power only over men, to rule them? Phauorinus in the 14. of Gel. cap. 1.
says, Nulla ratio videtur, cur ea syderum vis in hominibus valeret, si
deficeret in caeteris, It were no reason to say that the stars had power over
men, if they had none in other things. But will you see the bravery of
imprudency? They that now restrain their art to men only, denying it in
beasts, are wont, when it pleases them, to extend it even to cities, houses
and such like, as if by constellations they could tell us what should become of
these things. The story of Taruntius Firmanus, is reported by Tull. lib. 2. de
diuinatione, who at the request of Varro cast the nativity of the city of
Rome. Quidam Lucius Firmanus familiaris noster inprimis Chaldaicis rationibus
eruditus, vrbis etiam nostrae natalem diem repetebat abijs Parilibus, quibus
eam a Romulo conditam accepimus, Roma^que in iugo quum esset Luna, natamesse
dicebat, nec eius fata canere dubitabat. O vim maximam erroris, etiam ne vrbis
natalis dies, ad vim stellarum, and lunae pertinebit? Fac in puero refer, ex
qua affectione coeli primum spiritum duxerit, number hoc in latere, aut in
coemento, ex quibus vrbs effecta est, potuit valere: One Lucius Firmanus an
acquaintance of mine, a very odd fellow for mathematiques, was wont to fetch
the pedigree of our city from that feast, wherein it is thought to have been
builded by Romulus. Farther he added, that the moon at that time was in Libra,
not sticking also to read the destiny of it. O the force of ignorance, must
the foundation even of a city be drawn too within the compass of Moon and
stars? Admit it were of some moment in a child, how the heavens were affected
when it was borne, must therefore the like needs be granted in brick and
mortar, whereof the city was made? In Merton College in Oxford in the Wardens
lodging, a window there has the figure of heaven, when the first stone was
laid with these verses adjoined: Cubice sum december and vndena bis accipe
quadrae,
Summis sex and septem iungas tempora Christi,
Tunc surgunt domus haec condita quando fuit,
Richardi impensis Fitziames Praesidis aedis,
Sedi and Roffensi Praesulis eximij.
Do take the cube of ten, and eke
of twenty two the square,
To which add six and seven, and so
of Christ will come the year,
When the first stone here was laid.


Pisces. 5. Mercurius. 27 Luna. 1.

Aquarius. 16. Venus. 15.

Capricor. 28

Capricor. 10.

Sagit. 2. Jupiter. 11 Scorpio 11

Libra. 19

Virgo. 5.

Leo. 16.

Cancer. 28.

Cancer. 10.

Taurus 5 Mars 5 Gem. 2.

Aries. 19. Sol. 2. Saturn. 1

Figura coeli in primilapidis iactura, anno Christi, 1497. 12. die Martij. hora
10. minuto 20. ante meridiem: dies erat Sabathi: hora vero Veneris.



CHAP. VIII.
Of the uncertainty and falsehood of their Predictions.

BVut to grant them which is more then needs, that there is somewhat in their
predictions, yet it is no more then we see was of old in Apollos Oracles, such
as that, Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse:
Aeacida the Romans stout
Shall overcome, there is no doubt.
Or that, Croesus Halim penetrans, magnam peruertet opu^ vim:
Croesus by passing Halis flood,
Shall be the bane of mickle good.
For some in steed of a man will describe unto you a dawe, or such like. One
missing a silver spoone, which was hidden by a Cornish Chogh, which he had in
his house, and going to the figure-flinger to know what was become of his
spoone, the figure-flinger answered, the party which had it, had long legs,
went in a black coat, with a pair of red stockings, he had a beak nose, and
was borne westward from that place, he might seem to be a gentleman by his
high birth; but he thought no Englishma^ by reason of his strange tongue. Now
the Chogh indeed had long legs, red shanks, black feathers, a beak, was
borne westward, and high, and in steed of speech chattereth. With this blind
description many were called into suspicion, but the poor Chogh in the end was
found to have hid the spoone. This tale goes for good with many: but I am out
of doubt, that they cannot guess so well. If they will get any credit to their
ghesses, let the^ guess at somewhat, that shall happen to morrow, or shortly
after, the event whereof we are like to see, and as they carry themselves in
that, so trust them in the rest. If in these and such like they shall fail,
shall we be such puppies as to believe them in the rest? As if they cold say
true in nothing, but where they could not be controlled. If we were not too
much besotted, that which they say about winds and weather, as snow, rain,
frost, drouth and such others, might sufficiently put us in mind how to credit
them in the rest, and that there is no art in their predictions. How commonly
do they say false in these? And if at any time they say true, yet it is so,
that any man may see it was rather by hap then by skill. For if any unskillful
man not professed that way, should set down weather for every day at all
adventure, we doubt not but he would hit sometime even as they do. But the
vanity of their trade can no way better appear then by comparing of diverse
Almanacks together, where you may see, if you will see, the exceeding folly of
both parts, as well of them in writing, as others in believing. Adrian Turnebus
reports of himself, that he was wont to make trial of their art. By this
means many times (says he) to try their art, at the beginning of the year
in a new almanacke, where they write rain, I write drouth: where they calm, I
windy: where they clear, I clowdie, observing the event, and at the years
end, I gathered the sum of both our predictions, and found my self a great
deal better, and truer Astrologer. Whereby we may see what a goodly art that
is, which a man may seem to have by scoffing, and laughing at it, but what
will blessed Cardan himself say in this case? In his commentaries lib. 1. cap.
2. his words be these of Astrologers, they handle (says he) their matters so
carelessly, that they make the art to be great y slaundered. Since therefore
their predictions are for the most part false, or rather all false, to speak
on, it is plain they proceed not from any art, or certain observations, but
of rash and ignorant babbling at all adventure. Between art and hap hazard is
this difference, the one hitteth often, and very sildome fails; the other
fails commonly, and scarce ever hitteth, no not one in a hundred. Now what
reason is there, that one truth should credit so many lies, rather then so
many lies should discredit that one truth, which might have bin a lie, as well
as the rest, but that the blind man sometimes hitteth the hair. But since
their lies are mo then their truths, why may we not think that they hit upon
the truth, by chance? for when they conclude, that their art is good, because
sometime they hit, by as good an argument, will I prove that all arts, be they
never so superstitious and sottish, are good; for there is none of them, but if
they be still ghessing, they will sometime hit. Wherefore if Astrologers shall
condemn any divining arts as false, they may be proved to speak
contradictories, since they may be all proved true, by as good reason as they
bring for their art: but if again they shall hold them all for true, they
shall be no less subject to contradiction. For suppose the Chiromancer, the
Astrologer, and the Geomancer were al put to one question, no doubt they would
seeldome agree in the truth: and when any of them happened upon the truth you
should find it there, where you least looked for it, either because chance
rules most, where there is least reason, or because in the worse arts, the
devil is more ready to deceive. For that of S. Augustine is most true, that
Astrologers by the inspiration of the devil, which they perceive not, do
sometime tell the truth, which happens most commonly, when they seem
miraculously to foretell any particular event. For Ptolemy himself says, that
no man can foretell a particular without some divine inspiration. The
Astrologers iugling in predictions, and our rashness in believing, seems
Tullie to have touched very finely. lib. 2. de diuinat: What needs many words
says he, since we see daily these iugling companions convinced? how many
things have I known them to assure Pompey, Crassus and Caesar, that none of
them should die, til he was old, at home, and with very good reputation, and
famously? yet Pompey died in Egypt where he was beheaded: Caesar in the Senate
by stabbing: Crassus among the Parthians with his whole army. Wherefore I
cannot but marvel says Tully, if any live, who will believe them, whose
predictions are daily confuted by deeds and events. Seneca in his book
entitled Ludus in mortem Claudij Caesaris, by the way gyrding and scoffing at
these vagabond liars, makes Mercury, persuading the furies to kill Claudius,
to use this reason, to wit, that these miserable Chaldeans may not always lie.
For they were wont year by year, and month by month to give out the death
of Claudius: his words are these: Patere istos mathematicos aliqua^do veru^
dicere, which every year, and month, since he came to the state, have bin
burying him, much like this of Claudius is that which is written of pope
Alexander the sixth of that name, the Astrologers of that age were wont to give
out year by year, that he was but a dead man, and cold not pass still the
present year: yet, as it were in contempt of their predictions, he lived still,
and held out strong and lusty. But in the year 153. these wise artificers
changing their note, would now contrary bless him with long life; affirming
that he should live long in great success, and prosperity. But least they
should be any whit truer in now prophesying his life, then they had bin before
in prophesying his death, he died in the selfsame year. See with what a full
stream and maine opposition Saint Ambrose went against these liars. lib. 4. in
Hexaem. Cap. 7. A little while ago, says he, when there was great need of
rain, one said, lo now the new moon will bring shortly rain, and
notwithstanding our great want, yet I was loath that such blind assertions
should prove true. Finally I was very glad, that we had no rain til it being
obtained by the prayers of the church, gave sufficient proof that we were not
to rely upon the change of the moon, but upon the providence and grace of the
creator. By this example the vanity of Astrology was confuted, and the force
of christianity and godly prayer confirmed. Albumazar referring all great
chaunges to ten reuolutions of Saturn, which is in 300 years, has counted
Christ to be borne 600. years after Alexander the great, in which computation
he is about 300. years out. But no marvel of him, since he is so far out in a
plainer computation of Ptolemy the mathematique, making him one of the kings of
Egypt, which reigned after Alexander, when it is well known to the contrary,
that he was no king, and lived in Adrian the last time 160 years after those
Ptolemyes that were kings of Egypt. It were infinite to lay their lies
together: that one of 1588. may stand for many, and the rather because it
happened in our memory. It were well that all of that trade had those two
figures. 88. seared in their foreheads, that when they meet, they might laugh
one at another, as did the Aruspices in old time. Howsoever they might laugh,
it was no laughing matter to the Catholic king, and his invincible Navy, who
will be famous for that exploit till 88 come again. The Spaniards belike
thought, that this consummation of 88 would be by water, and therefore very
politikely they began to prepare for it betime, longer a great deal then ever
Noah did for the flood. And sure they might have done well, if they had bin
provided of a pilot such as was Hen. Nicholas in Chaucer. But it fell out
reasonable well with them, for they sped almost as well in their Calloones, as
if they had bin in his tubs. Some of these figure-flingers upon their skill have
bin so confident, that before hand upon their predictions, they would venture
never to keep shop longer in that trade, if their predictions failed. Their
predictions failed, and they have bin as good as their word by never meddling
that way since.

A maine master in these matters, no less then Leouitius, Iliad. 1. verse. 91.
(...). would needs give out to the world the day of his death: The day being
past, and the man alive, and as well for health as ever he was, one told him of
it, maruelling that so learned a man would be so fowly ouershot: but he seeking
to put it off with a jest, answered, that he never made a more happielie.

Pope John the 22. was also very presumptuous this way, giving out to all his
friends in a solemn meeting and feast, to their great comfort, as he thought,
that he was to live a long time: yet for all his skill he died within four
days after. In 88. what cause had men to believe that prediction, when in all
the years before they saw no preparation to any such matter, neither in
heaven, nor in earth. If the world was then to die, there would have gone some
signs of decay, as it were sickness before: except they thought it was to die
in a sound, or an apoplexy. When men are thus ready to father all their
follies upon heaven, imputing to it the cause of whatsoever happens, who can
hold, and not exclaim with him, (...).
Alack how men do heaven accuse,
When they themselves do it abuse.
Neither are their predictions only false, but also most unfortunate, as
running still upon unfortunate and dismal effects or events, as may appear by
their learned Almanackes, where you shall find such catalogues of diseases,
wars, treasons, and such like, without any one mention of any good to come,
that a man would think there were no goodness in heaven. For such dismal
Wisards may well serve that of the Poet, Iliad. 1. verse. 106. where Agamemnon
brauing Chalcas, uses these words: (...)
(...)
(...)
Could Prophet most unfortunate,
that never yet could tell
Of any thing that should befall,
or happen to me well.
Thou love such things to prophecy,
as means no good but ill:
Thou never spoke good word as yet,
or did good with thy will.


CHAP. IX.
Of the subject of Predictions.

But some are wont to oppose them thus: Of things we see done, because some
are necessary, some casual, and some in our free power. The Astrologers must
needs say, that their predictions hold either in necessary things, or in
casual events, or in those things which are in our power. If they say in
necessary things, then are their predictions in vain, for that which happens
necessarily, we cannot avoid, but will we, nill we, it will come to pass:
whereas predictions are then only auailable, when by them we can escape.
Secondly, if they say in casual events, then they do profess an
impossibility. For casual eue^ts are uncertain, but of uncertainties which may
happen this way, or that way, there can be no certain or sure prediction. It
remains therefore that their predictions be in things, which are in our power:
which also is impossible. For that which is in my power whether it shall happen
or no, neither has any further cause at the first, that can no man foretell:
the Astrologers therefore have no certain subject for their predictions. The
same reason as served Tullie against the Wisards of his time, may likewise fit
us against these, whom we now deal with, in the second de Diuinat. thence we
reason thus: Astrology avails neither where Sense, Art, Philosophy, or
civil policy is used, therefore it avails no where, nor in any subject.
First, for Sense: To judge colors we have our eyes: to judge sounds, our
ears: for smelles, our nose, and such like. Neither were an Astrologer, if he
were blind, able to judge of colors: or if he were deaf, of sounds, were he
never so skillful. As for matters of Art, who would leave the Physician, to know
of him what physic he should take, or what diet he should keep, or what
vein he should open, what humor he were to purge, and how much, and with what
dosis, in what form of purge, whether with pills, potions, or bole, and such
like? The squaring of circles, the doubling of cubes, and such like, have
always been left to the Geometrician. For Arithmetike, who ever went to him
to learn to add or subtract? For Music, to learn to frame his voice, to
know how to divide the Monochord, or whether Diatessaron be a concord, or a
discord? For Astronomy, to know of him whether the earth or Sun were greater?
whether the interposition of the earth, be the cause of the eclipse of the
Moon? For Philosophy, who ever went to them to know his duty toward his
friend or fo, kiffe or kin, prince or subject? How he was to frame a
syllogism, what were the elements, whereof all things are made? What Prince
for governing his realm did ever use them, rather then wise and sage
Councillors? If the question be of the best form of government, what laws,
what fashions are fittest, who in these causes conferreth with the Astrologer,
and not rather with the Statesman? If for answer to these and the like
objections they shall tell us that their predictions are in another manner of
subject, as in particular actions of men, depending upon their nativity, who
does not see how they seek shifts and euasions, such as at this time my
leisure can not stand upon? For particulars, can they tell us whether Peter was
ever at Rome: where King Arthur died; and how, and where he was buried, and
such like?

CHAP. X.
Of the small use of Predictions though they were true.

FArther we say, that if their predictions or prognostications be true, the^
they are of necessity; and if of necessity they cannot be avoided, and if
they cannot be avoided, they are known in vain: for to what end should we
know things so before, if we cannot prevent and avoid them? Nay, by this
means we should be in much worse case, then if we knew nothing, being
tormented and vexed, not only with the present evils, but with expectation of
them long before. This well knew Seneca, as may well appear by those words,
Epist. lib. 13. Epist. 89, Whether the stars (says he) be causes of events
(what avails the knowledge of a thing immutable) or signify only, to what
end would thou prevent that which thou can not escape? Whether thou
know or know them not, all is one, come to pass they will. But both
pithily, and like a Philosopher has Phauorinus concluded this case in few
words. They foretell us (says he) either good or bad things. If they foretell
good things and deceive, thou shall be unhappy with long expectation: if they
foretell true things, but ill, then thine own mind will make thee unfortunate
before thy destiny come: if they foretell good things which shall happen, then
shall thou have a double cross, for both shall thou be wearied with long
expectation and long hope, and thy forehope shall much abate and blemish the
fruit of thy future joy. Therefore there can be no good use of these
predictions, so that here may have place that of Sophocles, (...).
Where little wit and sense is found,
The pleasant life does more abound.
And how miserable a thing it is, to be in suspense between hope and fear,
and to be subject to the affectionate expectation of future events, witnesses
Horace lib. 1. Epist. 2.

Qui cupit, aut metuit, iuuat illum sic domus aut res,
Vt lippum pictae tabulae fomenta podagram.
Who longs and fears, of house and goods,
no greater comfort has,
Then bleared eyes by pictures fair,
and gowtie legs by bath.
If we had but any mean care, these things were enough to awake us, and stir
us up to a better consideration. The Trojans, when by the blow of Laocoons dart
they heard the armor rattle, and sound within the horse, they might have
learned, Si men's non laeua fuisset, ferro Argolicas foedare latebras; but in
their mad mood besotted through Sinons subtilty, as cosening a Jack as any
figure-flinger, but a great deal more cunning, they hoise in the horse with
heave and hoe, funemque manu contingere gaudent. Do not we the like? we see
these liers striving for the whetstone, and yet, as if they said nothing but
truth, we embrace and admire them, and by buying their books maintain their
lewd practice.

CHAP. XI.
The folly of predictions, confirmed by the diversity of twins, who being
borne both at once, dissent oftentimes in the whole course of their life, and
actions, with an answer to Figulinus Firmicus, and S. Thomas.

What are they able to say for twins, which are borne eodem enixu, sometime
one holding fast by the other; which often times notwithstanding are most
unlike, the one being a boy, the other a girl: the one being born alive, the
other dead. Proclus and Euristhenes twins and kings of Lacedaemonia, were
both in the end, and in the whole course of their life most contrary. But most
forcible is the example of Jacob and Esau, being most different in disposition,
manners, course of life, end, and whatsoever. If all heaven had bin altered
between their birthes, they could not have bin more different. To this they
are wont to answer, that the time which passes while the twins are borne,
though it seem little to us, yet to heaven, by reason of the swift motion, is
great, and makes great diversity. If this be true, that the constellation of
natiuities be so quickly past, then it will follow, that the Astrologer will
lack time to observe it in, and farther the reason of S. Gregory Homil. 10
sup. Euang. shall stand good. If therefore (says he) Jacob and his brother are
to be thought not borne under the same constellation, because one of them was
borne after the other, for the same reason we must think, that no one man is
wholly borne under the same constellation, for he comes not all away at once,
but peece-meale, part after part, first the head, then the neck, then the
breast, and last the feet. Jacob was borne with hold upon Esau, as if it were
all one birth. This matter of twins has S. August. discoursed at large, lib.
5. de ciuit. Dei, and lib. 2. de doctr. Christiana.

But for the whole matter of twins the Astrologers need not to take much
care, Nigidius Figulinus will clear that point, and make it as plain as pap
and porridge. For though his name were Nigidius, yet was he no Nigid: being
stung and netled with this objection of twins, he tells us such a solemn
tale of the fast running of a potters wheel, as he thought was beyond al
expectation: but sure I think the wheel, when he looked on it, ran so fast,
that it made him gyddie: when he had talked al he can of his potters wheel, he
might well hear that of Horace; -- amphora coepit
Institui currente rota cur vrceus exit?
It did begin at first to be
a pot of largest sise:
But in the end pot would not come,
but pitcher did arise.
When he has puffed and taken on all that he can, he brings forth no more
then the swelling mountain.

Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculusmus,
The hill does swell and takes on,
as it would cleave in sunder:
And out there startes a little mouse,
which made all laugh and wonder.
But now let us hear the wheel creake a while. If (says he) while he runs
his swift course, you do prick it twice with as much speed as ever you can,
and cause it to stand still, you shall see what a great distance and space will be
between the two pricks, which you made. Wherefore (says Nigid.) if heaven
could be marked after the same manner with two pricks, what a monstrous space
would be between them, considering how infinitely swifter the heaven runs
the^ any wheel?

-- Dij te Figuline, deaeque
Rectum ob consilium donent tonsore.
God send thy Barbar (Figuline)
a rasor sharp and kene,
To cut away the shagged hair,
that hangs in thine eyne.
Figulines comparison is scarce worth a fig. For suppose between the pricks
upon the wheel, were found a quarter of the wheel, then between the pricks
made with the like speed in the (...) or utter rim of heaven, will be a great
deal more then a quarter, nay infinitely more, considering how much swifter
heaven runs then any wheel. Farther, if he had not bin a Nigid, here he
should have considered how unlike and unfit his comparison was, the wheel
running about, God knows, how many thousand times, while the heaven goes but
once about. The heaven (as all save Nigits know) moves round but once in 24
hours, in which time how many thousand times the wheel will about, God
knows. Suppose the wheel went about but once in 24 hours, as heaven does,
and then he might have said somewhat, but not much to the purpose, for then one
might give two pricks with such speed, as that no great space would be
between them. The swiftness of the motion of heaven in this case is not to be
measured by the course of his (...) but by the angles which he describes at
the ce^ter, upon which altogether depends the alteration of the position, and
face of heaven. Now considering the distance and the swift motion of heaven, if
there should light many thousand miles between these two imaginary pricks:
yet in so infinite a body it were a matter of nothing, nor would make any
sensible difference. Farther if the swiftnes were such, that the manner of
constellation were so quickly altered, then the birth time of any cold never be
taken, nay farther the reason of S. Gregory, Homil tom. sup. Euang. would be
good and vailable. If therefore says he, Jacob and Esau may be thought not to
be borne under the same Place this in folio 53.
constellation, because they were not borne together, but one after another.
For the same cause we must judge that no one man is wholly borne under the same
constellation, for he comes not al at once out of the womb, but piece by
piece, first head, the^ neck then breast and so forth. Lastly, Jacob houlding
Esau by the foot, it might seem to be one birth, as S. August. says, lib. 2.
de genesis ad lit. cap. 17. But to press this matter of twins a little nearer,
what would gentle Nigid say to the monster borne in Scotland, recorded by
Buchana^, which in the lower parts was but one, having but one pair of legs,
but above the nauill was two, having two pair of arms, and two heads. If you
pricked, or hurt, any place beneath the nauill, they both felt it, but if you
pricked above the nauill, the one felt only: they would often chide, and some
time confer lovingly together, they lived till they were 28 years old, then
one of them dying, with stincke and putrefaction was the cause of the death of
the other. These two were borne at once, why should they not die at once? why
should the one die by disease, the other by stincke? by their birth they should
have agreed well, as having one constellation, but they did often wrangle and fall
out pitifully. If heaven cold not agree and accord them, yet their private
necessities should have maintained better agreement, between them. The like
story has Munster of two maids, which lived til they were ten years old,
whom he himself knew, being borne with their foreheads joined together, and
all the rest of their bodies several. At the ten years end, the one dying, to
save the other they ventred to sever them by cutting, but upon the cut which
cold not be cured, the other died not long after: here also we see, that
though they were borne at once, yet they died not at once, nor after one
manner. These things being thus, Nigid might do well to leave the wheel to the
potter where he had it, and who can use it better, for sure it does not greatly
serve his turn. But of Nigid for his devise may well be said that of the
Proverb, Turdus cacat sibi malu^, for if it be true, that in so small a moment
of time there be such a great alteration in heaven by reason of the exceeding
swift motion, then may all poor mathematicians put up their pipes. For if in
so little time there be so great alteration, that all things become not only
diverse, but also quite contrary, who shall ever be able to judge of the birth,
since the very moment, wherein conception and nativity are, by no means can
be had? Wherefore though we should grant that the stars had great force and
power over us, notwithstanding be it what it will, no man could ever comprehend
it, seeing these moments of constellations can not be had, the swift course of
the stars, far passing and preue^ting the slownes of our observation. Julius
Firmicus that famous trifler, seeing the force of this argument, sets a good
face on it, and labors a pace with many words to lose this knot, but with
what success, and how miserably every man that list, may see. Being struck
with this argument, he courseth up and down, in and out as a dear struck
with an arrow, but in vain; for he cannot so be rid of it. Haeret lateri
lethalis arundo,
The deadly arrow in his side
does stick and there it will abide.
S. Thomas seeing this great slaughter of his friends, yet will not give over:
he must needs venture one foot farther, according to that, Quondam etiam victis
redit in praecordia virtus,
Sometime the beaten very stowte,
does turn again and fight it out:
Playing the part of Proteus with quircks and quiddities, he does no less
entangle himself then did Proteus in his nets but his fashion is now and then
to run a subtlety out of breath, though in the end he see not greatly what to
do with it, or what good can come of it. In a treatise entitled de fato, he
says, that twins often times differ in disposition, because all the seed is
not received in the mother in the same instant. Again, because there is not
one and the same center of the hearts of both the twins, but diverse and in
diverse places, therefore he says that there is also a difference of Horizo^s.
Here is first to be considered how little pause there is in the receiving of
the parts of the seed, then how little asunder the two hearts be to change
the whole nature of men. If this be admitted, it will not be enough for the
Chaldea^s, or figure-flingers, to tell him that such a one was borne at London
or York; for example, but you must tell him in what street, in what house, in
what chamber, and in what part of the chamber; for all these will vary the
Horizon, much more then the poor cells of the mother. But howsoever S. Thomas
hit into this quirke here, yet in the whole question otherwhere he runs with
the curra^t of the church and fathers, and it is strange that he should stand
here upon so ridiculous a difference of Horizons. If in many miles the
difference of Horizons be not sensible, what can it be in these two hearts. If
thus to scan and wrest things be not Nodu^ in scirpo quaerere, I know not what
is. Amphion and Zethus, though they began with some argeeme^t, for they were
both expositi: yet in the whole course of their life they were as dissenting as
could be, no more the^ a grave Philisopher, and an harsh clown of the great
difference of this pair of twins you may see both Athenaeus lib. 7. and
Plato in Gorgia, and Tully lib. 2 de orat. and Dion. Chrysostom orat (...). their
iarring is well noted by Horace also libro. 1 Epist. Epist. 19.

Gratia sic fratrum geminorum, Amphionis atque
Zethi dissiluit.
Of whom also Propert. 3. Eleg. 15.6.

Et durum Zethum and Lachrymis Amphionamallem,
Experta est stabulis matter abacta suis.
Twin Zethus, and twin Amphion,
who had the self same mother,
By this means fell to iarres, and could
not well abide each other.
As these agreed in nothing but the position of heaven, so many others
differing in that only, have agreed with a marvelous consent in all their life,
and actions, as those payres who are made famous to all posterity, for their
concurrence, and liking in the course of their lives, as Theseus and Perithous,
Pilades and Orestes, Damon and Pythias, Nisus and Euryalus, who, though they
dissented in nativity: yet otherwise were linked together with a marvelous
consent, which could not be by reason of heaven, in which they had nothing
common, but by reason of some other cause. The Countess of Holland had 365
children, al hatched at once, is it like that they all had the same fortune?
Castor and Pollux twins also, yet not very like in their courses, the one
being a good rider, the other good at buffets. No more it seems did this
twinnishnesse work in Romulus and Remus, whose ends, actions and enterprises
how ill they suited, appears at large in Halycarnasseus and Liuie.

Now as the argument from the nativity of twins is, as you see, very
forcible; so if we should insist upon the conception, would it be more
forcible? The conception of twins being in the same moment, there cannot be
admitted any such alteration in the position of heaven, but that the twins
must needs have all things alike and answerable: which because they have not,
we may easily estimate how little is to be attributed to constellations. This
argument from the conception is very militant for us, unless some will fly to
salve and second it out of superfetation, which is yet a doubt depending, and
therefore not fit for deciding of questions. For if it shall be said, that the
seed of twins is received at diverse times of some distance, I grant it may be
so, yet I think it is more then they are able to prove, the mouth of the
mother after conception, shutting it self so close, as may be, if we believe
Galen or Hippocrates lib. 5. Aph. Aph. 51. or Auicen. lib. 3. sen. 21. tract.
1. cap. 16. this holds very constantly, saving in women and mares, which two
only of all other things admit the use of the male after conception. Whereby
it may come to pass, that they may have superfetation: yet both Pliny and
Aristotle other where affirm that the Hare and Conie use superfetation, so
that after the conception of one, they will conceive of another before they be
delivered of the first.

Also we see it in many birds: for example, Phesants, which being put
together cock and hen, the hen will not lay any egg till two months after;
which proves that every egg is two months in perfecting; but after she
begins to lay once, she will be scarce two days between every egg
laying, which could not be without superfetation. In women (says Aristotle
Hist. Animalium 7. cap. 4.) superfetation happens not often, nevertheless
sometime it does, and both live, so that there go some reasonable space
between the conceptions, after which manner Fablers do report Hercules and
Iphiclus to have been begotten. There was also (says he) a queen, which
lying with her husband, and her man both on one day, brought forth at one
birth, one like her huband, another like her man. These and such like are
related both by Aristotle, and Pliny lib. 7. which are rare examples. But if
one would contend, he needed not confess that those twins were got by
superfetation, although a great Physician Erasistratus affirms all twins to
be conceived by superfetation. Hippo and Empedocles think they come at one
lying together, by reason of the great quantity of seed; Asclepiades
attributing it not to the abundance, but quality and virtue of the seed. To
these two Auicen adds a third cause, that is, the shedding of the seed into
the two ventricles of the mother, where are conceived the two twins. But
whether it be by the abundance, or quality, or diversity of places, they must
and are conceived together, as the most and best hold, without any
superfetation. For if superfetation be admitted, then the one is in danger to
bane the other, by his coming sooner or later then his time, if they come
together; although we have heard of some that have been delivered of one after
another some good time, according to the distance of their conceptions.

Here were also to be considered, that one side of the matrix is stronger then
the other, both by philosophy and physic: which being so, though two twins
should concur in the time of conception, yet they might vary in their birth,
that which were sooner ready coming sooner into the world. It is also known
that a man-child comes faster on to his pefection, so long as he is unborn,
though after birth contrary, the woman ripeneth faster then the man child:
which being true, it must needs follow, that though a boy and a gyrle were
conceived together, yet they might have several births, the boy being sooner
ready both by reason of his sex, and perhaps also for being conceived in the
stronger part of the mother. For those answerable, and as it were pararelled
parts in the body, who can doubt, but they are the most precise and exact
twins that may be; I mean the eyes, the ears, the arms, the legs, fingers,
toes, and such like. Both the eyes no question are borne as just in the same
instant or moment as nothing can be iuster, yet the one continuing, we often
see his fellow blind, either by a reume or a blow, or some obstruction of
spirits, or such like. How often do we see the palfy possess the one half only
of the body both for motion and sense, leaving the other half free? the one
ear deaf, the other ear well: the one great toe gowtie, the other not; the
one hand cut off the other hold on; the one side of the head troubled with the
Hemicrania or Migram, and not the other? Yet no twins came ever so just
together into the world, as these answerable parts do one with another, eye
with eye, ear with ear, and so forth in the rest. Let any of our cunning men
show how these differences and diversities may be deduced cleanly from the
stars, and erit mihi maximus Augur, that is, as good a wisard as the proudest
of them all. As before we said, that their continual and common lying was
sufficient argument to prove that they had no ground of art; so now farther we
say, that for lack of sufficient observations they can have no art. For what
if such a man, borne in such a constellation, had such events, will it
therefore of this one observation follow, that every one so borne shall have
the like? Nay, they must remember, that vnica hirundo non facit ver. Therefore
that their predictions may be sure and firm, they must have observed the
selfsame habitude of stars, not once only in one man's birth, but again and
again diverse times, that seeing and observing still the same events in the
same constellation, we may learn that whenever the stars shall be so
placed, that then we are to look for the same events and accidents. And as in
physic we learn that a wound in the heart is death, not only because Dio
died of such a wound, but also because Theon and Socrates and diverse other died
of the like: so in Astrology we may believe that this figure of heaven has
this signification, if first it has been certified, and ratified by a
multitude of consenting observations. Seeing therefore that the same figure of
heaven comes but once in anno magno, that is, in years 36000. in so many
thousand years, we can make observation but of one nativity, which also will
be in great danger to miscary, and to be lost, by reason of so many decays and
ruins of the whole world, or at least of the earth, either all at once or by
peece-meale, in so infinite time. This devise of Annus magnus some utterly
disclaim from, as an impossibility, the motion of the stars being (as they
allege) incommensurable, so that they can never all come to the same
co^formation again. But the lying of these mates lies so open, that they
need neither me, nor any man else to confute or refell them. They babble much
here of the long continuance of the Egyptians, that the Chaldeans had so plied
this case, that they had recorded in writing the natiuities of 407000. years,
though to the contrary we know that it is not yet 6000. years complete from
the beginning of the world to this day. The original of the Chaldeans,
reckened from the division of tongues, is not yet 4000. years past. Hipparchus
and Ptolemie using the very ancientest observations that they could get,
cannot get any beyond Nabonassarus. These Egyptian antiquities are no less
pleasantly then acutely confuted by Saint Augustine lib. 18. de Ciuit. cap. 40.
Rashly and vainly presume some to say, that it is 100000. years since the
Egyptians began first to observe stars. But in what records or books have
they found this number, that received not past two thousand years ago their
first letters of Dame Isis? Though proofs out of profane Authors will not
be esteemed of some, yet for the fancy of a few I do not see why I should
forsake that course and way, wherein so many notable men have gone before me,
for to use that of the Poet, Quod decuit tantos cur mihi turpe putem? And since
such have done it, ego homu^cio id non facerem? And many grave and ancient
Fathers give us this lesson, to take from Philosophers, whatsoever good thing
we find in them as stray goods, and so to bring it home again for our own
use, because all truth is of God, whom we are to worship. So does S. Hierome
teach, and so does S. Basil in a proper book of that argument. S. Augustine
also practiced it himself, and in his book de doctrina Christiana so teaches
others. The same did others by the example of Moses, who was perfect in all
manner of Egyptian learning: also by the example of S. Paul, who alleges
verses out of Epimenides, Menander and Aratus, in whom also we find that for
Philosophers, Quod natura est Dei, manifestum est illis, that which was known
of God, was manifest to them. In the first of Daniel it is said, that God gave
the three children knowledge in all learning and wisdom. Damascen interpreted
Aristotle (...). Augustine having begun all Arts, finished some. Aquinas almost
upon all Aristotle: so did also Bonauentura: so have infinite good Divines done
of late: for the ancient fathers never condemned the truth wheresoever they
found it: nay, rather if they found any thing well said of Christians that had
erred, they were not afraid to use it. For they would not reject all Cyprians
works, because he held an error in Baptism. Origin had his faults, and yet
the Church allows many of his writings. So Saint Hierome borrows many
good things of them, whom he condemns of heresy, neither does he reject the
books of Lactantius and others because they were full of errors. So Saint
August. in his book de doctrina Christiana uses and likes certain rules of
the heretic Ticonius. In the word of God we are set to learn of the Emet,
the Lilies of the field, and the fowls of the air, and why then may we not
learn of Aristotle? The heavens declare the glory of God, and why not
Aristotle? And if he declare it, why may we not learn it of him? Balaam was
admonished of his Ass, much more may we of Plato. God has ordained praise out
of the mouths of babes and sucklings, which babes may well be the
Philosophers, as nourished with milk, rather then the sound meat of the word.
The Fathers often, as you may see by their homilies, preached without any text:
and S. Paul made no choice of a Canonical Text, when he preached upon the
Inscriptio ignoto Deo. Moses harkened to Iethro a Priest of Madian, and married
his daughter: Let Iethro be Aristotle, and his daughter Philosophy, whence by
some reasonable analogy may follow, that Christians may study philosophy, and
hearken to Philosophers. Hierem. chap. 35. the Jews are willed to learn of
the Rechabites: neither can some time spent in philosophy schools do any
harm, so that when we part from them we bring with us somewhat to furnish the
Church of God as the Israelites did, going out of Egypt. Our Savior himself
many times confirms his doctrine out of vulgar speech, as when he uses
that common saying, Nemo propheta in patria, and when he alleges against the
Jews judging of the alterations of the weather, their own saying: You say
(says he) if the evening be red, it will be fair, if the morning red, it will
be tempest. Likewise in the 16. of Luke, he uses a prouerbiall speech: He
that is faithful in the less, will be faithful in the more.

CHAP. XII.
Astrology by philosophers either condemned as wicked, or neglected as vain
and foolish.

AS in our divinity proofs was showed, that doctors, fathers, councels were
all banded against these iuglers: so here also may be produced an infinite
catalogue of Philosophers, and profane authors, who have ever condemned this
vanity. Xenophon in his book de factis and dictis Socratis, reports that
Socrates was wont to say, that the knowledge of future things, which belongs
to God only, is not to be attempted by men, because that men cannot attain
to such knowledge.

Pythagoras, Plato, and Democritus having traveled for to confer with the
Magicians of Persia, the wise men of Chaldea, and priests of Egypt, either
never learned of them this kind of art, or if they did, they seemed ever
utterly to contemn it as never vouchsafing to mention it in any writing.
Aristotle though he has no where writ purposely condemning this vanity, yet
his opinion scatteringly appears in many places of his works, (...), his
words be these, Futurorum contingentium non esse certam, et definitam
veritatem: and Quae per accidens, quaequeraro, vel ad vtrumlibet contingunt,
non posse scientia comprehendi, he has also delivered this very repugnant to
this star-craft, that these signs of corporal and sensible effects drawn
from the stars, may be avoided and auerred by others causes, according to
that of Ptolemy, Sapiens dominabitur astris. By Cicero. lib. 2. de diuinatione
it is plain that Eudoxus, Panetius, Archelaus, Cassander, and Scylax,
Halicarnasseus, all great Astronomers, did utterly reject these toys of
Astrology. Auicen would not have us to harken to the predictions of
Astrologers in things to come, because they neither know the points of heaven
nor the nature of these inferior things, neither are their predictions
grounded upon demonstration, but upon oratoricall, and poetical proofs. As of
Aristotle; so it is plain of the whole sect of Peripatetiques, in that they
hold that heaven uses only these means in working, to wit, light, and
motion. Even Ptolemy also in certain books de Fato, and prouide^tia yet
extant, has abundantly confuted these follies, showing them not to be the
causes of these effects, but sometime perhaps to signify, being but universal
and confused signs, whence proceeds a very deceitful and uncertain
conjecture. Wherefore Porphyrie writing his life, says, that after long study
of Astronomy, he perceived there was no trust to be given to the doomes of
Astrologers, which is also proved plentifully by Auicen in the last book of
his metaphysickes. Aulus Gellius has recorded a long and large discourse of
the great philosopher Phauorinus against Chaldeans the chief brokers and
brochers of this art. Picus also shows how Diogenes Laert. Seneca, Plutarch,
Seuerianus, and diverse others both ancient, and modern rejected these toys,
and in his last book, cap. 6. he relates that saying of Porphyrie, that then
oracles did fail, and fitten, when they would answer by Astrology, which
Porphyrie also, as testifies Philip Morney cap. 13. de verit. relig. says
that Apollo, when he could not answer out of the stars, was wont to desire
men to depart, and ask him no questions, for if they did, he threatened to
tell them nothing but lies. This was fair warning and plain dealing, and I
think the truest oracle that he ever uttered. Alexander Aphrod. the chief
interpreter of Aristotle among the Greeks, writ a book de Fato to Seuerus the
Emperor and Antonius his son, in which confuting Fatum, he says nothing of
Astrology, which the very name of Fatum would have forced him to, if he had not
utterly contemned it. In this iumpe with him the rest of the interpreters, who,
if at any time they name Astronomy, they show that they mean only that which
considers the course of the heavens. Ammonius the interpreter of Porphyrie in
the beginning of his work, has sufficiently uttered his mind. Auerroes
chief expositor among the Arabians every where baiteth, and hunteth Astrology,
affirming it to be no art, and the figures imagined in heaven, to be but a mere
fable and a tale of a tubbe, without which notwithstanding Astrology can hardly
stand. It were infinite to recite the late Philosophers that have banded
against this vanity. That of Plautus Horentinus is worth the marking, he when
he had lived 85 years, cast his own nativity examining it with as much art
and diligence as he could, notwithstanding he could find no sign of long life
in it. As for those that have written in defense or approbation of this art,
either new or old, there is such paucity, that you may well say of them that:
apparent rari nautes in gurgite vasto, they appear here one, and there one
like drowned rats; otherwise they would never fly for succor to those
counterfeits, to wit a book of Arist. entitled of great conjunctions, and
secrets to Alexander, which was never his. With the like folly they attributed
to Plato certain books, bearing the name of institution books, stuffed with
toies and trifles. Likewise they allege a book of Ovid de vetula, upon which
friar Bacon relieth much. They father also upon Albertus magnus, and Tho.
Aquinas a book de Necromanticis imaginibus, a babble not worth the name of
Thomas, and far from his judgment in many other places. Thus we see, what
poor shift they make to save themselves, much like a man in drowning, who
catches round about at every thing to help himself. But they will say, that
they have of every side good Philosophers, if we could hitte on them. As for
example, Ptolemy, Haly, Firmicus, Albunasar and others. For Ptolemy, as he was
a rare man in mathematiques; so for this matter of astrology one said very well
of him, that he was optimus malorum, that is, of bad the best; but for his
philosophy and understanding of Aristotle diverse learned men have taken
exception for his division of contemplative philosophy in his beginning of his
Almagest into Theological, Mathematical and Natural, because all things, as he
there says, consist of matter, form and motion, which are separable by
thought only, and not in deed: farther yelding the cause, why the Moon is
moist, he ascribes it to the vapors, which it draws from the earth, the^
how much more moist should the Sun be, which is known to draw infinitely more?
the^ he says that Saturn is cold because of his distance from the Sun; and
Mars hot by reason of his vicinity. To which may be said that of Mars has his
heat from the Sun, why is not the Sun as hot, or hotter then Mars? These things
are ridiculous in philosophy and not worthy confutation. Of Albumasar, I have
said before so much as may bewray his weakness. For Firmicus as I have said in
an other place, he is but a talker. He writes that Mercury in a night
nativity may possess medium coeli or the tenth house, whereas it is plain,
that Mercury can never be there then. For ever on the night time the Sun is
more then forty degrees from any part of mid-heauen: and Mercury is always
within thirty degrees or thereabout of the Sun, for which cause he was wont to
be called Pileatus, as wearing an hat to save him from the heat of the Sun,
which was so nere him. I have in another place spoken of his wise opinion, how
the stars and heaven have nothing to do in Emperors nativity. Guido
Bonatus fears that the four mathematikes can not stand, if strology fail.
But full wisely, as if he knew not the difference of Astrology and Astronomy,
Bardesanes also a man very well learned in these points, has a very good edge
this way, as appears by Eusebius lib. 6. Euang. praepar. cap. 8. because the
place there is very notable, I will here set it down: It is as follows; Among
the Seres the law forbids murder, adultery, and idolatry, so that in those
countries is neither whore, thief, nor murderer, neither does the fiery star
of Mars in the midst of heaven there force any man's will to manslaughter,
neither could Venus in conjunction with Mars cause any to mistress another
man's wife. Although it cannot be chosen, but that every day once Mars moves
to the midst of heaven, neither can it be denied, but in so great a country
men are borne every hour. Among the Indians and Bactrians there be many
thousands of those whom we call Brachmanni, who, what for tradition by
fathers, what for laws, neither worship images, nor eat any live thing,
neither ever drink either wine or ale, but refraining from all evil, tend
only upon the service of God. In the mean time all other Indians their
countrie-men, wallow in murder, drunkenness and Idolatry. There are also
found some, or rather there is an whole nation in the Indies, dwelling in the
same climate, which hunting and sacrificing men, devour them: neither do any
stars, be they never so good, keep them from blood and villainy, neither
any stars so bad, that they can make the Brachmanni commit folly. By the laws
in Persia men might marry their daughters and mothers: neither did they this
in Persia only: but when they change their country and climate they retain and
use these abominations; for which cause other countries detesting their
filthiness, call the^ Magussaeos. And there be to this day in Egypt, Phrygia,
and France, many of these Magussaei, which by succession from their fathers are
stained and polluted with this gear. Yet we cannot say, that they were all
borne in the house of Saturn, or Mars, being in conjunction with Venus. The
Amazones have no husbands, but in the spring time go to their neighbor
countries, and lie with the men: so it comes to pass, that by the course of
nature they must all be delivered at once, and killing the males, they bring
up only the females, becoming all warlike by a great care of actiuitie. It
were folly to think that all these women were borne under the same
constellation. This may be fortified and confirmed by the example of the Jews,
who living dispersedly, continually circumcise on the eight day, and rest the
Sabbath day. Now all the Jews had not the same position of heaven in their
natiuities, neither could any celestial power hale and pull them from the rites
and customs of their fathers. But what shall we say of Christians, who being
scattered infinitely all over the world, keep the same kind of life, and
doctrine, from which we cannot be moved a whit with rewards, threats, or
punishment? Will they say that all Christians had one Horoscopus? But that of
all others is most forcible, that they which before their conversion were most
earnest in the ways of their ancestors, after they were once converted,
changed religion, manners, kind of life so clean, as if they had never been
the same men. Wherefore so many Parthians as be Christians keep not many
wives, nor the Medes cast their dead to the dogs, nor the Indians burn their
dead, nor the Persians marry their daughters and sisters, nor the Egyptians
worship the dogs, or Apes and such like, but in all places they follow the same
laws, rites and manners. To be short, daily men are borne every where, and
every where we see them observe their own laws and fashions; neither do the
birth-stars force the Seres to commit murder, or the Brachmanni to eat flesh,
neither can they reclaim the Persians from their incestuous marriages, nor the
Medes from casting their dead to the dogs, nor the Parthians from multitude of
wives: for all nations as they list, etc. when they will use their liberty in
obeying their laws and customs, Hitherto Bardesanes. With like arguments to
these, you might fill whole volumes, and ouercharge the world. Ethiopians were
all black, were they belonging to one constellation? Farther, it is no fable
which is received of Hermophrodites, which play both the man and woman's part,
as they list, and at their choice. Such are the people beyond the Nasamones,
and their next neighbors Madians, as says Calliphanes: and such be found
also in Europe, not only among the people called Lumenses, among whom it is
severely looked to, and provided, that every one shall at the first choose
whether sex he will, and hold himself to it in pain of death: must these
therefore for this conuenience be all borne under one star? And should not
the same constellation make Hermophrodites here as well as there? The like may
be said of the great people called Arimaspi, who are all borne with one eye
only, which accident Eustathius upon Dyonys. does refer not to the stars, but
to their winking of one eye when they shoot: for with much winking in aiming
that eye waxed less, first in the fathers, then in the sons, then in their
children, and so still less and less, till at last it was quite out, and so
continued.

Herodotus in Thalia reports that the brain or sculs of the Persians were so
soft and tender, that one might pierce them with a small peble stone; but the
sculles of the Egyptians so hard, that they would not break with a great
stone, which difference he refers not to any constellation, but to the
diversity of education, the Egyptians using to shave their heads, and go in the
sun, whereby their sculs were hardened: the Persians contrary, never
shauing, but keeping their heads warm with caps and tires.

Therefore we may see that there is more required to the conueniences and
differences, then the position of stars according to that of Aristotle, Sol
and homo generant hominem, not Sol alone, nor homo alone: whence it will
follow, that for the foreseeing of future effects, there is more required then
the knowledge of celestial causes. Philosophy teaches us, that vt res habet
ad esse, sic se habet ad cognosci, that is, by what causes any thing is made,
by the same it must be known, if we seek for sure and certain knowledge.

With those profane testimonies alleged a little before, agrees that of
Ecclesiastes cap. 7. verse. 1. For who can show what is good for man in the
life, and in the number of the days of the life of his vanity, seeing he
makes them as a shadow, for who can show unto man what shall be after him?
What a vain question were this, if every Astrologer could by casting of
natiuities, and setting of figures foretell our actions and accidents. But more
vain were it if that brazen head made by Albertus magnus, and placed in his
study could answer ad omnia quaesita, as is reported by Tostatus, Number. to. 1.
fol. 22. col. 2.

This head by like was wont to tell schooletales, and therefore S. Thomas his
scholar getting into his study, fell upon it, and brake it, and defaced it:
this head was made by Astrology and art magike, as witnesses the same
Tostatus. He also relates the like of another brazen head shrined at Zamara in
Spain. That ever any such head spoke we need not to believe, but if it did,
it was the devil that answered within it, whom God does often permit thus to
delude us, because we delight in error, and willingly deceive ourselves,
harkening to lies rather then truth. When men broch such bables to the world,
affirming them to be done by Astrology, or a certain wicked concealed Art,
called (...), are they not worthily derided, and called coniurers; yea, though
they have studied many years, spent much money, and traveled many countries?
For their long study, if it be but of toys, they may worthily hear that,
(...). For their great charges and expenses they may hear that of Horace,
Dedecorum pretiosus emptor, a child will give more for a rattle or a
hobbyhorse, then a wise man will do for some good thing. And lastly, if after
such long travel they can make no more use of their labor, but to tell us
tales of Hobgoblin, and Will with wispe, let them pity them that list, only
the pity was that ever they came home again. To travel far, if it be on
foot, is a sign of good legs, but with a pair of good legs may go a fond
head: and, if it be on horseback, yet a man's follies may sit so close to him,
that he shall hardly ouer-ride them; for that which Horace says, Od. 1. lib.
3. Post equitem sedet atra cura, is also very true in this case: our follies
are sure companions, and therefore are called of Saint Basil very fitly (...).
which with agrees that of the Poet, Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare
currunt,
The heaven and air they only change,
That foreign countries use to range.
Ulysses is called (...), and such like, not for bringing home with him a Be
in a box, or such like: but his commendation was for seeing many country
fashions, and choosing the best if he had harkned to the Sirens singing O decus
Argolicum quin puppimflectis Ulysses,
Auribus vt nostros possis agnoscere cantus.
Nam nemo haec vnquam est transuectus caerula cursu,
Quin prius astiterit vocum dulcedine captus.
Ulysses do^ght^e knight of Greece,
mark well what we shall say:
For all men love to hear our voice,
that use to pass this way.
Horace will tell you then, Epist. 2. lib. 1. Epist.
Vixisset canis immundus, aut amica luto sus,
He had become a filthy dog,
Or else a swine and dartie hog.
Which is to be feared may well happen to many of our Tra^ellers at this day:
and if you did see some of their courses beyond sea, you would not only fear
it, but swear it.

CHAP. XIII.
Astrologers punished by Emperors, and derided by Alexander the Great.

But to return, beside the condem^ation of P^ilosophers, we see how that kind
of people have been persecuted by diverse Emperors, as Dioclesian, Constantine,
Theodosius and Valentinianus, but especially of Justinian, who all held this
profession not only vain and frivolous, but also pernicious and pestilent,
according to that of Tacitus, Mathematici genus hominum potent^bus infidum,
sperantibus fallax. The same Author reports, lib. 20. annal. that there were
laws enacted at Rome for the banishment of Astrologers out of Italy, anno
vrbis 614. Valerius reports, lib. 1. that Cornelius Hispalus Praetor made
proc^amation, that within ten days all this kind of people should back out
of, not Rome only, but also all Italy. And ^ io in the end of his 49. book
shows, that anno vrbis 721. M. Agrippa Aedilis thrust out of the City all
Figure-flingers and Iuglers.

Augustus also, as witnesses the same Author, lib. 56. forbad all these cold
Prophets to prognosticate. Vlpian also lib. 7. de Offic. Procons has these
words: Farthermore, the wily and crafty legerdemain of Astrologers was
forbidden. Neither was it then first forbidden, for it was prohibited of old.
Farther, there is a statute to be seen, wherein it is provided that
Figure-flingers, Wisards, and such as practice such lewd means to live by,
should be discommuned, and their goods confiscate. The same Author further
adds: It has bin very often forbidden almost of all princes, that no man
should enterprise, or meddle with such toys and follies, and they were diverse
ways punished, that entertained those lewd practices. Though gra^e and stayed
men will not be easily sed^ced by these iugling Iackes, yet because, as one
says, Leuia, et inepta ingenia are wont to listen to such witless ware, good
magistrates provided wholesome laws for the restraint of them. For that all
their art and profession, is but mere ghessing and hittie missie, as has been
showed before, may appear by the answer of Alexand. to the Chaldeans, who
upon their skill in predictions, dehorted him from going to Babylon, alleging,
that that iourny at that time could have no good issue. To whom he answered,
as is in Arrhian lib. 7. that verse of Euripides: (...).
No Wisard wiser is then he,
That ghesseth well, for ought I see.


This is that Graecus vulgaris versus alleged by Tully to the same purpose.
lib. 2. de diuina. It is marvel that Tully being so addicted and devoted to
Eurip. that he esteemed every verse of him a sufficient proof: It is marvel I
say that he would not rather quote him in this place by name, as he does
otherwhere, then allege it so nicely, as if he knew not who had bin the author
of it. Farther by his translation which he gives, it should seem that he had
it by tradition, and hearesay, not by reading of Eurip. For neither has he
altogether followed Eurip. in sense, nor, as he did, expressed it in verse; for
with him it is, Been qui conijciet, vatem hunc perhibeto optimum. Others, who
had belike not seen Eurip. nor read Tully for perhibeto read perhibebo. But
howsoever we read in greek or latin, this way, or that way, all comes to
one end; the whole art is but ghessing and uncertainties, this says
Euripides, this allowed Tully, this also confirmed Alexander, who (as says the
same Arrhian) having received no harm by his being at Babylon, to shame and
confound as it were the vanity of blind Chaldean prophecies, returned back by
the marshes very co^fidently. And if that be true which Clem. Alex. avouches
in his Eclogues page 345. lin. 45. then must all their predictions be nothing
but lies. For there it is said, that the Angels, which fell, taught men these
arts, now what can the devil teach but lies, who was a lier from the beginning.

CHAP. XIIII.
That none harken to Figure-flingers but Fools, since God has reserved the
the knowledge of future things to himself.

Now if any, notwithstanding that which has bin said, shall be so fond, as still
to rely upon these prophesies, and predictions, let him consider that of S.
Ambrose lib. 4. cap. 4. The art of figure-flingers is like a cobweb, in which
if a fly, or gnat be, 'entangled, it cannot escape, but greater things happening
into the^, they tear and rush through all those weak and slender atercop
nets. So it fares with the figureflingers pursuits, wherein unsettled giddy
pates may easily be, and are snared, while men of sounder sense, and more staid
judgment go clear away. Here have we not only the figure-flingers, but also
his gentle auditour and client touched; for if there were no receivers, there
would be no thieves: if there were no wagling wits, these cogging
figure-flingers might put up their pipes. And so long as there is soothing, we
shall never want southsayers. Farther, we are to consider, that all our
knowledge is limited, and that we do but see as it were in aenigmate, that our
understanding to the clearest things of nature, is but as the owls eye to the
sun, that veritas in profundo latet, that God has reserved many things for
his knowledge; which neither man nor angel can attain to, according to that
of the poet, Nec scire fas est omniae, and therefore the same poet gives us
this counsel for future things, Tu ne quaesieris scire (nefas) quem mihi, quem
tibi
finem dij dederint Leuconoe, nec Babylonios
Tentaris numeros, vt melius quicquid erit pati.
Seek not Leuconoe to know,
what death, and when may thee befall,
Look not for help of wisards craft,
for patience, their help is small.
This poet in this point is very constant; for with this agrees that. ode.
29. lib. 3.

Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus,
Ridetque, si mortalis vltra
Fas trepidat, quod adest memento
Componere aequus.
Divinely God has future things
concealed from mankind,
And laughes when men do quake for fear,
for things that are behind.
With this agrees also that of Pindarus. od. 12. oly.

(...)
(...).
No man ever as yet could get a trusty counselor for actions to come, for in
future things our counsels, and consultations, are obscure and blind. By which
testimonies we see that God has reserved to himself the knowledge of future
things, and not imparted them to any whosoever. This derogation from God seemed
so heinous to the Emperor Constantine, that he punished with loss of life
whosoever went to ask counsel of an Astrologer. And Justinian says, that it
was good for the common wealth, to have geometry taught, but of A^trology he
says it was damnable, and quite forbidden. Also Origin does for the same cause
as far censure the^ which seek to the Astrologers, as the Astrologers
themselves, Hom. 3. in Hier. If any of you seek after the follies of
Astrologers, he is in the land of the Chaldeans. If any waying the day of his
nativity, and, as if there were any thing in the diversity of hours, and
times, admit this opinion, because the stars being thus and thus figured,
make men riotous, adulterers, unchaste and such like, he is in the land of the
Chaldeans.

CAP. XV.
The Astrologers wresting a place of Aristotle to their purpose.

BBut whereas before we alleged Aristotle against these figureflingers, it may
be they will think, that we have offered them great wrong, for they are wont to
take sore hold of a place Polit. lib. 1. cap. 7. where it is reported of
Thales, that he by Astrology foreseeing how the years were like to prove,
bought all the Olives in the country, whereby he did wonderfully enrich
himself. To this authority first we say, that Aristotle does not report this
of Thales, as of his own knowledge, but rather as a tradition by hearesay, as
may very sufficiently appear by those words, (...), Again by Astrology in
that place is meant the observation of rising and setting of certain stars, as
Arcturus, Vergiliae, and so forth, by which men were wont to direct their
husbandry: for that in this sense of foretelling, the stars were to great
purpose, may appear by Clem. Alex. (...) pa. 345. lin. 49. where he says that
the stars are not (...), but (...), to foretell the chaunges of the air,
plenty, dearth, plagues, drouth and such like. With which also a greeth that
which he has (...). lib. 6. page 279. lin. 35. (...). If here they urge that
the name of Astrology is used in that place, they shall but bewray their own
ignorance: for in Aristotle, and other good writers, the words, Astronomy, and
Astrology were all one; neither were they severed, till this counterfeit
divination came up. If then they will know of us by what name their mystery,
and art has passed in the world, we must tell the^ that though it deserved to
pass like a rogue with a bored ear, yet, contrary to desert, as being well
descended, it has passed with this difference, (...), and (...). Of some it is
called (...), and of Clement. Alexand. (...), not being called ever Astronomy
simply, but with these additions. But that Astronomy and Astrology signified
ever in good Authors all one thing, may appear by Tully, lib. 2. de Diuinat.
where it is said of Anchialus and Cassander, that although they were excellent
in other parts of Astrology, yet they never used these predictions. In the
same place is the same word diverse times used: but what would we speak of one
place, when in all his works you shall never find the other word Astronomy,
but still Astrology: whereby is meant notwithstanding, the same as others
mean by the word Astronomy. Yet I am not ignorant that Clem. Alexand. (...)
page 26. calls the lawful (...), and that other in derision (...). Base and
vile though it be, yet in the end it so prevailed, that it did outface the
lawful Astronomy, by which it was at first countenanced, and brought into
credit. It played with Astronomy as the Cuckoo is said to play with other
birds, tumbling their eggs out of their nests that she may put in her own. And
as in this point Astrology resembles the old Cuckoo; so in another sort she
resembles the young Cuckoo, who in the end is wont to devour the bird that
fed her. Very fitly also may it be compared to the snake in Aesop, who being
refreshed a little with heat, began to annoye and trouble all the house with
hissing. Of this encroching, and insinuating counterfeit, may Astronomy well
complain in this manner: -- eiectam, laris egentem
Accepi, nostraque amens in sede locaui:
When I thee found, and took thee up,
at first thou wast an else,
Yet like a fool I set thee up,
as high as was my self.
If there be any similitude in these 2. arts, it is but such a countefeit
resemblance as is mentioned by Tully, lib. 3. de Orat. By scraping with the
foot, and certain terms of art, wherein they bleare the eyes of them that
cannot see into them. When Astronomy is compared to such a misshapen monster,
may it not well disdain the parison in these words?

Simia quam similis turpissima bestia nobis?
I must needs wonder when I see
A pouchmouth'd Ape so like to me.
But to return to Thales, it is not to be thought, but that he was very raw,
and far to seek in these vain speculations, for in those days Greece was
scarce acquainted with the first principles of Astronomy, so far were they from
Astrologicall toies.

CHAP. XVI.
Who first among the Greeks gave themselves to Astronomy, and how far.

IT is reported of Thales, that he was the first among the Grecians that
professed any skill in these matters. About 80. years after came Anaxagoras,
who was the first that durst adventure to put any thing in writing, concerning
the eclipse of the Moon, which had like to have cost him his life: for being
cast in prison of the Athenians for that cause, he was hardly delivered by the
great suit and labor of Pericles. For the Athenians took the stars to be
Gods, not thinking that they went about by any natural course, but freely at
their own election. After that, how many years Nicias had like to have marred
the Athenian state, for not knowing the cause of the eclipse of the Moon, you
may see in Plutarch and Pliny. Before Platoes time there is scarce mention of
any that took any thing upon him in these predictions. Eudoxus Gnidius,
Platoes great acquaintance and friend, having conuersed long with the
Egyptians, where he attained to the perfection of Astronomy, and Astrology,
expressly disallowed the latter, and first of his nation, gave himself wholly
to embrace and study the former. No Grecian is recorded to have given himself
so thoroughly to these studies. He did so diligently among the Egyptians,
observe the course of the stars, that the high place where he made his
standing to note them, even in Straboes time, was called Eudoxi speculae, that
is, Eudoxus beacon. This man among the Grecians, is said first to have been
skillful in this art, which notwithstanding he is reported to have condemned,
because he found it still false and fickle. If one thing only among a hundred
fell out true, he did not use that to make good all the rest that were false,
but contrary, rather discredited that one for the rests sake. He knew that one
shooting all day must needs sometime hit the mark, were he never such a
bungler, and that in often casting the dice, where there is nothing but chance,
one shall sometime turn up that chance which they call Venereus. As Aristotle
affirms nothing of Thales skill: so if Eudoxus had known any such memorable
skill to have been in Thales, he would not have concealed it, coming welnigh
three hundred years after him. But this story of Thales is by Pliny reported
of Democritus, so full of uncertainty is the whole matter. These things would
have bin considered of them that slander Thales with Astrology. As for
Aristotle, he writes only, that this was attributed to him because of his
wisdom and providence: but that he was an Astrologer, he no where says, nor
could well believe.

CHAP. XVII.
Astrology compared with other arts.

But if professions grounded upon reason do often fail, no marvel if this
witless starre-staring be still out, which has no ground but blind chance,
and the whirling of fortune. The physician foreseeth the disease: the captain
treason: the governor the tempest; yet these are often deceived, though they
proceed with reason. As the husbandman, when he sees the Olive blossom, he
hops so see the fruit too, and he has reason; yet sometime it falls out
otherwise. The Physician has the water, the pulse, actio laesa, qualitas
mutata, substantio naliter in haerentia, and a great many more helps for
indication, yet all too little sometime, the water deceiving so often, that it is
well called of some, meretrix medicorum. As for the difference of pulses they
are so nice, and so subtle, that one says of them, Nemo novit, nisi Deus, et
Galenus, qui habuit delicatissimum tactum: No man can discern them but God,
and Galen, who had a most subtle touch. Indeed the doctrine of pulses is
very exquisitelie set down by Galen, neither contains it any thing, which
may not seem full of reason; yet whether Galen ever in practice could
distinguish those differences, may well be doubted: speculation is one thing,
and practice is an other. I doubt not but many a musician in setting, could so
dash a song with proportions and moodes, that it would appose himself to sing
it; the like for any thing I see, may be thought of Galens pulses. The plain
and apprehensible differences of pulses, are by all means to be heeded, as
showing the state and affects of the heart, according to that, orta attestantur
suis principijs. As for the rest which are so obscure and subtle, if they be
let pass, the matter is not great: wherein we shall seem to imitate
musicians, who having three kinds of music, dia tonum, Enarmonium, and
Chronaticum, at this day retain, and use only that first, as being more plain
and manly, neglecting the two latter, partly for some effeminatenesse, partly
for some difficulty in framing, and applying it to our voice. But a great
deal more fit it were to compare this art with her fellow counterfaits
aruspicina, hydromantia, chiromantia, choschinomantia, and such like; for these
be in deed suitable, and matchable, every one as false as his fellow: neither
was ever Astrology either more in request, or more honored then were these
counterfeit toys. Wherefore there is good hope, that as all those other are
vanished and gone: so this will follow. Among the Romans they were to do
nothing either at home, or abroad, Nisi auspicato, and in what great account
was their Collegium augurum? Yet because all was but mere follies, we see what
is now become of them, even time will wear such things out, though we do not
at all help, according to that, opinionum commenta delet dies, fantastical
conceits time it self will dispatch. The feeding and flying, and guts of birds
were they not a goodly thing to make Almanakes by, or to direct actions? What a
notable jest is that of terripauium, and terripudium, and tripudium and how it
came to tripudium solistimum? Now how ill fauoredly have they agreed in
sinistrum, and dextrum, the Greeks taking dextrum for happy, the Latins
contrary sinistrum, according to that of Virg. Aene. 2. ver. 692, subitoque
fragore intonuit laeuum. Which difference also has been observed of Tully. 2.
de diuinat. in those words: Ad nostri augurij consuetudinem dixit Ennius.

Cum tonuit laeuum been tempestate serena. At Homericus Ajax apud Achillem,
querens de ferocitate Troianorum, nescio quid hoc modo prospera Jupiter his
dextris fulgoribus edit, ita nobis sinistra videntur, Graijs et barbaris dextra
meliora, quanquam haud ignoro, quae bona sunt, sinistra nos dicere, etiamsi
dextra sint. Neither shall we notwithstanding see this difference observed well
among the Latins, for of untowardly and unfortunate things says Virg. Ecl. 1.
Saepe sinistra caua praedixit ab ilice cornix. With which agrees that of
Eustath. (...).

But thus much only for a taste, that we may see what arts those can be, whose
grounds are not yet agreed upon. And yet I would think that even these arts
had more certainty then Astrology, because they deal with that which they
see, and handle, to wit, the bowels of birds, and feeding, and such like,
whereas the Astrologer has the stars so remote, that he must needs often
mistake and err.

CHAP. XVIII.
That the Astrologers need no farther confutation, then such as may be drawn
out of their own art, since their elections, and predictions can no way stand
together.

But these Astrologers, as it seems, though they be full of fictions, yet
were they never good poets; for they have not well learned that poetical
axiom, mendacem memorem, nor that of Horace, Sibi conuenientia finge: for if
they had, then once having delivered that our events, actions, end, and
enterprises do necessarily depend upon the nativity, they would never have
obtruded to us their doctrine of elections, they might easily see how ill
these two could stand together, for if our nativity, do necessitate as it
were, and force our actions, what place can there be left for elections, except
it be such elections as is sometime used among children, choose whether you will
have this or none. If the stars in our nativity dispose of our actions, and
future events, then must our actions of force fall out thereafter. Otherwise
how can they truly be said to dispose? Again if our actions be in our own
election to make them better or worse, by choosing a fit or unfit day for them,
how can the stars be said to rule and guide them? for if the stars rule them,
they are not in our election, and if they be in our election, the stars do not
rule them. We see therefore that these men can not be better confuted then by
themselves. Their positions have no coherence, nor hang any better together
then a rope of sand. Belike here must that great saying take place, Sapiens
dominabitur astris: but who shall be their Sapiens or wise man then? sure the
Astrologer only for ought that I see; for he seeing by his nativity, that such
an action, upon such a day cannot fall well out, and upon such a day must fall
well out, may change the day, and therewith the success of his enterprise, or
action at his pleasure: this every man cannot do, for lack of Astrology, and
therefore all the world be like are fools saving the Astrologer. I will not
here stand long to discourse of their Egyptian, and dismal days, nor of their
deriuation, whether they come of (...) and mala, or (...) and mala: Egyptian
sure they must needs be, because they are of those opprobria Egypti, which so
long as we retain, we are still in Egypt. Difference of times we grant, that
sometimes they are clear and quiet, sometime cloudy and troublesome, according
to that, (...),
The time sometime a stepdame is,
both fierce, and fell, and eke
The same sometime a mother is
exceeding kind and meek.


Time was no stepdame to Croesus till he came at Halys, but when he cried, O
Solon, Solon, then the case was altered. Otherwise we are to confess, that as
God is not (...), so is he not (...),' that is no accepter either of times or
persons. Genes. 1. ver. 18. God saw that the day was good, and shall we say
that they are unfortunate, or dismal? This heathenish superstition is
disallowed by the preacher, forbidden by the Apostle, and exploded by S.
Augustine. Eccles. 11. ver. 4, he that observes, and waits for wind and
weather, shall never make good harvest, and therefore we are there warned to
put the seed in the ground early and late, because we know not whether is most
like to take: what was the cause why the Apostle feared the Galath. what would
become of them, but their superstitious observing of months, times, and
years. S August. willing to show them how they entangle themselves, not being
able to reconcile their elections and constellations, has said both very
fitly, and fatherly to them, de ciu. dei. lib. 5. cap. 7, his words are as
follow: Now what an intolerable thing is it, that by choice of days, they
seek to change their old destinies with new? For example, one had it not in
his nativity, to have a worthy son, but rather a base child, and therefore
like a profound clarke, he made choice of a good hour to lie with his wife. By
this means he framed himself a new destiny, which he had not before, and by
this new destiny that became destiny to him, which was never his destiny by
nativity. O madness of all madness! we must take heed what day we marry one.
Belike least for lack of heed and choice, we should light upon a dismale day.
But by this means what is become of our birth constellation? can a man by
choice of a day alter his destiny, and cannot another power alter that which he
has chosen? Farther, if only men, not all other things be ruled by
constellations, wherefore do they for planting and sowing make choice of these
days, and of other days for gelding their catell, breaking their coltes,
covering their mares and such like.

But to leave Augustine, even Ptolemy confesses, that if thy nativity be
against thy enterprise, the elections of days will be to small purpose. Of
this point Mirandula discoursed more at large. lib. 2. aduersus Astrologos, but
in effect the same you shall find more briefly in S. Augustine in the place
above cited. To this co^futing them out of their own principles must be added
that of Alpetragius, teaching, that if there be a motion in heaven yet
unknown, the^ there is a body yet unknown too for that motion: which opinion
may also be confirmed by those motions, which have of late bin divised by our
modern Mathematiques, which they say their predecessors never knew. Now for
the sight and order of the planets, how do they agree? while they that follow
the Egyptians, place the moon next and immediately under the Sun, as does also
both Plato and Aristotle. For Aristotle in his book de coelo, and Plato in
Timaeo places the Moon next to the Sun, still understanding the Moon to be
the lowest of all the planets. Ptolemy, the Chaldeans, and the latter men place
the Sun in the midst of the planets, thinking that place meetest for it, as
King over the rest. Geber and Theon in their commentaries upon Ptolemy, hold
that the Sun is nere the Moon. Andreas Su^marius holds Saturn, Jupiter and
Mars to be higher then the rest: but which of them among themselves is highest
or lowest, neither is known (says he) nor can be known. Moses Egyptius
says, there is no certainty, what is the order and site of the planets,
especially of the three uppermost of the number of spheres above the planets,
what doutfull work have they made, some holding the eight sphere, in which are
the fixed stares, to be the uttermost: others imagining a ninth orb to
compass the eight which is invisible: some also suppose there is a tenth
sphere utmost of all. The authors of the first opinion were the Egyptians,
and the Chaldeans: which Plato and Aristotle after embraced and Hipparcus, and
Ptolemy: the same was lastly maintained by Leo Hebraeus, and Proclus the
Platonike. The second opinion follow most of our modernes, as Alphonsus, who
first made supputations of planets by this sphere, thinking it to be the
uttermost. Of the same mind were Leopoldus, Mahala, and Campanus, and
Albertus, all fathering this opinion upon Ptolemy, but falsely: for with him is
no ninth sphere, much less any tenth, as you may perceive both by the second
book of the Almagest, and the first book of Apotelesmata. For since Ptolemy
uses both the mouable signs, called the images, or the figures of the
eightsphear, and the immouable signs, referring to them the places of the
planets, is sufficient proof, that he dreamed of nothing, without the eight
sphere. For those four famous points, to wit, of the two tropicks, and two
equinoctial he calls the immouable signs, which are fixed and fastened in the
eight sphere, not in the ninth; for these be his words in the second book of
the Almagest; I will a buse the names of the signs, applying them to the
parts of the Zodiak, as if they began at the tropic and equinoctial points,
so the twelfth part from the vernall equinoctial toward the summer tropic, I
will call Aries, the second twelfth part, or (...), I will call Taurus, and so
forth, according to the order of the twelve signs delivered by us. And in the
first book of his Apotelesmata, he determines the parts of the Zodiake, to
which he refers the planets, by the Solstitiall, and Equinoctial points,
but be there, or be there not any ninth sphere, all the Astrology of our age
must needs down. For if these celestial influences proceed from all parts
of heavens, it will follow, that they can prognosticate nothing, which make no
account of the whole Orb, as if the bare places where no stars are, had no
force or power. But if these celestial influences to change things here,
proceed only from such stars as are endued with evident light and beams,
then must they of force grant, that no force descends from the ninth Sphere
hither, which either has no light at all, or such as cannot be perceived.
Wherefore either the whole Sphere is to be observed, which they do not, or that
ninth Sphere, if there be any such, is to be contemned, of which mind is Guido
Bonatus, affirming that whatsoever is above the eight Sphere, belongs not to
the Astrologer. Farther, we are to note how they jar not only in motions,
and reuolutions of the Planets, but even of the Sun it self, how diuersely and
contrary they write. Before Hipparchus time they held that the Suns
revolution, which is a year, contained only 350. days, and a quarter of a
day. Hipparchus thought the addition above even days was less then a quarter.
Ptolemey thinks that less to be the 300. part of a day. Albateguinus says,
it wanted of a quarter the 106. part of a day. Thebit says, that the year
contains 365. days, 6. hours, 10. minutes, 12. degr. Philolaus said that
the natural year consisted of 364. days and a half. Others in a matter of
such uncertainty, though they came near enough, if they made the year of 365
days, which opinion Saint Augustine seemed not much to mislike, who in his
Commentary super Genesim, to the 365. days adds the whole quarter day. When
we see these great men thus vary and dissent, we need marvel less at the
Arcadians, making years of three months long: and at the Acarnanians, who
used years of six months; and Greeks having years of 354. days. As they
dissent much in the quantity of the year: so is there as il agreement in the
beginning of it. But that this point cannot be determined of, Ptolemie proves
in the second book of his Apotelesmata for this reason, because in a circle no
man can find a beginning simply. Wherefore in the Zodiak are imagined four
beginnings by conjecture, the two Solstitial, and the two Equinoctial points.
The Egyptians began their year at the vernall Equinoctial, the Romans at the
winter Tropicke: others at the first of Libra. Plutarch in his Problems likes
Numa for beginning it at the winter Tropicke. If any, to determine this
controversy, shall say that we are to heed the creation of the world, he shall
rather increase, then diminish the controversy. For among the Hebrews, where
this were to be learned, is no certainty to be found, some of them holding
that the creation was in the Srping; others in Autumn: of which opinion are
many, for concerning the celebrating of the Passover in the first month, that
they say was spoken in respect of the solemnities. Farther, it is written in
Exodus, that the feast of Tabernacles was in the end of the year, which feast
we know, was kept in the end of the year. More might be brought to this
purpose, which for breuities sake at this time I purposely omit, seeing that
Saint Hierome both otherwhere, and upon Ezechiel, calls October the first
month, and January the fourth. I will not here enlarge how they vary about
the distances of Mercury from the Sun, of the difference of Signs, and
those which they call images, or Figures, of which in truth there can no
reckening be made, since they are nothing in nature, but the devises of men,
which might have made them otherwise, if they would, these which are now used,
being devised or related by Aratus, who (as testifies Cicero) writ of
Astrology, and had none himself.

CHAP. XIX.
Four causes why Astrologers seem often to say true, and that for their true
saying they are never a whit the more to be trusted.

COnsidering the falsenesse of their predictions, though there has been enough
said, why they should not be trusted, yet now briefly I will show, that
though all their predictions should fall out true, yet we were not one whit more
to believe or use them, but to follow the counsel of Saint August. lib. 2. de
doct. Christ. cap. 22. who wills us to abandon these men, not because they
say false, but (says he) though things come to pass as they say, yet believe
them not: for though the shape of dead Samuel told the truth to Saul, yet the
sacrilege of such representations are not a whit the less to be detested. And
though the wise woman in the Acts of the Apostles, gave a true testimony to
the Apostles; yet Paul did not spare that spirit, but rather cleansed it by the
rebuke, and casting out of that devil. Therefore all these Arts smelling of
vain, or rather hurtful superstition, by reason of a certain pestilent
confederacy between men and devils, as false and fraudulent compacts, are to
be rejected and abandoned of Christians. Why they should not be trusted though
they say all true, may appear, if we consider the causes why they say
sometimes true, which may be reduced to four: The first cause is referred to a
certain pact and league between the Astrologer and the devil, or to a
certain secret instinct and motion, whereby men at unawares are often incited to
guess, according to that of Saint Augustine, lib. 5. de Ciuitate Dei cap. 27.
It is not without cause believed (says he) that when Astrologers maruellously
make many true answers, it comes to pass by the suggestion of evil
spirits, whose chief care is to ingraft and fasten these wicked and false
opinions of stars in men's minds, and not by any art in observing and noting
the Horoscopus, which is none indeed. And the same Father, lib. 2, de Genesis ad
Lit. cap. 17. says, that this their foretelling of things, even when they say
true, is but the work of seducing spirits, to whom it is permitted to know
some truth in temporal matters. The second cause may be the secret disposition
of the divine providence, which by an hidden instinct sometimes so moves the
blind and wicked minds of these Wisards, that they foretell they cannot tell
how to their followers, such things as is necessary for the^ to hear, either
for their desert, or for some deep judgment of God. The third cause is the
craft and subtlety of the figure-flinger, who knows how to abuse the
simplicity of them that seek to him, Mill per Maeandros, by doubling and
turning like an hare in the snow, delivering his answer in such riddles, as for
obscurity may compare with that of Sphynx. (...), etc. or that of the Eunuch,
the Bat, the Pummie stone, and the elder tree, Homo non homo, percussit, non
percussit, auem non auem, lapide non lapide, in arbore non arbore. For when he
begins his answer thus: The party is of sanguine complexion, dwells
westward, and so forth, who can abide him? he will not say the man, nor the
woman, but the party which agrees to both, and then whethersoeuer it happen
on, he has said true. Now how many be there of sanguine complexion, and though
it should fall out of some other complexion, yet great disputes might be of the
difference of complexions, to maintain and uphold the lie, that though the
party was not now sanguine, yet naturally he was, but changed either by years,
or diet, or trade of life, and such like. The like scambling may be made in the
rest. The mischiefs that issue from these blind riddles are infinite, for by
them many innocent and clear people are called into question and doubt. How
happy had poor Aedipus been, if he had never heard that blind Senarius.
(...). If the Oracle had meant him any good, he should have told him who was
his mother, and that he should not lie with her in plain terms. But if they
should deal plainly, they should offend against one of Ptolemies rules in
Centiloquio, Prop. 1. They must not (says he) tell a thing particularly, but
universally, as one that sees a thing a far off. The fourth cause is the
doltish dullness of such as resort to them, who through their credulity suffer
themselves willingly to be abused. Of each of these causes might much be said,
which for brevity sake at this time I let pass. Thus we see that in seeking
for answers, there is more to be respected then the truth, we must see to the
means, that we seek lawfully. In the word are the lawful ways of seeking
expressed: Somnia, sacerdotes, prophetae, Sorts, Angeli, omina, but to seek to
these cold Prophets it is every where forbidden. If we shall know and confess
thus much, and yet nevertheless retain them, and use them, seeking to them,
as indeed we do (for who almost, be he never so religious, will not seek to
them) we may justly seem to imitate Saul, who in hypocritical impiety
banishing Astrologers, and sorcerers out of his kingdom, yet sought to them
himself. If we disallow them, and speak against them, and yet use them, we may
be thought to renounce them in word, and retain them indeed, to thrust them
away with the one hand, and pull them to us with the other, not much unlike to
merry Skeleton, who thrust his wife out at the door, and received her in
again at the window. The story is well known how the Bishop had charged him
to thrust his wife out of the door: but that which was but a meriment in
Skeleton may prove worse with us, for it is no dallying with God: if he bid us
thrust out these vile people, we must do it indeed, we must (...), we must
walk without halting.

CHAP. XX.
Of the true use of Stars, and study of Astronomy in the judgment of
Socrates and Bucer.

SVch things as God in his secret judgment has reserved to himself, we must
not go about to pick out of the stars, as if heaven were nothing worth, and
of no use, unless we might play the fools with it at our pleasure. Socrates,
as witnesses Xenophon lib. 4. de factis and dictis does so far allow of
Astronomy, as it may be converted to the use and help of men, and was wont to
persuade men to get so much knowledge in it, as might make them perfect in the
alteration of days, months, and reuolutions of years, for their travel,
navigations, husbandry, and such like. But to study these idle curious toys
of figure-flinging, of houses, centers, constellations, and such like, he did
by all means dissuade, because by these things came no good, nor benefit to
the life of man. Farther he said, it was more then a man could, to know these
things, and that they did much offend God, that went about those things which
he would keep to himself. If any would not be so satisfied, but would needs go
on in this curious course, of them he was wont to say, that they were as mad as
Anaxagoras. For he affirming the Sun to be fire, knew not that men look on the
fire, whereas they cannot behold the Sun, and are colored and tanned in the
Sun, but in the fire not at all. In that also he showed his ignorance, as if
the heat of the Sun did not cherish and breed things, the heat of the fire
contrary decaying them. But whereas he affirms the Sun to be a fiery
stone, he seems not to know that such a stone will not shine and give light,
nor can last or endure long, which both agree to the Sun. With these mad
opinions does wise Socrates suit the conceits of Astrologers.

With this great Philosopher let me match a great Divine, for so I hope that
will be true, (...). In Latin, Non caret effectu, quod voluere duo: In
English, Hardly shall you that thing withstand,
Which two men jointly take in hand.
Bucer upon the 138. Psalm. ver. 3. has these words; Here (says he) is set
out the wonderful work of God, which we behold in the Sun, the moon, and the
stars, appearing with so great and marvelous light, being both for the
constancy of their course, and certainty of their operations most wonderful.
These things were meet to be observed in the stars, and not contrary to Gods
commandment to prognosticate by them, or harken to prognosticators, which was
ever among all wise men very execrable, so that Dioclesian, though a persecuter
of Christ, did utterly condemn and prohibit this art. Constantine also
punished with loss of life, not only the prognosticatours, but also such as
sought to them. cap. de maleficis, and mathematicis. For it is the duty of a
Christian to depend wholly upon God, neither to doubt, but that he so orders
all, that nothing can happen but to his good and benefit. Wherefore not gaping
after things to come, he must have this care chiefly, that he order things
present to the glory, and after the will of God. Let it therefore be enough for
Christians, that God has declared these vanities to be abominable to him.
Deuter. 18.10. And that he does so nippingly insult as it were over stargazers
by name, Esaias. 47.12. Let it suffice us so to have observed the motion of them,
that we may know the distinction of times, and seasons, and how to do those
things, for which God has made them to be observed, by giving full proof of
their use, such as we see in husbandry, navigations, and such like. For other
eue^ts, let us not trouble our selves, since al things shall fall out for the
best, if we fear God: neither let us doubt, but whatsoever is good for us, God
will certainly reveal it in good time, as he was ever wont to do to his
people. When man was placed in Paradise, he was set there to dress the garden,
not to be gasing still up to the stars, like a wisard: when he was put out,
he was designed to till the ground, to dig, grub, weed, sweat, and swinke,
not to busy himself about aspects, conjunctions, oppositions, constellations,
influences, fiery, and watrie triplicities, and such like. Heaven is Gods book,
which we must leave to him, and content our selves with our earthly abce,
according to that Psalm. 113. Coelum coeli domino, terram autem dedit filijs
hominum. To what end has God placed us so far from the stars, if with
Astrolabes, staves and quadrants we can do all things, as if we were nearer.
You know what Horace said fitly of the seuering of countries.

Nequicquam deus abscidit
Prudens oceano dissociabili
Terras: si tamen impiae
Non tangenda rates transiliunt vada
This needs no application, and therefore I pass it over. Now no marvel, if
after this manner we abuse the stars and heaven, when in the same case we abuse
the parts of our bodies, to wit, the hands, thence framing an art called
palmestry, going about by certain lines there observed, to tell destinies, no
less then the Astrologer does by stars. Yet we know that the hand was never
given for any such purpose, neither Galen, writing de vsu partium, mentions
any such use of the hand, he calls it (...), because we handle things with
it. He says it is both (...), and (...), to serve our turn both in war and
peace: for in peace we help our selves with it, to do our business and in
fight we defend with it, and likewise offend; for the great use of it, he says
that it was, (...). And because at our first coming into the world, we are
borne without all means, or any instrument to help our selves, having only
hands wherewith we handle al other instruments, and make them as it were our
own, therefore he calls the hand (...), an instrument before instruments.
For whereas other creatures are born with some furniture to help and defend
themselves, the Ox having horns, the Lion paws, the Horse hoofes, the Bore
tuskes, the Be a sting, and so forth: only man is borne without any weapon:
but in steed of all weapons, he has hands, whereby he makes use of all
weapons: if he will iut, they be horns: if he will scratch, they be paws: if
he will write, they be a pen: if he will cut, they be a knife: if he will
fight, they be a sword, and so forth. Wherefore since nature could not furnish
him with such variety, without his great trouble, or rather marring, she has
given this one part to supply the wantes of all those instruments, by applying
them, and admitting them at needful times, and upon necessary occasions.
Neither in this point has nature dealt better with our minds then with our
bodies. For whereas other creatures come into the world furnished with some
art, to help themselves: some things with the art of flying: others with
swimming: Bees, with making honey: spiders with making cobwebs: silk worms
with making silks, and so forth: man comes destitute of all art. Yet for
supply of that want, he has received that which far passes all arts, that is
reason, by help of which he learneth all arts. Wherefore as Aristotle very
fitly calls the hand, (...), so no less fitly may we call reason (...), an
art before all arts. For that brute beasts, though they have arts, yet do not
learn them as men do, but have the^ naturally, according to that of
Hippocrates, (...), may well appear by that which Gale^ relates of the eagle,
duck, and the snake lib. 1. de vsu part. For if you take the eggs of an eagle
and duck, and a snake, and hatch them, at the very first hatching you shall see
the eagle, and the duck try as it were their wings, the young snake in the
mean time snusling into the mire; and if you keep them all three together in
one house till they be perfect, and so set them abroad together in the open
air, you shall see the eagle mount up into the air; the duck run into the
ditche; and the snake run creeping into an hole. So the eagle will fly; the
duck will swim; the snake creep into an hole, and all without teaching: so a
dear, or calf, before the horns come, if you anger it, it will but and push
with the bare forehead, as if horns either were there, or should be there. The
hand therefore we see is given for handling, not for telling of destinies.
Farther if this art be admitted, what great difference will there be in telling
of fortunes, how hard will it be to tell some, in respect of other some; for in
a countrymans hand who has almost worn out the lines out of his hand with
labor, what a hard thing were it to read his destiny. Again in the right and
left hand the lines often times so differ that one hand may seem to say the
other lies. In this case, I ask whether hand we must take. In some also I
have seen the lines with sores and biles, and such like worn out of the hand,
or at least much changed from that they were before. In this case must we say
that a man's destiny is changed with the lines, then a bile or a botch in the
hand may alter all his life and course, then which nothing can be imagined more
absurd. Neither will this abuse stay here; it is by some drawn also to
numbers: who would think very basely of numbers, if they did not see as they
think, some farly, and mysteries in them. Hence is it that upon the numbers of
7 and 9 some have grounded their clymactericall years, that every seventh year
and every 9. year should be climacterical, and 63, which is made of both those
numbers, that is of 7 multiplied into 9, is counted and called Clymactericus
magnus, the great clymactericke. These years they count to bring great
alteration to the life of man, dying in these years, but especially when they
are 63 years old. And therefore to estabish and fortify this folly, they
have recorded to us such famous men as have died in that year. In this point
how coseningly they are wont to carry themselves, every one may see: for if
any die, not only in that year in truth but any thing near it, as in the 62,
or 64 years of his life, they will fetch him into the 63 year, and say that
his age was mistaken. Neither can their dullness see, what ill favored
consequence this position draws with it, for if these numbers work this
effect upon years, then why should they not work the like upon months, days
and hours, and then we shall have climacterie months, weeks, days, and
hours, in all which we must be in as great danger as in the climactericall
years. That these numbers work upon other times as well as years, may be
proved if they do work at all, for the number of seven we see by septimestris
partus, that it works by months, that being vital, whereas octimestris
partus is otherwise seldom vital. Again it is said to be observed in women,
that if they contain the seed seven hours, they will conceive, and at seven
days after it will be covered with a skin, like the skin of an egg Galen de
semine. So we see that the number of seven works not only by years, but
days, months, and hours also. If there were any thing in the number, why
should not the seventh month kill the child rather then the eight. For nine
though it come not presently to my memory for men, yet for some other things,
it is plain enough, as in a bitche, which is nine days saltie, goes nine
days with whelp, and has her whelps nine days blind: whereby we see this
number also to show his force not only upon years, but also upon days, and
months. So that now we may safely conclude that this force of climacteries
belongs not only to years, but to hours, days, and months as well, which
being true, how many fatal and dismal times must a man pass over every day?
Again, if 63 be so dismal, why should it show that force only upon men, and
not upon crows, elephants, stagges, and such other, which are thought to live
as long as man? Who ever observed that in other things, that year was more
mortal then any other? But in men they say, it is so common, to dispatch them,
that thereupon it is called androcles, or androclon. But whereas the mandrag is
called androclon that bruser of men, how does that agree with the common
opinion, that it helps women to conception, does it both make and mar men?
About this doting opinion I have bin demanded of many women, to whom I could
answer nothing but this, that if their husbands could not make them conceive,
there was small hope in the mandrag apple, as if it did break and bruise men.
Of which name also there is an herb, which, for that it kills men, is called
androclon: this herb some take to be the mandrake, which by another name of
some is termed also (...), and of others (...), as resembling the shape and
form of a man. Where we may well note the wonderful force of folly, and
superstition, there being in this herb not so much as the smallest resemblance
of a man, not so much as in the root, where the resembla^ce is dreamed to be,
if there be any: But I have viewed it, and seen it, and taken it out of the
ground of purpose, and could never see wherein that resembled a man for any
shape, more then any other root did; yet we see how generally it is holden,
that it is very like a man for shape. If in these things which are so
familiar, which we may daily handle, and make trial of; if I say in these
things superstition has so prevailed, how much sooner may it prevail in
matters of religion, which we cannot make any such trial of, as not being
subject to sense, and palpable, as this and many such like are? Now that which
most aggrauateth this folly, and senseless conceit of climacteries is, that
some who would be counted both learned and religious, lay most of al hold upon
them. It were to be wished, that men in such cases would, or could sobrie
sapere, and not to take upon them in things, which they are altogether
unskillful in. While they will have all learning, they lose often times the
opinion of that which they have, much like Aesops dog, that could not content
himself with the bone, but would be snatching at the shadow, and so loose
all. But this of climactery years may seem very pardonable, if you consider
the rest. Some do not stick to affirm that by the mysteries of numbers we may
attain to know the mystery of our salvation, and election, and how our names
are registered and recorded in Gods book. Because I would not do any man wrong
in so weighty a point, I will set the words down as they lie in a certain
Mathemeticall preface, and they be these. Yet from these gross and material
things may we be led upward by degrees, so in forming our rude imagination,
toward the conceiving of numbers absolutely, not supposing, nor admixting any
thing created, corporal, or spiritual, to support, contain or represent
those numbers imagined, that at length we may be able to find the number of
our name gloriously exemplified, and registered in the book of the Trinity most
blessed and eternal. What can here be meant, but that by numbers we may find
out in what state we stand with God? We are taught that the spirit of God
testifies to our spirit, that we are the sons of God, but of the testimony
of numbers, I do not remember. Again, what is here meant by numbers I cannot
readily say: but if it may be lawful to guess, I would take it to be those
numbers, which Horace od. 9. lib. 1. calls Babylonij, that is certain
coniuring numbers, by which to seek to know things to come, as is there said,
is nefas. Thus we see that even the heathen and infidels shall rise to condemn
us in this point.

The like folly to this I heard once uttered by a disciphring rogue, who
because he had been in Italy and abroad, thought he might say what he list. He
for his art of disciphering went so far, that by it he said, might be found,
what were those visions, revelations, and (...), which the Apostle heard in the
third heaven. If those words were within the compass of a Cipher, why are they
said to be (...), Another beast I heard once in a public Lecture, magnifying
his skill in Logike, say, that he could prove predestination out of Arma
virumque cano. Farther out was he then the poor Duns, who in a Lecture
explicating those words, held himself a great deal closer to his Text, in
this sort: Arma, virumque cano, est propositio de copul^to extremo, and arma
virumque non est subiectum, sed praedicatum, and istud pronomen Ego, est
subiectum illius verbi Cano, and est propositio sic, Ego cano arma, and virum.
With this he began to admire himself, and protested to his Auditors, that
Virgil was never so read before.

With this superstition of climactery years we may match another as gross of
the leap years, which beca^se they follow the number of 4. coming every 4.
year, are holden by some to be no less dismal and dange^ous then the
climacteries. If this be granted, why then do we not make every fouth year a
climactery, as well as every 7. and 9. year, and so make 4. a climactery
number? But let us hear how they prove the leap year to be so fatal, and
dangerous. The very nature of things, say they, and the habit of bodies are
quite changed in the leap year, which they prove by the experience of Bathes
that year, which they say, are very unwholesome, and do much harm, by the
testimony of shepherds and heardsmen, who report that their flocks and
cattle those years either conceive not at all, or if they do, yet go not out
their time, or if they go out, yet they bring forth certain weak and crased
ware. Fruterers also complain that their t^ees are barren in those yea^es, or
at least yield naughty fruit. Some further add, that the kernels of some
trees which are set that year will turn of themselves, so that the sharp end
will stand where the flat end should be. And some that would seem wise,
maintain that those years are periculous for women with child. Whereupon
often times in many places you shall see those superstitious cretures shriue
themselves, gad a pilgrimage, ply their beads, prattle their Paternosters, and
wear garlands, which they call our Ladies garlands or coronets.

Again, they say that the leap year is Saturnine, which they prove thus. The
Saturnine year is every fourth year: but the leap year is every fourth
year: therefore the leap year is Saturnine. That the motion of Saturn is
guided by four, they would prove thus. These inferior things are moved by the
superior: for say they, the humors of our bodies are moved by that star, to
whicich they have resemblance: for example, Phlegm is moved every day as
following the Moon, which it resembles, so they say that blood in motion
follows the Sun: choler Mars every third day: Melancholy Saturn every fourth
day. Seeing therefore the leap year is Saturnine, and therefore bad, it must
needs do much harm to all things.

The opinion of the unluckiness of Saturn seems to have been very
ancient, as may appear by Virgil in many places, who whenever he will
signify Jupiter or Juno offended, and reuengefull, is wont to call them
Saturnios, and not else: as Aeneid. lib. 4.

Nec Saturnius haec oculis pater aspicit aequis. And of Juno in the same book,
Talibus aggreditur Venerem Saturnia dictis. And in another place, Irim de coelo
misit Saturnia Juno. And, -- veterisque memor Saturnia belli
Tantos iratum voluit sub pectore fluctus,
And -- Saturnique altera proles. But when the same Poet will signify her
favor and grace, he will call her magna or bona, as in that, Adsit laetitiae
Bacchus dator, and bona Juno. Others say that Saturn in progressio^ hurts not
at all, but only when he is retrograde. And that for that cause he gives the
sith for his cognizance, which so long as you thrust it forward, hurts
nothing: but if you draw it backward, will cut very sore whatsoever does
withstand it.

This kind of proof is but poetical, and pretty, and therefore let every one
esteem of it as far, and no farther then he lists: For it will be hard to
yield any good or substantial reason for a thing of this nature. And if my
conjecture might be heard against this opinion, I should rather think that
Virgil bestowed that epithet of Saturnius upon Jupiter by imitation of Homer,
who is wont to term him sometime (...), sometime (...), and sometime (...).
If any man will call to mind how willingly Virgil is wont to imitate Homer, and
how glad he is whensoever his good hap is to resemble him, he will easily
acknowledge that this my conjecture is not altogether (...), that is, to no
purpose, and out of tune.

For answer to the first reason, where it was said, that the leap year
changes the nature of things, we say that it is most false: for neither could
I ever observe it in any, and this present 1600. being leap year, does
sufficiently convince the contrary. For we see the course of nature by that
means nothing interrupted or changed, for we continue all still as we were
last year, men are men, and women are women still, neither are fruit, or
beasts, or bathes, or children ever a whit weaker or worse then they were
other years. So that the leap year for any thing I see, might well use the
defense of merry Skeleton, who being a Priest, and having a child by his wife,
every one cried out, oh Skeleton has a child, fie on him, etc. Their mouths
at that time he could not stop: but on a holy day in a merry mood, he brought
the child to Church with him, and in the pulpit stripped it naked, and held it
out, saying; See this child, is it not a pretty child, as other children be,
even as any of yours, has it not legs, arms, head, feet, limbs, proportioned
every way as it should be? If Skeleton had begot a monster, as a calfe, or such
like, what a life should poor Skeleton have had then? So we say for the leap
year, if it had changed the nature of things, as it is charged, how should it
have done then to defend it self? If the nature of any thing change in the
leap year, it seems to be true in men and women, according to the answer of
a mad fellow to his mistress, who being called knave by her, replied that it
was not possible, for said he, if you remember your self, good mistress, this
is leap year, and then, as you know well, knaves wear smockes. But for
farther answer, we must tell them, that the leap year is no work of nature,
but ex positione humana, at man's appointment and pleasure. Wherefore, since the
leap year is but an humane co^stitution, it cannot be that it should change
the nature of things.

For the objection of shepherds and Fruterers, we say, that it is but a lewd
shift of crafty hinds to deceive their masters, bearing them in hand, that
their things are dead, when they have stolen them.

For the objection of women with child in those years, it is of small force,
considering how timorous and fearful they be, and how naturally given to
superstition.

Whereas they go about to prove that the leap year is Saturnine, by the
working of melancholy, which is every fourth day, the answer is plain, that
melancholy in working observes the fourth day, as we see in quartaine agues:
but in Saturn it is nothing so, who leapeth rather by five: for still after
three ordinary years complete, comes the fourth leap year, otherwise
quite then in a quartaine ague: where we see continually but two good days,
and the third evil, and yet it is called and counted a quartaine, although I
am not ignorant that country people commonly call it the third day ague. The
like grossness is committed, when they say, that the Moon by her moisture
reigns over phlegm, and the sea: which if it were true, why should we not
have two fits every day of a quotidian, as we have two sea tides.

Again, the leap year being but a humane constitution, it had a time when it
began, before that time when there was no leap year, nor intercalating, what
was to be said then? And if we should not intercalate every fourth year, but
every eight year, putting in two days, or every twelfth year, putting in
three days, should only those years be bad and dismal? And now that the
Pope intercalateth certain days sooner then we, and at every 130. years,
quite otherwise then we, will that make no alteration in the leap year?
Again, why may not any other of the three years be the fourth year as well
as the leap year?

CHAP. XX
The vanity of Critical days howsoever deduced, whether from Galens new
month, Hippocrates numbers, or Conciliators tetragonicall aspects.

Galen the first author, and founder of critical days lib. 3. de diebus
criticis, has related to us two lunarie influences, the one by reason of the
sun, of whom the Moon borrows her light; the other by reason of the signs
of the Zodiake, which she passes through once monthly. Then he sets down
as both allowed by Astrologers, and confirmed by experience, that the Moon in
opposite, and quadrangular aspects, either in respect of the Sun, or in respect
of the twelve signs, does make great alterations in quadrangular distances
from the change showing half only, and in opposite distances the whole at full,
and so alters the state of the air. Farther, he affirms the same
alterations to happen to things, when the Moon comes to the quadrangular,
and opposite places to those where it was, when any thing was bred or borne.
For example: If any thing began to be, the Moon being in Taurus, it should
undergo these alterations, when the Moon is come to Leo and Aquarius, which
are signs quadrangularly respecting Taurus, which also he confirms with the
authority of the Egiptians. Hence he thought to find the certain and sure
cause of critical days, especially since the seventh and the fourteenth days
are holden as principal critikes; because in the seventh day the Moon comes
to the fourth sign, from that which it was in at the beginning of the disease:
and in the foureteenth day, to the opposite place of the same, in which two
places, because the Moon is wont to make stirs, it falls out that in those
days likewise the diseases be troublesome, and busy to death, if the disease
be dangerous: but to good health, if it be otherwise. Now Galen being desirous
to prove not only the 21. as Archigenes would have it, but the twe^tieth also
to be critical, he fetches that from the course of the Moon, which goes
round once every 27. days eight hours: which time is called mensis
peragrationis, and periodicus, that is, the peragration month. Then parting
this month into four equal parts, he allows to every quarter six days
twenty hours, so that the 21. day by the course of the Moon belonged partly
to the 21. day natural, partly to the twentieth. For his twelve first hours
ended and concluded the twentieth day, the rest beginning the 21. day. This
being thus, he concludes that critical motions fall upon the twentieth day in
long diseases, which proceed by numbers equal to the diseases, the Moon
coming to his second quadrangle, in that number of days: And again, upon the
21. day natural in sharp diseases which keep od days. Galen being come well,
as he thought, thus far, proceeded farther to contradict Archigenes, namely,
that no part of the 21. day should be critical, but the whole twentieth day
only. Wherefore he took not the peragration month, as we even now called it,
but that which is from change to change, consisting of 29. days twelve hours,
which of the learned is called mensis coniunctionis, and mensis synodicus, and
of us may be called the change month. Again, from the 29. day twelve hours,
he takes away those three days, wherein the Moon commonly is hidden, and
darkened in the change, because he thought it did not work upon these
inferior matters for lack of light. So there remained of that month only 26.
days, twelve hours, which is wont to be termed and known by the name of
mensis illuminationis: and we may call it the Apparition month. Now this and
the peragration month he put together, and made up 53. days, and twenty
hours: Then taking the half of this time, he made a month of his own,
containing 26. days, and 22. hours. This new kind of month they are wont to
call mensem medicinalem, that is, the physicians month, being compacted of
those days which the Moon has light in, and in which it passes round the
Zodiake: as if this month should contain the influence of the Moon two ways,
both in respect of the Sun, and in respect of the Zodiake. By this account
Galen had his purpose, since the weeks or quarters of this contain six
days, seventeen hours and an half. So it came to pass, that the third
quarter of the Physician month ended with the twentieth natural day, within
four hours and a half, which were put over to the 21. day. But all this pain
Galen might have saved, since by the peragration month also the 20. day fell
to be critical, as was said: and he himself does not deny, but the 21. may
be critical, especially in sharp diseases. This have I said, least when I
have showed, that the critical days cannot be referred to the Moon, whether
we weigh her virtue by the Sun, or the signs, it might be answered, that we
had not fully satisfied, because Galen had found out a compound influence to
make critical days by, which things notwithstanding either he has not done,
or if he has done it, yet he did it without reason, as shall diverse ways be
proved, for if these stirs, as he calls them, happen when the Moon is in
quadrangular or opposite signs to the place where any thing had his beginning:
and again, when it is illustrate with quadrangular or opposite Sunbeams, we
ought not to expect these events from the Moon: but at such times as it is
placed one of these ways, if so be that we look for those events from those
causes. But if we look for them from the Physicians month, and from the
halfes, and quarters of that, they shall not depend of those causes, which
Galen has proved to raise and breed those stirs: For then those causes are
not. Absurd therefore and sottish is it to say, that the virtue of both the
constellations are mingled at that time, when none of those constellations are
found. Wherefore if this critical power be sought of Galen in the quarters and
halfes of the Physicians month, and not in the quarters and halfes of the
peragration month, and month of illumination, it shall not at all be found in
Astrologicall influences. For neither can you bring it to the square, and
opposite signs, neither to the quadrangular or opposite sites of the Sun.
Farther, it can neither be made nor preserved at such time as these are not.
Again, according to Galens month, the thirteenth day rather then the
fourteenth, should be critical, for that has thirteen hours, whereas this
has but eleven hours. Wherefore you that be sticklers for Galen, how will
you here defend your selves, using the peragration month, not Galens, when you
will make the fourteenth day critical, but contrary, when you will make the
twentieth day critical, leaving the peragration month, and falling to the
other of Galens devise?

Farther, if one should sicken the day before the Moon began to be in change,
having the 7. day after for his critic, this by no means could depend either
upon the Sun, or upon any sign, since the Moon for the most part of that time
was darkened. So that even by Galens judgment it could not affect, or work
upon us. Moreover, this counterfeit month of Galens neither agrees with
nature, and supposes that the Moon is hid three days from the Sun, which all
men know to be false, and is against experience. Farther, it will follow, that
(if those days be standing and fixed) the Moon should go always alike fast,
not one while slower, and another while faster. Which to be most false, is
plain by Astronomicall computations. And who knows not that when she goes
in her epicycle (...), with the Center, of the Eccenter, she goes faster then
when she goes (...), which motion must needs abate from her swiftnes. But
that the critical days are not guided by the course of the Moon,
whencesoeuer they have their virtue from Sun, or signs, is hence plain. For
if they had it of the Sun, it would follow, that we must still fall sick at
the change of the Moon. For otherwise upon the seventh day the Moon could not
be halued, nor at her full light upon the 14. day, in which, he says, diseases
are provoked by reason of quadrangular and opposite configuration with the Sun:
but if they have their force from the signs, we may reason thus. The 7. and
14. day, as thou say, happens the provocation, but commonly the Moon upon
these days is not in the square and opposite places, therefore from the Moon,
by reason of those places, cannot that commotion or provocation proceed. The
Minor of this syllogism is plain to all that have but the least skill in the
course of the Moon: for sometime it comes to the square aspect upon the sixth
day, and to the opposite sign upon the 13. day, and sometime it comes not
before the eight or 9. day to the square aspect. Neither are these critical
days altogether guided by this motion: and if they were, yet the manner of
them would be otherwise then is prescribed. Therefore diverse have given other
causes of critical days, which depend nothing of the Moon. Hippocrates for
the Moon is utterly silent, referring all rather to certain numbers observed
by nature, as both Asclepiades, and Celsus have noted.

Auicen quite rejected this lunatique opinion for the great uncertainty of it,
as does also Auerroes in his Colliget, showing withal, that to meddle with
causes of critical days, does not belong to the Physician, but to some higher
philosophy; the physician ought only to know which are critical, and how he is
to handle his patient, when he perceives, and foreseeth the critical day:
Wherefore in this point we may safely follow Galen, but not in the other; both
because he was deceived, as has bin proved, and because his judgment and
authority in Philosophy is not much set by, even of some of his best friends:
for both Auicen, and Rabby Moses gave out, that he did but flutter in the
bows of arts, and never came at the root. Oftentimes also he fails in
logike, and natural philosophy, and in his discourses of motus and anima. How
slenderly he was seen in Astrology, may appear by his computation, which he
makes of the course of the Moon: and Conciliators defense of him, is, that in
his time the motion of heaven, and that skill was very gazen, and scarce well
found. Farther, he plainly refuses to give the reason, why the Moon should
have any such force in these quadrangular and opposite signs, alleging only
the authority of the Egyptians, whom notwithstanding in the sixth book of
Simples he taunteth and condemns as doters. Neither could they be observed of
such as never well knew the course of the Moon. For Hipparchus of Rhodes was
the first that in this point came any thing near the truth: after him Ptolemy
did better, yet so that the Arabians did not allow of him. Our modern masters
(the course of the Moon being better found,) have picked a new reason out of
the nature of the signs, which agrees neither with the truth, nor with Galen,
who^ they follow, nor with their positions, which they defend. The quadrangular
and opposite signs, say they, have contrary qualities (they mean for heat,
cold, dryness, and moisture,) either both, or the active qualities at least.
Then going on, they farther ad, that the quadrangular, and opposite aspects are
contrary. Upon these suppositions they infer, that when the Moon is come to
these places, which are contrary to those which it was in at the beginning of
the disease, then nature and the disease strive. For example, (say they) if the
Moon be in Taurus, when one falls sick, when it comes to the
quadrangular, or opposite place, to wit, Leo or Scorpius, then is deadly feid
between the disease and nature. Hence we infer, that the Moon will much more
do it, when she is in Gemini, which differs from Leo more then Taurus does,
the like will fall out when she is in Libra, which differs from Taurus more
then does Scorpius. This argument, or consequence, is to be proved even out of
the Astrologers themselves. For by their positions, the sign of Taurus is dry
and cold; Leo dry and hot; Scorpius dry and cold; Gemini hot and moist. To
this perhaps they will reply, that these signs are not joined by any aspect.
Again we prove that there is no contrariety in these places. For if they be
contrary, the Moon by their position should show this contrary effect, as
soon as it came to any place of contrary quality: but it comes from a cold
and dry place to an hot and moist, and yields not the contrary effect,
therefore this position falls. Now if they will say that the force consists
in the aspects themselves, they ought consequently to hold that the Moon
coming to trigonall signs should fortify the disease, because there is as
much force to concord in triangles, as to discord in squares; for as by reason
of discord of qualities, quadrangles stir up the disease, so by reason of
concord, triangles shall not stir them up. This being thus, that will follow to
cross the rules of Physicians, that the 11 day will be hurtful, which
notwithstanding is otherwise by their rules, seeing that the Moon the 11. day
almost grows trigonall. Farther, it cannot be (as Physicians hold) that the
sixth and eight day among the rest, cause ill co^motions, for this were against
Astrology, which upon those days brings the Moon to square aspects.
Again, why count they the tenth day and twelfth hurtful, the Moon then not
being placed in any aspect with the sign of the disease? But neither by reason
of sun, Moon nor constellation, can they find any cause why the critical
days should be sometime even, sometime od. For to let the rest pass now they
make the 41. day critical, after that they draw in even days, the 60, the
80, and the 120. then they go by months and years. For the constellations in
these times do much vary, as the astrologers say, whereas the physicians will
have their critical days to be set, continual, and uniform. To shut up this
discourse, let us hear the shameful error of Conciliator, the malice of the
sixth day which Galen compares to a tyrant, as the seventh day to a king, may
be (says he) reduced to the Moon, which comes with more speed to the
tetragonal aspect. The goodness of the seventh he charge upon the nature of
the tetragonall, which was contrary to the sign of the disease. So from the
square he deriueth both the malice of the sixth, and the goodness of the seventh.
Farther the circuit of humors he reduces to the stars; the slowest circuit
of melancholy (for that lies quiet two days) he refers to Saturn; choler
he ascribes to Mars; phlegm to the Moon; blood to Jupiter, but how fondly,
now see. The blood putrifieth without any pause, therefore his circuit should by
their rule be ascribed to the swiftest planet, not to Jupiter, which, if you
consider his revolution, is the slowest of all saving Saturn. Again, if that
be true, that the operation of the slower stars be slower proportionably to
their slownesse, then choler should make a longer fit then phlegm, because the
restitution, or (...) of Mars is much slower then the Moons. Notwithstanding
the flegmatique fit is much longer then the fit of choler, for this latter is
twelve hours, the other is eighteen hours long. Hence is clear that the
course given to phlegm, does better fit blood: for whereas it resembles the
motion of the sea, which ebbeth and flows, scarce putting any time between,
that does better agree to blood then phlegm, which is in continual motion as
the sea is, in which the little time between the ebbing and flowing, can by no
means answer to the sixth hours respite in a flegmatike ague. Lastly, if
phlegm answered to the water, then in twentiefoure hours, it should make two
periods of motition, as the sea does, which we see does not answer neither.
Farther, there is more resemblance, and agreement between the earth and the
water, the^ earth and fire in respect both of motion, qualities, and place, and
because they be (as Aristotle says) symbola. For the earth is cold and dry;
the water cold and moist; the fire hot and dry; the first two descending, the
fire ascending, which also is in the highest sphere, as the earth in the
lowest, with the water next it, and then the air. Therefore the motion of
choler should more differ from phlegm then from melancholy, if the humors be
compared with the elements.

And now that the Pope intercalateth certain days sooner then we, and at
every 130. years, quite otherwise then we, will that make no alteration in the
leap year? Again, why may not any other of the three years be the fourth
year as well as the leap year?

CHAP. XXI.
A Peroration exhorting to the abolishing of Astrologicall blasphemy, with an
encouragement of them that have to deal in the reformation of that ungodly
abuse.

THus much in this Discourse to show the abuse of a counterfeite art, I have
thought good to write at this time, both that they which are ignorant may be
seduced no longer, and that they which be otherwise, may be stirred up, and put
to an helping hand to the cleansing of Augiae stabulum, that foul dung heap,
which as yet wants some Hercules. And if my carriage in this cause has been
such, that I may seem to have said well, I have said as I wish and would: if
otherwise, I have said as I could, hoping that this good at least shall come of
my pains, that others who can do better, either will bear with me, for my
endeavor in so weighty a cause, accepting my good will, according to that, In
magnis voluisse sat est, in matters of importance the will is to be accepted:
or will be ready to second me with their best aid, remembering that good
admonition of the Poet, -- si quid nouisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non, his vtere mecum.
If you know better then that which is said,
put to your hand, and give us your aid.


The allegations and proofs that have been used, you see are not slender, or
lightly to be passed over, but drawn from the best Philosophers and Divines
of all ages. You may see, not what Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, and such others
do judge: how good Emperors and Kings, both Christian and others, have
banished all this kind: but also what Fathers, Doctors, Councels, from time to
time have thought of them: nor that only, which were notwithstanding enough.
But least by any means you should hold your selves excusable, you have hard
how God himself does sometimes threaten, sometimes taunt, ever terrify this
ungodly crew. Wherefore (to them that the reformation of so great an abuse
belongs, be it spoken) if you regard not the wisdom of Philosophers, nor the
authority of Emperors, yet hearken to the godly and religious councels of
Fathers and Divines; if not to them neither, because they are men, yet respect
the majesty and will of God, who is in this case very jealous, and will not
be mocked: Sigenus humanum, and mortalia temnitis arma,
At sperate Deum memorem --
If mortal men and humane arms
you nothing do regard,
Yet fear that God, which good and bad
most justly does reward.
It was some thing in the bad judge that heard the widow at last even for her
importunity, neither for Gods sake, nor man's sake, but even to be rid of her.
In this case we are to hope better of them that are to deal in it, that they
will proceed so in rooting out this superstitious relic, as shall become a
good conscience, that they will take the enemies of God as their own enemies,
as did David, inimici facti sunt mihi, I have counted them as mine enemies: for
how can you ever be thought to love God, if you hate not his enemies? Wherefore
persuade your selves, that so much hatred as you have to this profession, or
rather superstition, so much love you have to God and no more. If these things
be not better looked to, no doubt it will go better with many heathen and
Infidels, then with us, they shall rise up in judgment against us.

Wherefore even to this we may well reply that of the Apostle: If any be not
careful to condemn and expel this ungodly art, he has denied the faith,
and is worse then any infidel. Heathen Chalcas in Homer would not rely upon
dreams, but that he thought they came from God, for so it appears by those
words, Iliad. 1. (...), and shall we embrace, and admit those things, by
crediting them, which are only not allowed of God, but also very offensive to
him, and expressly forbidden by him.

For the better stirring up of our slackenesse, and putting some edge in us, I
could wish that this vile profession had some Colleges and endowments of
revenues and lands, such as the Chaldeans had in Babylon, then I doubt not but
there would start up a number, that would be very nimble and helping in this
cause: if not for the goodness of the cause, yet for the fatness of the spoil,
which would follow their overthrow. But here we see that true in us, which was
wont to be said of the Church of Rome, Curia Romana non captat ouem sine lana.
The Church of Rome will never pull
At sheep alone, but with the wool.
And no penie, no Paternoster: but even of these reformers, if they will do
any good in the cause, we will be ready to take it, acording to that, abs
quiuis homine beneficium, never refuse a good turn at any man's hand;
acknowledging so much by the warrant of our Savior, that they that are not
against us are with us. So long as this abuse remains, we are still in
Babylon, for that is not Babylon, -- vbi dicitur altam,
Coctilbus muris cinxisse Semiramis vrbem,
Which Queen Semiramis has fenced a goodly height and tall,
With baked brickes, whereof she made an admirable wall.
But that is Babylon, where Babylonicall superstitions are maintained or
suffered, in which so long as we continue, we can never truly say cecidit
Babylon: but still we have need to have that sounded in our ears, Exite de
illa populus meus Reuelat. 18.4. Deuteron. 18.1^. We learn that the
star-gasers are detested of God, and that for harkning to the^, the heathen
were cast out of their countries, then what shall become of us? If the heathen
could not escape in their ignorance, what shall become of us, who think our
selves so learned, and brag of the word: which notwithstanding, if we do not
look better to these things, we had better never have known Let us not be
wiser then God himself. Let us not deceive ourselves playing wily beguily, God
is not mocked. If we be his scholars, let us believe: In all arts Discentem
oportet credere, the scholar must believe his master. If we trust our selves
we do but deceive our selves, as the Jews did in this very case. Esaias. 47.10.
to whom it is there said, that their wisdom and knowledge had deceived them.
Wherefore to them, who have to do in this reformation, let us say that, Esaias.
47.13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the
astrologers and stargazers, and prognosticators stand up and save thee from
these things that shall come upon thee. As for the wisards and Astrologers
themselves, let them hear that in the same place: they are become as stubble;
the fire has consumed them, neither shall they deliver their souls from the
hand of the flame. If the heathen were cast out, and punished for these abuses,
as appears Deuter. 18, no doubt, unless we repent, and amend these things,
we must look to taste of the same cup: God has a day of reckening for us:
let not his long suffering increase our carelessnes: he is not slow as some men
count slownesse, Veniet et non tardabit, his arm is not so shortened, but he
can reach us. As yet he knocks at thy heart by his word: but if thou will not
open, he will knock thee indeed, and bruise thee. Let us think what a dreadful
thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God, if his wrath be kindled
but a little, then happy are all they that put their trust in him, the words of
God never return in vain, either they will mende us, or condemn us, let them
not be as Cassandraes oracles rejected and despised, neither let us be as the
adder stopping our ears at the voice of the charmer. But here some perhaps
will reply, that though some good law were enacted to restrain this
blasphemous folly, yet there were small hope of good that way, since we see how
good laws are daily neglected, notwithstanding this we must not so give over.

Tu ne cede malis sed contra audentius ito.
To evil see thou give not place,
But look it bouldly in the face.
Discharge thy self in making the law, and let the executour of it look to
himself. It shall not be the first, good law that has bin ill kept, and by
this means we shall leave a lively testimony to the world, that we have not
been unmindful of our duty in this point. This 42 years we have bin as men
possessed of a letargie, we have stood at a stay, and scarce gone any one step
forward: we have played Salomons sluggard rolling our selves in bed, as a
door is wont upon the hinges. Wherefore at last let us wake, let us rouse our
selves, stretch out our lazy limbs, go to it with hand and foot, redeeming
the time past. Let us harken to the Revel. 3.2. be awake, and confirm the
things which remain, that are ready to die, for I have not found thy works
perfect before God. Let us harken to this, least we hear that in the next
verse. If therefore thou will not watch, I will come to thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know in what hour I will come upon thee. Therefore as I said
before, so I say again, and to use the poets words, Iterumque iterumque
monebo, I will over it again and again. This profession is Babylon, the
professors are Babylonians, Exite de illa, leave her: or as the Prophet
Hieremie says, chap. 50. verse. 8. Recedite de medio illius Babel, and de terra
Chaldaeorum egredimini, and estote tanquam hirci ante gregem, Come out of
Babel, and show your selves men, as it were goats before their herds, that is
stoutly and without fear. And as it is in the 14. verse of the same chap. Make
war against Babel round about, whosoever has bow and arrow, bestow a shot upon
her. And why? Quia peccauit contra Iehouam, she has sinned against God.
Consecrate your hands upon them, happy are you, if you bruise their bones and
limbs against the stones. When you have thrust them away, you have but thrust
away Balaam the false Prophet, you have but thrust away Balaams ass, that dull
beast: you have but thrust away the mates and confederates of devils: you have
but thrust out certain Cananites, fear them not for their great giantly
stature. If we be afraid by putting away the^, to put away any point of good
learning, we are too simple, good letters are the things that they are very
innocent of, and free from, with them shall go nothing but cosening, iugling,
legerdemaine, lying, fraud, and falsehood. They are not filij scientiae: they
are children of the bond woman, they may not inherit with the children of the
free woman, they are bastards, the sons of an hedge hoar, their mother was an
Hittitie. They would gladly make a show of learning, Simia qua^ similis
turpissima bestia nobis, they are but cou^terfaits, off with their visards,
they are but that Asinus Camanus: of with the Lions skin, and the ass will
appear in his likeness: and you if will not, yet the asses ears will stick out
to do them shame enough. Strip away the harness, and under it you shall find
Patroclus, not Achilles, a counterfeit (...). And thererfore since they will be
Patroclus, it were pity but they should find an Hector to encounter with
them. Let them make what show of learning they can, yet will that still be
true, Simia simia erit etc. an ape will be an ape, and have a fling at his
nut-shels, howsoever he be apparrelled, and disguised. To enter their names in
the book or catalogue of the learned, were but to yoke an Ox and an ass
together. To bestow or allow them any thing for lying, were but to take the
childrens bread, and hurl it to the dogs, which are not worthy to eat the
crumbs under the table. What do we stop, why do we stay, what perils do we
cast, do we look what themselves will say? will we make the thief the judge?
We have heard Moses and the Prophets, and will not that serve, unless we hear
some from the dead? For authorities, and testimonies I think sufficient have
been produced: if any look for more, I can say no more but this, aut hoc
testium satis est, aut nihil erit.

An appendix to the 8. Chapter, proving that their praedictions cannot be true,
as not being comprehensible by reason of these inferior causes, which being
many, much alter the working of the superior causes, which also is confirmed
by abundaunce of testimonies of their best Astrologers.
ALthough it were granted that these inferior bodies are diuersely affected,
and wrought this way and that way by the heavens, which I think need not be
denied, yet notwithstanding I think the Astrologer should be smally believed
here for his false predictions, and that for two causes chiefly. First because
there is such variety, or rather confusion of the powers of heaven, and
heavenly causes, that the knowledge of them is altogether impossible, and
incomprehensible for three causes; namely, first for the multitude of stars;
secondly by reason of the proper force of every star, sign, and part of
heaven; thirdly by reason of certain altetations which happen to the planets.
For the number of the stars, we know they are so innumerable and
incomprehensible, that no man is able to say what portion of them is, whether
the one half or the third part, quarter, or such like. Yet Mathematicians in
this point have defined thus far, that if all the concauitie of the eight
sphere were filled with stars primae magnitudinis, it would contain
71209600, that is 70 millions, 209 thousand, and 600 stars. Now since the
Astrologers have noted in their catalogue as known only 1028 stars, they must
needs confess that they proceed by the help of a few, and a small part of
heaven, making the knowledge of the rest to be idle as it were, and to no
purpose, and measuring the knowledge of those, which are known only by the
view of the eye. For whereas they attribute the first 4. qualities to the
planets by their light, greatness, quality and distance of the fixed stars,
they do not so determine, but of them pronounce by their colors, this to be of
the nature of Saturn; another of Mars; another of Venus, and so forth.
Farther, it is agreed upon among the Astrologers and Mathematicians, that
Saturn in bulk contains the earth 91 times; Jupiter 95 times; Mars once and
half; the Sun 167 times; Venus the 37 part; Mercury the 21 part; the Moon
the 39 part. Moreover they affirm, that the stars of the first greatness, as
they term them, do contain the earth 107 times; of the second greatness 90
times; of the third 70 times; of the fourth 54 times; of the fifth 35 times; of
the sixth 18 times, which notwithstanding are the least that can be discerned by
the eye. So the whole number of stars distinguished by their bulk and
greatness is 1008; to which if you ad 5 more called nebulosos, and 9 called
obscuros, you have the full number of noted stars 1022. Now if in
considering the hugeness of these bodies, man's wit fails; if in so great
distance all wax dim to him, how shall he be able to judge any thing at all of
their substance, qualities and powers? The Sun and Moon, say they, work
upon these inferior matters; but the other stars have the same nature and
substance, the other therefore work and govern in the same manner. Be it so
then: yet the operations of the Sun and Moon are evident, and nothing
belonging to predictions. And whereas they say the other stars are of the
same nature, which the Sun and Moon are of, their meaning (I think) is, that
they are hot, bright, celestial, divine, and such like. But here the question
is not of the nature of the stars, but of their effects. But grant that not
only the Sun and Moon, but also all other stars work, what skilleth their
working, if we know not what they work? But in that they say all work,
because they are of the same nature, does most of all disprove predictions,
since they cannot tell the force of any one star, much less the number of all.
Farther, the difference of signs is so manifold, and infinite, that no man is
able to comprehend them. As for the error which comes by the alteration of
their forces, which follows chiefly the variety of the motion of the
planets, that of all others is the greatest. The reason and necessity of this
error rises hence, that this alteration reaches so far, that the planets
by variety of motion remit, or intend, not only their proper, and essential
force, but often quite change it to the contrary, becoming of good bad; of
favorable malign; of fortunate dismal, and contrary. Hence come those idle
names of retrogradation, station, velocitie, longitude, latitude, aspect,
combustion, direction, progression, revolution, and such like, with a great
many more then I have named. Another chief cause of Astrologicall lies is,
that by reason of their infinite variety, those things can never be
comprehended, which do remit, change, and abolish the force and working of the
stars, as in their general predictions concerning Empires, kingdoms,
countries, nations, towns, that general mutabilitie, and inconstancy of this
inferior world being always mutable and transitory. In the natiuities of
men, the nature of the seed, the accidents in the womb, the birth hour,
nourishment, education and institution, the will, advise, and such like, which
are not to be neglected, but diligently waighed. Of those things that go before
the nativity, although I have said somewhat before, yet it will not be amiss
to hear what Ficinus says upon a book of Plotinus entitled Vtrum stellae
aliquid agant, the things to be considered are in number five. First the nature
of the parents and the seed, and sowing time, which seed and sowing time
depends more of the nature, imagination, and voluntary motion of parents,
then of any constellation. Secondly, the time when the seed in the mother
waxes stiff, and glewish, which alteration in the seed follows the
condition of the seed and parents, rather then the constitution of heaven.
Thirdly, the time of quickening, which is not in all alike, but in some sooner,
in some later. Fourthly, the time when the child before birth, strives and
strugleth to untie and free it self from the bonds in the mothers womb,
which losing lies more in the strength of the child, and mother, then in the
habit of heaven. Fifthly, the time of birth, which depends chiefly of the
force and strength of the child, and mother. Again, the position of heaven was
not the same at the conception, quickening, and birth. By which differences, if
the temperament and constitution of our body be altered, then must needs the
Astrologer hold himself not to the bare constitution of heaven in the
nativity, but fly withal to these other times, and not pronounce any thing
before he has conferred all the times together. But as these times, and their
causes are unknown; so especially we cannot tell what is made of them being
all put together. Whence must needs proceed error, which the Astrologers
notwithstanding either know not, or dissemble, supposing the birth hour alone
to be sufficient for their predictions.

In the education is to be considered the diversity of countries, and custom;
for in England, Italy, France, Spain, and Germany, is not the same manner of
education: secondly is to be considered the variety of feeding. Neither do all
of the same country use the same diet and feeding, but rich folks one way,
and poor folks another, and in deed every one as they can. Now if he be
deceived both in things before births, and in births, and in the education
after, how can he ever judge aright of the temperament, which belongs rather
to the physician, then to the Astrologer. For the physician by probable signs
judges the temperament not only of the whole body, but of every part, as if
he see one given to anger, rage, brawling, he by and by judges him to be
choleric; if dull, heavy, drowsy, flegmaticke, whereas the Astrologer
judges of choler by the constitution of Mars; of melancholy by Saturn; of
blood by Jupiter, and so in the rest. Yet this mad stuff they seek to
fortify out of one or two misconstrued places of Hippocrates, Galen, and
Aristotle, so ridiculous and far from the purpose, that they bewray their own
poverty too much: but they that lack better fuel, must burn such as they
can get, if it be but sheeps trundles and cowdung.

Next education comes institution, whose force is not only confessed of all
wise men, but proved by experience. By institution and government a man often
imbraceth not that which the Astrologers pick out of heaven, but that which
their parents, friends, Tutors and Guardians shall think fittest, or that
which themselves love. It often falls out, that a man borne to learning and
philosophy, by institution is made a soldier; and he that was a soldier
naturally, is advanced to be a king. Many that are naturally naught by
institution are reclaimed. Zopyrus reading the destiny of Socrates, and
uttering many things contrary to his virtues, was hissed at for his labor of
the bystanders: but Socrates answered for him, that naturally he was such a
one, if good bringing up had not got the upper hand of nature. So long as Nero
hearkened to Seneca, he was well accepted and taken of all.

Next to our bringing up come our actions, desires, and business, in which is
chiefly to be considered the custom of countries, which we know to be guided,
not by any natural necessity or power of stars; but by laws customs,
examples, discipline, by the quality and opportunity of the place, or by a
man's own consultation and opinion. Where there is no punishment, there even
the better sort will offend: but where there is sharp and due correction, even
the naturally bad will refrain from offense. By imitation of the good many
daily become good; and ill by imitation of the ill, what star soever they be
borne under. So for occasion and opportunite, no star makes fishers and
hunters, where there is no occasion of fishing and hunting. Again, what star
soever men be borne under, they will fall to fishing and hunting, if occasion
serve, and need force them.

Now thus much having been said generally of those things, which not only
trouble, but quite overthrow the judgment of Astrologers, it will not be
amiss to show what not only ancient Ptolemy, but also those later men of the
same profession, VVolphius, Pontanus, Ficinus and Cardan himself have thought
in this point. Not far from the beginning of the first book of the
Quadripartite, Ptolemies words are these; Concerning natiuities, and several
temperaments, many other things concur, which alter the case in mixtures.
First, the diversity of seed has great force to bring forth of his own
kind; so great, that in the same air, and horizon, every sort of seed
holds to his own kind; man's to men; horses to horses. Notwithstanding I
remember that Ludouicus Viues in his first book de anima reports it to be
very ordinary with the women in Naples, and in Belgica Batauia, having
conceived of their husbands, to bring forth very monstrous beasts, which he
imputes partly to their diet, and feed, as being much upon Cabbage, and such
like; and partly to some imperfection and uncleanness of the mother. For by
the like imperfection we see the earth alter, and corrupt the seed cast into
it, bringing suldars and smuttie gear in steed of good wheat. But of this I
have said before cap. 7. Again the diversity of countries causes no small
difference in natiuities, though the seed be of the same kind, as of diverse
men: and though the state of heaven be the same, yet by diversity of
countries, here is great difference both in minds and bodies. Farther, though
these things were not, yet education and custom would cause great difference.
A little after his words be as follow; We may not think that all things happen
to men from heaven, as it were by an immutable and divine decree, or by a law
that forced particulars, and could not be resisted, for the course of heaven is
for euerimmutable, but these inferior things are natural, and mutable. As for
men, to them happen many things by reason of a general constitution, not for
any proper quality of the particular nature; as when by reason of great
chaunges, or alterations in the air, which can hardly be avoided, as it
falls out in great drouthes, plagues, deluges, where we still see the
inferior and particular causes give place to the superior, and more general.
By these places of Ptolemy we may perceive, that though a man by his particular
nativity, is to live so long, or to die thus, yet if there come a pestilent
constitution, it may sweep him away with others, before the time by his
nativity. Why? because that pestilent constitution has a more general, and
mighty cause, which must needs ouersway the particular cause of the nativity.
So if there be an hundred in a ship, who by their several natiuities, should
all die at several times, and several deaths: yet they are often all cast away
at once, by reason of the general and stronger cause which raised the tempest,
and prevails against all the particular causes of their several natiuities.
The like may be said of other causes. But to return to Ptolemie again, in the
third book of the Quadrip. his words be these: The universal causes are of
more force and efficacy, then particular causes. Which words of Ptolemie many
learned Mathematiques, Philosophers, and Astrologers do so interpret, as if
particular predictions were nothing worth. Among the rest Pontane has these
words: They which desce^d to particular predictions, are derided of Ptolemie
himself, because it cannot be, but that their conjectures and observations must
needs fail in this behalf. Of the use of Astrology VVolphius says: By the
circumstances of regions, countries, laws, education, parents, times, place,
that which was decreed by the stars, is often changed, and altered. There is
such an intricate variety of humane actions, trades and cases, that it is
impossible to pierce and enter into the particulars. Again, the same author:
Neither in the mean time can we deny, but there are very plausible arguments
brought against the art, for example, the swiftness of heaven, the
uncertainty of the conception, and birth hour, the dissimilitude of manners,
and fortune, of twins, which follow the one; the other in no more distance
perhaps then we may err from the point of the nativity, either by negligence
or difficulty of observation. To these ad shipwreck, fires, sacks of cities,
plagus, destructio^s of whole armies; for it is not like that so many thousand
had the same Horoscopus, or that their constellations agreed upon the same
hour: farther we may consider the natiuities of a number borne at the same
time, either in the same place, or diverse, of which some proved Kings, some
beggars, some learned, some rude, and idiots, some men, some women, some tall,
some dwarfes, with innumerable such differences. To the same purpose Ficinus
upon Plotinus: To conclude, says he, howsoever the matter goes, it is very
hard to judge of things to come: for if we know not what new thing is made by
the mixture of natural things, much less do we know what new thing rises by
the project of the star-beames.

Certainly, when the Astrologers confess, that by the conjunction of two
beams, another thing is made then by one beam alone, they must needs farther
confess, that by the medly of the beams of all the Planets, is bred a far
other matter, then when two only join. Which happens also much more, when not
only all the Planets, but the whole infinity of stars concur. But when mo
causes concur to an action, the harder is the judgment, because neither are
all the causes comprehended, neither if they were all comprehended, does it by
and by appear, what new thing proceeds of the multitude, especially since we
must take heed in judging not only celestial, but also eleme^tal causes, with
the concurrence of things contingent, which also both Ptolemie means, and
charge. Cardan book 1. chap. 3. upon the Quadripartite, does plainly
confess predictions to be lewd and false, and full of uncertainty, because
many stars are unknown. Farther, the motion or course of them that are known,
is either unknown, or uncertain. And in the nativity of Cl. Lauallus, Often
(says he) have I said, that all which is said must be understood, if the
general constitutions resist not, as wars, shipwracks, plagues, famine,
sedition, laws. But Ptolemie is the best interpreter of himself. It cannot be
(says he) that by art o^e may pronounce particular events, neither does sense
apprehend a particular, but a certain general form of sensible things.
Wherefore in handling these things we must follow only conjecture, for by
inspiration only do men foretell particulars. Hence it may seem likely, that
Ptolemie writ the Quadripartite, not purposely to teach the art, but to show
that there is indeed no Astrology, and if there be any, that it is such, as is
described by him, having no certainty, but made to the shame and derision of
Astrologers and their art. In a word the Arabians and Jews that have writ of
Astrology, do all agree, as witnesses Aben Ezra cap. 1. de natiuitat. That,
whatsoever heaven has decreed, need not come to pass, either because the
matter is not fit to receive the influe^ce, or because humane affairs depend
much upon our will, or because particular destinies, are overcome of the
general. Or lastly, because divine providence being above destiny, does
otherwise ordain, and dispose of things, then the ordinary course of heaven
affords. Thus you see that Aben Ezra has spoken to the Bill, though small to
the liking of diverse of the profession. For which some of them, no doubt will
be ready to spur him that question of the Poet, (...)?
Why have thou let such speeches fall,
As cannot choose but spoil us all.


But since Ptolemy, Ficinus, VVolphius, Pontanus, Cardan, and the rest of those
Foelices animae, heroical spirits, combine with him, he will easily answer
such a question. But what do we look for? When these great fensers have played
their prices, can we not be content, except we see what Sauga and Cimaleo will
say, and the base crew of them that can do nothing* but set a figure, and turn
an Ephemerides? You have confitentem reum, you may proceed to judgment at your
pleasure. Now that they have condemned themselves, do you look that they
should execute themselves too? That were too much, and perhaps it is not in
their constellations. To show farther the infirmities, or rather
impossibilities of their art, we might here stand upon a very great and
necessary point, which as yet themselves can by no means agree upon, and
which of all others should be chiefly agreed upon, that is the division of
their twelve houses. In which it is wonder to see how infinitely they vary;
some using the vertical circle; some the circle of position; others the parts
of the equator, and that very diuersely; some also following this man; some
that; some Ptolemy; some Aben Ezra; some Aben Moab; some Regiomontanus; some
Campaine, and so forth. If any shall say that this variety is nothing, so that
we follow some one, he is much deceived, and shows his ignorance. For Ioannes
de Roias in his third book in Planisphaerio, confesses the contrary, in
these words. But says he in such variety of opinions, whom we may boldly
follow, I cannot tell, only thus much I can say, that it is a matter of moment,
which way we follow this or that. These things being thus, may we not well
conclude, with Cornelius Agrippa, that this art, is nothing but deceitful
conjectures of superstitious people, which by long experience have made an art
of incertainties; whereby to get a few beggarly pence, they might deceive
others, as they are deceived themselves.

FINIS.
TO THE READER.
Among other scapes, gentle Reader, there are two of more importance: the one
committed in a place of Philo, page 8. lin. 24. which you may help, if in
steed of, The logical part to the fence and hedges, serving to defend the
plants, and the plants to bear fruit, so say they, etc. you read, The
logical part to the fence and hedges, but the moral part to the fruit,
affirming that the hedges and fences round about, are made only for the
safety of the fruit, but the plants to bear fruit, so say they, etc.

The other escape is page 107. lin. 26. Where the whole sentence, beginning at,
But whereas the Mandrag, etc. to the end of the first line upon the page
follow-must be transposed to the 22. line of the 108. page to come in before
that, Now that which most aggrauateth, etc. The rest correct thus.

Page 8. lin. 6. Abraham read Abram. p. 8. l. 22. fuit read fruit. p. 9. 6.
causes. r. cases. page 12. l. 2. motio r. nation. p. 13. l. 27. dele, such. p.
14. 13. dodeo^emoriani r. dodecatemoriani. p. 22. l. 20. are bounded. r. are
not bounded. p. 23. l. 16. further help. further or help p 33. l. 13
concortion. r. concoction. p. 57. l. 25. sen. fen. p. 63. l. 14. inscriptio. r.
inscription. p 73. l. 24. (...). p. 77. l. 18. pursutes. r pursnets. p 80. l.
28. would. r. should. 84. l. 14. substantionaliter. r. substantialiter. p. 90.
l. 11. sight r. site. p. 105. l. 3. (...). p. 107. 12. goes nine days. r
goes nine months p. 107. l. 23. that year was. r. this year was p. 117. l.
24 are only. r. are not only p. 118. l. 7. the fourth figne. r. the third
sign. p. 121. l. 14. upon the sun. r. upon the moon. p. 123. l 6. and in his.
r. as in his.

ASTRONOMIAE ENCOMIVM: A Ioanne Chambero ante annos 27. peroratum, quo tempore
Ptolemaei Almagestum, in alma Vniuersitate Oxonien. public enarrauit.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA


LONDINI, Excudebat Ioannes Harisonus. 1601.

TO THE READER.
CVrteous and gentle Readers, that the difference of co^nterfeit Astrology,
and lawful Astronomy may the better appear, I have thought good to publish
with my Treatise against Astrology an Oration, or speech which I pronounced in
the schools at Oxford 27. years ago, when I read the Astronomy Lecture
there. By which you may understand, that the commendation of Astronomy, and the
crimination, or reprehension of Astrology may well stand together, the one
being a most liberal and learned science, the oath a mere unlearned, and
witless babble. Wherefore I have not, as some happily would suspect, with the
Satyr in the fable, blown hot and cold out of the same mouth. For these two
things being so distinct and di^ferent, may be easily so handled, that the
repreh^sion of the one shall be no blemish at al to the other. Although I think
th^se men could wish, that I had given Astronomy a blow too, that so they
might catch better hold of me. But how far I am from disgracing or malicing any
good art, may appear by this speech, which was delivered wel^igh thirty
years before this Treatise was intended. Now that their counterfeit is
discarded, they will no doubt no longer care wh^t becomes of Astro^omie, no
more then did the queen, 1 King. 3. who having lost her own child, could very
willingly see the other child divided But as she was an unnatural queen for
her labor, so shall these men too much disclose their ill humor. That your
selves may be the better able to judge in this controversy, it were well that
you acquainted your selves with those ancient and sound Mathematicians Euclide,
Archimed, Ptolemy, and the like, bid a long farewell to these late dimies and
epitomies, which have already welnigh spoiled all good learning. For that which
cannot be related without grief, I know some famous Universities, which
banishing those ancient Authors, have caused by public order to be read and
interpreted in steed of them in their common schools, certa^ne hungry
vpstarts, scarce worth the naming. If this were not (...) I know not what was.
Where such changes are made, there may be great fear, what will become of Arts
and learning I trow. As for the changers themselves, they do too much bewray
their own weakness, and may ^ustly hear that which Crassu, said of his beast
eating thistles Sim^^es ha^ent labra lacturas, that is, Like will to like,
quoth the devil to the Collier: till they have more skill in these Arts, it
were to be wished, that the^ could rule their fingers, least they may seem
according to the proverb, In alienam messem falcem immittere. Better it were
for them to hearken to that in Athen. li. 6.

(...). So recommending these simple labors to your favorable and friendly
constructions, I take my leave.

ASTRONOMIAE ENCOMIVM.
VEreor profecto, and non mediocriter pertimesco (doctissimi iuuenes, virique
grauissimi) ne hodierno die, hoc loco ad agendum ampliss. ad dicendum ornatiss.
and temeritatis non parum, and audaciae plus quam velim, sit mihi subeundum:
quippe qui nec authoritate, nec ingenio, neque dicendi facultate satis
instructus, in hac celeberrima hominum Peripateticoru^ frequentia, conspectu
vestro multo iucundissimo, orationem de scientiarum infinitis laudibus essem
habiturus. Cogitanti enim mihi, and mentis aciem in omnes parts referenti,
nihil tam magnificum afferi posse visum est, nihil tam expolitum, nihil tam
splendidum, quod non exile, ieiunum, atque adeo frigidum in tantorum hominum
tali corona videretur: cum praesertim plurimos hic iam adesse intelligerem, qui
summis ingenijs, hoc long, longeque copiosius, and ornatius praestare
potuissent.

Quod nisi fuisset maiorum moribus, academiae communis parentis statutis,
priuatae domus institutis, vestrae denique voluntati obtemperandu^, libenter
equidem nouu^ hoc and inusitatum dicendi munus in quemuis aliu^ reiecissem,
partim authoritate, praesentiaque vestra, partim rerum de quibus dicturus sum
magnitudine, ac varietate perterritus. Quis enim tam frequens vsus
consuetudoque dicendi? quae verborum tanta, tam elaborata concinnitas, quod
tantum est vspi^m flumen ingenij, vt cuiuslibet artis lauds, ne dum
Astrologiae omnium artium dominae, plene possit, cumulateque complecti? Quae
memoria tam firma, constans, ac diuturna, vt possit vel separatim singula, vel
aceruatim omnia comprehendere? Quod orationis genus tam diuinum and
incredibile, tam concinna numerorum suauitate perpolitum, tam crebris verborum,
and sententiarum luminibus illustratum, vt rem tantam, tam diuinam pro
dignitate satis praedicare possit? Verum illud inprimis laetandum iure esse
video, quod in hac insolenta mihi ex hoc loco ratione dicendi apud eos homines
acturus sum, qui vt sunt ipsi doctiss. and omnium magnarum rerum, atque artium
scientiam consecuti, ita nullis de rebus quam de scientiarum laudibus audire
malint. Et merito sane, nam horum praesidijs tecti potestis vera atque
simplicia bona contueri, falsa autem, and insidiosa modis omnibus aspernari.
Spero equidem vos non tam meam tenuitatem, quam vestram humanitatem; non tam
meam inertiam, quam vestram peritiam; non tam meam in perorando infantiam, quam
vestram in omni genere dicendi eloque^tiam spectaturos. Si quid erit
praetermissum, quod Astrologiae splendorem vllo modo augeat, id vos pro vestra
singulari humanitate, dictum esse fingere. Equidem ego si dicendo Astrologiae
dignitati lucem aliquam attulero, and ipsi qui hanc disciplinam admirari
semper, and colere solebatis, vos non mediocriter ornatos esse cogitate. Quod
si nec ego, nec quisquam alius nostris encomijs quicquam profecerimus, si rei
magnitudine medio cursu obruaamur, and sic etiam vestris laudibus maximae fient
accessiones, vt qui sitis ijs d^sciplinis instructissimi, quarum amplitudo
tanta est, vt nulla possit orationis vbertas, nulla dicendi copia eius partem
aliquam explicare. Atque haec quidem causa erit mihi in dicendo bipartita.
Primum enim de dignitate atque praestantia, deinde de vtilitate dicemus. Quae
si magna, atque adeo maxima vobis videntur, quam vary and quam copiose dicatur
expectare nolite. Ego enim multis incommodis, difficultatibusque affectus, edam
quae potui, non vt volui, sed vt me temporis angustiae coegerunt, atque in
dignitatis ratione inprimis offertur, vt videamus, quos maiores, quos natales,
quem generis sui authorem and principem habet Astrologia: magnus sane locus and
inter Mathematicos iam multum diuque versatus. Qui de hac re memoriae quicquam
prodiderunt, qui literarum monumentis, quid sentirent, consignarunt, tanta sunt
in varietate, and dissensione constituti, vt eorum molestum sit annumerare
sententias, vt res nulla sit, de qua tantopere non solum Astronomi, sed etiam
Mathematici, and omnes docti dissentiant. Principio M. Cicero, quem nemo, nec
nimis valde vnquam, nec nimis saepe laudauerit, huius tam praeclari muneris
inuentores triplices refert, Assyrios, Chaldaeos, Aegyptios: Etenim Assyrij
propter planitiem magnitudinemque regionum, quas incolebant, cum coelum ex omni
part patens, atque apertu^ intuerentur, traiectiones motusque stellaru^
obseruaru^t quibus notatis, quid cuique significaretur, memoriae prodiderunt.
Qua in natione Chaldaei, diuturna obseruatione syderum, scientiam putantur
effecisse, vt praedici possit, quid cuique euenturum, and quo quisque fato
natus sit. Eandem artem Aegyptij non ex artis, sed ex gentis vocabulo nominati,
longinquitate temporum innumerabilibus pene seculis consecuti putantur. Quod si
temporis ratione primi inuentores existima^di sunt, erunt hi quos modo
percensui, Assyrij, omnium facile primi. Idem enim Cicero, quem quadam
admiratione commotus saepius fortasse, quam necesse est, nomino, author est
quadringenta, and septuaginta millia annorum, in periclitandis, experiundisque
pueris, quicunque essent nati, Babylonios posuisse. Ex quib. certe, si vera
sunt, satis constat, huius disciplinae antiquitatem (vt eam obiter
praestringam) tantam esse, vt asseueranter id affirmare quis audeat, nihil ex
omni memoria, nihil ex infinita saeculorum serie extare vetustius. Hunc
sequutus Seneca, virtutis, probitatis singular specimen, Thaletem primum hanc
artem excoluisse testatur, vnum ex septe^ Graeciae Sapientibus, eum, qui vt
obiurgatores suos conuinceret, ostenderetque etiam Philosophum, si ei commodum
esset, pecuniam facere posse, omnem oleam antequam florere coepisset, in agro
Milesio coemisse dicitur. Idem etiam primus defectionem solis, quae Astyage
regnante facta est, praedixisse fertur. Multa de Equinoctio, de vtraque Vrsa,
multa de magnitudine solis, de ci^culis maioribus, minoribus scripserat:
postremo lunae defectiones innumerabilibus pene saeculis praedixerat. Post
Senecam Plinius, cognomento secundus, doctrinae studijs primus, vir in astrorum
motibus, and omni philosophia multum diuque versatus, in eis libris, qui
inscribuntur de naturali historia ad Berosum, cui Athenienses, propter
diuinationem, praesensionemque rerum futurarum, statuam auream in publico
gymn^sio collocarunt, huius artis initia reuocat. Sed vt videamus bonarum
artium parentem Graeciam, in qua and nata, and alta est Philosophia: ille non
intelligendi solum, sed etiam dicendi grauissimus author and magister Plato,
qui in musicis, geometria, numeris, astris, se conterens, multis retroactis
te^poribus Athenis in academia veteri floruerat scriptum reliquit Thoth quendam
Egyptiorum Deum (quem eundem nonnulli Mercurium opinantur) Aegyptios non solum
astrorum scientiam, sed Geometriam etiam, and numerorum artem, ludumque
talarium primum docuisse. Atque hae fere sunt Philosophorum sententiae, in
quibus modo erat authoritas. Caeterorum deliramenta percensere, and longum
esset, quia infinita, and molestum, quia vix anicularum lucubratione digna
sunt. Iam vero, vt ad fabulas veniamus, Poetae quos mendacij and vanitatis
insimulandos nullo modo censeo, cum faciant Atlantis viribus coelum, sydera,
supera omnia niti, hoc non solum amplissimo, and dulcissimo, sed etiam
admirando genere orationis, quid significarunt aliud, quam diuinum hominem, cum
longinqui temporis vsu nullam in coelo nec fortunam, nec temeritatem, nec
errationem, nec vanitatem vidisset, certos quosdam coeli motus, ratos astrorum
ordines, spatiorum definitam periodum, quibus suos quaeque cursus conficerent
statuisse. Quid cum Endymionem Lunae delicias, ab eadem in monte Latmio ad
multos annos consopitum memorant, suisne monumentis hominem somniculosum, aut
veterno correptum immortalitati consecrare voluerunt? Quasi vero quisquam
esset, aut tam impudens, vt diceret, aut tam desipiens and hebes, vt crederet.
Voluerunt proculdubio hominem dimetiendi coeli peritissimum, fabulis apt
compositis, quasi quodam in tegimento obuolutum depingere, vt qui omnem Lunae
varietatem acerrimo ingenio explicasset, quemadmodum tum congrediens, cum Sole,
tum digrediens, and eam lucem quam a Sole accepit, mittat in terras, and vartas
ipsa mutationes lucis habeat: quemadmodum subiecta atque opposita soli radios
eius, and lumen obscuret, tum ipsa incidens in vmbra terrae, cum est e regione
Solis, interpositu, interiectuque terrae repent deficiat.

Sed nolo vobis in Poetarum, ac Philosophoru^ suffragijs multus videri. Habetis
ex omni antiquitate hominum doctissimorum sententias, quae cum tam variae sint,
tamque inter se dissidentes, alterum fieri profecto potest, vt earum nulla,
alterum certe non potest, vt plus vna sit vera. Sed sieve verae sint, sive
secus, sive hoc modo, sive illo, omnes profecto hoc nomine laudandi, quod rem
tantam, tam divinam in authors Deos, aut Heroas retulerunt. Melius meo iudicio
recentiores, melius patrum memoria PHILIP. MELANCTHON, qui vir, and quantus
singulari virtutis, ac pietatis laud florentissimus. Melius nostra aetate
PETRVS RAMVS, homo ad laudem insignis non omnino natus, sed ab ipso deo
affectus, que^ omnes amare meritissimo pro eius eximia sanctitate debemus.
Melius VICTORINVS STRIGELIVS, qui multis in vtraque philosophia libris
praeclare aeditis, non paucis, sed omnibus, non modo suis, sed etiam exteris,
non vna tantum aetate, sed in multa secula, atque prope infinita consuluit.
Melius SIMON, melius PACMEISTERVS, melius PEVCERVS, melius ERASMUS REINHOLDVS,
quos omnes honoris causa nomino: melius innumerabiles alij, qui cum coelestem
hunc admirabilem ordinem, incredibilemque constantiam vidissent, ex qua salus
omnium omnis oritur, non Atlanti cum fabulis, non minorum gentium dijs cum
Philosophis, sed omnium rerum, quae natura administrantur, seminatori, and
satori, and parenti, vt ita dicam, atque educatori, and altori, per omnes mundi
parts intento and pertinenti Deo hanc astrorum scientiam in acceptis
referendam censuerunt, neque id superstitiose and aniliter, sed physice and
constanti ratione. SOLOMON ille, qui, vt est in diuinis oraculis, vtraque re
excelluit, vt and doctrinae studijs, and regenda ciuitate Princeps esset,
testatur quidem apertis verbis, and oratione been longa, se omnia, quae ad
superiorum corporum machinationem motumque pertinent, diuinitus esse doctum,
quo ordine caelestes sphaerae ponantur, quibus motibus agitentur singuli
planetae, quibus temporum momentis signiferum orbem lustrent, quas efficiant in
cursu varietates, quemadmodu^ nihil immutent sempiternis seculorum aetatibus,
quin eadem ijsdem temporibus semper redeant. Quod si PLATO long omnium, qui
scripserunt, aut locuti sunt, and copia dicendi, and grauitate princeps, cum
terram vniuersam cerneret locatam in media mundi sede solidam, and globosam,
and vndique ipsam in sese nutibus suis conglobatam, totiusque mundi eam esse
figuram, quae omnes alias figuras complena contineret, quaeque nihil
asperitatis habere, nihil offensionis potest, nihil incisum angulis, nihil
aufractibus, nihil eminens, nihil lacunosum, haec inquam ille cum videret, si
sententiam illam aureolam saepius vsurpare non dubitauit, (...), quid est, quin
nos etiam, cum impetum caeli admirabili celeritate moueri vertique videamus,
constantissime conficientem vicissitudines anniuersarias, cum summa salute, et
conseruatione reru^ omniu^, vere, and libere dicamus, (...)? longa est oration,
multaeque rations, quibus doceri possit, and hanc artem, and caeteras omnes ab
ipso deo bonoru^ omnium inexhausto font promanare. Ad hanc dignitatis rationem
id inprimis pertinere arbitror, quod diuino semine procreata, tam claris
natalibus orta, cum iam e coelo esset in terras deuocata, non in tenebras se
abdidit Astronomia (vt hoc verbum vsu molliamus) non infimam turbam se
coniecit, non rusticanis hominibus se immiscuit, sed eam inijt rationem, qua
suam posset dignitatem facile tueri, lucemque suam long, lateque diffundere.
Itaque regibus se and magnis viris plerumque adiunxit, eis intima, proxima
familiarissima semper fuit, vt qui diuini numinis consilio rem tam diuinam
fouerent atque alerent.

Quare vt altius repetam, Adamus homo primus, and vir primus, cuius imperio
libenter omnia and studiose parebant, primum solis, and lunae reliquorumque
syderum circuitum notauisse, astrorum ortus, obitus, versusque cognouisse
putatur. Hunc secutus est Sethus, aetate quidem minor, astrorum peritia non
minor. Hij duo (vt est apud Iosephum) cum diligenter inspecto coelo
praeuiderent totius mundi interitum, and vastitatem, vnam diluuio, incendio
alteram, duas excitaru^t columnas, lateritiam hanc, illam lapideam, quibus
vtrique sua inuenta inscripserunt, vt si lateritiam diluuio dissipari
contingeret, lapidea superstes hominibus discendi copiam faceret, and quae
inscripta continebat spectanda adhiberet. Haec lapidea Iosephi temporibus
extabat in Syria. Idem etiam Josephus, sed alio loco refert Abrahamum, cum
audita Aegypti vbertate, illuc commigrasset, cum Aegyptijs vtramque artem and
numerorum illam, and astrorum istam, benign communicasse. Ad haec sanctus
Lucas, cum in rebus Apostolorum praeclarissime gestis, scribat Moisen
Aegyptiorum artibus instructissimum, ipse ne errat, an alios errare vult? Quid
dicam de Romulo, a quo accepimus Romam auspicato conditam, cum Luna esset in
iugo? Quid de Ptolemaeo, qui propter ingenium, industriam, multas literas ita
fuit admirabilis, vt extra communem hominum sortem positus and collocatus
videatur? Quid de Alphonso Hispaniarum rege, qui cognomento Astrologus
perhibetur? Atque vt ad nostra veniamus, quandoquidem multo magis me and nostra
and recentia, quam aut aliena, aut vetera delectare soleant: Quid de
Ethelstano, qui, vt est in nostris annalibus, opus astrologicum eleganter and
erudite scripsit. Quid Henrico eo nomine septimo, rege opulentioriue, an
sapientiori non facile dixero, quoties ille dicitur solennes Christi Opt. Max.
natalitia ad coeli, and astrorum modos attemperasse? Quid de eius filio,
Henrico octauo, tali patre dignissimo, qui si cum reliquis no Angliae, sed
totius Europae principibus conferatur, tantum supra caput extulit omnes,
quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi. Neque sane audiendus Osorius
Lusitanus, homo and sua opinione perdoctus, and aliorum iudicio non indoctus,
qui quinto libro de Educatione, and institutione Principis, astronomiam suo
regi verbo concedit, re vera adimit. Multum temporis suum principem in hac art
consumere non patitur, veretur enim homo nimis cautus, ne si in singulis
ins^stat, and immoretur, animum a corporis coniunctione diue^l^t humanos sensus
repudiet, denique ne hisce studijs irretitus nequeat vlla ratione reip.
consulere. At Alex^nder Magnus, quem omnes principes imitari and solent, and
debent, non solum omnes coeli regiones mente definierat, syderum omnium cursus
cognitione comprehenderat, sed orbem disciplinarum, quem Graeci vno verbo (...)
appellant, studio summo confecerat. Simile mihi fecisse videtur Epicurus, homo
impurissimus in deorum natura, and Osorius in institutione principis. Epicurus
enim cum inuidiae detestandae gratia, pellucidos quosdam and perflabiles deos,
lineamentis duntaxat extremis, non habitu solido induxisset, tandem fatetur in
suo deo non esse corpus, sed quasi corpus; non sanguinem, sed quasi sanguinem.
Ad eundem modum voluit Osorius suum regem non astronomum, sed quasi astronomum;
non Musicum, sed quasi Musicum; non Dialecticum, sed quasi Dialecticum; and vt
vno verbo dicam, nondoctum, sed quasi doctum. Sed vt Osorium cum bona p^ce
dimittamus, habeamus nos Romulos, Ptolemaeos, Alexandros, habeamus Alpho^sos,
Ethelstanos, Henricos, habeat ille suos quosdam fictitios and quasi pellucidos
reges. Quare vt hic aliquando de dignitate locus concludatur, puto me iam vobis
ostendisse Astrologiae non solum germanam patriam, sed pene incunabula, and
genus, and maiorum multa vestigia: itaque reprimam me, neque persequar longius,
eoque minus quo ad caetera perueniam citius. Vetus est opinio, and quae per
animos iam omnium peruasit, astronomiae quidem magnum esse nomen, magnam
speciem, magnam dignitatem, sed vtilitatem nullam, fructum nullum, nullum
certum, et destinatum, quo referatur, finem. Vt hanc opinionem ignauis, and
bonarum artium pestibus, excutiam, vt huius amentiae fibras omnes stirpitus
euellam, quae mihi de astronomiae vtilitate in me^tem veniunt, iam quam potero
paucissimis edisseram. Vos autem, vt spero, si quam opinionem mentibus vestris
comprehendistis, si eam ratio conuellat, non repugnabitis, sed eam animis
libentibus remittetis. Ac mihi sane cogitanti, tot res, tam graves, tam variae
occurrunt, vt verear ne ingenio, consilio sustinere non possim. Principio enim
in hac vtilitatis ratione, si eius amplitudinem cum caeterarum artium angustijs
conferamus, videbitur profecto, aut omnes omnium lauds exaequare, aut
singularum singulas mirum quantum superare. Nam caeterae arts habent quaeque
suum finem solitarium atque soliuagum: Rhetorice vt apt dicat ad persuadendum:
Physice vt naturam, rerum principia, causasque doceat, musice, vt de canendi
atque psallendi artificio, de solertissima modorum ratione disputet,
quemadmodum ex acuto and graui sono medijs interuallis aptissima ratione
coniunctis, dulcis concentus eliciatur. At Astronomia non tantum Solis and
Lunae, reliquorumque syderum ortus, obitus motusque, quo quidem tempore eorum
futurum sit docet, sed eas etiam arts, quas modo percensui, and caeteras omnes
mirifice adiuuat, ita quidem vt huius splendore destituti, crassissimis quasi
alicuius nactis tenebris offunda^tur. Solemn e coelo tollere videntur, qui e
bonarum artium comitatu hanc de coelo doctrinam eximunt. Vt enim sol multis
partibus mayor quam terra, omnes stellas clarissima luce collustrat: sic ista
disciplina caeteras arts largo quasi lumine replens, earum dignitatem atque
splendorem supra quam dici potest, tuetur and auget. Scitum est ergo illud
PLATONIS (...). Censebat vir diuinus non geometriae solum, sed Astronomiae
etiam, caeteraeque matheseos ignaros a Philosophorum scholis, atque subsellijs
longissime arcendos. Hoc praeceptum Platonis Zenocrates arctissime per omnem
vitam tenuit. Etenim cum quidam mathematum imperitus eius auditor esse vellet,
abi (inquit) ansas non habes philosophiae. Aristoteles, quem omnibus locis
principem, quem Homerum, quem Deum Philosophorum recte dixero, suis vbique
scriptis mathemata quaedam, quasi quodammodo gemmas, and emblemata aspergit.
Quare Themistius, aut quis alius (non enim recte memini, neque sane multum
refert scire, quod illi nomen fuerit) is igitur cum vedisset quendam, qui
eruditum illum mathematicorum puluerem nunquam attigisset, Aristotoles vt
aliquid addisceret, assidue versantem, quid inquit (...)? tam fuit sanctum non
Platonicis solum, sed etiam Peripateticis Philosophiae principia atque
fundamenta in Astronomia, and mathematicis elementis ponere. lam vero historia
vitae magistra, qua religio aduersus Deum, pietas in parents, charitas in
singulos, iustitia in omnes praedicatur, nisi per Astronomiam stetisset, quam
esset legenti squallida, quam sine omni iucunditatis sensu horrida? Hinc
historia duos debet, quos habet praestantissimos oculos, locorum ac temporum
descriptionem. Nam locorum descriptio, vt de hac primum dicamus, non perspecto,
et pertractato coelo, quaenam esse potest, immo vero potius quae omnino
Cosmographia, quae Geographia, cuius rei ignoratio tanta est etiam hodie apud
nos, vt nonnulli Oceanum flumen, Hiberiam vrbem esse putent; apud exteros, quod
a peregre redeuntibus saepius audiui, vt totam Angliam pagum aliquem, Londinum
vero orbis partem been magnam opinentur. Pari inscitia, sed maiori malitia
Osorius Lusitanns, in quo neque modum, neque modestiam vllam animaduerto contra
Haddonum grauissimu^ atque doctissimum virum, contendit a Roma propius abesse
Angliam quam Hispani^m. Qui etiamsi quantum credat, tantum posset, id tamen
licet omnem suum salem in ludendo consumpserit, nunquam efficiet, vt vel
Hispania longius recedat, vel nos ad Romam propius accedamus. Cum igitur
Hispanos multo maiori interuallo ab illa vrbe, quam nos disiunctos esse dicat,
id si generatim de tota Hispania intelligat, male profecto regionum situs, and
interualla didicit: sin remotiorem aliquam Hispaniae partem intellexerit, vt
Lusitaniam, tergiuersatur omnino, and migratur vir grauissimus. Sed dabit
fortasse idque breui nouas aliquas orbis descriptiones, dabit nouam Angliam,
nonvm Romam, noua^ Hispaniam, alias enim nunquam id obtinebit, de quo tantopere
contendit. Caeterum inuita in hoc loco versatur oration; videtur enim in aliorum
vitijs notandis nimis curiosa, and recte videretur, nisi iste me locus
admoueret, vt de hac materia pauca quaedam adiungerem. Quare vt eo redeat, vnde
digressa est oration, Geographiam, cuius in historijs infinitus est vsus, nullo
modo percipere possumus, nisi de coeli and terrae partitione, de vtriusque
horum inter se habitudine, de zonis, climatis, parallelis, necessaria quaedam
anticipatafuerint. Atqui sublata coeli contemplatione, ista nec doceri, nec
addisci possunt, obeamque causam, nec Geographia, quae ad ista tanquam
adminicula adnititur. Iam vero qui ignota temporum ratione historias
intelligere se posse confidit, perinde facit acsi quis Labirynthi errores sine
duce euadere velit. Nisi enim Ariadnes loco adsit, and (vt Poetae verbis vtar)
caecaregat vestigia filo, inter historiarum innumerabiles aufractus, and quasi
maeandros, incertus, nec intelligit vnde coeperit, quo recurrat, qui se tandem
expedire poterit. Hac duce non modo ipsi nos non erramus, sed aberrantes
historicos in viam saepe diducimus. Quod si a scientissimis astrologis finitus
est dies, mensis, annus, si ij de intercalandi ratione, de epactis, de aureo,
quem vocant, numero, in omne posterum tempus verissime praedixerunt, parum ne
constat quam sit horum ars vtilis ad historiam. Quid porro de medicina dicam,
quam multa, obseruato coelo, de incidenda vena, de diebus criticis, de toto
genere curandi praecipit, quae si ignoret medicus, number eum valere, an aegrotare
dicemus? Ad haec poetice, quae vt (...) liceat, Omne tulit punctum quia miscuit
vtile dulci. Habet illa quidem suos sibi peculiares astrorum ortus and occasus,
quosdam cosmicos, chronicos alios, alios heliacos. Neque Poetae solum notis
coelo impressis ad temporum momenta discriminanda vtuntur, sed aeque profecto,
vel multo etiam magis rei rusticae scriptores, vt nemo possit Hesiodum,
Virgilium, Columellam, Plinium, infinitos alios ad suam vtilitatem legere, nisi
fuerit astronomiae sacris diligenter initiatus.

Possent haec quae a me iam breuiter, strictimque dicuntur, fuse quidem, and
copiose omnibus electissimis verbis, grauissimisque sententijs rhetorice, and
augeri, and ornari, sed quo fui in ceteris longior, eo in istis sim oportet
breuior. Ex his vt spero, videtis, in hac superiorum corporum doctrina, quanta
sit vis, quantae oportunitates ad id, vt ceterae arts non ornentur solum, sed
etiam addiscantur, sine qua labascant necesse est, atque concidant, si non
omnes, at saltem pleraeque, si ne id quidem, at profecto optimae. Neque sane
dubito, quin satis iam tandem intelligatis, quanta sit eorum temeritasue, an
inscitia, an vtrumque, qui Astronomiam, and omnia mathemata despiciant, atque
pro nihilo putent, vt quae delectationis sint, et otij consumendi potius, quam
vllius fructus, aut emolumenti, vt quae in otio valiant, in negotio nihil
possint. In hac opinionis prauitate primus fuit Aristippus, philosophus been
mollis, et delicatus, qui vt est tertio metaph. libro, mathematicas arts
vehementer agitabat. Hunc secutus est Epicurus turpissimus homuncio, cuius
etiam nomen inuidiosum est, and infamiae subiectum. Is posteaquam o^scoenae
corporis voluptati constringendum se dedisset, cuius iucundissimo motu, and
quasi titillatione sensus hiarent, totam Geometriam falsam esse dicebat. Simili
peruersitate hodie Carpentarius pontificius omnem mathesim insectatur, vt vere
mihi id videar esse, quod, quodam in loco Cic. de Philosophis, nihil esse tam
absurdum, quod aliquis pontificius non defenderit. Carpentarius cum in hac
causa nihil dicat non modo Philosophia, sed etiam mediocri prudentia dignum, a
Petro Ramo non mathematico solum magno, verum etiam caeteroque perdocto viro
grauissimis verbis reprehenditur. Ad huius opinionis vanitatem, and errorem
eleuandum, posse vobis Archimedem, Epimachum, Architam, and complures alios
commemorare, qui machinis artificiose fabricatis, suas quique civitates
iacentes excitarunt, afflictatas recrearunt, omni crudelitate laceratas
restaurarunt. Possem multis exemplis ex omni antiquitatis memoria petitis me
artis contemplationem reprehendere, quibus in praesenti supersede^dum esse
putaui: vnum tamen illud silentio praetermittere, nec quia breue est, volui,
nec quia iucundum potui, nec quia ad hoc propositum aptum, vllo modo debui.
Pythes (vt author est Polyaenus) auri, argentique venis inuentis, totam
pythopolim auro inquirendo, fodie^do, purgando defatigabat, caeteris operibus
omnibus omissis penitus, and satio, and agriculture, and vitium curatio, and
reliqua ad vitae cultum necessaria cessabant opificia. Quod cum grave ciuibus,
ac perniciosum erat, mulieres omnes ad vnum, vxorem Pythae adierunt, orarunt,
vt apud virum ea de re ageret. Quas cum bono animo esse iussisset, aurifici
mandauit, vt varia cibaria, dapes, bellaria, ex auro summa art fingeret.
Pythes sub noctem, domum rediens, coenam petit, vxor auream mensam apponit, in
qua solidioris cibi nihil erat, omnia tamen egregie conquisitissimas epulas
ementiebantur. Pythes collaudata vxore, and artis imitationem admirans,
postulabat aliquid ad vescendum, cui illa eiusdem generis alia identidem
offerebat, tandem vero indignanti marito and se fame enectum, asseueranti
respondit. At tu neglecta agricultura, in qua sunt maxima momenta, ad been
viuendum, nihil aliud, quam vt aurum foderetur curasti, quod mutile plane
futurum est, nisi agrorum cultione, and rei rusticae studio, fruges, plantae,
pecudes, partim ad vsum hominum, partim ad fructum, partim ad vescendum
necessariae procurentur. Hac suae vxoris subtili vrbanitate stultitiam suam
edoctus Pythes, agriculturam, and alia opera, a quibus iam diu esset feriatum,
rursus permisit. Parabolam videtis, quam vestra intelligentia fretus, non
interpretabor, tantum dicam non debere nos contemplationis auro captos,
actionem negligere, quandoquidem, vt virtutis, sic artis laus omnis in action
consistit. Itaque praeclare Mar. T. Cic. in Officijs, sicut vbique cognitio,
contemplatioque naturae manca quodammodo est, si nulla actio rerum consequatur.
Multa dicenda sunt, and tamen multa dicuntur. Illud vero quam non paucis vtile,
sed vniuerso hominum generi salutare, quod ad praepotentis Dei cognitionem
capiendam, hac coeli and Astrorum inspectione, nihil habet nec natura, nec ars
valentius, nihil aptius. Quis enim est, vel quotusquisque, quem ordo syderum,
and in omni aeternitate constantia, quem admirabili varietate and pulchritudine
distinctum, and excultum coelum, quem decentissima rerum omnium inter se
consentiens natura, fateri non cogat, tanti operis and muneris moderatorem, and
architectum, Deum? Primusque sol, qui astrorum obtinet principatum, inflectens
cursum suum tum ad septentriones, tum ad meridiem, aestates and hyemes efficit,
and hisce duobus alia duo interiecta tempora. Huius annuos cursus spatijs
menstruis luna consequitur, cuius species ac forma mirifice mutatur, tum
crescendo, tum defectibus in initia recurrendo, habetque in cursu, and brumae
quandam, and solstitij similitudinem. Maxim vero admirabiles sunt motus
quinque planetarum, quae etiamsi errare dicantur, eosdem tamen in omni
aeternitate servant progressus, reliquosque motus constantes and ratos. Multa
mirabiliter efficient, tum antecedendo, tum retardando, tum vespertinis
temporibus delitescendo, tum matutinis serursum aperiendo, nihil immutant
sempiternis saeculorum aetatibus. Quae qui videat non indocte solum, verum
etiam impie faciat, si numen aliquod praestantissimae mentis, praesens and
praepotens, quo haec omnia regantur, non agnoscat. Quid quod iucunditas tanta
est, vt omnes omniu^ artium suauitates, and oblectamenta, si ex altera part
ponantur, ne apparerent quidem. Haec contemplationis suauitas, quae mentis
nostrae quasi pabulum optime dicatur, corporis voluptati, quam sensus accipiens
mouetur, and iucunditate perfunditur, and quae Epicuro, and passeribus omnibus
notissima est, tantum anteire videtur, vt ea ne in conspectu quidem
relinquatur. Etenim corporis voluptas, quae cil o and potione, and aurium
delectatione capitur, quae and parua est, and non necessaria, and qua etiam
carere possumus, fluit illa quidem, and prima quaeque auolat, saepiusque causas
poenitendi relinquit, quam recordandi. Haec autem studij, and commentationis
suauitudo, and constantior est, and permanentior, neque nos semel, nec ad breue
tempus, sed and saepe sane, and diutissime oblectatur. Quod si sua cuique
naturae actio iucundissima est, vt natare piscibus, modulari lusciniae, non
dubium est quin homines eximia quadam voluptate afficiantur, cum coelum
intueantur and suspiciant, magnitudine immensum, splendore clarissimum,
ordinata varietate pulcherrimum, constantia and stabilitate firmissimum.
Videtur solertissima natura, cum coeteras animantes ad pastum abiecisset, solum
hominem erectum, and excelsum finxisse, and ad coeli, quasi cognationis,
domicilijque pristini conspectum excitasse, vt hoc spectaculo apparatissimo
vitae mala infinita leuaret, atque minueret. Imperitorum vulgus miratur quidem,
and exclamat etiam, and mirifice delectatur, si quando sphaeram viderit, cuius
singulae conuersiones idem efficiant in sole, and luna, and quinque errantibus,
quod efficitur in coelo singulis diebus ac noctibus. At quanta maiori voluptate
summi illius cali stelliferi nos permulcebit, praesertim cum multis partibus
sunt haec perfecta, quam illa simulata solertius. Restant rerum futurarum
praedictiones and praesensiones, quae cum vtilitatis speciem amplam, and
illustrem prae seferant, eius tamen veram rationem tantum abest, vt
assequantur, vt longo sane interuallo post relinquantur.

Noui Astrologorum mores, noui genus, quam sint difficiles homines, quam
morosi, quam importuni, eorum tamen bona venia aliquid dicam, non vt eis bilem
commoueam, sed vt eos suae vanitatis commoneam. Quantum ego diuinare possum,
diuinatio nulla est. Si enim sit, vel earum rerum est, quae sensibus
perciptuntur, vel earum, quae art tractantur, non coru^ quae sub sensus
iudicium cadunt, nec enim qui oculis captus est, potuit vnqua^, quae alba, quae
nigra dicere, nec qui surdus varietates vocum, aut modos noscere. at ne eorum
quidem, quae art continentur, quanquam ad aegros, non Astrologos, aut
hariolos, sed medicos solemus adducere; nec vero qui tibijs aut fidibus vti
volunt, ab Astrologis accipiunt earum tractationem, sed a musicis. Eadem in
literis ratio est, reliquisque rebus, quarum est disciplina. Quid de
Astronomia? Number quis Astrologum consuluit, sol maiorne quam terra sit; an
tantus, quantus videatur; Lunaque suo lumine an solis vtatur; Sol, Luna, quem
motum habeant; quem quinque stellae, quae errare dicuntur? ad Astronomos haec,
non ad Astrologos referri solent. Quid quae a Geometris tractantur; number quis
eorum diuinare potest, quae sit duplicatio cubi; quae quadratura circuli?
Geometrarum est ista prudentia. Number tandem Astrologus de sphaera and Cylindro,
melius quam Archimedes; de impendente tempestate melius, quam gubernator; de
morbi natura acutius, quam medicus, de optimo reipub. statu, melius quam
principes and delecti viri, periti rerum ciuilium, vnquam praecipiet? Quod si
ad nihil horum adhibetur Astrologia, primum quae sit; and si sit, quis eius
vsus, quarum rerum sit, nihil prorsus intelligo. Omitto praedictiones and
notationes cuiusque vitae ex natali die. Atque ne illud quidem concedam eis vt
praedicere possint, quali quisque natura, and ad quam quisque rem maxim aptus
futurus sit. Nam caetera quae profitentur nego vllo modo posse sciri. At
aliquando vera dicunt, eorum ars euentu nonnunquam comprobatur. Nec quis est,
qui totum diem iaculans, non aliquando collimet, quid est tam incertum quam
talorum iactus, tamen nemo est, quin saepe iactans, Venereum aliquando iaciat,
nonnunquam etiam iterum, ac tertium. Number igitur vt inepti, Veneris id fieri
impulsu malumus, quam casu dicere?

Non lubet exempla commemorare, vobis praesertim, qui quotidie videtis
omniafere contra, ac ab eis dicta sunt, accidere. Sed ne in immensum excrescat
oration, istis in praesenti modum terminabo. Vos igitur rogo, and quidem valde
rogo, atque hortor, si ad bonarum artium vel perfectionem, vel etiam
mediocritatem peruenire velitis, vt in haec Astronomiae, and omnis Mathesis
studia olim extincta, iam denuo excitata and renouata, acrius tota mente
incumbatis. Si dignitatem spectetis, est diuino semine suscepta, a primarijs
viris, and regibus semper exculta. Caeterae arts magnifice iactant, and
intolerantissime gloriantur, and sibi valde placent; ars imperatoria, quod
Martem; musica, quod Apolline^; eloque^tia quod Mercurium in suis natalibus
habeat. Caeterum cedat Mars Deo, cedat militaris scientia, and omnes arts
Astronomiae. Quod si vtilitatem quaeratis, ea quidem tanta est, vt nulla mayor
in vita cogitari possit: cum enim coelum consideramus, and contemplamur,
erigimur, latiores fieri videmur, humana despicimus, cogitantesque supera atque
coelestia, haec nostra vt exigua, and minima contemnimus. Indagatio ipsa rerum,
tum maximarum, tum occultissimarum habet oblectationem maxim ingenuam,
stabilem, firmam, diuturnam, quae cum sapienter exquiritur, constantissime
retinetur, nulla aegritudine contaminari, aut flagitio deformari, nulla aetate,
aut vetustate consumi potest. Quare pergite, vt facitis, adolescentes atque id
studium, in quo estis, incumbite, vt and vobis honori, and Academiae ornamento,
and amicis vtilitati, and reipublicae Christianae emolumento esse possitis.
Moueat vos dignitas, permaneat vtilitas, si haec separata non suadeant,
coniuncta persuadea^t. Ptolemaeum nostrum voluite, reuoluite, dies, noctesque
cogitate.

The same done in English by the Author.
SVrely I am afraid, and that not a little (most learned and grave auditorie)
least at this time, and in this so famous a place, I shall procure the opinion
both of no small rashness, and of boldness, more a great deal then I would, as
daring without all helps either of authority, wit, or eloquence, to take upon
me in your presence to open my mouth in the endless praise of good Arts. For
when I consider, and cast about every way, I can hardly find any thing, either
so lofty, or picked, which may not seem cold, hungry and harsh, in such an
Auditorie: the rather, because I perceive diverse here present, which had been
both more fit to undertake, and more able to perform this office a great deal
then my self. And if I were not for diverse causes to frame and temper my
self, partly to the statutes of the University; partly to the custom of our
private College; and lastly, to your good pleasures, I could with all my heart
have wished some other to have supplied my place at this time, being as it were
daunted, partly with your authority and presence, and partly with the
excellency and variety of the thing in hand. For who either for his own
experience, or eloquence, or full tide of wit, is able to set out the praise of
any one Art whatsoever? much more of Astronomy, the mistress and monarch of
all Arts and sciences? whose memory is so settled, stayed, and lasting, that it
can either insist upon the particulars, or comprehend the generals? What kind
of speech can you devise so divine and incredible, so polished with pleasant
numbers, so beautified with shining words and sentences, that it may be thought
to attain to the full praise of so excellent a thing? But in this one thing
(me thinks) lies no small point of happiness, that in this new kind of
peroring I have to do with those men, who being most learned themselves, hear
nothing more willingly then the praises of learning. And reason good: for being
furnished with good Arts, you perceive what things are good indeed and simply:
and are able readily to avoid the deceitful and counterfeit show of good. And I
hope you will weigh what is fit not for my slenderness, but for your
gentleness; for my ignorance, but your skill; for my infancy in peroring, but
your eloquence in all manner of speaking. If I shall let slip any thing that
might tend to the magnifying of Astronomy, that I hope you of your singular
courtesy will supply. If I shall in any point seem to come near the praise of
Astronomy, then you that have always admired and studied this art, must
needs think your selves not a little advanced. But if neither I nor any man
else shall be able to prevail with our co^mendations, if in the mid race we
faint and fail; yet even so too shall your commendation appear, as having
spent your time in those studies, which neither tongue nor pen can ever
sufficiently extol. Now this commendation I mean to draw to two heads;
speaking first of her excellency, then of her commodity. Which two points, if
you see how great they be, look not with what variety and copy I am like to
handle them. For I being many ways encombred, must do things as I can, and
as the time will permit, not as I would. Now, in the point of Excellency we are
first to consider the stock and pedigree of Astronomy, who were her Ancestors
and first Authors: a very high point, and wherein all Mathematiques have much
busied themselves. They that have written any thing to this purpose, are so
diverse, and dissent so much, that it were very tedious to reckon their
opinions, there being nothing less agreed upon not only among Astronomers,
but all Mathematicians and learned men.

Now first and foremost M. T. Cicero, whom a man can never praise either too
often, or too much, fathereth this noble art upon three diverse nations, the
Assyrians, Chaldeans, and Egyptians. For the Assyrians dwelling in a plain
champion country, where heaven lay every way open to them, did observe the
course and motion of stars, whereby they took vp-them to tell men's
destinies. In which country also the Chaldeans, by observation of the stars,
are thought to have made an Art to tell things to come, and cast men's
natiuities. Long after these came the Egiptians, who were so called not of the
art, but of their country. Wherefore if we esteem and weigh the first
Authors by time, the Assyrians must needs be first. For the same Cicero (whom
for admiration and honor sake I name perhaps oftener then needs,) affirms,
that the Babylonians had spent 47000. years in observing the natiuities of
children, let none escape at their birth. Which things if they be true, no doubt
the antiquity of this science (to glance at that by the way) must needs be
such, that all antiquity can hardly avouch any thing more ancient. After Tully
comes Seneca, for virtue and wisdom inferior to none; and he makes Thales
to have been the first that gave light to this Art, him that was one of the
seven wise Greeks; who to convince his adversaries, and to prove that even a
Philosopher could thrive, if he list, bought up all the Olives in his country
before they did blossom. Of him is also reported, that he foretold the Eclipse
of the Sun, which happened in the reign of Astyages. He writ much of the
Equinoctial, of Vrsa mayor and minor, much of the greatness of the Sun, of the
circles both great and small: lastly, he did calculate the eclipses of the
Moon for infinite years almost. After Seneca, Pliny the second, a man very
famous for learning, not in the stars only, but all kind of philosophy: he
in his natural history fetches this skill from Berosus, to whom the
Athenians in their schools erected a public monument of gold, for his
divination and prophesying.

But to pry a little into Greece the mother and mistress of all learning and
arts, where Philosophy was bred and borne. Plato that worthy Author and
master not only of understanding, but also of uttering, who spending himself in
Music, Geometry, Arithmetike, and Astronomy, flourished a long time at
Athens, has recorded one Thoth, a certain Egyptian God (whom some think was
Mercury) to have taught the Egyptians not only Astronomy, but Geometry also
and Arithmetike. And these be in effect the opinions of Philosophers which bare
any sway. To insist upon the toys of the rest, were both long, because they be
infinite; and tedious, because they are scarce worthy to be reckened for old
wives tales. Wherefore to come a while to fables, poets, who^ I mean not to
discredit for liars, when they feign the heavens and stars to rest upon Atlas
shoulders: by this not only sweet, and pleasing, but also admirable devise,
what did they mean, but that he, when in long continuance of time he had
observed the certain course of heaven, and orderly motion of stars, concluded
that the heavens and stars had their steady periods and reuolutions, wherein
they passed their course and motions? Now when they feign that Endymion was
lulled asleep of the Moon in mount Latmius, meant they, think we to canonize
to posterity a drousie pate, as if any were either so impudent, as to say it;
or mad, as to believe it. But their purpose was only to point us out a man,
both conversant and cunning in the stars, and measuring of heaven, who had
compassed all the variety of the Moon, both how in conjunction with the Sun,
and in other distances, she both casts upon the earth that light, which she
receives of the Sun, and suffers great variety in her light: also how in
conjunctions with the Sun she darkeneth his beams and light, and in
oppositions to the Sun hitting into the shadow of the earth, she is suddenly
eclipsed by the interposition of the earth. But I will not trouble you long
with the testimonies of Philosophers and Poets. You have the opinions of
learned men of all ages, which because they are diverse, and dissenting one
from another, happen it may that none of them be true, but that mo be true then
one, can not happen. But whether they be true or false, skilleth not, in this
they are all to be commended, that they have referred the original of so
divine a thing, either to the gods or gods fellows. But better much, in my
opinion, in our fathers age, did Philip Melancthon, and in our memory Peter
Ramus, whom we all ought to love for his exceeding sanctity. Better did Victor.
Strigelius, who setting out books in both the Philosophies, has benefited not
a few, but many, not of his own nation only, but strangers also; not of one
only age, but for many, and almost infinite posterities. Better did Simon
Gryneus, better Pacmeisterus, Better Peucer, better Erasmus Reinhold: whom all
I name in way of honor. Better did infinite other, who marking this
celestial admirable order, and incredible constancy: whence proceeds the
wealth of all things, have referred this science, not to Atlas, as fablers do,
nor to certain petite gods, as do the Philosophers, but to the true and
living God, creator, author and father of all things, who governs all,
quickens all, and maintains all. Which they teach not superstitiously, or
dotingly, but like Philosophers, with good ground of reason. Solomon, whom we
all know to have excelled all that ever were both for learning and wisdom, as
being inspired rather from God, than taught by man, witnesses in plain words
and at large, that he learned of God whatsoever pertained to the framing and
motion of the heavens, both for the order of the spheres and their motion, in
how much time every Planet passes the Zodiake, with what variety of course,
never so altering or varying, but that still at the same time they return to
the same place. Now if divine Plato passing all that ever wrote or spoke, both
for variety and gravity, when he marked the whole earth firm, and round in
the midst, and withal the figure of the world to be most capable, as able to
receive all other figures, having neither rub, nor stop, nor angle, nor corner,
nor falling, nor swelling; when he (I say) marked these things, if he brake out
with this golden sentence, Of all Geometricians God is the greatest, why may
not we, viewing the wonderful swiftness and constant conversion of heaven,
yearly finishing the same course, with the singular preservation and
maintenance of all things, very truly and well say, that there is no Astronomer
to God. True it is, but it were long to show, with how many reasons it may be
proved, that both this art, and all the rest are derived from God himself.
For the dignity of this art, that also makes not a little, that being so well
borne, so famously descended, when now it was brought from heaven to earth: it
crept not into a corner, or sought to converse with base people, but took that
course, whereby she might easily keep her own, by spreading the beams of her
fame and renown far and near: Wherefore commonly she has made her companions
kings and great men, conuersing ever most familiarly, and freely with them, as
being stirred up of God, for her protection: wherefore, to seek the original,
Ada^ the first man, and our first father, whom al things did most wonderfully
and diligently obey, is thought first to have observed the course of the Sun,
and the Moon, and the other stars, with their rising and setting, and such
other matters. After him came Seth, in years I mean after him, but in this
skill nothing behind him. These two (as writes Josephus) how truly I cannot
tell, when by their diligent perusing of heaven, they foresaw the double
destruction of the world, the one by drowning; the other by burning; erected
two pillars; the one of brick; the other of stone; in which both of them
graued their inventions; that if the brick one should happen to be defaced
with the water, the stone pillar, as suruiuer, might remain to show men what
inscriptions it bare. This stone pillar in Josephus his time, was to be seen in
Syria. The same Josephus, but in another place shows how Abraham having heard
of the great fertility of Egypt, went thither, and imparted to them both these
arts, to wit Arithmetike and Astronomy. Again, when S. Luke in those
admirable acts of the Apostles writes, that Moses was so furnished with those
Egyptian arts, is he deceived himself, or would he deceive others? What should
we say of Romulus, who is reported to have built Rome by starcraft, the Moon
being in Libra: of Ptolemie, who for his wit, pains, and learning, was so rare
and excellent, that he seemed to be out of the common reach of men: of
Alphonsus King of Spain, who for his skill, was called by the name of
Astrologus? And to come nearer home, for me thinks our own and later things
are much more pleasant then those ancient and foreign examples, what shall we
say of Ethelstanus, who in our chronicles is recorded to have compiled in this
art a fine and learned work? Of King Henry the seventh of that name, whether
for wisdom, or wealth more to be admired it is hard to say, but how often by
some is he reported to have by the constitution of heaven, and stars, to have
directed his Christmasse keeping? Of his son Henry the eight, a son worthy
such a father, who if he be compared with other Kings, not of England only,
but of all Europe, does so far pass them all for princely virtues, as the
tallest tree does the lowest shrub for height? Neither are we here to hearken
to Osorius, a man in his own conceit very learned, and in the judgment of
others not unlearned: he in the fifth book of the Education, and training of
princes, does in word and show allow his prince some little smatch in
Astronomy, but in deed and effect, disallowed it; For he would not have his
prince to spend much time in this study. For by a certain abundante caution
he is afraid, least while he makes too long abode and stay in every of these
arts, he should too much alienate and sever his soul from the body, become
after a sort senseless, and so unfit for government. But Alexander the great,
whom al princes may well and safely follow, and so are wont, and ought, was not
only skillful in this science, but had attained not to a sophistical, and
prattling show of arts, but to that perfection, which the Greeks in one word
are wont to call (...). Filthy Epicure in describing the nature of God, and
Osorius in his Education seem to have taken the like course. For Epicure, when
for his credit sake; and to avoid slander, he had admitted certain
thorowelight perflable gods, having an appearance of a body, with out all
solid substance, in the end confesses, that his God has not a very body, but
as it were a body, nor any true blood, but as it were blood. In like sort,
Osorius will have his prince but a smatterer in all things: not an Astronomer,
but as it were an Astronomer: not a Musician, but as it were a Musician: not a
Logitian but as it were a logitia^: and in a word, not learned, but as it were
learned. But to dismiss Osorius with good terms, much good do it him with
his Kings of his own breed. In the mean time let us hold us to those old
ones, Alexander, Romulus, Ptolemy, Alpho^sus Ethelstanus, and the rest.
Wherefore to conclude this part of dignity, me think I have already
sufficiently showed you, not only the country of Astronomy, but her kind, and
nurserie, and tracts of her ancestors. Wherefore it will be good to stay here,
and not proceed farther, that we may come sooner to the rest. It is a general
received opinion; wherewith all men are possessed, that Astronomy is of great
name, great renown, great show, but of no benefit, no commodity, as having no
certain end, whereat to aim, or whither to refer it self. To firret this
lewd opinion out of the enemies of good arts, to pluck up by the root all the
sprigs of this madness, I will declare so much as at this present comes to
my mind, concerning the benefit which issues from Astronomy. While I am in
this cogitation, so many things offer themselves, so weighty, so diverse, that
I fear, how I shall weld my self in the discourse.

For first of all, if we compare the largeness of it, with the straitness of
other arts, it may seem either to match all their commendation jointly, or to
ouershoote them wonderfully one by one: for other arts have every one their
several and proper end: Rhetorike to speak perswadingly; Philosophy to teach
the nature, and causes of things; Musik to teach the skill of singing and tuning
the curious manner of moodes, how of a sharp, and a flat handsomely joined, and
couched together, proceeds sweet concent, and harmony. But Astronomy
entreats not only of the rising and setting, and motion of the Sun, Moon,
and stars, what time they will keep; but also it greatly furthereth those
other a^tes, which unless they borow light from it, are much obscured, and
darkened. They may be tho^ght to remove the Sun out of heaven, which sever this
art from the multitude. For as the Sun being much bigger then the earth,
lends light to all other stars: so this art replenishing all the rest with
the beams of her brightness, does wonderfully increase, and maintain their
luster, and glory. Therefore that of Plato is very fit (...), that is, let none
come in my school, that has not laid a foundation of Geometry: his meaning
(no doubt) was, that they were unfit for the schools of philosophy which were
not first furnished, not only with geometry, but Astronomy also, and other
mathematiques. This rule of Plato did Xenocrates observe all his life long: for
when one, who had no mathematiques, would have bin his scholar, hence (quoth
he) thou have not the handles of philosophy. Aristotle, whom we may evermore
call the Prince, the Homer, the God of philosophers, all along his writings
lets fall certain mathematical examples to beautify and set out his
writings: wherefore Themistius, or some other, whom I do not well remember
(neither skilleth it much for the name) he, I say when he saw one that had
never played his prize in the Mathematique schools, daily laboring Aristotle,
to get somewhat out of him, What (said he) does a sow in a garden? So precise
and superstitious almost were not only Platoniques, but Aristotelians also, to
have their scholars to lay a foundation of philosophy in Astronomy and other
mathemathical principles. As for history our lives mistress wherein appears
religion to Godward, piety to parents, love to every one, justice to all men.
If Astronomy were not, how dry would it be in reading, how unpleasing, and
senseless. To Astronomy does History owe her two precious eyes, to wit, the
description of time, and place. For description of places, to speak of that
first, without the inspection and perusing of heaven, how can that be, or
rather what Cosmographie at all, or what geography shall we have without this
knowledge, which is at this day so scarce and dainty, that many take the main
Ocean to be but a flood, and Ireland to be a city, and in foreign countries, as
I have heard of travelers, that they think England to be but a town, and
London a great large country. A like ignorantly, but more spitefully does
Osorius quarrel with M. Haddon, that England is nearer Rome then Spain: who,
though he were as mighty as he means, though he should spend all his baysalt
upon the point, yet shall he be never able either to bring us nearer to Rome,
or set Spain farther off. Whereas therefore he affirms Spain to be much
farther from Rome then we are: if he mean that generally of all Spain, he was
never sure any good Cosmographer: but if he mean it of some one remote part of
Spain, as Portugal, his Holiness does but gibe and trifle too much. But he
will perhaps shortly set out some new maps, we shall have a new England, a new
Rome, and a new Spain, else he will never be master of that which he so
strives for. But my speech is unwillingly upon this point, and may seem too
curious in noting other men's faults: and so it might seem justly, if the place
it self did not admonish me to speak somewhat of this matter. Wherefore to
return whence I have digressed: Geographie, without which there is small use
of story, we can no way learn, unless we borrow hence certain necessary
doctrines touching the partition of heaven and earth, of their mutual
concurrence, of zones, climats, parallels, and such like: but take a way
Astronomy, and these things can neither be taught nor learned. The same reason
may be given for geography, which staieth upon the same props. Now he that will
take upon him to wade through stories without distinction of times, may be
likened to him that would wind himself out of a labyrinth without a guide: for
if the notation of time be not present, like Ariadne, and (to use the Poets
words) guide our dark steps, being amazed with the infinite creeks, and
windings of stories, neither understand we where we began, or whither we tend,
or where to make an end. By the help and hand of this guide, neither do we err
our selves, and often times we correct the historians themselves. Now if the
best Astronomers have defined to us the day, month and year, if they have
foretold us long before the manner of intercalating the Epact, golden number,
and such like, is it not plain, how necessary their art is for history? What
should I farther say of Phisike, how many things be there in this art, without
wh ch he cannot be perfect?

Now poetry being of all others as a most profitable doctrine, so a most sweet
medicine: she has certain risings and settings of stars peculiar to her
self, called Chronici, Cosmici, and Heliaci. Neither poets only distinguish
times by the heavens, but they also that have writ of husbandry, that there
can be no reading of Hesiodus, Virgil, Columella, Pliny, infinite others, if a
man be not well entered in this art. These things, which I post over now
cursorywise and briefly, might be handled at large, rhetorically with brave
terms, and gallant sentences: but the longer I have been otherwhere, the
briefer I must be here. Hence I hope, you see how great force, and how many
helps are in Astronomy, not only to the adorning, but also to the learning of
other arts, without which they must needs quail, and go to ground; if not
all, yet the most; and if not that, yet sure the best. Neither can I doubt, but
that you understand sufficiently how rash or foolish, or both, they are, which
contemn and despise Astronomy, and al mathematiques, as tending to pleasure
and pastime, rather then to any use, or profit, suting well for quiet, but not
for troublesome times. Of this wise opinion was first fine Aristippus, that
smooth skinned minion, whosevery name is odious, and infamous: this man, after
he had given him self to be bound hand and foot of filthy pleasure, by whose
itch and tickling, his senses yawned, affirmed all geometry to be false. In
the like perverse and pestilent manner now a days does Carpentarius inueigh
against all mathematiques, that we may well allow that of Tully, affirming
that there is nothing so absurd, but it has come out of some philosophers
mouth. Carpentarius alleging in this cause nothing that might become either a
philosopher, or a mean wit, is sufficiently schooled of Ramus a great learned
man every way. To show the folly of this opinion, I could produce Archimedes,
Epimachus, Architas, Ctesebius and others, which by artificial engines of
their own devising, saved and delivered their Cities and countries. In
defense of this point might be alleged diverse examples both modern and
ancient, which at this time I let pass: that one notwithstanding, neither
because it is short, would I, nor because it is pleasant could I, nor because
it makes for the purpose, ought I to pass. Pythes (as relates Polienus)
having found out gold and silver mines, occupied his whole city in seeking,
and digging, and trying gold, leaving off all other works, as husbandry,
sowing, setting, planting, and such like things necessary for life, which thing
waxing very grievous and pernicious to his country, all the women of the town
together came to his wife, desiring her to deal with her husband, or else they
were undone. She putting her gossips in some comfort, took order with a
goldsmith, that he should work her diverse dishes and iunkets very curiously
in gold. Pythes coming hungry home at night called for his supper: his wife
sets before him a golden banquet, in which was not one morsel of meat, but
all made a good show as if it had been great dainties. Pythes at first
commending his wife and the great art of things, desired her to give him
somewhat to eat: whom she still served with the like again and again, till
Pythes being sharp set, grew into great choler, which his wife cooled with
this answer: Well then husband, why have you cast off husba^dry to dig gold,
which can be nothing worth, except by tillage and husbandry corn, trees, and
cattle, being all most necessary for the use and service of men, be maintained
and continued? By this pleasant subtlety of his wife, he perceiving his folly,
let his people return again to their former trades, which they had long
forgone. You see this story, which I will not at this time apply, least I
should too much distrust your wisdoms, only this I will note, that we ought not
so to drown our selves in conte^plation, that we forget action. For as in
virtue, so in arts the chief commendation depends of practice, therefore
that is a worthy saying of Tully: The knowledge and contemplation of nature is
after a sort imperfect and maimed, if it be not accompanied with action, and
practice. Much is said already, and much more might yet be said. Neither is
this knowledge and skill profitable or commodious only, but also very
isntrumental, and helpful to our salvation, since neither nature, nor art
has any thing more potent to stir us to the knowledge of God then the
contemplation of heavenly motions. For who in the world is there, whom the
order and constancy of stars, whom the heavens in so glorious a manner
decked, and beautified, whom the comely consent of nature would not force to
confess, that there must needs be a maker, and mediator of so goodly a work?
For first the Sun, among the stars King and Keisar, by turning his course
Northward, and Southward, makes both summer and winter, and those other two
times, which lie between these. The yearly course of the Sun does the Moon
after a sort monthly represent or imitate, whose form and fashion does
wonderfully alter, one while waxing, another while waining, having in her
course a certain resemblance of the two Solstitia. But most admirable are the
courses of the five planets, which though they be said to stray and wander, yet
hold they one and the same constant motion for ever: most marvelous it is to
behold their directions, stations, retrogradations, their settings, their
risings, how in all eternity they alter not a whit: which when we see, if we do
not confess that present mighty God that made them all, we are to be counted
not only unlearned, but more brutish then Cannibals. Farther, to say somewhat
of the pleasantness of this art, it is such, that if the pleasures, and
delights of all other arts were set against it, they were nothing. This
pleasure of speculation, which may well be called the food of the mind, does
so far pass all bodily pleasure, which Epicure and sparrowes so pursue, that
they are left more the^ a kenning behind for the pleasure of the body, which
consists in meat, and drink, and delights of hearing, which is both small
and unnecessary, and which we may well be without, flows and passes away,
leaving oftener cause of repentance, then of remembrance. But this pleasure of
study and contemplation is both constanter and surer, not delighting for once,
or a while, but often and long: and if that be pleasing to every thing, which
it does naturally; as swimming to fishes; singing to thrushes, it cannot be but
men must be needs ravished with pleasure, when they behold heaven so great, so
bright, so fair with variety, so firm and constant with stabilitie. Nature
shows, when she had bowed all other creatures down^ to the ground, to have
framed man only upright, looking upward to heaven, as to his old home whence
he came, that by this goodly spectacle he might delay and mitigate the manifold
miseries of this life. The silly cuntry wondereth and exclameth, and takes on
stra^gely, in which every revolution has the same operation, as heaven has in
the Sun and Moon, and the 5 planets, then how much more shall the reuolutions
of heaven it self delight us being made a great deal more perfect then any
counterfeit can express, there remains now only the predictions of things
to come, which although they make a great show of profit, yet are they so far
from it as nothing can be more. I know well the quality of Astrologers. I
know their kind, how waiward, how testie, how froward they be:
notwithstanding with their leave, I will say a word or two, not meaning to move
their choler, but to admonish them of their vanity. If I can guess or divine
any thing there is no divination by stars: for if there be, it must be either
of things subject to our senses, or else of things belonging to arts: not of
things subject to senses, for neither can a blind man ever tell what is white,
and what is black; nor a deaf man judge of sounds; neither is it of things
which are within the compass of art, for we use about sick men, not
Astrologers and wisards, but Physicians: and they that will sing and learn to
play on instruments, go to school, not to Astrologers, but to musicians. The
like may be said of learning, and other things which are taught: for
Astronomy, did ever man ask a figureflinger, whether the Sun were greater
then the earth, or just as big as it shows; whether the Moon have light of
her self, or borrows of the Sun; what motions they both have; and what the
other five stars, which are called planets: for these questions we were wont
to go to Astronomers, not to Astrologers. Farther, in things belonging to
geometry, can any of them by a figure tell us how either to double a cube, or
square a circle: this skill belongs to geometry: last of all, can the
Astrologer discourse unto us of the sphere and of the Cilinder better the^
Archimedes; of sea tempests, better then the Governor; of the disease better
then the physician; of the best form of government better the^ expert
councelors or states me^: wherefore if in none of these things there be no help
of Astrology, I cannot see either what it is, or whether it is, or of what
things it is, or what use it has. I will here say nothing of natiuities and
destinies which they are dog at, neither will I yield them so much, that they
can foretell the disposition of any man's nature, and what he will prove most fit
for: as for the rest of their profession I utterly renounce it. But some will
say, they sometime tell truth, the events confirming their art: As if any
shooting all day long, did not sometime hit the mark. What is more uncertain
then casting of dice, yet in long casting, who does not sometimes turn up that
chance which is called Venereus, yea sometimes twice or thrice, shall we
therefore like fools say, that it happened rather by some instinct of Venus,
then by chance? I list not plead many examples, especially amongst you, which
see daily how all things fall contrary to their predictions. But least I should
be too long and tedious, I will here make an end. Wherefore I pray you, and most
earnestly desire and beseech you, that if ever you mean to come to any
prefection or mediocritie of good arts, you would bend your selves to the study
of Astronomy, and all true mathematics, not long ago dead, but now revived and
raised again. If you respect the honor of it, it is divinely descended, of
kings and princes evermore used. Other arts brag and boast, and think well of
themselves, that they are descended; namely, military of Mars; Music of
Apollo; Rhethorike of Mercury. But let Mars give place to God, and both
Military, and all other arts to Astronomy. Now, if you look to the profit of
it, it is such as none can be greater in this world: for when we study and
meditate on heaven, we rouse and retch ourselves we despise the world, and
fixed upon those celestial sights, we contemn these inferior things as simple
and nothing worth: the very study of so ample and secret things has a kind of
delight most commendable, stable, firm, and continual, wise in the catching,
and constant in the keeping, which neither can be weakened with sickness, nor
stained with slander, nor wasted with years and age. Wherefore go on as you
have begun, and continue that good course wherein you are, both to your own
credit, the honor of the University, and the good both of Gods Church and the
common wealth: be moved with the honor, but more moved with the profit: if
severally they can not stir you, yet jointly let them stir and restir you.
For Ptolemy turn him and toss him night and day, study him waking, dream of
him sleeping.

(...).
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. lin. 14. insolenta. leg. insolita. p. 2. l. 26. fingere. fingite p. 3.
l. 7. dicatur. dicantur. p. 5. l. 3. talarium le. talarum. p. 5. l. 30. vmbra.
vmbram. p. 6. l. 18* Simo^. Simon Grinaeus. p. 7. l. 12. complena. complens. p.
8. l. 5. dele, versusque. p. 8. l. 29. de Henrico. p. 10. l. 28. quidque. p.
to. l. 30. destitutae. p. 11. l. 20. Aristotelem. p. 11. l. 27. huic. p. 13. l.
2. enim quis Ariadnes. p. 14. l. 18. esse dicturus quod. p 14. 24. possem
vobis. p. 14. 28. meram artis. p. 15. l. 19. quod inutile. p. 16. 24. qui videt
p. 20. 1. atque in id. p. 20. 4. permoucat. p. 38. l. 16. country man. p. 38. l
17. strangely, when.


