A SHORT Discourse of the most rare and excellent virtue of Nitre: Wherein is
declared the sundry and diverse cures by the same effected, and how it may be
as well received in medicine inwardly as outwardly plaisterwise applied: serving
to the use and commodity as well of the meaner people as of the delicater
sort.

Ecclesiast. 38.4. The Lord has created medicines of the earth, and he that is
wise will not abhor them.

IMPRINTED at London by Gerald Dewes, dwelling in Paul's churchyearde at the
sign of the Swanne. 1584.

The Printer to the Reader.
I Have adventured (gentle Reader) for thy behoof, to print this small
treatise touching the faculties and qualities of Nitre, whose virtue (being
such as our author avouches) may bring to all which stand in need thereof no
small ease, and commodity: the medicines are not very hard to be made or
compounded, nor over costly to be procured, but how commodious and effectual,
I leave to the learned, and to such, as by proof have had, or may have profit
thereby. Thus omitting to commend that (which I hope will commend it self
sufficiently) I end nothing doubting but that all those which receive
commodity and ease by others travails and labors, will not be unthankful
for the same but use them to Gods glory.

Thine at his small power. A. D.

Fortuna

A COPY OF A DISCOVRSE WRITTEN FROM THE ISLE OF LAMBY ON THE the East coaste
of Ireland, by Thomas Chalonergent* unto his cosen John Napper Apothecarie
dwelling at the sign of the Ewe and the golden Lamb over against Soper lane
end in cheepe side at London, touching the quality and faculty of Nitre. The
example whereof he sent unto him with that letter.
WITH my hearty commendations beloved cosen: in performance of my promise
(although not so sone as you looked for): I do send unto you herewith by this
bearer, some Nitre onwards. And as you shall like thereof, I shall be willing to
furnish you accordingly. Not doubting that you shall find it a merchandise as
auailleable and gainful, as any drugge of gross quantity that you shall
have to do with, so many ways commodious is it, to the use as well of the
meaner people, as of the delicater sort.

THis Nitre is (as you may perciue) a juice thickened by growing together, and
hardened by congelation, in form and appearance like unto transparent Alome,
Salgemme, or Borace. And (in deed) such sort of it as is grown together in
the earth and hardened into a stony substance by long abiding so, and at the
last is dug up and brought into Christian regions out of Egypt, Armenie,
Turkey, Barbary, and other far countries coming to the hands of the Borace
makers vnpure, and by them refyned, is the principal substance and matter, of
which they do make the Borace wherewith the Goldsmythes do solder their
works of gold and of silver: And the Battriesmythes their copper pannes. A
drugge so rare and precious, as by the great price and small plenty thereof,
is known unto you. Neither comes this Nitre (which I do send unto you)
otherwise to be had in quantity for our country to have the use and commodie
thereof, but by my fathers industry and means. And yet his good mind unto
his native country is such, as to procure it so reasonably cheap, that the
poorer sort be not barred the benefit of so necessary and so great a
commodity, for the excessiuenes of the price.

What I have heard him define and discourse of the complexion, nature, and
excellent faculty, and manyfold use, of this Nitre: (gathered partly of good
authors, and partly of his own experience and of reason) I will empart unto
you, cosen, so well as my memory has served me to note: To your self I mean.
For if (by your showing this my letter for commendation of the matter) the
learned, or others (in proof thereof) reprone my report, I must excuse me to
have not so perfectly borne a way his speeches thereof, as he delivered them.
Neither did he to other end impart it unto me, but for mine own instruction:
knowing how sufficiently the learned (upon the sight and taste of this Nitre)
can define and set down what it is, and how to use it. And fittest for their
censure and judgment, charitablie to publish and recommend the fittest use and
fruition thereof, to the public commodity.

The smack thereof (being at the first taste unto the tongue, sour sharp, then
moderately bitter, and lastly a little rank in the swallowing) argues
therein a mixture of a watrie substance, altered and maistred by coldness beyond
the first degree (formallie rather then effectually) whereon an externe heat
has out breathed whatsoever native heat was therein: Leaving yet the pricking
sharpnes that was in that watrie altered substance, which perceth the tongue,
and therewith also mixed an earthie dry substance, ouermaistred and
subtiliated by a smoothering heat, (partly beyond the first degree, causing
the rankenes and leuened Nitrositie: and partly adusted by a sterie heat
unto the middle of the second degree, causing bitterness:) which bitterness
being of more force, effects the taste more strongly the^ the rank
Nitrositie. So as until the smacke of bitterness be passed, the ranknes is not
perceived. By mixture of which passive substances, earth, and water, the action
and leauening of putrefactiue heat, has caused in that rank Nitrositie, an
oilie and gummie substance aerie. The fattenes and oyllienes whereof, together
with the aforesaid watrie substance (out of the which the nature heat first
has been euaporated by an externe heat, and then altered and maistred by
coldness, so surmounteth the dry, adust, earthy, subtle part thereof, as
suffices it not to fluzze nor inflame, nor be set on fire, (as Saltpeter will)
nor to spark (as salt will) by reason the watrie substance is so maistred with
the oily airie substance, neither is it salt as Saltpeter is. For, as for the
the taste of saltnes (which was else also perceived in that sort of Nitre that
comes from Armenie, as well as also that fine meal or flower of Nitre called
Aphro^ Nitron) this Nitre has thereof little or nothing at all. Because (what
saltnes it had of if self) is separated from it in the refyning. And for the
oyllines or fattenes sti^l abiding with it, unless it be consumed by further
burning artificial, it has not yet that purchased saltnes.

The color of this Nitre is (as you may see) only white, by reason of the
refineing: And so not of color black, or russet, as is the native or
vnpurified Nitre mixed with the sotle of the earth or slimie pittes or slowghes
out of the which it is dug or gathered.

So in faculty this Nitre has no astringe^ce (which, you wot, means in our
English tongue, shriueling, or shutting of the poores or swertholes of the
skin) as that other salter Nitre has. But it has faculties and virtues of
entering, and percing, and sufficiently warming and heating, suppling,
rarifying, opening, enlarging, vnstopping, dividing, resolving, spredding,
dispersing, extenuating, euaporing, emptying, discombring, and effectually
wyping, clensing, and skowringe, without smarting, fretting, or excoriation as
has the other sharper or salter Nitre. To you cosen, that do understand these
usual terms concerning these faculties and virtues, I recite them as of
ordinary they be termed. Nevertheless this refined Nitre (with artificial
burning) shall also purchase more subtility and aduste quality. Whereby it
shall be the more percing, heating, resolving, wasting, and drying. And with
bay salt or alume added, or else with any other medicine astrictiue, hot or
cold as shall be requisite, it shall also be be accompanied with that faculty,
wherewith the sinews or other parts, which by loosenes or slacknes are weak,
shall be fastened and kept in their due tightenes and strength.

The preparation of this Nitre unto more subtilitie, sharpenes, drines and
heat, is after three sorts ensuing.
SPread this Nitre thin in a platter of glased earth or of pewter. So set it
in the hot Sun, and attend it until it be parched white and not molten, and
so it will come into fine white poulder or flower as Aphron Nitro^. And hereby
gets it somewhat more subtilenes and less gummines, and may be named
puryfied Alphron Nitron.

The second way.
GEt a new earthen pot glased within, and fitted with a cover (to close it,
that no ashes come therein) having such an handel as thereby with your tongues
or pliers you may (when it is in your fiery furnaice) take of the cover, to
look into your pot, and again at your pleasure cover it. Fill that pot half
full with this Nitre. And set that pot with the Nitre therein and the cover
thereon in a wide furnace for this purpose, raised with two walls on either
side a foot high from the ground, left open through between those two sides
before and behind. Grate that ouerthwarte with bars of iron, each bar a
finger widenes from other, and thereon above those bars as well before as
behind, as also one each side, wall it up square half a yard more of
height. And let the widenes of the furneys within, be such, as your pot being
set in the midst of your furnace may have room on every side of your
furnace half a foot: not forgetting to trauers your furnace within, with two
sufficient bars whereon to place your pot half a foot above your foresaid
iron grate: and that you have to cover the upper mouth of your furnace with
tiles, brick, or iron plates, to be couched upon iron rods or bars, loose
and remoueable for the purpose. These things thus reddie, fill your furnace
with dead charcoales, first half a foot height from the grate. Then place
your pot upon the two bars in the midst of your furnace: having your pot
(as aforesaid) half full of Nitre, and covering your pot with the cover
fitted for it, pour in more dead charcoales to fill the void room on every
side about your pot, up as high about your pot, as your Nitre fills your pot
within, and somewhat more. Then kindle your charcoales leisurely beneath and
above: closing the foreparte and hinder part of the vent under the grate, with
loose brickes or tyles, so as the wind under, come not up to vehement at the
first. But that your pot take heat by little and little increasing. And it were
not amiss that your pot were empty (but yet covered) until the coals be all
fiered, and your pot nealled red hot. And then to put in your Nitre unto the
half fulness of your pot (as aforesaid) and so cover your pot, and also the
upper mouth of your furnace, with the couers thereto prepared. So yet, as there
is vent-hoales left, one at every corner, and one in the midst. And then pull
away the closure of your nether vents under the grate of your furnace, that
the fire may have full quickening by the grate: And as the experience of the
work will teach you) suffer your Nitre to melt and dry up and tossed, so farforth
as the color become black and not yet white again. Then take up your pot,
first above your coals, with plying tongues or hooks fit for you purpose: Then
higher upon the upper bars of your furneys: And lastly upon hot ashes, and
scrape out your Nitre with a fair iron ladle fit thereto, and braie it into
fine poulder, and reserve it. It has then, lesser moisture and gummines, and
more subtilitie, and more heating and drying faculty, then the first way
aforesaid.

The third way of more Calcination to make this Nitre, yet more sharp and
subtle, then the other two ways aforesaid.
USing the self same way last before prescribed: when this Nitre has taken
such heat, as the melting and heauing thereof has ceased, and that your Nitre
is dried and burned beyond black color, and become again perfect color:
use it as is aforesaid in withdrawing it from the fire. And after that it is
taken out of your pot, bray it lightly, and reserve it to use: Equivalent unto
Nitre called Bawrak of Armenie: howbeit not astrictiue without mixture of
astrictiue medicines as aforesaid.

By the which aforesaid complexion, quality and faculties: this Nitre has
(as well otherwise as in medicine) the manifold and sundry operations and
virtues, particularly (for example) declared hereafter, besides a great many more
then I set forth,

Outward reamedies to fordoe foulenes and diseases of the skin: as tawnie
steynings, Sunneburning, freckles, dusknes, iaundises, yellow, green, and
black, wheales and white whelks, choleric, melancholicke, and flegmatike
euaporations, ill color or complexion by sickness called Atrophe, which comes
of ill conuertion and assimulation of the nourishment: and to restoore the
skin and complexion to the native beauty. Also to remove and fordoe, skurffe,
dandruffe, skales, skalles, scabbes, pimples, pushes, maunge, ringewormes,
tetters, byles, buttons, dry lepries, and such effects.
FIrst that (that for those purposes) of antiquity, Nitre as well as Aphron
Nitre, and Bawrak, has been (of ordinary use in Baines and hot houses)
dissolved in warmed water, or in warmed lie made of the ashes of vineshreddes
or of rosyers, or of sweet briars, or of bra^bles, or of willowes, or of
rosemarie, or of sage, or of hysope, or of lauender, or of thyme, or of bays,
or of such like, or else in a young boy childs urine vndistilled, or rather
distilled: or else in vinegre, or rather in distilled vinegre, or in iuyces of
very sour Orre^ges, or rather in iuyces of lymmo^s, or else dissolved with
clarified white honey, and (after three days seasoning) laid on by night, or
else in like sort dissolved with hens grease, or capons grease, or swannes
grease: or oils of sweet almondes and of bittre almondes, (three or four
days before mixed and seasoned together) I say with any of those liquours or
iuycees, laid on at night, and washed of in the morning with rosewater, or with
water of beaneflowers, or with the clear broth of barlie meal, of wheat
branne and mallowe roots: (For to scour and cleanse the hear, the face, the
skin, and the rest of the body, from rankenes of smell, and from fumosities,
sweat, soil, steyning and dusknes of the skin, and to fordoe freckles,
spottings, tawnynes, Sunneburning, morphewes, iaundizes, discolorings, scurffe,
dandruffe, scales, scalles, scabbes, maunge, pushes, pymples, ringewormes,
tetters, roughnes, and all such deformities and affectes of the skin) it is
touched by many ancient authors, insomuch as (amongst others) S. Jerome in
an Epistle to a Gentlewoman, says: Although thou wash thy skin with Nitre,
and rub it never so much with the herb called Bawrak or Bowrik, what avails
it, if yet thou remain filthy with sin?

And to those purposes also, some do dissolve Nitre in distilled whaye, or in
distilled Goats milk: or else do temper it with the brooth and fatnes of
figs: or else with the fine meal of the knottes of the roots of Aaron
called cuckoo pyutle or the knottes of roots of serpentine called dragon or
snakegrasse: nine times sooked in rosewater and each time dried by the Sun or
over a sooking fire: or with meal of lupynes: or or with oil of bitter
almondes, and lay it on all night, and on the morning wash it of, as aforesaid.

But if those affectes be deep rooted, and do require stronger scouring out:
Then put oken ashes, and unquenched lyme, in a meisshing tubbe, the one cowched
by course upon the other by several lays or couches, beginning at the
nethermost with the ashes and leaving uppermost with the ashes. Then pour
therein hot water, or rather the warmed urine of young boy children, in
quantity sufficient (to wit) so much licour, as the ashes and lime will
receive, to be but filled with the licour to the upper ashes. And if you take
young boy childs urine, it may be had at the schools, setting vessels for
that purpose. Then (after sufficient steeping with the ashes and lime) boil
that mixture together, and lastelie brain and let run the lie into a
receiving vessel, and let it settle to become clear, and then (by a spyggot
somewhat higher the^ the grounds settled) draw the clear lie from the
troubled grounds, and boil that clear lie down again unto such wasting and
strength, that it can bear an egg. Then distill it into a limbeck (if you
will) and put by, the weaker licour which droppeth first, and reserve for your
purpose the strongest licour that distilleth the first weaker water: And unto
so much of that strong distilled water, or else unto the strong Lie it self
vndistilled (so much as will cover the bottom of an earthen boiling pipking, or
skillet well glased within, and fitted with a cover of the same stuff, and so
set over a soft fire of wood coals) melt therein, for every pint of that
strong distilled water, or strong Lie, two pound weight of chosen Soap not
rank nor stinking. And the^ cast thereto by little and little, twice so much
weight of Nitre as your soap weyed) and as the Nitre is all dissolved therein,
boil them altogether to the wasting of the said distilled water or lycour of
Lie. Foreseeing that your boyllyng vessel be but a third part full of them
all, least they foam over.

This done, take it from the fire, and slurre it still with a stick or
splatter until it be come cold and stiff. Then form your stuff into flat
pellets or small round balls: and put the^ on a fair board to dry and to
harden in the wind and shadow, and reserve them to wet (at sundry times as
you shall need) with juice of lymondes or of sour Orenges, or with distilled
vynegre, or with distilled urine of young boy children, or with the flewgme
water of distilled wine. And with the slyme of one of those pellets or balls
so moisted, rub the stayninges or spots of the skin, suffering it to lie
on a reasonable space: And then wash it of with broth of barlie flower, or of
wheat braune boylled with stamped roots of mallows, or with distilled water
of the coddes and flowers of beans, or of roses, or of whaye distilled.

And to the self same purpose is succinctlie taught by Galene. To take (as
aforesaid) to parts of Nitre and one part of Soap, tempred with sufficient
quantity of strong Soap Lie call- Capitellum, and to make them into tro^^skes or
pelletes to be dried and reserved to be used as aforesaid. And this outward
medicine is for effects of the skin, of hard removing.

An other way more delicate, and for tender skin, which leysurely remoueth
such affectes, and also does smooth and bewtifie the skin.
Steep chosen Gum Tragacanthe of the purest and whittest a night and a day
in rosewater, then put thereto of this Nitre, and a courtesy of Camphere. And
season and incorporate them together, and by night lay it on, and wash it of
in the morning as aforesaid.

An other for the same, of stronger effect.
TAke chosen Gum Tragacanth, of the whytest and purest, one portion,
distilled rosewater, or rather strong vinegre distilled with red roses either
fresh or dry, thrice or four times so much as the weight of the Gum, and
therein steep your gum until it soften and dissolve therein: Add fine
poulder of the knottes of Aaron roots, or of Dragon roots, seven times
sooked in rosewater, and every time dried again by the Sun: Also fine
poulder of sweet preos root: And fine flower of Rice: of every of those
three, as much as the weight of your Gum. Then put so much Nitre as your gum
and roots and riseflowre (altogether) weyed, and over a soft fire, mix and
temper them together: always stirring them until the Nitre melte, and that
the compound lastly (after washing of the overplus of the rosewater) be apt
to become stiff (which shall be known by proof of a drop let fall on a
marble stone to cool: if being cold it become stiff) the^ sprinckling into
your mixture a courtesy of Camphere, and so mixing that with stirring, take it
from the fire, and still stir your mixture until it become cold and stiff.

So form it into washing balls, and dry them in the wind and shadow, not
forgetting (at the first) to dissolve a courtesy of musk, ciuet, and
Ambergreyce, in your aforesaid rosewater, or distilled roseuinegre for the more
pleasauntnes of the smell. Howbeit that the rosewater, and the yreos root, of
themselves, are sufficient of pleasant odor. And whereas Gum Tragacanth
(either for deerenes or for scarcity shall be forborne) there, the slime of the
harebell root, otherwise called Ierubell or Hiacynthus, may serve in steed of
that gum.

The use of those balls, is to moist one of them at night in warmed rosewater,
or in warmed water of the flowers and coddes of beans, or (for more effect) in
distilled strong vinegre rosate, or in iuyces of distilled lymondes, or of
sour orenges distilled and purified by the feltre: And at going to bed,
smeere the affected places of the skin, yea, and over all the face, with the
slime of your moysted ball, suffering it to lie one all night, or less space,
as the medicine to the tenderness of the skin is tolerable. And then always
wash and skoure it of with some of the waters aforesaid. These balls in
hotter water, may serve to wash and scour the bearde, the face and the hears
of the head, in steed of sope-balles adorate.

A lotion of washing to fordoe ringe-wormes, and tetters.
TAke of Nitre 3. dragmes, of common salt one dragme, of distilled water of the
roots of soure-dockes four ounces, of vinegre of squilla one ounce, dissolve
and and mixed them together: And each time of the use of them (being warmed and
well mixed) moisten a cloth or sponge therein and rub therewith the places
affected.

An ointment or plaster to foredoe hard knobbes, buttons, or corns
wheresoever they be in the face, or other parts of the skin.
TAke Nitre, Salgemme, or dug salt, leaves and tender croppes of hysope,
and penyrioll, of each a like portion: Braie them fine and soft, and over a
moderate fire encorporate them in Gerate rosate. The receipte thereof I need
not to receive unto you (cosen) that are an Apothecarie, and apply it to the
place affected.

An other ointment for the same.
TAke Nitre, Alume du plume, seeds of Basil or Deyinum, leaves and tender
tops of green penyroiall, and Costus Indiane, of each a like portion: Bray
them soft and fine, and over a soft fire mix them with hens grease, or
capons grease, or swannes grease, or ducks grease, and anoint the places
affected.

An other ointment to fordoe the buttons of lepree faces.
TAke burned Nitre, burned alume, and calcined Tartar, of each one ounce and a
half, brown yellow Litarge, and the ingredience of the unguent citrine (which
I need not receite to you chosen being an Apothecarie) of each four ounces, of
Ceruce washed, two ounces of iuyces of Lymonds, of roots of Enula campana, of
the roots of Soure-docke, of roots of Cyclamine, and roots of Dragon or
serpentine. And roots of Aaron or cuccow pyntell, of every of them (as often
infuzed in rosewater and dried again in the Sun as before described) five
ounces, vinegre of squilla, water of plantine, water of purcelane, of each
three ounces, and of oil of complete roses, a pint, use them according to
your art, and encorporate them together, and therewith anoint the place
affected.

To mundifie and heal ulcers in the face.
TAke Nitre, and over a soft fire (and in an empty vessel set within an other
vessel full of boiling water) dissolve it with honey and cowes milk, and
annointe the ulcers of three with.

An expert ointment for cure of maunge, ringe-wormes, scabbes, and eating
soores.
TAke Nitre, brymestone, and Maiorane, otherwise called Margerome, of each a
dragme, beat and sifte the Nitre and brimestone into fine poulder, and braye
the Maiorane fine and soft, mix them, and temper them with oil rosate, and
therewith anoint the places affected.

A linement or enoynting, effectually good against Itche, and breaking out of
all the body.
MElte Nitre and brimestone together which (being cold) comes to be hard as
a stone, braie that again into fine poulder, and with grease make a salve, or
smeering for the purpose aforesaid, or else bathe it on with young boy childs
urine, or with the broth of meal of lypynes and wheat branne.

A lotion or washing for the same.
TAke the fine poulders of Nitre and of sulphur vine, or else of sulphur
commune, bayled together, with bruised sorell roots in vinegre, and with a
cloth or sponge, dipped in that licoure, rub the places affected, or else cut
a Lymond or sour Orange by half ouerthwarte, and thereon bestow of that
lycoure with those poulders, and with the innerside of oak of those half
Lymonds or Orenges, rub the places affected. Or ese take the foresaid
poulders of Nitre and brymestone molten together, and with a young boy childs
urine, or with broth of meal of lupines and of wheaten branne, or with wine
(mixed warm) dippe therein a sponge, and bathe and soke the places affected.

In like manner, mix Nitre with vinegre distilled or vndistilled, or with
juice of lymondes or of sour Orenges, or put the poulder of Nitre on the moist
inward part of lymons, or cyterone or sour Oranges cut overthwart, and rub
the places affected with the juice. In like manner, bruise and steep Nitre and
salt, in vertioyce of vynes or of crabbes, and lay one the places affected
with Itche, or with Tetters or ringe-wormes or pushes or pimples new come out.

An effectual plaster and lotion or washing for the Affectes aforesaid.
Mix Nitre with a young boy childs urine, and with a pestell of fine red
copper bray and fret them long together in a mortar of fine red copper, set and
continued over hot ashes made hot by fire or over hot sand, or the hot
Sun, until the mixture do become thick, and then so taken out, and put in
an earthen glased platter and dried in the Sun or over hot sand (still
turning it over and over with a splatter) until it corn like to small worms
or at least until it be made into fine poulder, and when you will use it, mix
it with Therebyntine, and apply it in plaster to the affectes aforesaid.

It cures pushes called surferters, skuruie and scaly dry leprees, and
filthy maungines, and all such breaking out: Applying it on by night, and one
the morning wyping it of with a sponge dipped in warm barelie broth, or
warmed broth of wheaten branne boiled with bruised roots of mallows, and the
place washed after with rosewater, or with water of flowers and coddes of
beans, or such like.

The same emplaister or washing. Applied to the foreheade and swollen brows,
does remeadie the swollen brows. Take heed to wink while it is in laying on,
and also while it is in washing of, least the sharpenes of the medicine it
self (or mixed with the broth) do smarte and fret the eyes.

A lotion or lynement for bringing out, and for outward healing of the small
pockes, measelles, whealkes, and pushes.
Mix Nitre with iuyces of Hysope, Marigoldes, and Camomell, and therewith
temper oil of bitter almondes, and with the lyniment enoint the skin, or
else burn Nitre white (as aforesaid) and quence it hoate in rough tasted
wine, then temper it with oil of bitter almondes, and anoint the body, after
bayne.

For healiing and sealing up of rank lepree breaking out.
TEmpre Nitre with vittrioll, and with viridae Aeris called verdegres or green
canker of copper or brass, and lay it one the places affected, This (if it
were with licour or grease, or oil or gum) aggreeth very near with that
working of Nitre in a copper mortar, as aforesaid. But either of them are to
be washed of with decoction of wheat branne broilled with bruised mallowe
roots and afterward with rosewater, or other waters of delaying and
claryfying faculty.

For opening, riping, drawing and mundifying of carbuncles sores, and for cure
of suspecte fellon sores with hollow brimmes, deep sores, and all ulcers in
general.
TEmper Nitre with Therebyntine and apply it thereto for salve, etc.

A lotion unto the cankring, creeping and spredding of malitiouse ulcers and
sores.
TAke vinegre drawn through quick lime before unquenched and therewith mix
Nitre, and so wash the sores.

An other lotion, and emplaister to fordoe deformities of scuruie and dry
scaly eating lepres, maung, tetters, ringewormes, itches, and deformed neiles.
Dissolve Nitre in strong distilled vynegre, and therewith first rub the
said deformities, and then lay to them bruised roots of sorell, or of Sorell
du boys, or of Sowre-dockes, boiled in vinegre, or steeped and tempered raw in
vinegre.

An ointment to heal the skin broken out of putrified salt fleugme, be it
one the face, or elsewhere on the rest of the body.
TEmper Nitre with old barowes grease, or else rather with oil of roses, and
wax in form of a lynement or smering and therewith anoint the places affected.

An other lotion for the Itche.
Dissolve Nitre and alume with distilled vinegre, or with water of Scabious,
and therewith rub and wash the places affected.

A lotion or rubbing for Itche, Maunge and Scuruie leprees.
Rub the places with poulder of Nitre, mixed with dogs urine when it may be
come by, and it helps those effects,

A liniment to fordoe freckells in the face, and other places of the skin.
Dissolve Nitre with Galbanum, in strong distilled vinegre or in juice of
lymondes or sour Orenges, and rub and smeere the places affected, and after
it has lain on by night, wash it off every morning as is aforesaid.

A drink for the Iaundyze
Mix a sponefull of Nitre each morning with a draught of wine, and drink it
fasting.

A lyniment or lotion for the st^yning of the Iaundize (after right cure) used
inwardes
Dissolve Nitre in distilled vinegre, and with a sponge rub and scour the
skin at night going to bed, and each morning wash it off* as aforesaid.

A liniment or lotion delicate to fordoe Morphews, dark and white.
Dissolve Nitre with white wine (if not with distilled vinegre, or with iuyces
of Lymondes, or of sour Orenges) and therewith rub the places deformed, at
going to bed, and one the morning wash it of as aforesaid.

Likewise for the white morphewes.
Mix Nitre with the juice of the herb and roots of that wild kind of
Ciquorie, called Condrilla or Caudarilla, or Seralia, but with us called Dent
de Lion, or else take honey with Trociske or paste of the same herb and
roots, and temper therewith distilled vinegree, or juice of Lymonds, or of
sour orenges, and rub the places so steyned, at going to bed, and in the
morning wash and skowre it of, as before mentioned.

An other lotio^ or washing for the white Morphew.
TAke Nitre with creta cimolea (a chalk so named which you know) dissolve
them in distilled vinegre, and rub them in the Sun upon the places affected.

For such as are discolered by the sickness called Atrophia, in that their
nourishment is not natuturally converted.
Dissolve Nitre in warm water, and use it to baine them therewith, it is good
for them.

To fordoe the rank smell of the armeholes, and other the clensing parts of
the body, and foldes of the skin.
Dissolve Nitre in warm water, and with a sponge or lynnen cloth dipped
therein, bath and skowre away the swet and rank humors and fumosities
expulsed by nature through those loose clensing parts.

In general.
TO bayne with warm water, with only Nitre therein dissolved, or adding what
other sorts of medicines simple or compounde, acording the diversity of the
cause: dath cleanse, and supple, and smoth, and bewtifie the skin. And
heals, the Itche, and Maunge, and skuruie or dry skalie Lepree: Reformeth
cold and moist distemperances, Hydropisyes, benommings and other diseases of
the synewes motive and sensitive, caused through coldenes, slymines, clammines,
congelation, clynging, cluddering, stopping, stuffing, compression, distention,
contraction, crampes or stitches, and slacknes or paralisie. Moreover cures
streightnes of breath and weising in the wine pipes, catarres and distillations
from the head. Remedieth rawnes of the stomak pasted or sobbed with fleugme.
Redresseth the cold and ouermoist distemperance of the Liver, Spleen,
Kydneyes, Matrice, and Genitories, deuideth, vnstoppeth, and skowreth away, the
slymie clinging and pasted chokeings and stuffinges in them moderatlie heateth
and comfort them, and apteth the Matrice unto conception.

An ointment for the face, to make the skin smooth, egall, stick, and
suppell, fordoing the duskenes of the skin, and yelding the complexion clear
transparent.
TAke of seeds of psillium otherwise called Fleworte, a dragme, oil of Tartar
three ounces, steep them together three days in a glased vessel, then put
the seeds with the oil in a little long lynnen bag bound strong at the
neck, and wring it downwardes between two sticks, and gather so the slime or
muscilage that comes through the lynnen, and mix that slime with an ounce of
oil rosate, and therein dissolve Nitre and Salgemme, of each a dragme, so
enoynt the face therewith at night going to bed, and wash it of in the morning
with rosewater or bean flowers water or broth of wheat branne and barlye
meal decoct with Mallow roots, settled and drawn clear from the grounds by
an hole perced above the grounds, or with such like.

An other ointment to the same purpose and effect.
TAke oil of the marrowe of Hearts bones two ounces, oil of the marrow of a
gelded calfe two ounces, oil of Gourde seeds one ounce, Uenice Therbyntine
washed well and often in rosewater half an ounce, Goattes suet half an ounce,
new wax three dragmes, melte first the wax in a double vessel as before
specified, then add and melte therewith the Goats suet then add and melte
therewith ye Therbyntine, then add the said oils, and mix and temper them
well, then add and temper therewith the poulders of Masticke and of burned
Nitre, of each two dragmes, and stir and incorporate them well altogethrr,
taking it from the fire, and still stirring them until they be cold, and with
that oyntemente enoynte the face at night going to bed, and in the morninge
wash it of with water of wheat branne and Mallows, as aforesaid.

To cherish the growing of the hears, and to cause them to become fair and
yellow naturally
TEmper Nitre and raw stamped Lupynes with warm water, and therewith
ordinarily wash the hears and roots of them.

Likewise for the same.
TAke the fleugme water of Aqua-vitae drawn of wine, and of it, with ashes of
the wood and leaves of Iuie burned, make Lie, and with that Lie warmed,
dissolve Nitre, and Labdanum, adding oil of sweet Almondes, of the which
mixture (daily and often during lx. days, at each time warmed) sponge and
moysten the hears and the roots of the hears, and it will yield them fair
and yellow naturally from the roots.

Likewise for the same.
TAke the bark or outward part of cane roots half an ounce, and Aphron
Nitre, half an ounce, mix them with pix Liquida (it is not Tar: you cosen,
do know the right pix Llquida) and rub that lyniment on the place being
often shaven.

An other for the same.
TAke Aphron Nitre, white pepper, Ginger, Muscaerda, or Mousduong, Alcionium
(of which I can well furnishe you) ashes of Goats houes, juice of Thapsia, and
Mirra of each a like deal, braye them well, and mix and incorporate them with
Goats gall, and use it as aforesaid, washing it off with Lie of dulce and
tender wood or with Nitre soap, which is made of egall patres of sweet soap
and of Nitre dissolved and encorporated together.

For falling off, or pilling of the hears.
Dissolve Nitre with wine Maluesie, or Bastard, or Muskadell, or like sweet
wine, and therewith rub the places pilde of hair, or which by the heat or
itching are like to pill, cisting first those places lightly over with the
point of a penne-knife, or skratching Skalpell, and after, rub and apply
thereon, the raw leaves of beetes, and the use hereof will bring again the
hear to grow.

To fordoe vermin, Nittes, Skurffe, Dandruffe, Scales, mattring Skalles, and
dry Skalles in the head.
Dissolve Nitre, and terra Samia in oil of Raddish seeds, and therewith rub
the places a affected.

An other for the same
TAke Nitre with meal of Lupynes, or with hens galle, or Partriche gall, or
with stronger galle, also poulder of Staphisagre, and distilled urine of a boy
child, mix them and let them all season together: And therewith rub the
roots of the hears and places affected, and after, wash it off as
aforesaid, it does fordoe those affectes, and cleanses the hears and the
roots of them, and yeldes them a clear color.

A medicine to skoure and heal the moisture and mattering skalles of the head.
Dissolve Nitre in white vinegre, or in a boy childs urine distilled or
vndistilled, or with juice of a Lymonde, and mix therewith poulder of Olibanum
(which is the masculine Frankencence (and rub it one the places affected.

Another for the same.
TAke tosted Nitre (which is the second way of preparinge before spoken of)
sprinckle it one the places affected, and and rub it with a red Onyon, or
with Bulbus esculentus, cut ouerchwarte, etc.

An ointment for the same.
TAke Aphoron Nitre, Frankencens, fine poulder of Leaddessage, vine buddinges,
and Mirrhe, braie them well each by themselves, and mix them with vinegre and
oil of Mirtilles as much as suffices, so make an ointment, and use it to the
places affected.

Likewise for the same.
TAke Nitre and Uitrioll of each a dragme, dissolve them in oil, and make an
ointment to be used for the like effect upon the roots of dark colored
hears, but not unto such as have bright colored hears.

Likewise.
TAke Aphron Nitre, Alume du plume, Staphisagre, Olibanum, Rocket seeds,
Uittrioll, of each a dragme, Sulphur viue vi. dragmes, Rue three croppes, braie
them fine each by themselves, and mix them with vinegree and oil of
Bayeberies, or of Mirtilles, as much as suffices, and so make an ointment, to
use unto the roots of dark colored hears, but unto bright colored hears,
leave out the Uittrioll.

An ointment for skalles on the head and for dandruffe.
TAke Nitre meal of cicers, meal of Fenegreke, wheat branne, poulder of
Mirtilles, and bruised mustard seeds, of each two ounces, oil Olive as much as
suffices, vinegre and water, of each a little, make an oyntement and enoynt
the the head, first shaued and washed and then rubbed dry with a roughe
cloth.

A washing medicine for the same.
TAke Aphron Nitre, Uittrioll, of each a like, dissolve them in warm wine,
as much as suffices, and with a spong dipped and wrong out, rub the roots
of the hears there with (at the least once every wecke) if the hears be
black.

But if the hears be yellow or bright, then use this medicine.
TAke Nitre, and white Arguill (which as you know, is the hard effects of
Lies cleaving to the sides and heads of white wine vessels, or Rheynish wine
fattes) poulder of a Pumice, and meal of Lupynes, of each a like deal, boil
them in white wine, and use it with a sponge unto the roots of the hears, as
aforesaid,

An other ointment to fordoe Vermin and Nittes in the head, and other hearie
places.
TAke poulders of Nitre, Staphisagre, and of roots of white elleborus, of each
a like deal, boil them in as much oil of Radish seeds as suffices, and in a
bayne (after sweating and cleansing of the head or hearie parts affected)
rub one that ointment.

An other ointment for the same.
TAke Nitre, and the red orpyment called Sanderake of each a like deal, and of
Staphisagre, as much as of both the other, heat and sifte them fine, and temper
them with oil and vinegre as much as suffices, and enointe the roots of the
hears as aforesaid.

To clean the teath.
TAke Nitre burned as aforesaid, until it become first black and lastly white
again, and therewith rub the teeth. and it skowreth them and restores them
their native color.

For the toothache.
Boil Nitre with wine and pepper, and hold that licour in the mouth.

Likewise.
Boil Nitre and bruised Leeke seed with vinegre or with wine, and hold that
licoure in the mouth.

Or else.
Boil Nitre and bruised Leekes, with vinegre, or with wine and hold that licour
in the mouth.

For an old ache in the head.
TAk Nitre, with the juice of the leaves and beries of Iuie and snuff that
mixture into the nosethrilles, ann then shed upon the head vinegre beaten with
oil Rosate or else Oxirhodinum.

Or else rather.
Temper Nitre with juice of Iuye leaves and beryes and with honey and with oil
of Camomill, and snuff up that mixture into the nosethrilles.

And therewith also for the same.
Enoint the head with the said mixture, tempered with vinegree Rosate, and
with oils of Camomell and of Uioletts, and oil Rosate Omphacyne, which is (as
you know) oil of unripe Olives made with buddes of unripe Roses.

For the ears akeing, and mattering, or having noise or hissing or ringing in
them. And also to cleanse the ears from stopping or stuffing, and to amend the
hearing.
PUt (warmed) into the ears, the said mixture of Nitre, with the juice of the
leaves and berries of Iuie, and with the oils of bitter Almondes, of
Cammomill, of Uiolettes and of complet Roses.

Or else.
Mix and dissolve Nitre with warmed wine, or with Aquavitae, or with oil of
bitter Almondes, or with distilled vinegre, or (only) with warm water and
juice of Onyons, and so drop it warm into the ears.

Or for the same.
Blow the dry poulder of Nitre with a quill into the ears.

For bleared eyes, pynne, web, and skarres in the eyes, or for white, grown
between the circle and black of the eye, and to remove dymnes of of the eyes,
and to sharpen the eye sight.
TEmper Nitre with honey of Roses, or else boil Nitre in wine Maluesie unto
the half, and delay it with Rosewater, or with Endive water, or else boil
Nitre with figs, in barely water, and put any of those mixtures (cold) into
the corners of the eyes.

For bleeding at the nose.
Mix Nitre with Silphium or Assa fetida, and hold it to the nose to smell
thereto.

Or else.
Receive into the nose, the steme of vapor of Nitre boiled in water.

To help the deformities of the neyles.
Dissolve Nitre with wine Maluesie, in the cup or bark of pomegranate, set
upon hot ashes, and dip clowtes therein, and apply them upon the deformed
neyles.

For cure of the Squinancie or strangles.
Boil Nitre with Uiolet flowers, and temper that broth with honey of Uiolets,
and therewith mix pix liquida or Cedria, and gargle that mixture, and by
little and little, let down some of it.

Or else.
Dissolve Nitre with broth of Hysope and figs, and gargle it, and by little
and little let it down.

Or else.
Gargle the decoction of Nitre, Uiolet flowers, Lupynes, and poulder of young
Swallows, and of their nests: myxed with honey of Uiolets.

Also.
Apply outwardes: honey of violets, and oil of Uiolettes, tempered with
Nitre, and with meal of Lupynes and poulder of young Swallows, and of their
nestes, and Album grecum, or rather excrementum pueri infantis.

Or else.
Mix Nitre with decoction of wormwood, adding oils of Uiolets, and of
wormwood, with honey of Uiolettes: and meal of Lupynes, poulder of young
Swallows, or of Swallows nestes: Album graecum and excrementum pueri
infantis, and emplaister this compounde outwardes.

For paralisie of the tongue
Boil Nitre with Sage, and posca: or water, vinegre and salt, and put that
mixture to leven with doa, and so make that doa in bread, and let the patient
use to eat that bread.

For the which also of ancient time: Nitre, has been used as well in the
leauening and seasoning of bread: as also in the mosting or smering over of
the bread, when they did put their bread into the Oven, for to cause the
bread baked, to have a fair shyning gloss.

For other paralisies and slacknes of the Sinews, and for privation of the
faculty of sense or moving of the sinews, and for stitches, crampes,
conuulsions, distortio^s, wrying, shrinking, crowching or tying forwards,
backewardes, or sidewardes, of the sinews, and for all such like greefes or
defaultes of the sinews and faculties motive and sensitive.
Use bathes or fomentations, with sponges or clowtes dipped in the boiling of
Nitre in salt water, or of Nitre boylled with water and salt, together with
Sage, Lauander, Rosemarie, Thyme, Hysope, Organie, Penyriall, Sauerie, elder
leaves, Danewort, myntes, Horehounde, dead nettels, enula campana roots, Oken
polipodie roots, or such like, enointing the affected places (first and last)
with the Oil of castorie, or else with the Oils of Spyke, and of Masticke
tempered with the poulder of Castorie.

Or (in causes requiring less vehemence) as wrenches of sinews, or grief and
anguish of sinews:
Temper Nitre with barrowes grease, or with oil of roses, and wax, and so
enointe the places grieved.

A bathe to the feet, very wholesome for the feet, the sinews, the head, and
all the body to be used once or twice weekelie, in the morning or evening,
before meal, and at going to sleep.
TAke red Rose leaves, fresh or dry, Cammomell, Betonie, Organie, Sage, Rue
and Asarum of each an handefull, put them into a lynnen bag, and knit the
bag, and so boil the same in water sufficiently. Then cast thereto two
pound and an half of Nitre, and a fistfull of bay salt (while the bath is yet
on the fire) and when they are dissolved in the bath: use that bathe,
sufficiently warm or temperately hot, it may serve a long while (to be heat
and bathed in) from time to time, until the licour be consumed.

For stifenes of grief of the Rompe, the hippe-ache, or Sciatica, or such like.
Give glisters of Nitre with broth of Daneworte, or of bark of the roots of
elder, and of roots of enula ca^pana*

To ease the hurt of other parts of the body.
ENOyte the ioynctes or other parts grieved before a fire or in the hot Sun,
with flower of Nitre, and fine poulder of brymstone, boiled together in the
water of the Smythes trough, which has gotten quality and taste of quenching
of fiered iron, and participation of the Seacoale nature.

Or else for the same.
Boil Nitre with Rue roots, or with Turnepes together with leaves and bark
of Elder, or Daneworte, and therewith bath or use fomentation unto the grieved
parts before a fire, or in the hot Sun.

For vncumbring and clensing of the Lunges, and breastbulke, and for remedy of
hoarsenes, old coughe, and toughe coughe, stright breath, weising in the
windepipes, heaviness of the breaste, and sighing.
Boil Nitre with Hysope and figs, and with that broathe, mix the juice of
raw Colewortes, and lick down that mixture with a spone, by little and
little, holding open the mouth, and leaning backewardes, that the draweing in
of the breath may let down the licour by little and little into the weasand
pype and Lunges.

Or else for the same.
Take Nitre with juice of raw Colewortes, and Hysope, and use it as aforesaid.

Or else for the same.
Dissolve Nitre with posca, or with water and vinegre, wherein the herb
Melissa (otherwise called Apiastrum, commonly called balm) in good quantity
has been stamped, and boiled with figs, and with great raysings cleansed from
the kernelles, and the licour of that broth wrong out, to be used as
aforesaid.

Or else for the same.
Dissolve Nitre with honey of Uiolets, and broth of balm leaves, and use it
as aforesaid.

Or else for the same.
Dissolve Nitre with iuyces of Hysope and horehound, and with broth of honey,
or of figs, or of great raysons cleansed from their kernelles, or of juice of
Liquorice, and use it as aforesaid.

Or else for more effect to the same.
Take Aphron Nitre (which is the fine meal or flower of Nitre) and Galbanum,
and Therbyntyne of each a like deal, mix and form them in pills, the
muchenes of a bean, and hold one of those pills long under the tongue, to
mix thereof as much as may be with the moisture of the mouth to descend down
the weysande pype as the breath is drawn in the mouth being hold open and
leaning backwarde as aforesaid, and lastly swallow it, and so renew the like
at sundry times or (if it be loathsome) lap it in pappe of a roasted apple
buttered with sugar, and swallow it down, and so continue that remeadie to
fordoe the old coughe, weising in the windpipes, streitnes of breath, and
heaviness of the breast, and sighing.

Likewise for heaviness of the Lunges and cause of sighing.
Drink down (by little and little) etc. Nitre dissolved with ptizane.

Also for the same.
The use of Nitre bayne as aforesaid is good for those affectes.

To cle^se the stomak of filth and enco^bra^ce of slyimy and clinging humors,
and lothsomenes and to remedy suffocation, windynes, heauing, gnawing and
torment, of the stomach, vnderbulke, and bowels.
A Dragme of Nitre with honey of Roses, or with common honey, taken by the
mouth, skowreth down the fecces and filth of the stomach, and so riddeth the
fulsomenes and lothsomenes, and restores appetite.

For the same.
Mix Nitre with Oximel de radicibus, and bruised pepper, and bruised
Anyseseedes, or Dilleseedes, and poulder of red meadowe Mintes, and poulder of
Yreos root, or of galanga root, compound them in form of an electuarie, and
eat thereof.

Also for the same.
Make lyniment or fomentation of the region of the stomak with Nitre and juice,
or decoction of Mintes, Rue, Dill, Cummine, complete Roses, bitter Almondes,
and Rue.

For suffocation or strangulation by such sliemy and clinging matter in the
stomak or in the veins or co^duittes between it, and the Liver or Spleen.
Drink Nitre with Lazer or Assa dulcis, or only with posca, or warm water,
vinegre and salt, or else in warmed wine.

Or else for the same.
Make Almond milk of sweet Almondes and bitter Almondes, brayed and drawn
with the decoction of Nitre, Camomel Flowers, Uiolets, Borage, Buglosse,
Balme-hearbe red Mintes of the meadow, Roseleaues, and Lazer or Assa dulcis,
and drink thereof.

Also for the same.
In the same Almonde milk and decoction warmed, dippe sponges and make warm
bathing or fomentation on the region of the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen,
enointed first with the oils of bitter Almondes, Camomell, Dill, Rue, and
complete Roses.

Likewise for the same.
Drink a dragme of Nitre, with broth of Rue, red Roses and Dill or Commin, or
with the oils aforesaid, receive it down.

Likewise for the torment of the stomak and bowels.
Drink Nitre, and Balme-hearbe, with warmed wine, or with Ale warmed, or with
warm water.

To vnstoppe and discombre the Liver, from the distentions, stuffinges and
chokings of the conduites thereof.
Drink Nitre with broth of Cicorie, Endive, Dent de Lion, adding in the
broathe a few red Rose leaves, and on the region of the Liver, emplaister or
enoynt Nitre with oil of bitter Almonds, oil Rosate, and vinegre of Roses
wherein fiered steel is often quenched.

Also give glisters with the said decoctions, and with the oils of bitter
Almondes, and of Cammomell, and with honey of Roses: dissoluing therein an
ounce of Nitre at a time.

To assuage and ease the swelling or stuffing and hardenes of the Spleen.
TAke Nitre, and Caper roots, and Fenegreke seeds brayed, with also a
courtesy of red rose leaves, fresh or dry. Boil them in water, adding Rose
vinegre, or simple vinegre wherein fiered steel has been quenched, and with
sponges or pieces of soft frise, make outward bathing and supyling on the
region of the Spleen, enointed first with oils of Cammomell, of Dill, of
complete Roses, of unripe Roses, of sweet Almondes, of bitter Almondes, and of
Capers, or proceed by degrees and turns of mollifying, rarifiying, and
resolving, always mixing the comfortatiues.

Also.
Make an Oximell or syrup of honey Rosate, or of common honey well clarifyed,
adding vinegre Rosate or simple vinegre wherein fiered steel is often quenched
as aforesaid: boiling therein Nitre, Fenegreeke seeds bruised, red Rose leaves,
and Capers both fruit and barks of the roots, and receive down by the mouth
a sponefull every morning fasting.

Also.
Eat down Nitre with figs and Capers.

Or else.
Eat Nitre with figs and Hysope.

And also for the same.
Make emplayster to the region of the Spleen of stamped figs mixed with
Nitre, Hysope, and fruits and roots of Capers, tempred with vinegre Rosate,
and vinegre of Elders, or with simple vinegre, wherein fiered steel has been
often quenched, and much the better if the place be first as aforesaid,
softened by degrees with hens grease, or capons grease, oil of Cammomell,
oil Rosate complete, oil of sweet Almondes, oil of Dill, oil of bitter
Almondes, oil of roots of Capers, each after other, always mixing steeled
vinegre, and some oil of unripe Roses, or else some decoction of Willowe
barks.

Likewise.
Enoynte the region of the Spleen with Nitre, meal of Fenugreke seeds, or of
Lupynes, steeled vinegre, oils Rosate Omphacine, and also complet, oils of
sweet Almonds and of bitter Almondes, oils of Cammomell, of Dill, of Elders,
and of roots of Capers, or such of them, as (for the purpose) shall be
convenient.

For gurgling, heauing, and torment of the vnderbulke.
MAke warm bathing or fomentation under the bulk of the chest and short
ribs, with sponges or with soft fryze cloutes, dipped (one after an other)
in white wine boiled with Nitre, Cammomell flowers, Marigolde flowers, Borage,
Buglosse, Languedebeof, Hysope, Dill, Mugwort, Balme-hearbe, and a courtesy of
saffron, anointing first the place with oils of Uiolets, of Ca^momell, of
sweet Almonds, of bitter Almondes, and of Roses complete.

Also for the same.
It avails to drink that decoction, with Nitre, and poulder of Amber and
Lazer, or Assa dulcis.

Or else for the same.
To drink Nitre it self with sugar, or without sugar were it but with warm
drink, or warm whaye, or warm water.

For the Illiacke passion, (to wit, the torment of the upper bowels and gutts.)
Drink the like decoction of Nitre, Cammomell flowers, Marigolde flowers,
Hysope, Basil minte, balme-hearbe, poulder of Yreos root, and Galanga root,
and Lazer or Assa dulcis, adding bruised seeds of Parslie, Fenill, Anyse, Dill,
and Cummin, and that broth to be made in Almonde milk drawn of sweet
Almondes and of bitter Almondes.

Also for the same.
Make outwardly on the grieved place, a hot bathing or fomentation with the
same decoction: first enoynting on the place grieved the oils of Cammomell,
Dill, and of bitter Almondes.

Likewise for the same.
Drink a dragme of Nitre in warmed wine, or in other warmed licour,
convenient, with Rue croppes, or with Dill, branches and seeds, or with
Cummin seeds, or Annyse seeds.

For the Collicke passion.
Use the self same remedies inwardes by the mouth: and outwardes by hot
bathing and fomentation and enointings as before described, for the Ilyake
passion.

Moreover.
Give glisters of Nitre with the like decoctions and oils.

For the Hydropsie.
Eat Nitre with figs and Hysope.

Also.
Stamp Nitre with figs and Hysope, and apply it playsterwise one the belly
and other parts affected.

Or else.
Temper Nitre, with garden Snayles stamped shelles and all, such as feed on
herbs hot and dry, as Rosmarie, Sage, Lauender, Thyme, Organie, Basil,
Sauerie, Penirorall, Towne-cresses, Hysope, Parcelie, and such like. Adding
fine poulders of Baye-salte, Cloves, Mace, Nuttemukes, Mastik and Frankencens,
tempering them all with vinigre Rosate quenched with steel, and apply it
plaisterwise, and so let it remain on, until of it self it fall of, and then
renew it (from time to time) until the swelling be abated, and the
distemperance be amended.

Also for the same.
Give Nitre in glister with decoction of Daneworte (herb and roots) or of
the berries, leaves, and inner rinds of barks of the bows and roots of Elder
tree, and roots of gladen Acorns, or Yreos, therewith boiled, or poulder of
either of those roots thereinto cast.

Also for the same.
Use Nitre baynes made either with the said decoction, or else at least with
salt water.

For Nitre bayne by quality and virtue does (more effectually then salt baine)
remedy all cold and moist distemperances, and by the subtilitie and
penetration unto to the depth, does carry therewith the virtue of heating,
dividing, vnstopping, euaporating, and drying, as well as of dispersing,
wasting, extenuating, mundification, abs^ersion, skowring, and avoiding.
Wherefore, Nitre serves properly against Hydropsies, Gontes, dolowres of
sinews, Paralysies, Cra^pes, Stitches, short breath, Cough, thicknes of the
eyesight, sounding and wattring of the ears, Scabbes, Maunge, etc.

For to assuage and abate inflammation, swelling and anguish of the Coddes.
Stamp Nitre with great Raysons (be they vnkerneled, or not) brayed very
small and soft, and mixing therewith a competent portion of oils of Uiolets
and Roses, warm it, and apply it in cataplasme or pultes.

To dispare or swage other swellings, inflammations and inflations, or heauings
outward.
TEmper Nitre with the pulpe of Casia fistularis, honey of Uiolets, honey of
Roses, oil of Uiolets, oil of Roses complete, oil of Cammomell, and iuyces
of Cammomell, Marigoldes, and Elders.

And if the evil be inwardes.
Drink Nitre with broathe of Cammomell flowers, Marigolde-flowers and
Uiolet-flowers, adding also Roses, or Cicorie, or Dent de lion, etc.

For Carnosities or knobbes growing in the conduit of the yearde, or in the
purse of the coddes.
TEmper Nitre with ashes of vine twigges, and steeled vinegre and apply it on
the outside, and using that medicine, it shall disperse and consume those
carnosities and knobbes.

To break the stone in the kidneyes and bladder, and and to vnstoppe and
discharge the stuffing and chokeing there, and in the conduits of the urine:
And for mundifying of soores in the kydnyes and bladder.
TAke by mouth Nitre with Oximell of Raddish, adding honey of Roses, or poulder
of red Roses.

Or else in like sort.
Swallowe down Nitre with pulpe of Cassia fistularis drawn with the broth of
a Coney farced with Parsley and Cammomell.

Or else in like sort.
Swallowe down Nitre and poulder of Rhwebarbe, tempred with conserve of Roses,
and with Cassia fistularis drawn as aforesaid.

And moreover also for the same.
Enoynte the region of the Kidneyes and down from the Reins aloft by the
Hippes and Flanks, as the conduits of the urine do descend, and between the
coddes and the fundamente, with the fat of Conyes kydneyes, mixed with Nitre.

And also.
Put into the fundament a Suppositorie made with Nitre, fat of Coneyes
kydneyes, and iuyces of Cammomell and of Parslye hardened with sufficient
quantity of honey of Uiolets and of Roses and tallowe of a bucke Goat molten
together.

And also.
Give glisters in sufficient quantity of Nitre, with Cassia fistularis and
broathe of a Coney farced with Cammomell, Maidenhaire, Parsley, Raddish,
Sampier, Saxifrage, and such like, adding honey of Roses and of Uiolets and
oil of Cammomell.

For to supple and dissolve the Cake or hardenes grown in the substance of the
Matrice, and for remedy of suffocatio^ and tortures of the Matrice, and to
open and cleanse and apt the Matrice unto conception, and to procure it the
benefit of the ordinary and monthly auoidance.
Give Nitre with iuyces of Cammomell, herb Mercurial, Hysope, and Mugworte to
drink.

Or else.
Farce those herbs with Nitre in the body of an old Cock weried with long
chasing, and unfeathered while it is alive: Then strangled with salt, and cast
forthwith into cold water: and then to be farced with Nitre, and those
herbs: and boiled according to Art, and give the broth of that Cock to
drink.

Or else.
Boil Nitre with those herbs, in wine and give it to drink.

Or else.
Dissolve Nitre, with Lazer or Assa dulcis, or Belzoynye, by steeping and
warming them in wine, and give it to drink.

Or else to the poorer sort.
Give drink of Nitre it self with those herbs, boylled in warm water, or
with warm water mixed with a courtesy of vinegre, or with wine.

Likewise.
Use iniections, or pessaries, into the matrice, of Nitre mixed and dissolved
with iuyces of Hysope, Marigoldes, Cammomell, Mugworte, Motherworte, herb
Mercuriall, and olye of bitter Almondes, and therein dissoluing Galbanum, Assa
dulcis or Belzoynie, and a courtesy of Ambregrise, or Aliapta museata.

And likewise outwardly.
Apply emplaisters, or use enoyntmentes, or bathinges of Nitre with the like
herbs, decoctions, gummes, and oils.

To smooth the wrinckles of women's bellies after childing.
^Ray Nitre with the leaves of Idianthose or black maidenhaire in a stone
mortar, with a boy childs brine, and therewith let them use to bath their
bellyes.

To bring the blood, and plumnes and supplenes unto any member decated and
wythered by not receiueing nutriment.
TAke black pitche, wax, and Colophonie of each thrce ounces, melt them, and
put thereunto an ounce of Tharre, an ounce and an half of Nitre, three dragmes
of Sulphur vif, poulders of pepper, and of Aderge, of each two dragmes,
Belzoynie two dragmes, Euphorbium or Catharides half a dragme, Labdanum an
ounce, oil of sweet Almondes and oil Ciprine, of each an ounce, mix them
according to Art, and make a liquide sticking plaster syreade on leather to
put on, and to pluck of again often times after it cleueth.

To procure sweating.
Drink Nitre with iuyces of Cammomell and Marigoldes in warm posset-ale.

Also.
Enointe the skin with Nitre, mixte with oils of Cammomell and of bitter
Almondes, and lie down lapped warm with clothes.

To stay immoderate sweating.
Dissolve and temper Nitre with poulder of dry Iris, in oil Rosate Omphacine,
adding vinegre Rosate, or other vinegree steeled, and anoint the place to much
sweating.

To supple and nimble the stifenes and wearines of the lymmes.
ENoynte the lymmes with Nitre dissolved with oil, and a fourth part of
vinegre.

Or rather
Enoynte the lymmes with Nitre only dissolved with oil of Cammomell.

Or else.
With a sponge dipped in warm broathe of Cammomell, and Marigold-flowers, or
Elder leaves, boiled in wine or Ale and Nitre therein dissolved: adding hens
grease, or capons grease, or oil: supple and bath the lymmes before a fire, or
in the warmth of the Sun.

To prevent the grudg or cold shrugge or shakeing, inuading with the access of
fits of Fevers.
Dissolve and temper Nitre with oil olive, or rather with oil of bitter
Almondes, or of Dill, or of Raddish seeds, or of Nettleseedes, or of Castorie,
or of Spyke, or of Nardus, and annointe the chine of the back, from the nape
of the neck down beneath the shoulder blades, and also the wrestes of the
hands and the feet.

Or else.
Before the access of the fit, procure to sweat, according the instructions
aforesaid.

To laxe and scour the bowels.
Drink Nitre with poulder of Yreos in juice of raw colewortes.

Or else.
Drink Nitre only with iuce of raw colewortes.

Or else.
Drink Nitre with the first broth of colewortes not ouerboyled.

Or else.
Drink down a large sponefull of poulder of Nitre with warm water or with
warm whey, or or with white wine, or with broth of great Raysons, or with
warm water and honey.

Moreover.
Nitre also so taken cleanses the stomach and bowels of the clinging slymie
filth and dirte cleuing thereunto, and riddeth the choking of the conduites and
veins, and warmeth and restores them their natural operation, euaporing the
sweltring heat and restoring natural heat.

For burning or scalding.
TAke Nitre tosted (as aforesaid) until it become black, bray it then into
fine poulder, and sprinckle it thick on the place burned or sckalded.

For the biting of a mad dog, and for other venomous biting or stinging.
TEmper and melt Nitre with Roson, or with Therebyntine adding vinegre, and
goosegreace, or swynes grease, and apply that treat for the beginning of the
cure. And in the continuance of ye cure, driane vinegre through unquenched
lime, and temper that vinegre with Nitre, and with that lotion, soake and bath
the wound, and mix also that lotion with the aforesarde treat to be still
used to the cure.

Likewise.
Rube the wound with Nitre tempered with dogs urine, when it can be had.

Against the venom of Henbane received into the body.
Drink Nitre dissolved with warm water, and with the singer, or with a
feather procure to vomit it up, and so do eftesones again and again.

Against the estonyeng venom of Mandragora taken into the body.
FIrst procure often vomit by the means aforesaid, with Nitre, and warm
water, and honey. Then drink largely of the bruage of stamped wormwood
boylled in Muscadeli or Bastard or Maluesie, or other ^at sweet wine, and the
juice or broth of the said herb well streyned and wrong into the wine: and
therein a good portion of Nitre dissolved, and the patientes head to be
sponged with vinegre and oil Rosate: adding smelles hot and sharp and Rank
to the nose, and causing the patient to exercise the body mightelie, and then
also procure sweating as aforesaid.

Against the venom and strangling of unkind Mushrowmes eaten.
Stamp and strain the leaves and stalks of Melissa otherwise called
Apiastrum or balm herb, with Pusca, or with vinegre water and salt, and in
strayned licour, dissolve Nitre, and drink it warm in large quantity, and
procure as aforesaid to yield it up by vomit, and so do often again and
again.

Against the venom, and vlceration, and strangulation and tormente caused by
receieuing inwardes, of Buprestes, or of other Cantharides.
Drink Nitre with Lazer or Assa dulcis or Belzoynie, dissolved and te^pred
with warm water and honey, or with sweet wine, or with other wine and honey,
warmed, and (as aforesaid) yield it up by vomit; and so renew it often, and
then take troeiskes of Alkakengie with Almonde milk, or else take Almonde
milk drawn with broth of Lettice, Uiolettes, Borage, Petimorell, Purcelane,
Plantaine, great Reysons, the cold seeds, and such like.

Against the venom, and strangulation of Bulls blood taken inwardes.
Drink Nitre with Pusca and salt, or with water and vinegre and salt, or
with Aleger and salt warmed, and (after a while, by procurement as aforesaid,
yield it up by vomit, and renew that remedy again and again.

And universally, for all strangulations, or suffocations, stuffinges, or
obstructions, by any of those causes, or cluddred blood, or, humors, gross
cla^mie, slimie, clinging, pasted, or cleuing.
NItre, is an effectual remedy for all those, as well by taking it inwardes,
as also to be bathed, enointed, emplaistred outwardes. For (as aforesaid) it
perceth, deuideth dissolueth, subtileth, loses, suppleth, rarifieth,
enlarges, extenuateth, vnstoppeth, opens, makes way, euaporeth, auoideth,
skowreth, and cleanses, all such collections, congeallings, cludeeringes,
suffocations, and encombrances, without any extoriation or seltring, which
Nitre of it self, does rather heal, then empaire.

And yet moreover besides the foresaid uses of Nitre in medicine, it is
serviceable unto other uses. As.

For soldring of gold, silver, or copper, and to yield fair color unto gold
vnfine.
BRaie or rather fret Nitre, and some Alume du plume, with boy childs urine,
in a mortar of pure red copper, with a pestell also of pure red copper, setting
the mortar over hot ashes, or over hot sand, or in the hot Sun, until the
mixture (togethers with the limell or fretting of the copper) becomme (at the
last) thick and almost dry, then with a thin chippe (or an other sit
instrument) take it out of the mortar, and also from the pestell, and dry it
in the Sun, on a glased earthen dish, and so reserve it to be made into fine
poulder, to the like use as gold smythes and coppersmythes do new occupy
Borace, and it yeeldes fair color unto the metal, by way of cemtecing.

For sponginge or skouring of grease, or of filthy spots or soil out of
silk or lynnen or bombazine, or woollen or leather.
SPonge with the foresaid Trociskes of Nitre and Soap dissolved, and used hot
with a young boy childs urine distilled or vndistilled, or with vinegre
distilled, or white vinegre vndistilled, (or more specially) with juice of
Lymondes, or of very sour Orenges, repeating the doing thereof sundr^ times
if it so needs.

For skowring and whytting of lynnen cloth, or lynnen yarne.
Dissolve Nitre in sharp Lie made reasonable hot, and therein steep and wash
the lynnen cloth or yearne, sundry times, and lastly rinse it out (as often
as needs in warm water, and spread and white it in the air and Sun,
according the ordinary.

For skowring of woll, or of woollen cloth, or of woollen yearne, from the
soil, grease and fatnes therein: whereby to make it apt to receive and retain
Die: and moreover to yield it soft and supple.
Use Nitre in the same manner, first with Lie (rosonably hot not very hat) and
lastly use only Nitre with warm water, and it so effectually suppleth, and
softeneth, and rariefieth the wolle, and skowreth out the greacestnes and
oylynes of the wolle: As (in deed the help of winestone named Arguille to
fret and dry out the greacesines or fatnes of the wolle) or yet the help of
Alume, or of copporas (to gum the woolle, and to cause it to receive, or to
sooke in and receive the die) shall be found not only superfluous, but also
rather harmefulll, to the clothes softnes and supplenes and fiuenes thereof,
in that every of them, do yield the woolle hard, stubborn, stiff, rough,
and brittle: So as of ancient time (while Nitre was to be had plenteouslie and
of price not excessive to much aaboue the others) Nitre was used to that
purpose, especially, for the most precious clothes and colors.

For to skowre and supple Buffe-leather, Shamois lether, and such like skins,
to make them to become clean, dry, suplle and soft.
NItre (used first with warm Lie, dulce, and not over sharp, and then Nitre
eftesones with warm water) does that business so well, as none better.

For to taw and make furs, supple and soft.
Wash them in warm water with Nitre soap (before described) and they shall
become so soft and perfectly supple: As (drying them at the fire, or never so
many times after wet and dried) they shall not be hard nor stiff.

THus have I exceeded the measure of a letter, while I follow to recite unto
you the so manifold and commodious uses of Nitre, which thing it self (being
found again, and now known to be had) will (I assure you) be gratefully
accepted of: and more sufficiently recommended to the public use and
utility, by the learned Physicians and experimentors. Wherefore I thus commit
you to God from Lambay, etc.

Your very friend and loving Cosine. TH. CHAPTER


