THE JUST MAN'S MEMORIAL.

CVIVS MEMORIA JN BENEDICTIONIBVS.

TO THE PRETIOVS AND IMMORTAL MEMORY OF the Right Honorable and truly Noble
Lord, WILLIAM Earl of PEMBROKE: AS IT WAS DELIVERED in a Sermon at BAYNARDS
Castle, before the Interment of the body.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Allde, for Nahaniel ^^tter. An^ Dom. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND most Noble, Philip Earl of Pembroke, and
Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household.
My very good Lord:
It Is the usual fashion and custom among us that be Preachers, (and it is as
commendable as common) to commit our thoughts to the safe custody of Paper,
that they may not die; and upon occasion, from the Paper, to award them to the
Presle, that the dead may live. This fashion have I followed, and yet it is my
first adventure this way; and as my adventure, so my mis-hap; that with Crassus
Son, I should stand dumb all my life long, till now that I have seen my
Gracious Master struck dead before mine eyes, and with Elisha forced to cry out
after him; My Master, My Master, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof. Time I see is envious, and her Sickle so sharp, and keen, that it
threatens ruin, not only to the being and life of man, but his Memory also.
This was it that made me put on; if not to raise and revive the one, yet at
leastwise, somewhat longer to propagate the other.

They be the fluctuant and wandering excursions of a few broken, and interrupted
hours; some of these herbae agrestes, wild herbs of the common Field, which
with the Child of the Prophet, I humbly tender to your Honors hands, and make
bold to strew on your Noble Brothers Hearse! I well hoped ere this, to have
seen some fairer and sweeter flowers presented from his own Garden, such as
might have drowned the odor of these; but I perceive some have learned (with
Pythagoras Scholars) as well to be silent, as to speak. Nec vox, nec verba
supersunt. I am sorry to see the world as full now of Ingratitude, as 'twas
once of Infidelity: but it is neither wonderful, nor new, that though many
Leapers were cleansed, yet but one should return to give thanks.

For my part, my friends will conceive perhaps, that as he with the very fear,
lest he should break a Crystal glass, brake it:

Frangere dum metuit, frangit Chrystallina: So I (the least of all the least,
Minimorum minimus, as Bernard speaks) may be judged to have shipwrackt that
small credit I have with the Living, out of fear to be thought unthankful to
the Dead. But herein I bid adieu to all these respects; none of these things
move me, as counting nothing dear to me, Acts 20.24.
no not mine own life, as Paul said, that in any wise, I might be hold
serviceable to the bleeding memory of my dear, dear Master.

I know none fitter to own any Remainder of a Brother, then a Brother, the
sole Inheritor as of his Honors, so of his Fortunes; Let me crave then, if not
your patience to read, yet your acceptance to receive these poor weak lines,
devoted to his neuer-dying Memory. I have entitled it, His Memorial; that if
any things in him were honest, if any things just, if any things pure, Phil.
4.8, 9.
if any things lovely, if any things of good report, (as many such there were)
in remembering Him, you may not forget to think on them! In Gods name, those
good things which you have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in
him, those do; and the God of blessing and peace shall be ever with you.

My Lord, let me take the boldness to tell you, that the eyes of the World are
fastened on you; you cannot be hid, your actions are not done in a corner,
notice will be taken of all your Counsels, and your Counselors, men are big
with the expectation of you; and blame them not that they should be so,
especially of you, who (besides others of your Illustrious Stock and Lineage
well known) have had so pious and religious an Aeneas to your Brother, and so
famous and valiant a Hector to your Uncle.

Et Frater Aeneas, and Avunculus excitet:

Let the Fiety and goodness of the one, and the valor and Cheualry of the
other, serve as so many silver Watchbels in your ears, to awaken you to all
Honorable and Noble atchieuements. Miltiades Trophies would not let
Themistocles sleep. Neither let the matchless Trophies and Monuments of their
glory, suffer your eyes to sleep, or your eyelids to slumber: but be rather
as spurs to set you forward in the courageous prosecution of all good causes
for Gods Glory and the Church. O be not idle in the Imitation of them, whose
Image you not only bear, but whose part also you are; so shall not After-ages
in the Stor^ing of their glorious Annals, shut up yours, with a Degeneremque
Neoptolemum.

You live in the face of a glorious Court, where your eyes, are daily filled,
as with Magnificence, so with Vanity; yet you shall do well, otherwise, to
cast them aside from such Gorgeous Spectacles, and stick them in the shrowds
and winding-sheetes of the dead. Nothing shall more humble you then this, and
so nothing lift you nearer Heaven then this! We use ashes for the cleansing of
our Garments and doubtless there is nothing better to cleanse the soul from
sin, then a frequent Meditation on the ashes of our Predecessors. For if we
sift these ashes well, we shall beat them into dust, and from dust boult them
into that nothing, out of which we were all at first taken. By remembering our
beginning, we shall seldom do amiss: but by remembering our latter end,
never, if the Wiseman say true. David accounted one day in Gods Court better
then a thousand otherwhere; and surely (my Lord) you will one day find, upon
your deathbed, one hour spent in Gods service this way, more worth then ten
thousand, worn out, in empty and indefinite agitations. None is your Peer
now, but your Peer; yet the time shall come, when you and I shall be fellows;
in the common bag of mortality, the Rooke is Checke-mate with the King.

Therefore, among those multitudes, and throngs of employments that stuff the
soul with distractions, and wherewithal men of your Place are often taken up:
I pray leave one void corner, for this wholesome thought of your Mortality;
that you also shall die, suddenly it may be, as he has done before you;
certainly, it must be, as all have, and shall do hereafter. Though they be
esteemed happy that stand before Kings, (and such has your happiness been to
stand in favor, before two most mighty Monarks,) to hear and observe their
sayings and actions, as the Queen of Sheba said: yet let me put you in mind of
a greater happiness then this; and that is, at the last Day, to stand (rectus in
Curia) before the King of Kings. O, be as studious of this, as you are of
that! You go in and out before a most Religious and Gracious Sovereign, such
as the Sun has seldom seen his like! yet that you may see the weakness of
all earthly dependances, the Spirit of God whispers you in the ear, with,
Trust not in Princes, nor in any Child of Man; they may leave you, or you them,
ere you be aware. The Theaters and Scaffolds of the greatest eminency, whereon
you great Petentates, and Grandees act your several parts, either stand
leaning and reeling on the quick-sand of Mutability, and Inconstancy, or else
lie open and obnoxious to the wind of Disfavor, and Disgrace.

It is the Staff and Rod of Gods fear and obedience that must sustain you,
when happily the Staff of your Honor, like that of Egypt, may break, and
run into your hand. If your Counsel be of God, (as Gamaliel said) if you
make him your foundation, assure your self, your House shall stand, you shall
see your Childrens Children, and peace upon Israel. If you miss of your
Groundwork here, you can expect nothing but ruin; Tectum will be Sepulchrum,
your House shall be your Grave, as that was to Samson.

As at first I craved your patience to accept; so now I sue for pardon to
acquit my ouer-great presumption with your Lordship; As the Nouellists said of
some short eiaculatory Prayers in our Liturgy, that they were rather good
wishes, then Prayers; My desire is, I should be so understood of your Honor,
as if my counsel were rather taken for direction, then instruction, and for my
honest well-wishing, to your House, and Family, the^ my bold advice. The God of
all blessing continue his Blessings toward you, and multiply his Graces on
you, and yours, your Honorable Lady, with the rest of your most hopeful
Posterity, to the Worlds end.

Your Honors, in all respects, most dutifully obliged, T. C.

THE JUST MAN'S MEMORIAL.
ESAIAS 57.1. The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
Merciful men are taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.


THat the Prophet Esaias may go for a Prophetical Evangelist, or an Euangelical
Prophet; some of us have heard to be the speech of S. Hierome; that he was a
Prophet even in this, that the righteous perishes. O that we could! we cannot
deny, but for an Evangelist, whatsoever he was to the righteous man, sure I am,
he was none to us. Euangelium is glad tidings, good news. This that I have now
delivered, sad and heavy, I may safely say, though in another sense, that which
old Eli said, It Is no good news; It Is no good message that we hear.

But sorrow had almost made me forget what I had to say; I have laid my Scene
in Jury, and thither I must again, and begin my Sermon where Esaias ended his.
And I do not miscall it, when I say a Sermon, for it is a piece of a Sermon
that the Prophet made, not at the Funeral of Josiah, or Ezechiah only, (Alas
for Josiah, Alas, his glory had been enough for these) but even of all the
land of Judea besides; God had even now given his signal to the battle, was
now giving his Beloved into the hand of his enemies, had now set up his
standard on high, advanced his streaming Ensigns to call for the Be of
Assyria, and to hiss for the Hornet of Babylon; his meaning was to let in a
flood of Nations upon them. Assyrians, Babylonians, Grecians, Egyptians,
Romans, etc. people of a stern countenance, and a fierce behavior, speaking
a language that his people understood not, and to denounce this war, and
proclaim this judgment is our Prophets errand, ver. 9. of the former chapter.
All ye beasts of the Field, come to devour, yea all ye beasts in the
Forest. 1. All ye beasts and savage Nations. An allegory taken from the wild
Boar of the Forest, and other beasts that root up the Vines, and destroy the
Vine-yards.

O, but spare thy people, mercy cries, bless thine inheritance, the seat of
thy feet, and place where thine honor dwells; let not such profane feet
press upon her sacred pauements, whom thou have chosen out of all places of
the world for thine own residence; here will I dwell; let not Jerusalem be
laid waste; O be favorable unto Sion, rather build up, then break down the
walls of thy Jerusalem! But then Judgment stops Mercies mouth, and her turn
is to plead for God next. Verum est, It Is true she says, God made Jerusalem
the beauty of holiness, and Sion the joy of the whole earth: But, O quantum
haec Niobe, etc? How is she degenerated from what she was, to what she is? she
is not she now, non samnium in samnio! you cannot find Sion in Sion, Bethel is
Bethauen, become and the House of God, a den of thieves.

The sins of the Priests (yea, and of the Princes and Rulers too, if Calvin
mistake not, Iudices praefectos Reges) first cry for judgment, and then the
Peoples follow, to fill up the measure of the Priests. Dormientes, says the
vulgar; Tempori seruientes, 10.
says Iu. from the Heb. Time-seruers well expounded, ver. 11. by looking to
their own way, they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from
his Quarter, Peccatum est satis, a man would think here were sins enough, yet
to these sins they add others as it were drunkenness to thirst, excess and
luxury. Come say they, ver. 12. we will fetch wine, and we will fill our selves
with strong drink, and erit sicut hodie, sic and cras, to morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundantly. See the incogitancy of these men, crastinum
peccatum hodie delinquu^t, as Nyssen of the rich man in the Gospel, they sin to
day for to morrow, and yet they themselves hodier^i, nay, hesterni, yesterdaies
men, and not to days, for we are no more by David's reckoning, we are but of
yesterday, and know nothing, for our days pass away on earth, as does a
shadow, 1. Chro. 21. These be the sins of the Princes and Priests.

The peoples sins succeed the Priests and Princes, (vt Sacerdos, sic
populus) and theirs is want of consideration, they are all careless,
retchlesse, regardlesse of the death of good men, of the taking away of
merciful men, they lay not this to heart, that is their sin, and it is the
general sin of them al Non est qui recogitat, no^ est qui intelligit, so one
Translation runs: Nemo homo reponit in animo, nemine aduertente; so another:
Prince, and Priest and people sin, and just men, merciful men, are taken
away for their sins.

The righteous, etc.

We consider in the word 3. generals.

Three things: 1. The generality of mortality, deaths impartiality, the
righteous themselves, even the righteous, they perish, they die. 2. Man's
security, and in consideration for all that, though the righteous perish, no
man, none, not a man, very few if any consider, that the best spoke in their
wheel is broken, the best stake in their hedge plucked up, the fairest flower
in their garden withered, none consider this, none lays this to heart. 3.
Behold the severity and bounty of God, as the Apostle speaks; his judgment and
his mercy going hand in hand severity and judgment to them that are left,
bounty and mercy to them that are taken away: They are taken away from the
evil to come.


And because the Prophet complains of this generality of neglect and
disregard, 'twere good we had an eye back to every one of these three, as we
go along. First, a glaunce, a regard to this generality of mortality, consider
that; lay that to heart; Secondly, a glaunce on the generality of this
disrespect, and neglect, consider that, etc. Thirdly, one eye on Gods severity
toward the suruiuors, they are kept and preserved for the evil day, they are
left in the midst of a sea of dangers; and the other eye on Gods goodness and
bounty toward them that are dead, they are taken away from the evil to come:
one is left, for the other is taken from the evil to come.

I must crave pardon, if, by reason of mine own indisposition of body and mind
at this time, with the Lillies of the field, I neither labor much, nor spin,
for what I shall say: the plainest and coursest stuff is fittest for mourners,
you know, quorum nos primi, among whom most of us, I am sure, may be chief,
especially if we seriously consider, if we lay to heart what our loss is, such
a man, such a master; such a no such man, such a no such master.

Priscaparem nescijt, aequalem postera nullum exhibitura dies.

Iustus perit; There be those who by Iustus understand Christus, who suffered
such a shameful death, as he seemed to perish, and yet such was the oscitancy
and unadvisedness of men, that few or none considered, that for our sins was
he wounded, that for our transgressions was he broken, not his own, that the
chastisement of our peace was laid on him, and that by his stripes we were
healed, etc. Iustus perit; 1. Esaias perit, the Jews would have the Prophet
himself to be understood here, who is said to have been cut in pieces with a
woodde^ saw, by idolatrous Manasses! witnesses; and those other Prophets whom
he slew to be meant by those men of mercy; and so the Prophet was futurae
calamitatis Propheta, a true Prophet indeed: But it will not be need, I
conceive, to empale that sense which the Spirit of God has laid open, and made
common; Christianus will do as well as Christus, or Esaias; to conster this
text, every Child of God is this Just man. But then it will be demanded, Is any
child of God just? is any that is borne of unclean seed righteous? did he
charge his Angels with folly, and may a son of man be just? Just is one
sometimes who thinks himself just, and is not; Certain trusted that they were
just, Luke 18.9. Sometimes one that endeavors to live justly in his general
calling as a Christian, so were Zachary and Elizabeth both just, Luke 1.6.
(...) though not (...), sine querela, though non sine culpa; sine crimine, non
sine peccato; sometimes one that deals justly in his particular vocation, Luke
23.50.
so was, Joseph said to be a good man, and a just; Sometimes one that is just
and righteous by the imputation of Christ's justice, iustus ex fide, Romans 1.17.
Sometimes one that gives to every man that which is his own, Honor to whom
honor, etc. And lastly, sometimes one that performs just works in his own
person, though imperfectly, so was Noah said to be just and righteous in his
Generation, Thee only have I seen righteous before me, says God, Genesis 7.1.
All these acceptions save one, may serve to span and comprehend the meaning of
the word Iustus; In short, just either first comparatiue, so was Noah; again
just in comparison of his sons and their wives, or just absolute in respect
of sincerity of heart, though nor in regard of a perfect and complete
sanctity: But be our Just man what he will, or who he will, neither his justice
nor integrity, nor his sincerity can save him alive, perit; Iustus perit?
that is pity, me thinks; it is no good Syntaxis, for if iustus, quomodo perit?
and if perit? quomodo iustus?

For, shall the just man's labor be in vain in the Lord? shall his flittings
be numbered, and the hairs of his head reckoned, and his tears bottled up
that none of them be lost, and shall he perish? has God made all men for
naught? First.
perit then 1. can be no more then praterit, and that the Apostle pronounced of
the whole frame of nature, (...), the figure or fashion of this world passes
away, then of man too; the Sun and Moon, these also shift the Scene every
day over our heads, alter the figure of their round and dance daily, and are
only constant but in inconstancy. But be it as it will with those celestial
bodies that are above; ours below, are so subject to S. James his parallage and
(...), (...).
our parallaxes, and our tropicks, our turnings and changings, our waxings and
wanings, as that we are not the same men now, what we were a while ago, nor
what we shall be a while after! scarce what we are; every moment fleeceth us of
somewhat; Singula de nobis anni praedantur euntes; if we die daily, we must
needs vary and change daily* not a minute of time that we spend, but spends a
pickle, some dust of sand in the houreglasse of our life; nay, for a minute
that we spend of time, Time spends a month of ours. Seneca tells us, that it
was a Philosophers question, If a man went down twice in a quarter of an hour
or less into a River, whether it were the same River or no, into which he went
down? I may make a question, If it be the same man as well, if the same that
goes out, as he was coming in; sitting and standing. If I be the same man in
the pulpit that I was in my chamber but even now; for, Ego ipse dum loquor
mutari ista, mutatus sum; says Seneca, praeterit, then will hold good sense,
he passes, he changes, even the Just man passes.

Perit: referring it to the body; for as for that, the best language that the
Heathen gave it, was no better then a bellows full of wind, a bag full of
dung, a bottle full of smoke; temporis spolium, fati ludibrium, the laughing
stock of the gods, the May Game of the destinies, Fortunae lusus, Fortunes
Tennis-ball, bandied from hazard to hazard; the best that S. Bernard gives man,
is but little better, sperma faetidum, domus stercorum, esca vermium; my body
decaies daily. Sicut dies moritur in noctem, and infantia in pueritiam, and
pueritia in iuuentutem; these scratch and scramble for the little coal of my
life; 'Twill be no harm then to think that Iustus perit in this sense; for
the body must to the earth, whence it was taken, though the soul return to
God that gave it. Eccles. 12.
perit, that is videtur perire, like a shooting Star, Quae si non cecidit,
potuit cecidisse videri! in the account and estimation of the wicked worldly
man, the Just man seems to perish, and come to nothing. The Wiseman has
pricked the song of these profane ones, We fools accounted his life, i. the
Righteous man's life, ver. 1. madness, and his end to be without honor; Sap. 5.
But they sing out of tune; for mark how they correct themselves by and by?
How is he numbered among the Children of God, and his lot is among the Saints?
So that this perishing is but a perishing in show, not in truth, or a
preterition, or passing by, rather then a perishing; or at leastwise, it is but
perituri, the perishing of a body that must perish; otherwise there is nothing
that does perish, either of the just, or unjust: for though death be via
vniuersae carnis, yet it is not meta, but after death comes judgment.

For, I pray tell me, do those that sleep perish? no; the Just man's death is
but a sleep; our friend Lazarus sleeps, said our Savior, Ioh. 11.11. Do
those that pass from one place to another perish? from worse to better? no;
the Just man's death is but transitus; our Savior called his death so, Ioh.
13.1. Do those that are transported, as in a Chariot, perish? death is
Vehiculum in pace, Luke 2. a pass in peace; an entering into peace, a resting
softly, and sweetly, as upon a bed; requiescunt in cubilibus, in the very next
verse. Do those that are loosed out of prison perish? death is but solutio ex
bigis, Phil. 1.23. Bring my soul out of prison, says David; Animam educ e
carcere. i. animam e corpore, says Hugo, and the gloss; in one word, do
those that go to a wedding perish? I trow no; death is but iter ad nuptias,
when God shall wipe away (...), every tear from all eyes, and death shall be no
more, nor mourning, nor cry, nor labor, for abiere prima, the first things are
passed, i. sins, and their effects of sorrow and misery, Reu. 21.4.

Instus perit. But how does he perish? which way does he die? He leaves that
at large, he speaks indefinitely of the manner how, because the means and
ways be infinite; moriendi mill figurae; some have a long lease of their life
granted them, even to four score and nineteen years; others have a diem
clausit extremum served upon them as soon as ever they are borne into the
world; some do dimidiare dies suos, some scarce come half ways, some men's
sun sets at noone, some in the morning, others at night, some think
themselves to their end, (multi ad fatum venere suum, dum fata timent) die with
very thought of heart: So did Queen Mary for the loss of Calice. Embowell me
(says she) when I am dead, and you shall find Calice written in my heart. Some
speak themselves to their end, have died with talking; so did Valentinian with
strayning his voice against the Sarmatian Ambassadors. Some read themselves to
their end, so did Holcot, who died of the plague as he was reading that very
verse, Remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss, Eccle. 7. The changes
and chances of this mortal life be infinite, yet perit is the end of all;
iustus and iniustus, all is one here, as the fool dies, so dies the wise man,
as the base, so the honorable, Pauperum tabernas, regumque turres. Death
stalks as soon, and knockes as hard at the Princes Chamber door, as at the
Ploughmans Posterne gate, there is no avoiding this perit.

All have died, all must die; and can any man think he shall get that by
favor, which only God himself has by nature, to be immortal?

There have been those who have sought by Art to carue the hardest stone, to
dissolve the most flinty and brazen Adamant, to tame and subdue the wildest
beasts, but never any yet found that attempted a means to avoid death, (...),
vndissoluable, untameable, unavoidable death. In the auerting of other dangers,
either strength, or power, or counsel, or cunning, or flight, of prayers, or
bribes, or somewhat may prevail, but death can neither be driven away by
force, nor redeemed by money, nor avoided by flight, nor auerted by counsel,
nor prevented by prayers, or tears; a deaf Judge, an inexorable Tyrant. A
King of France, that was both rich, powerful, and victorious, found this most
true; for being to die, All this (says he) will not obtain the prorogation of
death one hour.

No; if any, or all this would have done it, our dear Master that is now lost
to us, had been amongst us still, and our dead Lord had been alive, I had
spared my pains from this sad Embassage to day, and you had spared your eyes,
and hearts in this last service to his immortal Obsequies! Could either the
strength of the Soldier, or the counsel of the Lawyer, or the devotion of the
Divine, or the skill of the Physician, or the grief of Servants, or the duty
of Scholars, or the prayers of the poor, or the tears of the Widow and
Fatherless, or the love even of his Enemies, if he had any, or the good
wishes of all; if any, I say, or all these could have kept him alive, Serus in
Celum, no man had gone later to Heaven then he, he had died as old as ever
lived any! Iustus perit, had been out of date to day; Illud immortalitate
dignum ingenium, (as Tully of Crassus) illa humanitas, illa virtus non morte
subita extincta esset, that sweet and Angelical conversation of his, that Noble
and courteous disposition, that truly Honorable and virtuous inclination had
not been extinct so suddenly; fuit hoc luctuosum suis, acerbum patriae, grave
bonis omnibus! it seems to be pend of purpose for him; this has brought
distraction and perplexity to his Servants, bitterness to his Country; And I
think there is no honest man living, who either had known him, or heard of
him, but is sorry at the heart for the death of the Earl of Pembroke.

A man of that state and use, as things now stand, that what Scaliger says of
Strisset the calculator, he was worthy, quem neque senium senem faceret, neque
naturae lex vita priuaret; neither to be broken with age, nor stricken with
death. And for our parts that were his Servants, I think, I may say that which
Valerius does of Cornelia, upon the loss of her loving Husband, Cornelians
nescio an foeliciorem dixerim, quod talem virum habuerit, an miseriorem, quod
amiserit; I know not whether we were more happy in having such a Master, or
more unhappy that we have lost him; Iustus perit!

I am loath to give him more, then he would have given himself; though I call
him just, yet I dare not say he was perfect; though righteous, yet not without
sin: I should lie, and I say not, non est humilitas, but non est veritas,
there were no truth in me; he knew that the way to heaven by innocence was long
sithence blocked up, and therefore he took another course, and our hope is, he
is arrived there by the way of penitencie; he that was so often, so daily, so
duly, every morning and evening upon his knees to God, for the pardon of the
sins of his youth, I doubt not, and for preventing the sins of his age, did
acknowledge he was a grievous sinner; and this confession made him Just. He
acknowledged God his Alpha, and therefore I doubt not but his Omega too; He
made God his God early, by his private devotion, and there is no question but
God made him his too, by his secret inspiration, in the vpshot and evening of
his days; Just by the imputation of Christ's Justice, so Just; Just in the
discharge of his particular Calling, as a Magistrate, so Just; Just in the
sincerity of his intentions, and simplicity of his heart, so Just; Just in
indeauouring himself in the duty of his general Calling, as a Christian, in
praying, and hearing with all diligence, and attention; whersoeuer the Gospel
shall be preached, there this shall be spoken in memorial of him, that the
Chaplains eye for direction, and the Chapels ear for attention, ones out,
and to others off, by Iustus perit.

I told you that Iustus was one, that gives to every man that which is his
own, suum cuique, he did so: First, duty to his God, obedience to his
Sovereign, love to his Equals, patience to Petitioners, regard to his
Inferiors, affability to all; A Just Christian, a Just Servant, a faithful
and Just Councellor, a Just Peer, a Just Steward, a Just Master, a Just Man!
Whose Ox, or whose Ass did he ever take away, as Samuel said? whose
Vineyard did he ever gape after, to wring from the Owner, by extortion or
oppression? Neither the cries of oppressed Orphans, nor the sorrowful sighing
of Prisoners, nor the blood of Innocents, nor the wages of Hirelings, nor the
poor Man's pledge, nor the shop-mans penny, did ever cry to heaven against him.
Yet perit, this Just good man is dead and gone.

And as it is now, so 'twas ever heretofore true, what the Poet said long
sithence: Optima prima fere manibus rapiuntur auaris,
Implentur numeris deteriora suis!


It Is the ambition of destiny to let the best go first, and to leave the
Reffuse for the world; the Patriarchs they went before the Prophets, they
succeeded the Patriarchs, the Apostles the Prophets; the noble armies of
Martyrs the Apostles, and all the godly Professors departed hence in Gods faith
and fear, have come after them; Thus has the Te Deum been sung in all ages,
but the best for the most part, ever first taken. Nec bonatam sequitur, quam
bona prima fuit, seldom comes the better, whether we regard the ages or
persons.

Well, do Just men die? Then we shall have weeping, and wailing, and great
mourning, such as Rachels was, I hope; we shall have sorrowing of all sides;
the house of Leui and their wives apart, etc. then when Josiah is gathered to
his Fathers, every one will take up a bitter lamentation, as was that of
Hadadrimon, in the Valley of Megiddo, for Josiah; then you shall read nothing
but Characters of woe in every man's face; for who is there, but would willingly
have died, to have spared the Just man's life, such as Josiah? Is it possible
that Joseph's feet should be ground in the stocks, and no man sorry, Super
contrituram Iosephi, for the threshing and flailing of Joseph? A man would
think so, yet we do not find it so, for Iustus perit, and non est qui
recogitat: a generality of neglect and disregard, like a leprous scab, has
spread it self over all sorts of men: for all that; though the Righteous
perish, none lays it to his heart, none lays his hand upon his heart, none
smites his thigh with Ephraim, and asks either quid feci? or, quid patres
fecerunt? or, Iustus quid fecit? that he should perish? None considers that a
day is coming, wherein he shall either be acquitted in the merits of a
Redeemer, by an Enquest of Saints and Angels, or be condemned in the sins of
his Fathers; As God does in a manner powder and brine up the remembrance of
wicked men, as he did Lots wife, suffers their quarters (as it were) to be set
up in Stories, vt poena impij, sit eruditio Iusti, and that Monumenta might be
Monimenta, their Monuments, good men's admonishments; So again does he sent and
embalme the memory of the Just man, for other men's imitation, that as a relish,
from Lots wives pillar, so an Odor of a sweet smell from Mary Magdalens
Ointment might remain to all posterity.

And yet see the sequel, men are so stuffed in the head, with the coldness of
charity, or so distemperd in their taste with the fevrish humor of
inconsideration and sensuality, that they can neither taste the salt of the
one, or with the Spouse in the Canticles, In vnguentorum odore currere, be
drawn or affected with the odors of the other, none lays this to heart! God
accepts never so little, if done from the heart; quod potuit fecit, said our
Savior in Mary Magdalens case, Mar. 14.8. and 'twas well taken, and quod
habuit dedit, in the poor Widows, Mar. 12.44. and 'twas well accepted, God
places not acceptance in (...), nor in (...), but in (...)* he accepts
Nehemiah's desire to fear him, Neh. 1.11. Ezechiahs setting his heart to seek
him, 2. Reg. 20.3. the the servants but preparing to do his Masters will, Luke
11.42, 47. David's but Secundum cor meum, his honest true heart, 1. Sam. 13.14.
This is all, when we have no more, and yet no man can afford God his heart;
none lays it out in pios vsus, not so much for Gods sake, as for his own.
'Twas well fabled that our Progenitors were flints and stones, for ever
sithence documenta damus, we show our breeding, we proclaim our beginning;
'Twas a Rock, out of which we were hewne, and a Quatry of Adamant, out of
which we were digg d; Job expostulates with God, Is my flesh of stone? and are
my bones brass, says he? Yes, holy Job, our flesh is stone, and our bones,
and hearts, of Adamant and brass non est qui recogitat. Do you remember what
S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 5. such and such things have been reported to be among
you, and vos non doluistis, he grieves that they did not grieve. Do you
remember what the Prophet says? Ver. 5. Thou have smitten them, sed non
doluerunt, but they made light of it, they grieved not. Do you remember what
Solomon says of the drunkard? They have stricken me, Sed non agrotaui; It Is
our case for all the world; God has smitten many a good man, about us, above
us, below us, on both sides of us, and we have not been sensible, either of
our own blows, or of theirs. 'Twas Verbum vigilans, have you no regard? Is it
nothing to you? Lam. 1.12. A strange matter! Let God smite the Rock, and that
melts presently into compassion; Let him but blow with his Fan upon the Seas,
and the waters will roar; If he do but touch the mountains, they smoke.
Balaams Ass has eloquence enough to reprove the madness of a Prophet; only
man is incompassionate and indolent, he alone of all other creatures, as if he
had the Priest to his Father, and were a-kinne to the Leuite by the Mothers
side, passes by the wounded man, the Just dead man; and cannot afford him so
much as the oil of his eyes, in stead of a flower to cast after him into his
grave. Let us all pray with the Spouse, Blow O South wind, and thaw our frozen
and congealed hearts* With Joshua beseech the Sun of righteousness to stand
still over Gibeon and Atalon, the rocky and dark valleys of our hearts, that
we may lay this to heart; that the righteous perishes, and as it follows,
merciful men are taken away; and so I proceed.

Viri misericordiae, says the vulgar* Homines benigni; Iunius, or as the Heb.
benignitatis; recipiuntur, says one, colliguntur says another; as corn is
into the barn, or as flowers are to weaue a Garland; colliguntur non
rapiuntur, as the fools soul was against his will, Exeunt istinc voluntatis
obsequio, non necessitatis vinculo; merciful men are but taken, cruel men are
compelled and haled by violence to a fearful end. Turn over the History of
the Roman Emperors, and you shall hardly find one of them that was a cruel
man, a blood-shedder, but his blood was shed. Neque enim lex iustior vlla est.
Julius Caesar stabbed by the hands of Brutus and Cassius. Antonius by his own;
Claudius by Caius Caligula; Caius by the Praetorian Soldiers; Nero that
butchered the Apostles, at last became his own executioner; Galba succeeds
Nero, Otho slayes him, and ere long after, himself. Vitellius comes next to
Otho, who was made away too, and not vouchsafed the honor of burial. Domitian
is Successor to Vitellius, and after he had banished S. John into Pathmos, is
cruelly put to death in his own Palace; Ad gremium Cereris sine caede and
sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte tyranni.


Judgment without mercy shall he have that showed no mercy, and mercy
triumphs over judgment, etc. The merciful men are but taken in, gathered
up; the merciless are rent and torn by violence, to the judgment to come:
But we are speaking of men of Mercy.

The Mercy of a man is seen in three things especially: 1. donando, in giving:
2. condonando, forgiving: 3. consolando, comforting. The first, that makes
virum benignum, the second, bonum: but the third, virum misericordiarum, a man
made up of mercies, so that a merciful man is one that does miseriae
condolere, and misero succurrere, grieves for the misery of the miserable, and
seeks to relieve the miserable in their misery; misericors quasi miserum cor
habeus, says the old Etymologist.

There be some which have no memorial, says the Wise man, Eccl. 44.10. who are
perished as though they had never been; and are become as though they had
never been borne, and their children after the^ the bell that knolls to their
burial, knocks out the memory of their whole life; a fearful judgment upon
cruel men; yet this we find by daily experience but what follows in that
place? ver. 10. Sed sunt viri misericordiae: but there are men of mercy, whose
righteousness has not been forgotten, with their Posterity shall remain a
good inheritance, etc. Their bodies are buried in peace, but their name lives
for evermore; though Iustus perit be true, yet Iustitia manet is as true;
though they be taken away, yet their mercy shall never be buried in oblivion;
These be the men of mercy. Of Moses the same Author says, cap. 45.1. that his
memorial was blessed, that he was beloved of God and men, that he found favor
in the sight of all flesh, and all was because he was a merciful man; the
Canonical Scripture makes him the meekest man upon earth, Number. 12. and the
Apocryphal, the mercifullest; So that if either be true, he must needs obtain
mercy. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

And to apply this again to our dead Master, as Elisha applied his living body
to the dead child's, it will not be very hard. S. Gregory says of a Preacher,
Ille praedicat viua voce, qui praedicat vita and voce: so he is truly merciful,
that to the pity of the heart adds the bounty of the hand. He that is dead,
our gracious and merciful Master, (cuius memoria in benedictionibus) did so,
he did alterius miseriam quasi suam reputare, he accounted others miseries, as
his own, and that was it that made him pitiful; and he did, de malo alterius
quasi de suo dolere, he grieved for other men's sorrows, as for his own, and
that made him merciful; He did not shut up the door of compassion and
commiseration from the necessitous, as S John's phrase is, there was his pity:
but he even powered out of his soul to the needy, Esaias 58. as it is our Prophets
phrase: There was his mercy.

What Job Job
of himself, that I of him, De vtero matris egressa mecum, ab infantia mea
mecum creuit miseratio, mercy was brought up with him from his youth, as with a
Father, and he guided her from his Mothers womb, and what Bernard of mercy and
peace, they be collectaneae, bedfellowes, they sleep together, and
collactaneae in another place, Foster-brothers, they suck one milk, one breast
together, that I of him and mercy; she was his bedfellow from his cradle, his
foster-sister from his mothers breast.

Naz. at the funeral of Athanasius doubted not to affirm, that Athanasium
laudare, was idem ac virtutem ipsam laudare, to commend Athanasius was al one,
as to frame a Panegyricke of virtue her self. Pardon me, if my unfeigned
affection and service to my dead Master, carry me so far to say, that to
commend this merciful man were all one, as to commend mercy it self: A true
disciple of a blessed Master, The broken Reed did not he bruise, the smoking
flax would not he quench. Solomon says, that the very mercies of the wicked
are cruel, because their kindnesses and benefits are rather bestowed to the
hurt then the good of other; All the cruelties that he had, were mercies: With
good Theodosius, neminem dimisit tristem, never Suitor went sad from his
presence: though he begged of his Savior every day, yet he never begged of his
gracious Sovereign but once, and that not for himself neither, but that the
Widow and the fatherless might not beg; he had our Saviors rule by heart, he
knew 'twas regalius dare, quam accipere, more like a Prince to give, then to
receive: so that I may say, True Nobility before him went, but for a moral
virtue, he only made it a divine: And as Augustine, Epist. 123. of a good
soul deceased, Illa quidem anima in societatem fidelium and castarum recepta,
lauds nec curat, nec quaerit, humanas imitationem tantum querit. That good
Soul now taken up into the company of the faithful Saints departed, neither
regards, nor requires our commendations; all his desire is, that we would
imitate his example in this; that I of him, Go and do thou likewise. And
shall we doubt to say now, as Paul does, that he has found mercy already?
that is the fruit of mercy; and shall find it in more abundance at that Day?
Shall we doubt to affirm that which our Savior does of the merciful; erga
eum erunt miserationes, as the Syriack renders it in the plural? No; he has
received mercies for himself there, and our hope is, he shall receive mercies
for his, here; those that come after him shall be blessed, mercy for measure,
mercy for mercy, mercy obtaind for mercy bestowed, dispersit and dedit, dedit
temporalia, accepit aeterna. He has dispersed abroad, and given to the poor:
he restored to God his temporals, and God has bestowed on him mercy for all
eternity.

Justice could not keep the Righteous man alive, Iustus perit: but may not
mercy, by which we nearer resemble God then by justice, preserve the merciful?
No, neither; even those are taken away too; colliguntur, like flowers or fruits
that are gathered, ripe; Till thirty we are welcome to the world, in the
kindest manner; from that, till fifty, much good do it us; but from fifty
forward, is a time of taking leave, and so God be with us; his time was so, in
the year of his Iubile, in his fiftieth year, he returns from this Land of
his captivity, to the Land of the Living, the Land of perfect liberty,
colligitur, he is taken away, taken up; As a Master from his Servants, as a
Shepherd from his Sheep, as a Pillar from a Church, as a Buttresse from a
leaning wall, as a Guardian from his Pupils, as a Bridegroom from his Bride, so
is he taken; nay more, as a Father from his Brother, as a Brother from his
friends, as a kinsman from strangers, as a Friend from all; so is he taken away.

The goodly Tree (like that in Daniel) that affoorded us shadow, and meat, and
drink, and fuel, was our all, omnia Gratianus, as he in Ausonius, rostra,
^uilia, castra, agri, domus, nummus, fundus, nobis omnia Gratianus, only with
a voice from heaven is now fallen, cut down, and taken away: now he is truly
(...), a Tree turned topsy-turuy, vpside down. (...); this can God do; this
can he do, that thunders in the clouds above. He that flourished as the Cedar
of Lebanon, not many days ago, lies now as low as any shrub of the Desert!
with one stroke of thunder is our Laurel blasted; the Tree, under whose goodly
bows we sported and recreated our selves, and under whose shadow we sat
down and sung, is felled to make Timber for the Triumphant Church in heaven,
while our house on earth is running to decay, only the dew lodges upon some of
his branches.

-- Non deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo.
He seems to live (as it were) multiplied in an Honorable Brother, and many a
sweet Nephew; and O may the dew of Heaven still lodge upon those branches; let
them spread forth as the Valleys, as Gardens by the Rivers side, as the Trees
of Lign-aloes which the Lord has planted, and as Cedar trees besides the
waters, Number. 24 6. Collectus est, he is taken; but then let me ask, who took
him away from us? Quis collegu? Some envious man sure has done this, as we
slept. No, not so; no man, if my charity misguide me not, I suppose there lived
not a man, bur would have kept him alive if he could. Who then? was it Gods
doing? Factum a Domino? it is true; Quicquid patimur, quicquid facimus, venit ab
alto.

A Sparrow falls not without his providence, much less do Princes and Great
men fall without his leave. But I must search yet nearer into this, Quis
colligit? Was it neither man nor God? Who then? Shall I tell you? Your sins
(our sins, that I except not my self from the number) have made a separation
between him and us, and our iniquities have hid him from us, so that we shall
see the face of our dear Master no more.

Behold, says God, for your iniquities have you sold your selves; and for your
transgressions is your mother put away, in the 50. of this Prophecy, Our
Master, say I, is taken away. We may well complain of these, as Mary did, upon
she knew not whom; Sustulerunt Dominum, they have taken away our Lord from us,
and we know too well to our grief, the place where they have laid him; Quis
talia fando?

Can any man then forbid tears, that we that were his Servants, should not
weep, as he said of the water? Surely no, non arguo doloris affectum, sed
doledi excessu^; as Blesensis to a King of England, sorrowing for the death of
his son, Conuersus est planctus eius in gaudiu^, conuertatur and vester:
Epist. 107. his sorrow is turned into joy, let yours be so too. As Christ to
the women of Jerusalem, Nolite flere, Weep not for me, not for thee, for whom
then? weep not so, so weep rather for your selves, and the sins of your
own souls; for though ill for us, yet it is good for him: Weep not for him
therefore thus, but rest assured, that if you serve him as you ought, what you
have lost in him, you shall find in God. If thou seek him, he will be found of
thee, says David to Solomon; he will be with you, while you be with him; As
Elkanah to Hannah, Why weepest thou, etc? Am not I better then ten sons? Let
the Wife suppose she hears God comforting her, Am not I better then ten
Husbands? and the Brother, Am not I better then ten Brothers? and the Nephew,
Am not I better then ten Uncles? and the Servant, and the Poor, Am not I
better then ten Masters? then ten Benefactors? For to say truth, miserable
Comforters are all these; Husband, or Brother, or Kinsman, or Master, or
Patron, if God himself make not one. And because no man lays to heart, no
man considers the generality of mortality, or the generality of the disregard
had to the perishing of the Just, to the taking away of merciful men, let us
cast an eye that way, consider that they do not consider, Be wise betimes,
lest we be wise, when it will be too late! Boterus de m^ribus gentium, says,
that the Italian is wise beforehand; the Frenchman after the thing is done,
the Almaine in the doing: Let us herein be the Italians Scholars, learn
before hand to prevent that by our daily preparation, which otherwise will
prevent us. S. Chrysostom, to put thee thoroughly in mind of thy vanity, thy
mortality, tells thee, that God has made the earth, patriam, to teach thee,
that thou art Country man to Vanity; and nutricem, to lesson thee, that thou
art Foster-child to Vanity; and Matrem, Son of Vanity; and Mensam, a Guest to
Vanity; and Domum, a Tennant to Vanity; and lastly, Sepulchrum too, the
Prisoner to Vanity; like an Anchoret thou feedest on thy grave, live in thy
grave, suck'st on thy grave, dwell in thy grave, and at last shall be
clothed with thy grave; And though thy thoughts be as ambitious as Cesars,
which the great Ball of the World could not contain, yet a lesser on the
Obeliske shall contain thy ashes, as it did his, and then all thy Vanity, like
thy Days, shall be compassed in a span; Vniuersa Vanitas, omnis homo, every
man is every way, all kind of Vanity! Have an eye to this: and that we shall
all rise again to Judgment after these our days of vanity, but in a
different manner, as the Egyptians and Israelites, vtrique mare sunt ingressi,
non similiter egress^; they both went down into the sea alike, but they came
not up alike! Violae crescunt sicut and Sp^nae; tamen Violae in odorem, Spinae
in ignem: The Thorns grow, as do the Violets, but these are bound up to make
a Nose-gay, those bundled up in faggots, to make fuel for the fire. Have one
eye that way. Palmares posuisti dies: Thou have made my days as it were a span
long.

Again, seeing it is so, that most men have the least regard of the Just man's
perishing, and Merciful men's taking away, let us have another eye that way;
let us grieve for them, that they grieve not for themselves, or others; our
Savior did so: O si cognouisses, and tu! O that thou had, etc! He cannot go
through with his sentence for weeping, and throbbing, Singultu medios impediente
sonos. O, this is a disease too Epidemicall in the world, that the death of
others, so sudden sometimes, so certain always, yet cannot win us to prepare
for, to beware of our own! Happy whiles the passing Bell goes, or the Burial
is reading, or the Corpse lies before our faces, we can be so devout as to lift
up an eye or spend a sigh, or bestow a tear, or let rail a groan, or perchance
at the same charges, a knock upon the breast, with a Lord be merciful to us,
what a frail creature is man? to day a man, to morrow no man, I say for a very
little while we are content to lend an ear to God, to consecrate it a
Sanctuary to Devotion, and in our brothers death, to think upon our own
mortality: But no sooner is the Book turned in, or the humming of the Bell out
of our ears, or the Coffin covered with earth; but we presently forget what
we did, where we have been, what we have seen, or heard.

And instantly we begin to make our ears and mouths Gutters and Sincks for
filthy and unsavory speeches, to run up and down in our eyes and hearts,
graves of unclean lusts, cages for every filthy and unwholesome bird; we
cannot leave our old wont: like S. Iaemes glasse-gazer, while we are poring
into the pit, we see as in a glass our own frailty, and can be content to
acknowledge it, but no sooner have we turned our backs, but we forget
immediately what our fashion and shape was, and we have utterly thrown out of
our minds, that voice which speaks unto us as unto children, shall I say?
nay, rather as unto worms and beasts, Terra es, and in terram reuerteris, Dust
thou art, and to dust thou shall return. I cannot fitter compare such Men,
then to Swine, who while one of their fellows is going to the block, they
yell and cry, but no sooner has the knife cut his throat, but presently theirs
are stopped, away to their washtroughs, and wallowing in the mire again. O
consider this, all you that forget God, consider that you do not consider,
that there is an evil day coming, wherein such as you shall be taken, as Birds
in a net, as Dear in a toil, when the Just and Merciful men shall be
preserved from the evil to come.

A facie malitiae collectus est iustus, Heaven is fasciculus viuentium, the
bundle of life, or of the living; that is the vulgar; ante faciem ipsius mali
recipitur iustus, that is the original; that is; for illustration sake, ante
aduentum mali, before the evil day come, and the years draw nigh, so Genesis
36.6. Esau is said to have gone into the Country of Seir, before the face of
Jacob. i. before Jacob was come. This evil here meant, is that denounced at
the first verse, the calling in of Foreign Nations to eat up, and to devour
Gods people. All ye beasts, come to devour, etc.

And here I told you there were two things considerable, Gods Judgment, and
his Mercy; his Severity, and his Goodness; his Judgment on those that are
left, his Mercy toward them that are taken away; ill for those, good for
these; the one happy, the other miserable.

Now the evil to come, is twofold, contingent, or necessary, an evil that
may be, or an evil that must be, (...), or (...). Of the first sort is war,
famine, pestilence, earthquakes, inundations; these be (...), things that may
come; of the second sort is old age, and dotage, and sickness, and at the
last, death; and after death, Judgment; these be (...), things that must come;
these shall be, will we, nill we; this is the sad night, of which our Savior
speaks, the night comes, when no man can work, the night of age, the night
of death, the night of Judgment; when these nights be come, no man can work.
No man will deny but that in a dark, cold, stormy tempestuous night, he has
the best of it that is a-bed, and asleep, and he the worst, that is up and
awake: Our life here is such a night, and our death in Christ, such a bed,
requies^unt in cubilibus; and come my people, enter thou into thy chambers,
Esa. 26. The rest in the grave is there compared to the rest that a man takes
in his bedchamber: And have not they the worst of it, then, who are left behind?

Should that anguish and perplexity of heart, befall thee, that befell
Ezechiah, when he turned to the wall and wept, as if he would have told his
tale to that which could not hear him. If Jonas pangs should come upon thee,
or Elias travels overtake thee; Take away my life, why should I live? I am no
better then my Fathers; Would thou not with the Wise man praise the dead,
which are already dead, more then the living, which are yet alive? Eccl. 4.2?
Nay, would thou not with the fool, Verse. 6.
esteem an handful of quietness in thy grave? (melior est plena vola
quietis, plenis pugnis molestiae) better then both the hands full of travail
and vexation of spirit here on earth? This is no more then that which may be,
this is an evil that may come, ere thou be aware of it. Should the case so
stand with thee, as Moses describes it, Deuteronomy. 28. when in the morning thou
shall say, Would God it were evening, and in the evening thou shall say, would
God it were morning, etc. for the fear of thy heart, wherewith thou shall
fear, and for the sight of thine eyes, that thou shall see, when thy life
shall hang before thee, like Tantalus apples, but thou shall not enjoy it, but
rather like Dives in hell shall see other men happy, and thy self miserable.
This is no more then that which may be, this is malum venturum, an evil to
come.

To come a little nearer home; Should things fall out so? (which yet God
forbid) that though the City cried out of her gates to the Country, as the man
did to Paul, Come out of Macedonia, and help us in the City, Act. 16.9. and the
Country should call from her suburbs and graunges, to the City, For the love of
God, lend us your hand in the City, and help us in the Country; Should there
fall out to be such a vicissitude of complaints between them, and yet the
City neither able to supply the Country with her sweetness, nor the Country
the City with her fatness, for fear of Mors in olla, bitterness in the end?
Who would not say that this were Malum venturum with a witness? And yet even
such an evil to come, is now feared of the wisest; The thing that has been,
it is that which shall be, says Solomon, and that which is done, is that which
shall be done, Eccl. 1.9.
and there is no new thing under the Sun, not in specie, but has been done
in one kind or other before we were borne; and may be again, when we are dead,
cuiuis potest accidere, quod cuiquam potest, that may happen to any one, which
has yet happened but to one.

Enoch, he was translated, yea speedily was he taken away, lest that
wickedness should alter his understanding, Wisd. 4.10, 11.
or deceit, beguile his soul. A facie malitiae, thus with Abraham, Genesis 15.15.
Thou shall go to thy Fathers in peace, thou shall be buried in a good old age.
This was Gods goodness unto Abraham. Thus with Noah, whom God took in the
time of wrath, in exchange for the world, Eccl. 44.17. they drowned, he saved.
The same to Ezechiah by Isaias the Prophet Behold, the days come, when of thy
sons which issue from thee, which thou shall beget, shall they take away, and
they shall be Eunuchs, 2. King. 20.18.
in the Palace of the King of Babylon: but as for thy part, thou shall sleep
with thy Fathers. Was not this Word of the Lord, good for Ezechiah? The like
was promised to Josiah, I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and thou shall be
gathered into thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil
that I will bring upon this place. 2. King. 22.20.
A great favor to Josiah, that this evil should not come to pass in his time.

This goodness of God will appear the more clearly, if we consider the
company which the godly part from, and the society they go to; they part from
a valley of tears, from the midst of a froward and crooked Generation. It made
David sigh deeply, Hei mihi quia incolatus meus, etc. Woe is me that I am
constrained, etc. They go to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general
assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are written in Heaven, Heb.
12.23.
and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of Just men made perfect, and
to Jesus the Mediator, etc. O praeclarum illum diem, cum ad illud animarum
consortium oetumque proficiscar, may the Christian far better say then the
Heathen man did! O blessed and happy day, when I shall go hence, to be
admitted into the College and Society of all Saints departed this life! 2.
Pet. 3.
Here while we live below, the good man shall have somewhat to vex his soul,
as Just Lot had by hearing and seeing, in so much as he shall wish sometimes,
Vtinam aut ego surdus, aut ille mutus, I would either I had no ears to hear,
or that man no tongue to speak! But Foelix Nepotianus, says S. Hierome, qui
haec non videt, haec non audit Nepotian, is happy, who neither hears, nor sees
these things! Lib. de erat.
Tully shall make the sense full; Non videbit bello flagrantem Italiam, non
ardentem inuidia Senatum, He shall not see Italy reeking with the blood of
Patriots, nor the Senate sweltring in envy one against another, etc. And this
is now our dear Masters condition; his eyes shall not see, Cant. 3.
nor his ears hear that which shall wound his soul any more; his eyes shall
no more wound his heart. Should the abomination of desolation, the Idol of the
Mass be set up again in the holy place; and Dagon shoulder the Arc out of
doors hereafter, as the Arc has done Dagon heretofore; Happy he, his eyes
shall not see this, Foelix Nepotianus, our Nepotian is happy, that shall
neither hear, nor see any of all this.

Should such intestine iarres begin again, as once did between those two
fatal Houses for the Mastery of the double Rose, should we see in our own
Land, and of our own Countrymen, Ensign borne against Ensign, and Cross
against Cross, Signa pares aquilas, and pila mina^tia pilis, soelix Nepotianus
hoc non videret, etc. happy he his eyes should behold none of all this Should
Rabshakeh, Zenacheribs General, approach our Ports at Sea, rail, and
blaspheme the Hoasts of the living God, with Dog* and Heretic; tell us to our
teeth, that he would come up with the multitude of his Charriots, to the sides
of our Lebanon, 2. King. 19 23.
and would enter into the Lodgings of our Borders, and into the Forest of our
Carmel; happy he his ears shall be filled with none of these blasphemies; But
in stead of seeing the one, he now sees the Beatificall face of God, and in
stead of the other, he hears the noise of Cherubins, and the songs of
Seraphins, Collectus est a facie itae, he is taken away from the evil to come;
The Orator says, that presently upon the death of ^rassus such misery befell
the State of Rome, Vt mihi non erepta a dijs immortalibus vita, sed donata mors
esse videatur; life was not so much taken from him, for a punishment, as death
bestowd on him for a reward; Pray God his prove not so; pray God his death be
not Primitiae dormientium, in some sense, but a say of that mortality, which is
feared to follow, I fear it is.

^oh. 14.
Howsoever it be good for him, it is ill for us, he is gone, (...), as our
Savior said, to his own house and long home, and has left us alone, some of
us without house or home, and yet we are not alone neither in our griefs,
while the Church and Commonwealth, if I might not speak too broad, the whole
Christian world shares with us in his loss. For what Hortensius of Brutus, we
have double cause to grieve Brutus, quod and ipse Republica careas, and illa
Te; that I of him, the Commonwealth has a share in this loss, For as much as
though he want not the Commonwealth now (he is better provided for) yet, the
Commonwealth will want him! I have ended that Theme at last, though himself
be a Theme without end; an immortal Argument. Pardon my length, grief keeps
no hours; I come in a few words to admonish you that be alive, Exercitia enim
magis sunt ista quam funera! These Commemorations be rather exercises for the
use of the living, then for the honor of the dead, that you labor to fly from
the vengeance, the evil to come, and I would I could say it were malum
venturum, an evil to come, and no more: but it is present, there is evil that
is present, Malum culpa, the evil of sin, and where this is present, you may
be sure, Malum poe ae, the evil of punishment will not stay long behind,
Flagitium and flagellum vt acus and filum, where sin goes before, sin and a
scourge are as the needle and the thread, etc. vengeance will limpe after, and
creep where it cannot go.

The Harvest of the whole earth is now ready, and Gods Sickle is in his hand to
reap down all; Tit. 1.11.
pray then and labor to be delivered a praesenti malo seculo, from this
present evil world. Let us enter into our own hearts, and there every one of
us study to find the plague of his own heart, 1. Kings 8.
by a serious reuiew of our ways past, and be wise, As David asks, How many
are the days of thy Servant? so 'twere good for us, if with David we would
oftener ask, Psalm. 93.
How many are my days? how long have I lived? and how have I bestowed these
days? For our Rents and Incomes, we have Rentall Books; for our Money, Bags
and Chests; for our Garments, Wardrobes and Presses; and we know how to spend,
and use those sparingly, and with moderation; only we are wasters of our
days, as if we had Methusalems years in a Treasure. Pliny makes man to
complain of the gods, that the Eagle and Stagge were longer lyu'd then he, and
that man's age was nothing; He does not well to repine so; For, Non parum
habemus temporis, sed multum perdimus, Senec. Epist.
It Is not a little time that we live, but it is much time that we lose. What
with nihil agendo, and aliud agendo, and male agendo, with doing nothing, or
worse then nothing, we bring our years to a few minutes. Infantes sumus, dum
senes videmur, Martial.
we are but Infants, when we look like old men. Careless men as we are; we
spend our allowance of lights; in Riot and Wantonness, and so at last are
feign to go to bed darkling! we dream of rest here, and contemplate upon I
know not what Elizian Fields, and Ayery Paradises upon earth, whereas God
knows, we have here naught else but desiderium quietis, a desire to rest;
only in Heaven, quietem de sideriorum, (...)
rest to all our desires! I say, we build to our selves Castles in the Air,
like Aristophanes Cuckoe in the Clouds! when as oftentimes Stulte, hac nocte,
Thou fool, Luke 12.
this night casts a dampe upon all our fleeting, and speculatiue designs; In
Heaven rest? Let me speak that again; I said not true, No, not in Heaven
rest, yet: Till the resurrection of all Flesh, at the last Day!

For as all the Creation groans on earth (in the Apostles Metaphore) longing to
be delivered from the bondage, etc. Romans 8.
so do the blessed Souls deceased, sigh and groan after their manner, to be
reunited to their own bodies, and then they shall rest in that Day. When the
Bride-grome is absent, then men fast, says our Savior; but when present, they
rest and rejoice. Our bodies be the Bride-groomes, our Souls the Brides; Till
these meet again, they fast, after rejoice, and rest. Wonderful strange,
(you will say) that a Soul clothed with Glory and Immortality, should desire the
company of a Carcass lapt in Lead: Non been conueniunt, what communion between
corruption, and incorruption? yet so it is; for, Quid est magnus ille animarum
clamor? Iu. Dedic Eccles.
(says Bernard) What means the bleating of those innocent Lambs? the cries
of Souls in the Revelation? He answers, Clamor is but Amor, and magnu^
desiderium, This cry is but a love, and longing desire, to be reioyned again
to their own bodies. Apoc. 14.
A labor requiescunt qui in Domino moriuntur, sed non requiescunt interim a
clamore, those blessed Souls do rest from their labor, not from their
clamor* the Souls of the slaughtered bodies, do yet cry from under the
Throne of God, and the same Father gives the reason; Quia etsi nihil habent,
quod molestet, nondum tamen habent quod delectet, donec requiem resurrectio,
donec Sabbatum, Pascha sequatur, for though they feel nothing to afflict them;
yet they have not all that delights them, till such time as the Resurrection
follow their rest, and an eternal Sabbath in Heaven, this bitter Passover on
earth; then shall they flow in all perfection of Bliss, then perfectly taken
from evil to come.

And is that all? No; that is but the one half of their blessedness; for
besides this ereption and deliverance from evil, they shall be invested in the
present fruition of all good whatsoever; here be heard the cries of captives,
and sick, and poor, etc. There the captive shall have his freedom, the sick
his health, the poor, riches; the blind, sight, the lame shall be restored to
his legs; the Orphane to his Parents, the Widow to her Husband, the sad man to
a neuer-interrupted solace, the old man shall have his youth renewed, the child
his age filled, the weak his strength repaired, every valley shall be exalted,
every crooked thing shall be made straight; when that which is perfect is
come, 1. Cor. 13.
then that which is imperfect shall be done away; the dead in Christ eternal
Life freely bestowed, The gift of God is eternal Life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. In comparison of this good to come; Romans 6.15.
all worldly treasure is but mere beggary, all the pomp and glory of this
earth, but dung and darkness; all pleasures whatsoever but nauscous and
loathsome; in a word, All flesh is grass, and the glory of it as the flower of
that grass, not gramen, but foenum, withered grass; withered before it be
plucked up: only the Word of the Lord, the Kingdom of Heaven promised in that
Word, endures for ever; there we may hope to meet all again, but here on
earth never. The Shepherd is smitten, and we the Sheep of his pasture shall
be scattered abroad.

TO God the Father, which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
Heb. 13.20.
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, working in you that which is
well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ: to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

