THE DELIGTFVL HISTORY of Celestina the Fair.

Daughter to the king of Thessalie.

Showing how she was inchaunted by the three Fairies: with the strange
Adventures, Travels, Chiualries, Tournies, Combats, Victories, and Loves of
diverse wandering Princes and knights errant, but especially of Sir Marcomyr of
Tharsus, who did conquest her by the sword, and enioied her afterward in
marriage, with the Thessalian kingdom for her dowry, and his perpetual
inheritance.

Done out of French into English.

NON PLUS WB



LONDON, Printed by A. I. for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop at
the upper end of Gracious street. 1596.

To the Worshipful and his very good friend, M. Barley of Petworth in Sussex,
W.B. wishes health and prosperity.
Remembering sir, the great good will and undeserved kindness which your Worship
has showed unto me, makes me to think my self much bound unto you, and so
much, as if I should not by some means show my self thankful to your Worship,
I might be condemned of great ingratitude. Wherefore I have thought good even
now (being urged thereunto by the kindness which I have found at your hands) to
show my thankful mind toward you, although not in so ample manner as I would
do, or as I hope hereafter I shall do, when it shall please God to make me
better able, till which time I humbly desire you to accept at my hands this
token of my fervent good will: wherein I have made bold to set forth under
your Worships Patronage, this Book, entitled The delectable History of
Celestina the Fair: hoping it will be the better regarded of your Worship,
first in respect of the endeavor and pains which has been taken in translating
and publishing of the same, to the intent the reading thereof might be some
pleasure and delight both to your Worship and your good friends: and secondly
in respect of my thankful and willing mind toward you, who wishes unto your
Worship all bountiful happiness in this life, according to your hearts
desire, and in the life to come eternal felicity.

Your Worships to command, William Barley.

The delightful History of Celestina the fair, daughter to the king of
Thessalie Showing how she was inchaunted by the three Fairies, with the
strange adventures, travels, chiualries, tourneys, combats, victories, and
loves of diverse wandering Princes, and knights errant, but especially of sir
Marcomyr of Tharius, who did conquest her by the sword, and enjoyed her
afterward in marriage, with the Thessalian kingdom for her dowry, and her
perpetual inheritance.
CHAP. I.
THe time being then come, that Belcarin king Frisols son should receive the
order ofknighthood, he humbly besought the Emperor to knight him with his
own hand: the like request made young Tiraquell, son to duke Eustace, of
Micene, who desired likewise the honor ofthe same order: which the good Prince
graciously granted, foreseeing how worthily on them knighthood would be
employed. Therefore after observation ofthe Uigill, as the use was, on the
Monday morning next after Easter day, he armed them both knights with great
magnificence, beseeching God of his goodness, to make them of that valor
which should never degenerate from their auncesters: Belcarin especially, to
whom with a loving kiss on his cheek he began thus. Dear nephew, I pray our
Sovereign above, to accomplish in you the per^ection of all noble virtues,
that every one may say, you are son to the good knight Frisol, no less
hardy and val^r^us, then any whosoever bore Arms in his time.

The ceremony being ended, they all re^urned to the Palace, where the new
knights, as soon as they could be disarmed, attired themselves in most rich
and sumptuous robes for the more honor ofthe feast, which for their sakes was
solemnised with very great pomp throughout all the Court. But Belcarin made
no tariance to behold the ^^litie of that assembly: his mind was rather
occupied in the high intended thought of his future glory, then in the excess
of a feast: which made him begin thus to debate with himself. Belcarin, thou
have now no more idle time to spend, having taken upon thee the honorable
degree of knighthood, and art therewith invested by the h^nd of thine uncle the
Emperor, one of the best knights whom ever the divine providence has adorned
and made illustrious through many laudable virtues: which never wanted thy
father also, in any thing that might be requisite to a man perfectly
accomplished in arms: if thou have lived hitherto in delights and pleasures,
yet now it is high time for thee to travail the world, to show wherein thou
resemblest thine ancestors, treading in their steps, who with great pain
wandered before thee, and purchased thereby that famous reno^me, the memory
whereofshall ever remain immortal: the which if thou will not blemish, thou
must hasten thy departure from hence, and look out to seek some strange
adventures as they did.

After many cogitations which perplexed his mind not a little, he resolved in
as secret manner as might be, to depart with one only Squire to attend upon his
person, purposing to take his voyage directly into Macedon, there to make his
first assay of Arms in the adventure of Celestina the Fair, who was at that
time enchaunted within a castle of the I Will of Carderie: for at that season
there was no other talk every where but of the great number of knights who
daily flocked thither, enterprising to win her by the sword, being to have her
in marriage afterward, with the kingdom of Thessalie for her dowry: so great
should be the recompense and guerdon of him, who could deliver her out o^the
enchanted dungeon. But as yet had no knight been seen there, who could set
foot within the castle to set free this young Princess. Now were Belcarins
ears oftentimes tickled with the fame of this adventure, which every one
reputed so strange, that he determined to go thither, to try what he could
do, with an incredible desire to perform it: for besides he should thereby
purchase great honor, and a general commendation of the world, he might yet
think himself most fortunat, making his, so rich and fair a Damsel, and
that by dint of sword. So that being exceeding glad through the hope which he
had conceived to atchieue his desired purpose, he did only but three days
honor this solemn feast with his presence, and the fourth day endossed very
early in the morning a rich armor burnisht green, which he had caused very
privily to be made, and commanded to paint on his shield in a silver field a
castle of G^wles, representing a Jasper stone in verdure for his devise.
Departing thus the city without knowledge of any person, he took his voyage
toward the kingdom of Macedon.

The Emperor who heard afterward ofhis secret departure, was passing glad of
this enterprise, and in presence of many knights began thus in his favor: Now
as God me help, I have an opinion, nay, a confident hope, Belcarin will be
have himself so valiantly in feats of arms, that all ye will be glad in
heart to hear me make the discourse thereof. God grant it may be so, and may
he fortunatly direct him in his courses, and so well prosper the generous
forwardness, that all men may behold shining in him, that he may win
thereby honor and advancement, such as his heart desires.

Surely this act of Belcarin did well please them except Tiraqu^l, who was
greatly offended, because he imparte^ to him no part of his intent: for he
would gl^dly have kep^ him company, so that he resolved immediately to put
himself in quest after him, as soon after it fell out.

In the mean time Belcarin made such expedition in his iournies, that without
any let by the way, he got out o^ the bo^ds of the Empire in a small ti^e: and
being entered the frontiers of the kingdom of Macedonie, he lodged the first
night, in an old knights castle, who very affable and courteous, seeing him
pass before his gate, (because it was already late) ge^tly desired him to
take his rest that night with him: which offer he willingly accepted at the
instant request of the venerable old father, who took great pleasure in
beholding Belcarin, after he had disarmed himself, as well for his goodly
stature and proportion of members, as for his eloquence and affability
wherewith he much enriched and graced his language, which was occasion that
they conferred long time together: and falling from one matter into another, in
the end the old man discovered that this knight was one of the chiefest
favorites ofthe Emperor Cleodomyr.

But the Gentleman had three sons very ungracious ^mpes and of a wicked
nat^re, who were very much offended at the courtesy and liberal hospetallitie
their father used toward strangers: wherefore he who knew well their malice,
went to meet them in the way homeward (for at that present they were hunting
abroad) to admonish them how they should welcome and entreat this new guest:
Know my children, quoth he, we have this night in our house a knight descended
of the Emperors house, whose physiognomie bewraieth him to come ofsome great
and high lineage: for which cause I pray you do him all the honor you can in the
best sort devise, and feasting him with all cheer and gladness, speak
nothing before him, which may not beseem his honorable estate. Father
answered they, we shall do all your commandments: But as soon as he was gone,
they conspired to assail this knight on the morrow at the entrance into a
forrestnot far distant from the castle, to prove if he were so brave a man,
as their f^ther had signified unto them. Therefore came not they to supper as
they promised, but on the morrow morning betime salied out of the castle all
three well mounted and in arms. The honorable and good knight seeing the
ingratitude and disobedience of his childeren did his best to do all the honor
he could to Belcarin, who returning him many thanks, the next day departed, and
took his leave of him, to put himself again into his way, wherein he had
rode little more then two miles, but he met the three brethren lying in ambush
for him at the side of a wood: the eldest having his lance vanced upon his
thigh, stepped before him and thus began to play the champion:

Fair knight you must ioust with me, otherwise you can pass no further: for
now I will try whether you be so hardy and valiant as your report is, or no.
Belcarin who doubted a greater ambuscado, took a lance out of his esquiers
hand, and speaking very courteously made him this answer: Knight ye offer great
wrong to assail thus the Emperors gentlemen, perhaps you may quickly find
one, who will give you both your hands full, and little leisure to repent your
have. Trouble not your self therefore (replied the eldest brother) have don, and
prepare your self to break a lance. This said, they retired from each other
the length of a good carrier, then setting spurs to their horses they came to
encounter with such a violent ^ury, that the assailants staff flying in
shiuers could not stir never so little Belcarin out of the saddle: who on the
other side (for that he was strong and puissant) hit him so soundly with the
first blow o^his lance, that piercing his shield and armor he ran him more
then a foot and hal^e through the body with his sword: so that there was no need
to send for a Surgeon to cure his wound: The two other brethren which beheld
this piteous spectacle supposing truly their elder brother had his deaths
wou^d, came in a great rage galloping toward him, and called to him aloud: Ha
knight in a curled hour did thou strike that blow, for thou shall presently
receive thy death. So they can both full at him: but the one mis^ his blow, and
the other lighted upon his slanke, where he made a little wound, whereof when
Belcarin felt the smart, he began to stir himself courageously in his own
defense. And albeit these two brethren d^d trouble him sore, yet the bickering
las^ed but a while: for this young prince being very resolute and exper^ in
arms, did deliver such a full blow upon the massard of one of them, that he
set him tumbling to the ground to bear his brother company. And to make
brief, with his falchion doubled his blows so thick against the other, that
he was feign to fall from his horse al amassed to the earth: where he lest them
all three thus vanquished, and betook himself to his voi^ge again.

The squier who came with the brethren, having seen the end of the skirmish,
rode back presently toward the castle, and finding their father in his
chamber, certified him of this heavy news. Alas sir quoth he, man unlucky
hour did you lodge yesternight the strange knight, who even now has made an
end of s^aieng your three sons: Th^^ h^ began to rehearse the whole discourse
of the combat, wh^^e sor^^wfull issue drew up the fludgates of a stream of
tears which distilled from the miserable fathers eyes, who bewailing their so
great disaster called them many times fellonious and proud children.

His vassals understanding afterward the occasion of his grievous lamentation,
went incontinent to the place, where their young lords were discomfited, Two
whereof they found stone dead, and the third in danger of his life, if he had
not present succor. Whom they put into a litter, and the other two they laid
upon a Beer covered over with doleful black, and so did they convey them with
much sorrow and mourning into the castle, where was their weeping mother
pouring forth a sea of salt tears, wringing her hands with pitiful and
lamentable complaints, s^reeching up to the heavens with continual yelling and
crying, that you would have judged her rather to have resembled some senceles
thing then a woman in any thing partaking human wit and reason. The like did
her daughter also, who after she came again to her best senses, did protest
and deeply swear before ^er mother* yt her heart should never rest at ease,
before she had caused this murderer to die a cruel death, wherefore as soon
as the two dead corpses were enterred, she departed against her fathers will,
accompanied only with two squiers to seek out Belcarin, with full intention to
be revenged of him by hook or by crook, whenever or howsoever.

CHAP. II. How Belcarin came unknown into Macedon where he carried away the
price of the Tourney that king Florendos caused to be held at the nuptials of
the Infant Deni^e, discovering himself only to Alderine daughter to the duke
of Pontus and Durace.
BElcarin roode two days journey in great diligence, keeping on still his way
toward the Isle of Carderie, and the third day following, for that it was so
extreme sultrie and hot, which he could not well endure in his armor, he
alighted about noone of the day hard by a ^^eare fountain to refresh himself
a little, but he had not ben long there when he perceived coming along by a
little way which crossed in to the very place where he was, a great train of
knights and ladies which came riding amain. It was the duke of Pontus and of
Durace, who was going into Macedon to the wedding which king Florendos did make
of his daughter Denise, with the king of Thrace, nephew to the wife of Caniam.
This duke of Pontus had riding along with him his Spouse Laurena, with a very
fair daughter of theirs also called Alderine, who roode foremost of all the
troop, devising in matters of parley with her Damsels, not without a full ent^^
to stay somewhile to solace themselves at the ^o^tain: and there she was arrived
before Belcarin had settled his helmet on his head again, so that the princess
by a glaunce had a perfect view of him, and discrying him to be of a beautiful
vis^ge, richly armed, and without any company but of one only Squire, as she
was sage and well advised, saluted him with a comely grace: whereof Belcarin
was much astonished, supposing she had known him: but he changed quickly his
opinion: for supposing that to proceed rather of her gentle nature and courtesy
than otherwise, thought she must needs come of some great house: therefore
making a low obeisance in sign of reverence, he very courteously resaluted her.
Soon after perceived he the train of this lady, and for that he feared to be
discovered by some of the company, caused his horse to be brought him, and
mounted, he took again into the way wherein he was going before, whereat
Alderine somewhat displeased, for she would very feign have known who he was,
boorded him thus.

Sir knight, stay here boldly at your ease, and forsake not this sweet and
delectable place for our coming: for considering the great heat of the day,
it is yet no time for you to travel on your way. And if you go peradventure to
the tourney which is held in Macedon, you may come thither in good time with
the Duke my father, who shall be very glad of your company, and I much more,
who met you here by chance first of all.

Belcarin humbly thanking her for this courtesy, made his excuse that he could
not go into Macedon, because he had many other more urgent affairs in another
quarter, whether he did pretend his voyage, therefore once more he took leave
of her again, and spurred his horse that way which seemed fittest for his
purpose: only to get himself as far as he could from this company: and
meeting a Squire who came after the train and carriages, he demanded of him,
if he knew not the Lord who rode before with so great a train? the Squire
answered him, it was the Duke of Pontus, who was going into Macedone to the
feast which king Florendos celebrated for the marriage of the infant Denise, and
that he had in company with him his daughter Alderine, to see the iustes and
tournaments which they were there preparing.

So soon as Belcarin understood this news he began ^o think that the lady
which came first to the fountain should be the dukes daughter, of whom he had
many times heard talk before. By means whereof he purposed to go see this
assembly, in as secret manner as he might possibly, ^or he should have time
enough afterward to perform his voyage. Thus did Belcarin forsake the way
toward the Isle of Carderie to take that of Macedon, which was little more
than three days journey from thence. On the third day, being come near the
city, he met with two knights armed, who went to this tourney, and after
enterchange of salutations, the two knights asked him if he came not thither
to just. I go thither (quoth Belcarin) to behold the brave me^ at arms, who will
appear within the lists. Let us go then together in company, if it please
you, said they, because we are for the same effect departed from our countries.
So they road on their ways talking of many matters toward Macedon, where being
arrived, they found a large plain covered with tents of the nobility which were
already come to see the solemnity. Therefore they two knights commanded their
squires to set up a fair and rich Pauilion, which they caused to be brought
thither expressly for ye same cause, requesting Belcarin very lovingly that he
would there stay with them: whereunto (for that he would not enter into the
city) he most willingly condiscended, fearing also not to find any lodging so
fit for his purpose.

On the morrow morning arrived there the duke of Pontus, before whom came the
king Florendos, accompanied with his new son in law for to entertain and
welcome him. But Alderine who went foremost with a passing comely grace, showed
her self fair in perfection: yet something sad and pensive for the desire
she had to know who was that knight ofthe Fountain, whom she could never
cancel out ^^her thoughts since: When Belcarin beheld her come arm (...) with
the king of Thrace, trickt up in her finest attire, she seemed ^arre more f^ire
to him then when he saw her at the Fountain. I^so^^^h that he purposed, if
peradventure he could not (...) ^^uenture of C^l^stina, to act such things wi^h
(...), that he mi^^t purchase the love of this (...). But the (...), wife to
King Florendos, (...) the Dutch^^^ L^^rena honorably, and the (...) ^aking
A^derin^ with her, would not p^rt (...) the evening of her marriage day: whose
solem^^ (...) was gr^^t and magnificent in all things.

The next day following ^he ^ing, the Qu^ene, and their son and daughter newly
es^ouse^, went forth into the large field, to behold the T^^t^s whi^^ were
already in a readiness: where as s^^ne as they were mounted upon the
scaff^lds, richly hanged and provided for them, and many other Ladies and
Gentlewomen of estate, they began to bestirre themselves to the encounter of
arms. In the which of the one side, and of the other, there were see^e a great
number of brave knights, and especially of the Emrours court, for that he
himself, who could not be present at his sisters feast, had sent thither many
of his knights to honor it the more. The great feats of arms that were
exploited in this conflic^, surpassed truly the most maruailous that had
been seen before: and amongst the rest, the Dukes of An^men, and of Men^e,
behaved themselves valiantly, who were upon the point to have won the honor
of the first assault, if Belcarin had not come in: who standing still a little
to behold the skirmish, with intention to succor the weaker part, began at
last to rowse himself, when he said to his companions* Follow me, brethren, to
help the vanquished. Then setting spurs to his horse, came with such a
fierce sallie, with his Lance charged against Be^laquin, son to Mos^a; upon
him whom he saw do greatest damage to the adversary party: and such was the
encounter, that he dismounted him, and sent him like a feather to the ground.
Quickly set hand to his courtelare, and began to strike so furiously all those
that fought against him, that within a little while he put force and courage
again into the side which was reputed before for vanquished.

Whereat the Duke Anemon, who saw his side put to the worse, was in a great
rage against them: and as he perceived all this to proceed from the coming
in of Belcarin, he began presently to gather in toward him, and to salute him
with a great blow of his swoorde upon his helmet, of whom by and by he
received quick payment: for that Belcarin lifting himself upon his Stirrops,
reached him a full blow so right on his Beauer, that he set him packing in a
maze under his horse heels. Then passing further, made way through the press,
and bore down to the ground all that ever he met, in such manner that king
Florendos, and the other Nobles who did accompany him, were in a great
wonder, and none could discrie, nor give any knowledge who he should be,
except Alderine, who then sitting there hard by Queen Denise, could not hold
her tongue, but must prattle of him thus.

Madame, how think you ofthe knight in the green armor? What I think?
(quoth she) I never saw man at Arms who might compare with him, seeing that
alone he has done more in this Tourney, then the rest, put all together: and
I should be very glad to know whether he be of so noble blood, as he is
valiant and skillful in the exercise of Arms.

Madame, replied Alderine, I believe he cannot be but a great personage,
seeing that he keeps himself so close, and will not be discovered of any:
Moreover, she told her, how she found him at the Fountain bare headed, his
Murrion lying by him. And know ye (quoth she) proceeding further, that if he
be valiant at Arms, as you see yet he wants no lively and rare beauty
o^face, nor a very comely grace and gesture to accompany it. Now I have a
great desire (quoth Queen Denise) to know who he is, so that I think best to
send a messenger to him for the same effect. Then (quoth Alderine interrupting
her) Madame, I pray you that the messenger may be one of my pages, who shall
wait for him at the going out of the Tylt, to conjure him on your behalf to
declare his name: and if he desire not to be known, we will conceal it so
secretly that no man shall know it by our mean. Your opinion likes me best
of all other (quoth the new Bride) but I would that this errand were done from
you: ^or he calling to mind the little acquaintance you had ofhim at the
Fountain, will make him self known peradventure more willingly to you only,
than to any other.

Alderine then called one of her Pages, named Gratian, and instructed him what
he had to say to the Knight in the green armor, to whom she sent him
expreslie, with instant request, joined with a singular desire to know who he
was. In the mean time, Belcarin did such admirable things in his Iustes, and
with such his insupportable dexterity and martial prowess did so canuasse
his adversaries, that being no longer able to stand before him, they got away,
and departed out of the lists, where he remained alone victorious. Then the two
knights with whom he soiourned, who had been rather occupied all this while
to behold his prowesses, than to Just and Tilt, being wonderful glad ofthe
honor he did them, in winning the honor of this day, set him in the midst
between them, and so took their way toward their Tent: whither they were
followed by the Page of Alderine, who never lost sight of them, but finding a
fit place for the purpose, took Belcarins Horse by the Bridle, and bowing
down with a low reverence, began thus: Fair Knight, may you please to hear
two words of a message which I have to do unto you: He, who was most
courteous and affable, withdrew himself presently from his companions, when
Gracian proceeded in this manner.

My lord to your self does Alderine daughter to the duke of Pon^us and Durace
send me now, to let you understand the cause she has to grieve and complain
of you for ever: seeing that coming to these iustes you disdained the offer of
her company. Nevertheless if you will condescend to one thing which she sends
me to entreat at your hands, laying aside all this anger and sorrow, she shall
have no cause to complain of you hereafter.

My brother, answered Belcarin, it should be some difficult, nay impossible
thing, if I did not undertake it to find pardon at so high a ladies hands as
your mistres is: albeit if I have made an offense toward her excellency, it
was only through mine ignorance, who knew her not. And when I left her at the
fountain, it was not truly mine intent to be present at this tilting, as
afterward I was constrained. So that mine excuses could nothing prevail
against the importunity which has countermaunded me.

Then the page replied: Seeing that it is your pleasure to accomplish that
which my lady Alderine would entreat you, know she has an extreme desire to
know who you are, and wherefore you keep your self so close and secret: for
considering your valor and chiualry, she esteems you above all others, of
whom as yet she had ever any knowledge: promising you also by the faith ofsuch
a lady as she is, ^ot to make it manifest to any creature, if so be your
pleasure. I may think my self very happy quoth Belcarin then, if so noble
and perfect a princess takes pain to be inquisitiue of my deed, and when I
should have concluded with my self to conceal it from all the world, yet would
I not from her: wherefore brother, you shall tell her that my name is Belcarin,
I am nephew to the emperor of Constantinople: and the cause why I am not
willing yet to be known, is that I am but lately knighted, and having not as
yet performed any thing which may so much b^^ on my name, that it may be
registered in the number of the valiant, I resolved not to publish it but with
very good testimonial. Further you shall assure her from me, that I offer my
self from henceforth to serve her as her most humble knight, hoping under the
favor of her famous name, to win so great reputation, that I and my posterity
shall for ever remain her bounden servant. And then when I have done those
things, whereby I may merit honor and commendation, I will come unto her my
self to make her the offer of my heart, which feels it self so much
affectioned to obey her, that it shall not attempt any thing hereafter, which
may not be to her liking and pleasure. So much she shall know in commanding me,
for I have so ready a will to employ my self in her service that
notwithstanding the hazard of my life did depend upon doing it, I will not
spare any of my best forces: Beseeching her moreover not to disclose my name to
any one for that I would at this present visit the king Florendos and the
Queen my grandfather and grandame.

With this answer returned Gracian to his mistres, who stayed for him in so
great devotion, that so soon as she saw him come a far of, she could not
contain, but must needs ask him what success had followed the exploit of his
embassage. Well Madame answered the page, but you must keep it secret, for so
is his humble request. That shall we do most willingly quoth they, and then
he recounted to them all that he had understood of him, saying that he was
Belcarin the king of Hungaries son. What is it he? Quoth Queen Denise,
screeking alowd for joy, why he is then my nephew: and what so great injury
have we done him that he vouchsafes not to visit us? Truly I should be very
glad to see him, for I love him entirely, for that from our infancy we were
brought up together. And well can I assure you Madame Alderine, that he has
been always very courteous and gentle from a youth, wherefore I rejoice
greatly, that his valor in arms does so well second his courtesy and mildnes.
Nevertheless seeing he will be so ^^^ret* he shall not be disclosed for us.

We need not demand whether Alderine were ioifull when she heard say that
Belcarin was descended of so noble and famous blood seeing also he proffered
himself already very cordially to be her knight: wherefore from that very
instant hour she began to love him without measure, and to imprint so well his
remembrance in her spirit, that she could never blot it out, but every hour
more then other did she multiply in her heart the amourous passion that Cupid,
who was then in ambush, had before brewed for her at the Fountain.

CHAP. III. How Belcarin fearing to be discovered, departed secretly out of
Macedon to fall again into his way, in which he met a knight, whom he afterward
vanquished, and how he had a fierce combat with him who guarded the bridge
where Celestina was enchanted.
AS soon as Belcarin had dispatched away Alderines gentlem^n, he resolved to
depart that court, doubting the king Florendos would send to seek him all
about, as soon after ^ell out, for he desired greatly to know who was the
knight that was the vanquisher. But he found himself frustrate of his attempt,
for that Belcarin g^t him quickly away: which the king could hardly have
believed, had he not perceived it in his second iusting, which he ordained for
the nonst, the which seemed to him but a sport of little children, in
comparison of the former tourney, where this unknown knight showed such
incredible acts of chiualry: and albeit queen Denise and the princess
Alderine, heard the^ speaking hereof many times, yet would they never open any
other thing, butthat he should be some one of best account in the emperors
court.

Belcarin then after that he had in most courteous manner thanked the two
knights, for their great humanity and courtesy toward him, took of the^
honestly his leave, ^aining he was constrained to be gone in all have for some
affairs of importance which he was to manage in another place: whereat the two
knights showing themselves greatly displeased of this sudden departure*
offered to keep him company: but he thanked them again, saying as then he
had no need thereof. So he put himself again into the way which he left
before to see Alderine* and road that day little more then three mile, only to
dislodge himself from the court. It chanced he took up his lodging all that
night in a fair green meddow, where (for that there was no houseroome near)
he purposed to rest, and to pass that night away as well as he might: But even
as he thought to close his eyes, and to take a nappe, a deep thought of the
surpassing beauty of Alderine troubled his spirit: During which he entered this
combat with himself. Truly, Belcarin, thou may by good right be noted o^
ingratitude and discourtesie, having showed so little ciuility toward so noble
a princess as is the duke of Pontus daughter: Ah, Thou must amend this fault,
and show her in effect that the innocent mistaking of duty is nothing, where
repentance and satisfaction for the offense committed presently ensue. After
many amorous discourses he resolved himself (if he could not atchieue the
adventure of Celestina) to accept her with all his heart for wife: And in this
point of his thought, a sweet sleep fell into his eyes, which continued
without waking till the morrow morning, when seeing it clear day, he mounted
on horsbacke. But he had not gone far, ere he met a knight armed at all
points who asked him whether he came from Macedon, and whether the marriage of
the kings daughter were solemnized? whereunto he answered, affirming that they
were: notwithstanding if he went to the Tourney, he should come thither time
enough to be set a work.

(...) knight bidding him farewell, without further talk road on ^is way. And
if you will know-what news with him: he was Sergin the son of Cardin, he who
departed from Constantinople with Colmelie, to follow the dams^l who came to do
the hasty embassage to the emperor Cleodomyr, as you understood in the last
chapter of his history. And albeit they had raunged over many countries to
find her, yet could they never hear any news for that she was retired very
quickly within the castle of Carderie, from whence the Fairie sent her away
in haste to the Court, for the dispatch ofthat business, which tended to the
greater glory and renown of the future prowess of Marcomyr, son to the
Queen of Tharsus, and the Emperor Cleodomyr. To the end that this knight
coming one day to undo the enchantment of Celestina, he might be enterned
with greater honor and magnificence. Now had Sergin made his assay in this
adventure, but being not able to go any further in it than others, having
understood of the solemnity and open Court held in Macedon, went thither in
a great perplexity to be present at the Tourney at that time when Belcarin
gave him certain news thereof. These two knights could not have ridden far
more than half a mile the one from the other, when Sergin met the Damsel,
sister to the two brethren whom Belcarin slew at the wood side: who having
pursued him as far as king Florendos Court, was advertised by one of her
squires whom she sent after him in post, that he had won the honor of the
triumph: from the which withdrawing himself very secretly, afterward he
took right the high way of Carderie, into which way she made such have after
him, that she met with Sergin soon after Belcarin had left him, and thus to
him began she say:

Gentleman, I pray you show me whether you met not before a knight who carried
a green armor upon his back, the most traitorous and disloial man who liuith
this day in the whole world. For my father having done him all the hon^^^ that
he could d^uis^ one (...) him in his Cas^ell, and the (...) him the more,
comm^unded three brethren I h^d to accompani^ him on his way. The ingr^tefull
and fellon wretch without any other occasion cruelly did two of them to death,
and lest the third in danger to go quickly to keep them company: so that I
now go after him, in hope to (...) some v^lerous man ^t Arms, who abhorring
the iniquity and cruelty of (...), may have some compassion t^ ^uenge me of
th^s ^^trage. Full well knew this t^^^teresse to col^ur her sp^^ch^s, and by
this mean finely to f^ame and l^y together a ca^^el^us Prosopopo^a, that she
impri^ted in Serg^^ heart, ^ desire of revenging so foul an im^cie. Wherefore
he made her ^his answer, Fair damsel, if it he so ^s you say, the knight
cannot excuse himself, but he is in (...) a traitor, and a (...), an^ you shall
see that God above will not permit him to live l^ng in this world unpunished.
The damsel began to swear ^^e^rably it was troth which she had said, pr^ying
him very instantly he would help her in this d^^^resse, i^ his opportunity
might serve: most willingly, answered Se^gi^, (...) I do my best endeavor to
make him pay ^eare for this his villainy* for I am a capital enemy of vi^e
murth^rers.

Then turned they bridle incontinently to follow after Belcarin, but they could
not overtake him all that day, nor the morrow, because he road a very round
pace. The third day afterward, b^ing newly gone out of a little place where he
had lodged all night, they discovered him a far off upon the top of a little
hill, whereof the damsel was very glad, and then again she (...) Sergin to
employ all his best force to take revenge on this ^yr^nt. The knight promising
still so to do, ^purd li^ely his ^our^er to overtake Belcarin the sooner. To
whom he (...) aloud a far off, speaking in a great bra^^d^, (...), s^^y, ^hou
traitor and caitife Knight, to receive of my ^a^^ the guerdon for murdering
so cowardly those who h^d entertained thee with all humanity into (...) who
heard himself thus reviled, was moved to great choler: then furiously turning
bridle toward him who did urge this disloyalty wrongfully to him, made this
stout answer: Evil for thy profit come thou now to publish in this
Country to foul a lie. At the instant down with his beauer, and by and by
vayling his Lance, ran with a most violent fury against him* ^he like did
Sergin bravely for his part, who breaking his (...) upon the enemy, pierced
his harness quite through (...) his pouldrons, and scarde his flesh a little as
the (...). But B^^carin charge^ him with so great force (...) him neat out of
the Saddle: being thus smitt^^, (...) full down under his horse heels, and by
no mean was able to recover his feet, wherefore seeing him lie thus without
moving arm or foot, he proceeded on his way.

The ^ams^ll who was ar^iued by this time, seeing Serg^^ in that (...) from her
palfr^y very sorrowful and angry, (...) wr^pping up his wounds as well as
she could with her Squires, ^etermined to carry him into some place to cure
his wounds, making the greatest lame^tation that might ^e for so strange an
accident. Alas, good God, q^^th she, how give you power to the wicked thus to
wrong the good and just? Suffer not, I beseech you, this traitor to do any
further hurt, but hastening the hour of his death give your consent, that he
may quickly be trust up, or come to some unhappy end. The two squires who had
already lifted him on horseback, returning the very way they came, conducted
him to the lame lodging, where Belcarin had soiourned the night before. There
understood they oftheir host, how that he went to try himself in the
adventure of Celestina, whither the Damsel had willingly followed him: but
loath to leave Sergin in so evident danger, she t^rried three days with him,
serving him in the best manner she could, because for her love he had incurred
this peril.

So we will leave them there together to return to Belcarin* who road so hard,
that at last he arrived at a castle standing within half a days journey of
the I Will where Celestina was. This fortress did belong to a gentlewoman being a
widow, who had two fair daughters, and one son knighted not long before, no
less valiant in feats of Arms, then learned and prompt in many other
disciplines. In this place he was maruailous well entertained, for the Lady
of the Castle was a very honorable woman, and her daughters very courteous
Gentlewomen, and of comely grace: Supper time come, he was served in good sort,
with many fine dishes: re^ection taken, he began to discourse with them, and
entering in talk of diverse matters, he enquired of the deeds of knights who
did make the adventure of the Isle, whereunto the Gentlewomans son called
Lipes, made this answer:

Truly, Gentlman, I should hold him for ill advised, who will enterprise to go
thither to labor in that matter, seeing it is but a while since a knight
arrived there, and is returned but with dishonor, forasmuch as the de^ise of
this enchantment (as well have the three Fairies known to do it) has been
of such efficacy, that he who shall exploite the undoing of it, had need be
of singular prowess and valor.

But can you tell me, replied then Belcarin, the condition of this adventure,
and wherein consists the greatest difficulty? for yet have I never found any
who could tell it me truly: nor satisfy the great desire I had to learn it.
Better then any man living can I now discourse it to you, quoth Lipes, because
I have been there oftentimes to accompany Knights who came to this place, as
you do, and I have seen many of them combat with him who gardeth the
entrance of the Bridge, albeit to their disaduauntage. Know you then, sir,
that the Isle of Carderie is by diameter of great extend^e, and environed with
the sea on the one side, on the other side washes and waters it a flood,
which discharges it self in the salt water very near the castle, at the foot
whereof is built a bridge by meruellous architecture whilome accessible to all
wandering knights: But since Celestina was there shut up and enclosed within
the great dungeon, no stranger might ever enter in there: those of the Isle
only do go and come, all other not. Upon this bridge are placed three little
turrets, one in the midst, the other two at both the ends. In the first is a
knight surpassing the common measure and proportion of men, so fierce, hardy,
and valiant, that since the beginning of this enchauntment, has not any one
looked him in face who could ever take any advantage upon his Prowess, except
only the lord of the Isle Liquie, his son whom the emperor Marcomyr
vanquished at the Just, when he conquered the Sagittarie. He being called
Linedes by name, was so magnanimious and laborous, that he fought against the
knight of the bridge from morning to night: and albeit the battle were rough
and cruel, yet was there never perceived any want of courage or fear at all in
him, which happened not to him of the bridge, for that the blood which he lost,
did make him so feeble, that his heart began to fail him. But a
crumpshouldered and ill-favored dwarf who stood sentinel in the top of the
first tower to discover the knights who came a far off along the fields,
winding then sweetly his enchanted horn which he wears at his neck in a
skarfe, did so restore him all his force, that he seemed even then to have
entered fresh into the combat. In this manner held he out till the sun setting,
when Linedes his enemy began to be weakened in his strength: by means
whereof, before the dwarf returned to sound his horn, he gave the knight of
the tower such a girde, that he made him save himself on the ground with his
hands: Then running swiftly along the bridge, got quickly to the middle turret,
the gates whereof standing before wide open, shut themselves at his coming,
with so fearful ^reaking and trembling of the whol^ b^^lding, that Linedes
fell to ground in a sound: yet for all that h^e was quickly up again. A good
part of the night was already slipped away, before he came to himself out of his
sound, whereby his Squiers (thinking verily he was dead) did make the most
grievous complaints that might be, and when he was come again to his former
senses he ^ound himself so giddy and frushed, that he remained more then ^oure
hours before he could recover his speech. In the mean while he was borne into
a bed which his squiers had set up for him in a tent, where he soiorned three
days and never went abroad, the fourth day feeling himself strong enough to
endure hor^eback (for that he s^w there was no way for him to return once more
to pr^^e this adventure) he departed thence sad and in great ^holler. And I
tell you Sir, for a certain that when the dwar^e who s^ood sentinel in the
top of the f^^st ^urret saw the knight of the bridge wax faint, and to have
the worst of the battle, sounding but his horn, he put him again into his
former strength: whereby it comes to pass that no man can stand out long
time against him: seeing then such an enterprise brings great danger and
sometimes death with it, mine advise should be, that no man henceforward would
come to adventure it any more.

You count me marvelous things then quoth Belcarin: sure the Fairies were very
well learned yt devised this enchantment: wherefore I think they have not shut
in the damsel there without great occasion, being assured some Knight must
exploit this adventure: toward the which every one presuming a little of
himself may march courageously with a hope that it is he for whom it has been
reserved. Whereupon I do not wonder if many fall into this error, seeing that
for my part I will not refuse to go, for any thing whatsoever may befall me. I^
peraduentu^e I die in the conflict, I shall augment only the number of those
who cannot attain the purpose of their enterprises, without receiving any
(...) ^^shonour thereby.

Lip^^ entreated him of all loves to forbear the voyage, and so did his sisters
in like manner, in the sweet acquaintance and good f^uor of whom he was entered
very far already, especially of the younger, very fair and courteous above the
other: but little auailed them al their persuasiue reasons propounded to turn
him, for that Belcarin being come expressly from a far country, would not for
any thing in the world have failed to make some assay of his prowess and
valor in tha^ so famous adventure.

When Lipe^ saw him so resolute in his opinion, he offered to bear him company,
were it but to show him the way, which courtesy B^lc^rin accepted most
willingly: by this good occasion getting to horseback the morrow morning very
early, they were in the isle about noon. For that day ye young prince pleased to
rest himself a little within a rich tent which three squiers had already
reared there, who were sent thither before by Lipe^ sisters with necessary
prouisio^s for such a purpose so soon as they understood the resolution. When
it grew late, Belcarin went to view the isle, and beholding the tower wherein
Celestina was, he prayed unto God in his mind, to give him so much force, that
he might deliver her out of that place, and purchase above al others the honor
to have happily achieved such an adventure. So deeply was his mind occupied
in that thought: that of all the night he could not put it away, but said
often in himself:

Ah Belcarin, God forbid thou should suffer thy heart to abase it self,
delay not to plonge thy self manly in the execution of this enterprise, for
albeit courage and strength fit for so worthy Prowess should fail thee, yet
ought only to prick thee forward, the renown and generositie of thine
ancestors, being the son of one of the best knights, who is this day under
the Zodiake, and nephew to that great Emperor, with whom none can ever make
compare. Thus discoursed he in his mind, overcome with amourous fancy, t^^l
the bre^^e of day, when he began to arm himself leisurely at all points, then
went he toward the bridge, where in a little place right before the first
Turret, waited for him the knight of ^he guard, so huge and fierce, that
although Belcarin were hardy and valiant, he was notwithstanding somewhat
afraid, albeit he showed no sign thereof outwardly, but covering himself
bravely with his shield, hardy past wonder marched on forward to enter the
bridge, when the garder, came to debar him, saying very proudly: Stand back,
knight, if you will not have the combat against me, for this step I forbid all
those that are like you. For none other end am I come hither, quoth Belcarin,
but to ^ight with thee, and to pass the bridge, if it be in my power: with
that word he took him such a rap with his sword, that he started the fire from
his eyes under his helmet: but the knight was quit with him presently, for he
paid Belcarin two for one, so well set on with his club wherewith he fought,
that he taught him the way where he might go fet the like ^s often as he
would. Nevertheless by his dexterity and skill in managing his arms, he did
beat by afterward almost all the rest of his blows, and did reach his enemy
some sound knocks very often. In this manner continued they about three hours
hacking and hewing one another, till Lipes, who commended Belcarin greatly (and
much more then he did before) spoke aloud a word of courage, that he had never
in his life seen knight, who quitted himself so well, keeping his weapons in
his hand.

These words did so animate and provoke the courage of Belcarin, that
perceiving the knight of the bridge somewhat weary, he would have done that
which he heard say Linedes did: but the guard which stood a little on the left
hand, lent him such a villainous polte, which hit him on the shoulder, that
Belcarin was feign to kiss the ground with one knee.

Then did the dwarf sound his horn so sweetly, that al Those which heard it,
were very joyful and pleased, except the Prince, who felt a great ^ea^e and
a^^king in his heart: nevertheless, as a man not^ing but heart and valor, he
dissembled it. The knight th^n r^sto^^d to his former force by the sound of the
horn, (...) the assault more ^uriouslie than he did at first, in the which
Belcarin behaved himself always so bravely, that he held him shrewde tugge:
and one thing comforted him above all other, it was, that none of all the
blows that his enemy lighted upon him, had given him a bleeding wound, but
did only bruise the flesh under his armor, and therefore could he fight
very well at his ease. Thrice blewe the watch which was above at the sentinel
his horn to fortify his champion to the battle: which continued so long that
in the end Belcarin felt himself a little wearied, by reason he had not rested
himself all that day. Nevertheless he imagined with himself, that showing
no other valor then that which he used in this skirmish, in vain had he
taken so great pain to come thither: which he would have counted a great
shame, if the Emperor had been advertised thereof.

Being in this imagination, his stomach began to increase in him maruellously,
wherefore he gathered near his enemy, thinking to lay him along on the
ground: but the knight of the bridge was too wary for him to be taken at that
disaduauntage, for stepping a little aside, he delivered him so sound a blow
on his crest, that he cleft it in two pieces. When Belcarin saw himself in
this danger, he threw with a mighty violence the two pieces at his
adversary, and by great chance hit him so full over the shinnes, that the
knight fell backward, and turned round twice or thrice in the place.

Then the Prince seeing that he might easily get the bridge without
resistance of any, ran very swi^tlie to the midst Turret, the gates
whereof closed at the instant with so great impetuositie, that he sell from
his height down to the ground all amazed, and without any feeling at all.

Now L^pe^ who was very glad to see him run along the bridge, changed his
joy into sadness when he perceived him half dead, nevertheless lifting him
up between his arms, with the help of his two Squires, carried him presently
upon his bed: where disarming him straight, and sprinckling Vinegar, and cold
water on his face, they used so good remedies that he came quickly to himself
again. But he had no sooner recovered his spirits, when he began to lament in
strange manner, as well for his misfortune and disgrace, as for the murdering
blows which his enemy had given him, whereof bore witness his armor, thrust
through and pierced in many places.

While he thus complained and lamented so grievously, Lipes begun in most
courteous manner to comfort him again: Sir, quoth he, be of good cheer, take
a good heart to pass over and let slip this anguish of mind, assuring your
self without doubt, that it is more than eight years since ever Knight came
into this Isle, (only Linedes excepted) who has woonne so great honor, as
you have done now: so that you have far greater cause to rejoice, than to
complain as you do. Alas, my brother, answered Belcarin, a sorrowful man may
I be, who have not atchiued my purpose pretended: but seeing I see none other
remedy, I must take in patience the disaster that has so shamefully put me to
this foil. For of things so diuelishly enchaunted, never succeeds any good:
Accursed be the Fairies, with all their infernal charms and sorceries, which
make poor wandering Knights suffer so many mischiefs and diseases for their
pleasures.

CHAP. IIII. How Belcarin resolved to fight with all those who came to make
assay in the adventure of Celestina, and how amongst others he made front
against the marquis of Trosse, whom he overcame: and afterward against
Tiraquel, to whom he discovered himself.
LIpes took great pains to cause the knight Belcarin to be attended with all
diligence, whilst he kept his bed; who in ye mean time was proiecting a
thousand new fantastical discourses in his mind. Sometimes imagining with him
self, that having not effected this adventure, he must perform so rare and
admirable matters of chivalry, thereby to amend and cover this shame. For this
cause he purposed to make stay long time in this place, to combat all those who
should come thither to make their trials in the adventure, with resolution that
the brave feats of arms which he should exploit there, and wheresoever else he
should employ himself abroad, should be for love of Alderine the duke of
Pontus daughter, who^ from that time forward he purposed to love above all
other in the world: and if peradventure he were vanquished by any knight, he
determined to go incontinent unto king Florendos court. This desseigne
discovered he to Lipes, who marvelled much thereat, and told him that this was
no small thing that he did undertake, because there were wont continually to
arrive good knights from all parts* nevertheless, knowing him before very
resolute in his deliberations, he proceeded with him in this sort, Seeing you
are fully resolved thus to do, I will not forsake you, but to see your
prowess and great chivalry, which I am most certain rests under the
dexterity of your person, I offer my selffrankely to do you service with my
loyal company. Commanded moreover incontinent (for their greater expeditio^)
that they should bring him from his house, horses, and arme^, ^s well offensive
as defensive, briefly, all manner (...) which were necessary for so long a
time of (...) as they hoped to spend in this enterprice.

But so soon as Belcarin could endure the travail of arms, he sailed not to
endosse them, to be in a readiness, if per^due^ture any thing chanced in the
mean time: and so it fell out that the Marquis of Trosse (who came then to make
his assay in that adu^nture) arrived there the same day. He was a brave and a
hardy m^n at Arms, and albeit he parted from his countries well accompanied
with knights, pages, and gentlem^n, he had nevertheless caused them to stay
behind, short of this place, and toward him he marched with one only squire,
who bore his lance.

When Belcarin saw him come so courageously directly to the bridge, he mounted
incontinent on horseback, then drew near him, saying: Gentleman, this way can
you not pass, before you Just with me, because I have established this for a
law, that no knight shall have battle with him on the bridge, who has not first
overcome me: for a few days past my strength having failed me in the assay of
this adventure, I will that no other shall accomplish it, if he cannot prevail
against me. This your rashness seems to me very great (replied the Marquis)
seeing you enterprise to carry a burden of such weight: but I believe you do
it to depart hence more ashamed and dishonored (...) you have done heretofore.
Happen what shall ((...) Belcarin) then with some disdain you must pass (...)
my hands, and take heed of me, if you think good. The Marquis had already
drawn his sword which was the cause that in the violent running of the horses
they made a furious encounter: and having both a desire to behave themselves
bravely, brake their Lances down to their handles, brushing one another with
their Sheeldes, and shouldring so fiercely that the Marquis fell to the
ground: feeling himself hurt a little ^ith his fall g^tteth quickly on his
(...), dr^w ^orthwith his sword, with which he (...) such a blow on the ribs,
that he made (...): but Belcarin who was nimble l^apt (...) the saddle, and
setting hand to his bl^de likewise ran upon him in a great rage. Ill for thy
profit, (says he) learnest thou ever to use such cowardice in combating, for
thou shall receive by and by thy deserved guerdon: then charged him with two
such deadly blows upon his helmet, that before the sword was from it, the
blood ran down in the place. The Marquis, who was active and courageous went
always eagerly to work, and defended himself with a wonderful stomach:
nevertheless Belcarin who surpassed him in valor and actiuity fetched him quickly
so lively about, that the Marquis, who could not almost stand before him, did
but void the strokes: Which his adversary spying, laid so fiercely upon the
edge of his shield, that he laid him along at his feet, where the miserable
Marquis lost all possibility and mean to defend himself: for so soon as he was
down Belcarin began to batter him cruelly with the pommell of his sword,
saying: Catif, yield thee now for vanquished, and swear unto me thou will
never seek to meddle or make any more in this adventure, if not, I send
presently thy soul to the devil. In good faith knight answered the Marquis,
you have passed me so far, that I warrant I shall never pass further in it:
and of favor I beseech you to leave me in this pittious estate in the which
now I yield my self at your mercy. Belcarin who heard him speak so gently,
thought he was in danger of death: therefore withdrew himself a side a little
whilst the Marquis squier approached him, to see in what state he was: who when
he had quickly raised him on his feet, bound up his wounds with a kercheif
which he tore in pieces, he set him fair and softly on his horse which he took
at the end of the carrier. But before the Marquis departed from thence he
requested Belcarin very amiably to tell him who he was, to the end he might
know the name of his vanquisher: which he granted him willingly. H^ quoth the
Marquis: truly I have no cause to complain nor to be sorrowful for my
mishap* seeing it is by the hand of so valiant a knight* that I see my self
now vanquished: the Marquis having spoken these words, marched toward the
place where he had le^t his people, and from thence to a town from whence he
stirred not, til he had recovered his perfect cure and health: then to^ke his
iourny directly into Macedon, and there recounted what had happened to him with
Belcarin.

The king Florendos and the queen his wife were very ioifull hearing so good
report of Belcarin: for they said, they had a nephew so called* who might very
well be the same: then demanded him what arms he carried: the Marquis answered,
green. As sure as God lives the^ said the king, it is none other but he: and
getting a few days since the best at the tourney, departed thence secretly,
fearing to be discovered, whereof I am very glad, and con him thank that he
can do so well: for that in Prowes^e and chivalry he seeks to resemble king
Frisol his father. Great was the joy that the nobles of the court received by
this news, but above al other was Alderine most ioifull, because she had set
her heart, and all her most secret thoughts upon him, and loved him every day
more ardently then other, for the great praises she heard were every where
spread abroad of his singular deeds of arms: so that by the only blast of this
renown many knights departed from that court to go try themselves against
him, who being all vanquished, augmented his fame daily more and more.

But to return to the damsel who pursued to be revenged of Belcarin for the
death of her brethren, after that she had three days served Sergin very
courteously, (seeing him on the fourth well amended) she purposed to depart his
company honestly, to follow after her enemy. It fell out by fortune, Tiraquel
son of duke Eustace, who went to see his companion Belcarin every where abroad,
arrived the same evening in a lodging, where seeing the Damsel make such
pittious moan (for she could very well play her part at the arrival of any
one) was moved at the last with pity and compassion to promise her his aid,
if she stood in need thereof, and as he demanded the cause of her lamentation
and sorrow, she made answer, how she having two brethren slain treacherously
by a disloial person wh^ her father lodged one night in his Castle did put her
self presently in pursuit after him, and meeting by the way a courteous
knight, besought him to take revenge of the murderer who had committed that
vile act* in brief, that this valiant Gentleman also had been by him
daungerously wounded: which caused him so much the more to grieve and sorrow at
her fortune. Full well knew she how to work him by her enticing and sugared
words, so far that Tiraquel promised her once more his aid: and enquiring what
was become of the wounded knight, quickly could she answer, Here within, sir,
now past danger, by the good care we have had of him, as you may now well see.
Then she led him into Sergins chamber, where so soon as they had sight of each
other, they were presently acquainted, and full glad was Sergin at ye heart,
knowing Tiraquel to be so near him: but Tiraquel was very sorrowful and
displeased, seeing Sergin in so il a taking. Yet he swore both to revenge him
and the damsel also, if peradventure he might meet with the knight who had done
the massacre. And for as much as since his arriual he saw him better amended by
the one half, and to take pleasure to hear him speak, he told him how Belcarin
and he, were both together on one self same day knighted by ye hand of the
emperor of Constantinople: from whence that Belcarin departed very soon
afterward vnweeting to all the world, and especially to me (quoth. he) who made
after presently to seek him, and could never hitherto hear any tidings of him.
What arms carries he, quoth. Sergin the^? white, and very rich, answered Tiraquel.
That knight, have I not yet seen, said Sergin again, but he may be very well
now in Macedonie at the marriage of the infant Denise, which is there kept most
magnifice^tly. Tr^^ly then quoth Tiraquel if I were not now bound by (...)
promise to this Damsel, I would ge^ (...) before I went further: but my heart
shall never be in rest till I have found out the knight who has brought you
into this bad case.

That night passed they away ioifully together, especially the Damsel was very
glad of Tiraque^s promise, for that he seemed to her very hardy and able to
deliver her out of all her sorrows. The morrow morning being come, both of
them at one instant took their leave of Sergin to take their journey toward
the Isle of Carderie, where they arrived upon a thursday about noone, just as
Belcarin was prauncing and managing his horse up and down: but he having
discovered them from a far, laced his helmet, and mounted incontinent upon a
good courser which Lipes had caused to be brought him before from his castle:
of whom and of his sisters who came thither to visit him many times, he reciued
daily great support and pleasure. As soon as the Damsel saw Belcarin on
horseback, she knew him by his armor: wherefore looking Tiraquel in face with
an eye moving him to pity, she encouraged her champion thus: Sir quoth she, see
there the traitor that slew my brethren, whom I believe, God has stayed here
expresslie to the end I may be revenged of the wrong he has done me.

Glad was Tiraquel to find him here, that he might upon so good quarrel, as he
thought, begin his first feats of arms: Belcarin who knew him by his harnes^e
(for that it was of the same trimming as was his, in which he received the
order of knighthood at the same time with Tiraquel) was no less ioifull to see
him so near, imagining strait that he came to seek him out: nevertheless
would try him a little at the I^ust, and so stepped before him, saying: Knight
you cannot pass farther for I guard this straight: Small account make I of
such cowards as you, quoth Tiraquel, that murder traitorously gen^^emen who
do you honor, surmounting far your merit, which I will make you buy as
dearly by and by. Straight will I see that (replied Belcarin) whether it be in
your power to make me confess that which I never once thought of, much less
ever committed. You did felloniouslie commit the homicide, replied Tiraquel
then, and take heed of me upon such an occasion, for I have a great desire to
make you repent it: Scant had he ended these speeches, but they ran full one
at another: and so furious was their meeting, that their Lances flying in
pieces, they dashed each other so mightily with their sheeldes, that they
wounded one another a little. Belcarin he lost his Stirrops, and Tiraquel went
to the ground, but that was by his horses fault, who being weary and tired by
the long way which he had carried his master, who was very corpulent and
mighty, was sore galled, and had his back broken at the encounter: yet
Tiraquel getting up quickly again, set most bravely hand to his sword, crying:
Alight, knight, or I will kill thy Monture. I will alight most willingly (quoth
Belcarin) but it shall be to embrace you, for that I have no will to fight with
you any longer. What, what, quoth Tiraquel, there is no need of triumph: for if
I be fallen from my horse, for that you have not vanquished me. Great delight
took Belcarin, to feel himself so courageously spoken unto by his most dear
and singular friend: nevertheless, willing to sound him better yet, he
alighted forthwith, and came to him directly with his sword in his hand.
Knight, quoth he, I spoke to you for your great good, notwithstanding (because
you will have it so) I am content to see what you can do with your sword. Then
Tiraquel, who thought verily that he was flowted, in a great chafe, hit him
two great blows between the cuirasse and the helmet: but Belcarin had no will
to strike, therefore (to make no hotter sport) he laid down incontinent on the
ground his sword and sheeld, then came with open arms to give him a joyful
acolade, saying: My entire friend Tiraquel, I have ere now sufficiently known
your valor and prowess, wherefore I pray you pardon your brother Belcarin the
offense he made, in not imparting to you his deliberation, when he departed
from Constantinople: for I am assured you go seeking after him. What, quickly
answered Tiraquel, are you then my brother Belcarin? Truly the error which I
have now committed, has been for that I knew you not, by means whereof, I
pray you of all favor, that you will cast down your helmet, for that the arms
which I see on your back now, have caused in me this oversight.

Then helmets went on both sides to the ground, and these two companions many
times embraced each other most lovingly, when Tiraquel in this sort spoke to
Belcarin: In good faith sir, it cannot by any mean sink into my head, that your
heart has ever consented to commit such a treacherous act, as this damsel
has persuaded me to believe. Tell me, I pray you now, began Belcarin, what
fellow is this? for another knight (whom I suppose I slew, or at the least sore
wounded) has already fought with me upon that quarrel: assuring you this
damsel should be some bad woman, seeing she accuses me thus wrongfully, and
staineth mine honor with this disloialtie. She has given me to understand,
quoth Tiraquel, how her father having greatly honored you in his castle, one
night that you lodged there, and the morrow morning having sent three of his
sons to accompany you on your way, how you should slay two of them outright,
leaving the third sore wounded. Ah, treacherous damsel, then quoth Belcarin,
how manifest a lie do I now hear? My companion, most true it is, that I
slept one night in the Castle that she speaks of, where I never saw man, but
the Lord of the place, who was a very honorable and courteous knight: of whom
taking my leave the morrow morning all alone, when I had scant gone little more
then two miles, I found at the side of a forest, three knights all armed, who
forced me to Just against them, and my fortune was at the first encounter to
lay one on the ground with my lance: which the other perceiving, ran both
with great violence upon me, but I delivered my self from them as well as I
might. If they were the sons of the Lord of the Castle, that know not I,
greatly it should displease me if they were, for the honor and good
entertainment I received at his hands. I believe assuredly as you say, then
replied Tiraquel, and this damsel can not be but some shameless and badde
woman, who has deceived me with this lie: But she may thank the great
gladness which has seized my spirits in seeing you, otherwise I should
chastise her sharply, for her impudency and crafty malice.

She, who heard all these speeches, and saw peace established between the two
Knights, having the very tears standing in her eyes, begins to exclaim thus:
Oh, most accursed and unfortunate wretch, ah what collusion is this? Certes,
this knight whom I brought hither, seems to me as false and disloial as the
other, of whom I seek revenge: nevertheless, seeing he has circumuented me,
and ill performed his promise, if I die not speedily, I hope to make him repent
it, and to see my self revenged of them both. Having uttered these speeches,
she returned the same way she came, and the two knights retired into their
Tents. There Tiraquel recounted to Belcarin, how the knight whom the Damsel
caused first to fight against him, upon this supposed treason, was Sergin, whom
he had also left in the Chirurgians hands: whereof Belcarin was grievously
displeased, much blaming and cursing the shameless woman, who had induced them
both falselie to believe her. Then for his part he discoursed to Tiraquell, all
that had happened to him in this adventure* also what determination he had set
down against all those, who should come thither with like intention, for as
much as he could not undo the enchantment himself.

By the faith of a Knight, quoth Tiraquel then, your attempt seems to me
far greater and more difficult, than the execution of that of the Castle
wherein the Lady is prisoner, in the which I have no mind to make assay,
seeing it cannot by you be brought to an end: but well content will I be, to
keep here in your good company. So they dwelt there together, being most
exquisitely served of all that was necessary for them, and taking all pleasure
that they might best devise, they did there pass time merrily with the
daughters of Lipes, who came thither many times to visit them: Albeit,
Belcarin found that he had some what to do, for that it behooved him to make
good against so great a number of Knights, who came thither from all parts to
prove themselves in the adventure: besides against those whom the damsel
conducted thither, to revenge the death of her brethren. But this was a strange
and admirable case, that all the long time that Belcarin soiourned there, never
came any knight thither who could go beyond him in chivalry and prowess: so
that this renown, accompanied with a singular and most commendable praise,
spread it self over all the kingdom of Madedon, and moreover in the empire of
Greece. During which painful exercise that he continued without intermission,
the delicious life which by their industry they studied to provide, was very
necessary for him in that place, for that it did diminish much the sorrow and
travail that he endured. Wherein we will leave him a little to recreate his
spirits, to speak of the good Knight Marcomyr, son of the Emperor
Cleodomyr, and of the Queen of Tarsus.

CHAP. V. How Marcomyr having knowledge he was the Emperor Cleodomyr son
caused himself to be knighted, then demanded license of the queen his mother,
to go see him in Constantinople, which he very hardly obtained, and of that
which fortuned thereupon.
THe Queen of Tarsus caused with great care to be brought up Marcomyr her
son, whom she had by the Emperor Cleodomyr at that time, when following the
exercise of arms he arrived in the City of Alfarin situate in the kingdom
of Pasmerie, as you have read amply in his history* This child was of so good
a nature, that the queen and all those of the kingdom held themselves very
well pleased, because the more he grew in corpulence, so much the more he
showed himself virtuous, and to descend of royal and illustrious blood: so
that to put him out of all desire ever to go see his father, (fearing he would
have a will to make himself a Christian) they would never tell him of whom he
was engendered. But to the end he should be brought up and well instructed, as
did the Heroical generousnes of so high and great a prince require, the queen
committed the charge and government of him to a brother of the defunct king of
Tarsus her husband, a knight both very valiant and wise: of whom he was so
virtuously instructed in litterature, that his natural enclination his fashion
of life, and good manners did appear every day more then other most
commendable, whereby he was exceedingly made of, and reverenced by his friends,
especially because they saw a wise discretion in him, to prefer mercy before
rigor: for he took great pleasure to do any favor or charitable act to those
who did require him. Nevertheless if he appeared courteous and loving toward
the good, so contrariwise he showed himself bitter and severe against the
wicked, so that by reason of his meruellous wisdom and natural care he had in
good things, from his very infancy and tender age, he would understand the
managing of the affairs of the kingdom: wherein, within a little while (his
spirit being marvelous apt to be taught, and capable of all good things) he
ordered himself so well, and was so good a politician in his government, that the
queen began to lay upon him the government of the whole estate. If he enriched
himself by little and little in the perfection of all virtues, there wanted
not in him the blossom of a lively beauty of his body: wherein were all
comely graces so excellent well bestowed in every part, with the which he could
so well behave himself with all temperance and modesty toward al brave
knights, who hearing his praises published through all the marches of Tarsus
bordering round about, came of their own accord to offer him their service.

So that the court was quickly full, when on a day before he was armed knight
(for in truth beside the royal nature which he brought with him from his
mothers womb, according to the aspect and celestial influence of his
constellation he was born and naturally inclined to arms) there came to sit
down upon a bench in a walking place within a base court of his palace, an old
wrinckled and decrepit woman, so ragged and torn that she showed her bare
illfauoured flesh in many places: trembling so sore, that it seemed her soul
would strait depart out of her body. Whereat those who went up and down there
within began to wonder, yet had some compassion on the poor wretch, and as
Marcomyr came forth of his chamber, he saw her in this miserable estate, and
beheld her a good while, saying not a word, and without any speech went
presently from the place to sit down to dinner. Afterward purposing to go
abroad some where to disport himself, he found her sitting in the same place
where he saw her before: by reason whereof, he begins to say to one of his
cosins, named Ozalias, son of his ouncle and governor: Cannot we know who
is that good old woman which you see leaning upon that stone seat there. Then
Ozalias, to understand the matter truly, came near this old beldame to
demand her who she was, and whether she would have any thing that was within
the house. But the impudent old trot, answering not a word, looked upon him
with a squay look, and then turned her back to him: whereat Ozalias
disdaining, kicked her so good a thumpe with his foot, that he made her fall
from her seat to the ground.

At this goodly spectacle, Marcomyr began to laugh a good, and all the Barons
and Nobles with him, but their laughter turned into a sudden admiration: for
so soon as this old mother was risen up again, she seemed so great and
ougly, that she made them all wonder who had beheld her so little before. Then
she turned her self all in a rage toward the Prince, taking him up sharply
thus:

Ha Marcomyr, sure thou will never resemble the Emperor of Constantinople thy
father, who is as meeld and affable to the poorest and least, as to the
greatest lords, and other persons of higher quality! What avail have thou
gotten to rejoice at the injury which I have received of thy gentleman? I pray
the great Monarque Cupido (quoth she, holding up her hands to heaven) that he
wound thy heart cruelly with the love of fair Celestina, and suffer thee never
to leave thinking on her, that thou may leave off this dainty and peaceable
life which thou now leadest, to change it for that wherein men endure most
pains and travels. So did a good while since thy father for the Princess
Polinard, whom he loved so perfectly, that with all his best force and
dexterity of body he attempted to win the roialtie that fortune prepares for
her dearest fauourits, upon the which he is now ^eated, enjoying a far greater
felicity then any other Prince dwelling under our hemispheare. Forsake then
these court delights in which thy mother seeks to drown thee, begin to
manage arms a little, which shall eternize thy name, and make the honor which
thou shall purchase immortal: for this is thy great shame (being son to so
rare and invincible a knight) not to aspire by this mean to imitate him and
trace in his labourious steps. Then, when I shall behold thee up to the ears
in thine amourous passions, languishing and tormenting thy self out of
measure, I will think my self revenged of the wrong and dishonor that thou
have suffered me to sustain in thy presence.

The old woman had no sooner ended these speeches to Marcomyr (whom from that
time forward, she dubbed knight of the order of Cupid, who is to carry for
ensign A wounded heart pierced with an arrow) she vanished out of sight
incontinent, whereat they were all sore affeared which beheld her: even the
Prince himself who remained for a while after amazed as though he had been in a
trance: and thinking upon that which the old beldame had said to him, he felt
his heart so troubled and fiered for the love of her whom as yet he knew not,
that he was fame to burst forth into these complaints: Alas, who may that lady
be, with whose love by the only rebuke of this old woman I feel my self
already so ravished? Surely, if her speeches be not colored, or too far from
any truth, that I am the Emperor of Constantinoples son, it behooves me to
act some things by which I may be judged to resemble him.

Mean time his spirit was thus occupied in this diversity of thoughts, and
that none durst be so hardy as to disturb him, Ozalias went to the queens
chamber, where he recounted to her all this whole discourse, whereat she was
greatly displeased: and immediately came into the presence for thither they said
her son had withdrawn himself before: who perceiving his mother coming
toward him, came before her with a very sad countenance, and greatly
perplexed, as he was. She took him then by the hand, and causing him to sit
down by her, thus she begins: Son, I know not what sollies, it seems,
this old doting woman has now put into your head, cease I pray you to believe
them, and I will tell you the very truth.

Madam, answered Marcomyr, I am sure you will not hide it from me in any
thing, notwithstanding, I marvel much you have hitherto concealed from me the
degree of my genealogy: for the Emperor Cleodomyr, being so brave and worthy
a knight as he is accounted of throughout the world, I could have had none
occasion of disdain to be his son, and you less to have told it me.
Therefore I pray you most humbly, resolve me this doubt and scruple which I
have in my mind: to the end if it be so, I may employ my best endeavors to
make the bud issued from so noble and virtuous a branch, blossom forth and
flourish the better. And fear you not for his sake, I should ever forsake you,
for it were impossible for me to leave the law, after which I have so long time
lived, for any strange law what so ever it might be.

Alas, my son, quoth the Queen, interrupting him, I pray the gods to inspire
you, and to direct so well your desseigns, that you fully accomplish what you
promise me: for the only fear I have to loose you, has made me keep close
til this present hour, that which you desire so much to know: But seeing your
ears have been tickled with that which I can no longer dissemble, assure your
self, my son, what the old Beldame told you is most true. Then recounted
she to him the whole story: how she, to have issue of some excellent and
worthy knight (imitating Thalestria Queen of the Amazonians, who for like
occasions did acquaint her self with the valiant king Alexander) did by the
counsel of a wise Magitian, amourously deceive the emperor Cleodomyr: in
conclusion she besought him not to leave her whilst she lived: for that being
deprived and banished from his presence, (...) could not live one hour.

Great matters are these which you tell me, quoth the young prince, the Emperor
then knows not that he has had any children by you? No surely, replied the
Queen, nor would I he should for any thing in the world. That can not be long
so, quoth Marcomyr, for needs must I one day go to see him: but believe me,
Madam, I shall not be long away, for that I have fully determined never to
leave you, nor to abandon by my will the kingdom, that God has given me to
govern. Thus communed together of many things the mother and the son, who from
thence forward showed himself to his vassals very pleasant, and well pleased
in mind: so that resolving speedily to be knighted, he caused to be made for
himself an armor perfect red, and another white for Ozalias, whom he loved as
his brother. And after they had watched in the chapel, they had both the
sword girded to them, and the long spur put on by the father of Ozalias, who
was one of the best knights in all those countries. Having then both of them
received of him the accollado, order was given for the sol^mnising of a great
feast for ye same effect. During which feast, Marcomyr bestowed many rich
presents upon diverse. But he could never forget Celestina, nor put out of his
mind the words of the old beldame, for that he had them so lively imprinted
therein, that they tormented him more than might do any mortal martyrdom.
Wherefore he concluded to pass into Greece, to the end to visit the Emperor his
father, and to learn some news of this lady, for well deemed he, not
without cause, had the enchauntresse used such vile speeches to him: so that
one day after dinner finding the Queen his mother at convenient leisure, and
in a place fit for the purpose: in very modest sort he kissed her cheek. And
as many discourses had passed between them, Marcomyr besought her humbly, she
would grant him one ^oone* which the Queen, who loved him as dearly as her
own person (little deeming his affection would carry him to that which he had
already de^eigned) willinglydid grant him. I would madame, quoth he then, you
take no displeasure, if I make shortly a voyage to Constantinople, to see the
emperor my father, and the brave knights of his court: for I feel daily augment
in me the desire, which ever since you assured me to be his son, comes every
hour into mine imagination: but I promise you by the inviolable and sincere
faith which the child above all things owes the mother, to return with as
great speed, as shall be possible.

Alas, my son, cried out the Queen, and sighed, your words have so far
wounded and pierced my heart, that I behold plainly Atropos already cutting
off the thread of my sorrowful life: yet if to avoid the extremity into which
I see my self now reduced, I feared always to manifest to you my ruin,
seeing I cannot now prevent it, nor with honesty deny, that whereunto I have
so rashly consented, it is good reason I suffer patiently my misfortune. One
only thing I will entreat you, (if maternall zeal, and love, may so far
move you to have compassion on me) it would please you to return with all
speed possible to the place of your nativity: to the end once before I die,
that these mine eyes beholding you, my soul may pass with better comfort
into the other world. The Gods forbid (replied Marcomyr) I should contrary
the least of your commandments, or in any wise frustrate the good hope which
you may conceive of my return.

My dear child, then quoth the Queen, seeng you undertake so far a voyage,
I should advice that you accompany your self with some number of knights, to
the end the Emperor may entertain you with greater honor. Madame, answered
he, I am certain, my Lord the Emperor will esteem nothing the more of me,
for seeing me well accompanied, because he shall well know I am king of
Tharsus, wherein consists not the true point of mine honor neither, but
rather in the continual travels, which I hope herea^^^^ t^ endure in fair
feats of arms, which I hope he shall hear resound of me through the world.
For, (as you are not ignorant) the time has been when he himself has gone
alone through the world, by his magnanimious courage, exposing himself to
thousands of marvelous adventures, which are at this day blown abroad of
hi^: and nevertheless, the divine goodness has always preserved him from death
in all the perils that ever he was in, and as well as he a number more of
other renowned princes. What adventure can a man name more hazardous than that
of Jason the Argonaut, when he won the golden f^eece in the Is^e of Colches?
Or that of Theseus the gallant champion, when he vanquished the M^^otaur in
the Labyrinth of Creete? and yet the gods delivered them both from all danger.
Truly in my time I have sometimes behold shi^s with poor equippage singling
in the deep s^a in great ^ortu^e of weather and storm, who in the end hau^
^r^iued rich, and cast anchor in the safe haven. Many others (...) I seen also
wh^ ^ithful sail nauigating in a calm ^ea, (...) o^ will, who have afterward
been ca^^ (...) and (...) near the shore side, and in the h^uens mouth: I
should not ^h^n fear to commit my self to the peril of the sea and fortune,
seeing we are all predestinate. Therefore have I determined to carry along with
me no more company but Ozalias, and only two squires, as simple gentlemen.
Desiring to prove my self against ye knights of Europe, before the emperor
know me.

The Queen resolved to strive no longer against the determination her son had
secretly concluded in his mind, but rather endeavored to show him the fairest
countenance, although her sorrowful heart did hardly consent thereto. Wherefore
Marcomyr on a day causing all ye principal of his kingdom to assemble together,
declared to the^ his full intention, with express commandment that none of
them should transgress the ordinance and will of his mother nor of his o^ncle,
whom he lest behind him for governor and lieutenant general over all the
province in his absence. Allof them were very sorry for so sudden a
departure, but seeing they could not stay him, they all promised with one
accord, to accomplish all that which he had given them in charge to do: wishing
him all in their hearts a prosperous and happy voyage.

Then the queen retired her self into her closet, where her hand imitating
the office of her tongue, she couched quickly in writing a letter dire^^ed to
the Emperor, with which letter she was to send a ring like unto one which she
presented him, when she was in the countries of Asia: to the end by means of
this ring, Marcomyr should be the sooner recognished of him: whilst these
things were in doing (there was rigging ^ very tall ship, thoroughly equipped
with all store of nourishing victuals, and whatsoever else was necessary for ^o
long ^ voyage) he took his congie honestly of all his vassals, and (...) after
of the Queen his mother who felt a great heartbreaking at this departure: then
came she directly into the haven, with the ring and let^^r whose ten^^r
ensues: The queen of Tarsus letter to the Emperor Cleodomyr.
The Superscription was this:
To the most illustrious and generous Cleodomyr, Emperor of Constantinople,
the most loiall of lovers, the most accomplished of knights, and the most high
of princes who inhabit the Center of the world, the queen of Tarsus his
entire and perpetual lover, kissing the hands of his Imperial majesty,
sends salutation.
IF the heavens had been in my behalf so happy and liberal distributours of
the gifts and perfections requisite to an accomplished lady, as fortune was to
me afterward favorable and gen^^e, adorning my head with the royal crown of
Tarsus, I had never had no recourse to charms nor Magic (my dear lover and
most fortunate Prince) when I sought to have your acquaintance in the kingdom
of Pasmerie. But for as much as with the never so little of these so highly
esteemed graces of nature as I possess, the fatal destinies made me bow to
your love, after I saw you in the town of Alfarin, my former virtue could not
so prevail against the ardent desire which the renown of your praise had
before lively imprinted in my spirit, but my chastity in the end there
remained without recovery defiled. Nevertheless I never accounted that any
disaster nor mishap in my behalf, seeing the celestial bodies were so
merciful as they suffered to derive of that act Marcomyr our common son: to
whom albeit I had ever concealed you were his father, nevertheless by Divine
Oracle not long since he has been advertised thereof, and since has so
cunningly wrought his matters that he has constrained me (not without mine
extreme grief and utter mistrust ever to see him again) to give him leave to
go to visit you. Whereunto very hardly had I condescended, were it not the
confidence I have that you will send him me again, so soon as you shall have
seen and recognished him for your son. And of this accident I assured my
self you would not be displeased, if you consider how you have aided to bring
into this world a young man, the beginning of whose towardness, good manners,
and honest behauiours does presage hope of his laudable and future valiauncie.
I send you him then thus accompanied only with one of his cosins, for that
herein such was his advise, showing me in all resolute sort, how when you
traveled the world, it was for the most part alone, and as a simple wandering
knight. And to the end you make no doubt to recognish him for your son
(besi^^s the conjectures, that his Phisiognomie, proportion of members, and the
proper h^w of his blood may naturally inform you) I send you by him a ring
like unto that which I gave you the very day you departed from the town of
Alfarin mine Admiral, in which the night going before you begat this child of
me: the which if you compare together, you shall find the words I spoke to you
(in taking leave one of another) not to have been vain nor lying. Praying you
once more by the honor and reverence of the firm and loiall amity which you
have always had in so-great and singular account toward the only mistress of
your heart, it would please you to send our son back again to us as soon
as may be: To the end we may pass together ioifullie the rest of this short
life, wherewith it shall please our Gods to enrich us with hereafter in this
base region wherein we live.

The most humble of your lovers; The queen of Tarsus.




CHAP. VI. How Marcomyr was by tempest of weather, driven into the isle of
Delphos, where after he had understood of the adventure of the temple, he
determined to take harbor: how afterward he vanquished the son of the giant
Baledon who kept this isle then by force.
SO soon as Marcomyr was come to the haven where he should embarke, with many
jewels, and many other things necessary for such a voyage, he was the fourth
man who went aboard. And causing them to set sail, commanded his pilots to
steer toward the coasts of Thrace, where he had hope to learn some news of
Celestin ^herfor who^ (and yet could not he tell any cause) he felt his h^rt
before cruelly wounded, and plonged in a most passionat ag^^y. Scant had he put
out from shore, when began to blow a contrary flaw of wind, which altered his
course pretended for Constantinople: for there fell so terri^le a storm, that
he abode three days and three nights f^oating among the waves, where his
mariners themselves knew not on what coast they were. At last the tempest
being ceased, he commanded the master to cast the plummet to the bottom of
the sea, to know in what country they were. He knew strait they were sailing
in Europe and in the Mediteranean sea, very near the (...) of D^lphos, by
means whereof* Marcomyr purposed to make in with the island to refresh
himself a little.

But into this island were the Pagans weent to come very often in ancient time
to visit the temple of Apollo, and to consult with his Oracle: wherein at this
time was Lord a giant called Baledo^, the most cruel and greatest tyrant who
then lived in all the three parts of the world. This giant who had a son no
less valerous in arms then himself, after by force he had ceized this isle,
caused a strong castle to be built upon a little promontorie which reached far
into the sea, where it was divided into two maine rocks hidden within the
waves. And would not permit any other port in all the isle but that, which he
appointed between these two rocks, at the end and extremity of either whereof
he commanded to make ^ast a great chain of iron to run a cross, which lay
commonly very low within the water: But when any vessel was come in to come to
an Anchor in the haven, two me^ who wa^thed for the purpose upon the top of a
tower near hand, did hoise it up in suc^ sort, that he might not put out
again without the good will of the giant. Who pillaged in this manner, and
greatly domaged all those who arrived there: and if peradventure he found any
knight that did resist or would not obey his will, he overcame them by force of
arms, and then commanded to thrust them into a stinking and dark prison.

The merchants and others traffaking by sea, spoiled of all they carried, he
caused them cruelly to be put to death: so that all who had notise of this
tyranny, did shun this road as a dangerous quicksand or gulf. In this Isle
was there moreover a greater adventure: for in the time of the Gentiles there
was a rich priest, a great Magitian, and a searcher out of secret things, high
priest of the sanctuary of the Temple, and beside chief of the Economicall and
political government of this province: who having one very fair daughter,
chaste and adorned with all virtues requisite in a virgin, did consecrat her to
the service of the Oracle. It fell out the duke of Fera, a very comely and
gallant young gentleman, fell in love with her, only by report he heard of
her: for he had many times heard tell, that in beauty and comeliness she
did excel the most properest of all those parts: therefore did he send to the
prelate to demand her for his wife, but many times as he sent, he had his labor
for his travel, because her father would never be far from her.

And even as the messenger which is sent twice or thrice into one place to
obtain something of a man, would saine have, seeks by all means possible to
satisfy his desire who requesteth it, rather to avoid the pain and shame to
be always talking about the matter, then for any zeal and good devotion which
he has toward him: even so fell it out with the bearer of this embassage:
being vexed to go and come so often without doing any good, did bring at last
to pass, that he talked one day with the maiden, whom he gave so sweet a
lesson, and set such a gloss upon his reasons to make a privy marriage, that
she was ravished in love of the Duke, and promised him, if his master would
come to take her away secretly from her fathers house, she would go willingly
with him.

The duke understanding this embassage made have presently to the isle, where
being arrived, he advertised the Damsel, who sent him word back he should go
stay for her in a certain place near her fathers palace, where she would not
miss to meet him, so soon as his people should be asleep. But the priest who
by means of his Magic had prevented all these practices, knowing the place
where the lord of Fera attended for his daughter, caused from the mountain to
descend two fierce lions enchaunted: These cruel beasts rushing in with a
hideous roaring upon the miserable Duke (who by no mean knew how to prevent
such ambuskadoes) began to fawn on him in pitiful manner: mean while this
young prince losing at that instant all power to defend himself against the
rage and fury of these infernal beasts, was quickly torn in pieces. Which
his Squier beholding (too pitiful and lamentable a spectacle) who was come
alone to accompany him, exclaimed with such a fearful cry, as the Damsel
who had her ears most attentive to listen, heard it easily, so also did some
other of the house, who running forth with burning torches to know what was the
matter, found the Duke already dead: Whereof the maiden being advertised, she
ran out of the palace as a body possessed with a spirit or mad, to go to
finish up the sacrifice. So insufferable was the grief and sorrow she had to
see her future spouse lie so cruelly massacred, that taking his very sword, set
the pommell against the ground and the point right under her breast: then cast
her self with a great stresse of body upon it, thinking to pierce right upon
her heart, to which she would not give one only moment of life after the death
of her lover: For all that she was frustrate of her attempt, for the sword
passing through the right side, she fell upon the dead body, still full of
life, where making many complaints with sighs and sobs as fast as one could
follow another, she wrote with her own blood upon a paper which she found in
her bosom, twelve lamentable verses in form of an Epitaph. To the which
knowing her death drew near, she adioined only these last words.

If it be so (O choice paragon of courtes^e) that for my sake you have endured
the shipwreck of this life, it should be for ever to me too great a remourse
of conscience, if the very hour I had not done as much to make the expiation
of your funerals so much the more accomplished. And to the end my father may
know the more then sudden rashness of his counsel, I will now leave him such
relikes, he shall have certain testimony thereof. Wherein for that his
repentance shall come too late, I pray him in recompense, to bury our two
bodies together in one tomb, commanding for a perpetual memory of our
sorrowful tragedy, this Epitaph to be engraven over us: Cease weeping, tears
for his death be not sorry,
Whose fame for euershall survive in glory.
Detest his stony diamantine heart,
Who caused his only daughters deadly smart,
O furious planet! O thou angry fate!
What cruel mischeife could ye meditate
More inhumaine, then bodies twain to kill,
Ah I mistake! surely it is none ill:
For death which all living creatures seaseth,
Our loving bodies of all anguish eases,
And linkes our souls in perfect knots of love,
Which did on earth such bitter sorrows prove.


Having written this Epitaph, she paid the humane tribute unto nature, for
never afterward her passible body, received any motion of the vital spirits,
and it is no fable to die of loue-sicknesse, if with the ancient histories we
will confer a million of modern and late writers. But to return to the
highpriest, when he heard that his daughter was ran toward that clamor,
he followed her incontinent, for fear least she should make away her self,
and finding her already dead, with her Epitaph as yet in her hand: he was in
great danger to have made the third person in this pitiful tragedy. So
vehement was the anguish which seized his sorrowful soul, that he remained
long time without speaking word, as a man forlorn: and sure the sorrow and
indignation that he endured, had made him die in the place, if for all comfort
he had not broken his silence with an imperfect speech in this sort.

Alas, miserable and wretched man, if thy knowledge did serve thee to act and
effect the death of the duke of Fera, why was it not sufficient to prevent that
of thine own daughter? Ah in a cursed hour was I counseled ever to take that
deadly opportunity. Many other grievous complaints poured he out over those
two dead bodies, who might be truly compared to Piramus and Thisbe:
notwithstanding after that he had shed over them many tears, accompanied with
innumerable sighs, he gave order that a fair and rich tomb of brass should
be erected, in which after he had embaulmed them, according to the ancient
ceremony of funeral rites and pomps, he caused both their bodies to be buried
together, with a great conuoy of mourners, and the Epitaph aforesaid to be
engraven round about the same. Some few days after, through the grief and
melancholy he took, seeing himself deprived of his lawful heir, and in that
behalf the order of nature perverted, he also lest this mortal life, but first
did he shut up and make fast the treasures ofthe temple by such enchantment,
and with so fearful a guard, that since the time he died, the access unto it
has bin very dangerous. So that until the time Marcomyr arrived there, no
body could ever enter into it, albeit before Baledon had seized into his hands
the Isle, a great number of knights of diverse countries had been there to try
what they could do: and thither came also for the same effect the giant
himself, who being in a great chafe, he could not tell how to approach ye
temple, because the isle seemed to him pleasantly situated, and very goodly to
behold, he invaded it by force of arms. So that the people thereof, could
never resist his hostility.

But returning to our purpose, Marcomyr being arrived in this isle of Delphos,
one of his mariners who knew al these things well, told him of this mischievous
giant, and besought him in any wise not to anchor in this port: for we shall all
abide by it quoth he either dead or prisoners. How so, quoth Marcomyr, is there
no man in the world who can abate his pride, and chastise his so great tyranny?
If God help me I will see, seeing fortune has guided me hither, and if I be
son of the Emperor Cleodomyr I should not fear this lubberly kind of giants,
resembling rather senceles brazen pillars in their monstrous statures, then any
human creatures, and less any other strange adventures, be they never so
difficult and dangerous: for if I will win praise and immortal honor, I must
a long time follow the exercise of warfare, as he did in his young years,
dompting many such monsters, and atcheiuing fortunatly innumerable enterprises:
Turn then the prow to landward, and let us enter hardly into the haven,
without making your selves affeard of this slouenly and villainous Golias: Then
the Pilots, albeit sore against their will, leaving the shore directed the
helm right between the two rocks, where they were no sooner entered, but
they saw themselves shut in with the chain which was hoised up behind thera:
whereat all of them were sore dismayed, except Marcomyr and Ozalias, who
equipping themselves with gantlets and their helmets, which they had laid down
a little before to refresh themselves, did prepare to the defense, if
peradventure it came to any matter of blows. The giant being advertised there
was in the haven a rich ship fast enclosed within the chain, commanded his son
to take arms and go accompanied with some others to take them all prisoners
which were come in: whereunto the young tyrant obeyed, and being well armed with
three knights entered into a squiffe: then coming as fast as they could row
directly to Marcomyrs vessel, who was already upon the hatches, began to
board him with these proud speeches:

Knight how durst thou presume to enter in here, without our license? I have
truly been so saucie this once, quoth Marcomyr, and the reason is, I make
small account of cowards and base companions, such as thy self, who by
damnable treacheries entrap people within this port, that you may afterward use
all cruelty and fellonie toward them: but now it is time you receive the due
guerdon of all your execrable brutishnes. With these words the giant was so
eager, and fell into such a rage, that he commanded his rowers and mariners
by and by to grapple fast to the ship of Marcomyr, thinking to enter as soon
(...) he came to her: but it fell out otherwise, for the prince who was as
hardy as a lion, seeing he must either di^ there, or show in arms some
notable act, knew full well how to repulse so great a fury as that. And began
to reach him very great and marvelous slashes, which he might do at his
ease, for the giants barque which was ^ery low under him, reached but to the
height of the lower deck of Marcomyrs ship which gave him some advantage in
fight. In the which if they two showed the little good will that the one owed
the other, yet Ozalias and the three knights of the Isle, made it appear that
they would not be scant good freindes together again in have. So fierce and
sharp appeared the conflict of two against four, that the son of Baledon
feeling himself put to the foil by his enemy (whom he could not strike at
his pleasure) resolved to put himself in hazard, when reaching up with his
hand upon the side of the hatches, he thought to leap into the ship. But
Marcomyr who slept not a wink in this skirmish, lighted a great blow upon his
arm, which sliced it quite from his shoulder: wherewith the giant, by reason
of the extreme pain he felt, fell down half dead within his vessel, making
a noise as if it had been the rain and fall of some Obelisque or Pyramide. In
the mean time Ozalias fetched such a beak upon the skull of one of the three
knights, that he cleft him down to the jaws: whereat the giants skippers
being sore amated, retired as fast as they could row to get quickly to land:

As soon as some of them were gotten on the sand, they ran with all speed to
give Baledon understanding of the speedy dispatch of his son. When the giant
heard the news, he began to rore like a bull, with such a horrible and hoarse
voice, crying: Ah, Ah, Jupiter! As my son dead, If so it be, I will take the
most cruel revenge that ever was heard of: nevertheless I cannot think that
the gods have so far forgotten themselves, as to destinate my son to so
unfortunate a disaster. Having ended this speech, he commanded his arms to be
fetched him incontinent, the which he began to put on, when they brought up
into his chamber his son half dead, whom when his eyes had seen, his heart
began to rise so strangely, that it had almost burst for sorrow. And of such
inward bitterness and passion did clearly demonstrate all his outward parts
of his body, for besides he could not hold still nor arms nor legs, it
seemed a burning flame of fire proceeded from his mouth, eyes, and nosethrils.

The two knights who had saved themselves in their bark, and some others also
which had stayed on the shore, spoke a thousand outrageous words and villainies
to Marcomyr, assuring him one would speedily come, to make him die a cruel
death. But Marcomyr answered, their reproaches and menaces did move him but a
little, for their lord being a traitor and an inexecrable tyrant, their gods
should know, it were not lawful to suffer him to live any longer in this
world. And to come unto his desire he had good confidence in them they would
give him miraculous power. And if he be such quoth he, and so valiant as you
make him, let him come hardly to encounter me in single combat, in the which if
I be so much favored of Mars and fortune that I get the victory, let him
accomplish only what I shall bid him, and I will save his life: contrariwise if
I be vanquished of him, he may do with me and mine what he shall best think
good. Wherefore to the end he know, I have no fear of any such brauadoes, if
he will give me safe conduct of the single combat, and assure me I shall not be
hurt, but by himself, I will presently come a shore to defy him to the combat.

CHAP. VII. How Marcomyr landed to combat the giant Baledon, whom he
vanquished, and afterward delivered many knights out of his prisons, amongst
whom were two young princes Moors, who as they were sailing to the Emperors
court, were by tempest cast a shore in this island.
FReely did the Prince of Tarsus speak to the lookers on, whilst one of the
knights who was before escaped from him, having heard all his discourse, went
immediately to give the giant notice thereof: who being before departed from his
palace, marched so furious and full of rage, that he made all his familiars
and those of his own house a^^eard. Uery glad was he to here the embassage,
and approaching the shore, called alowd to Marcomyr. Hocaitife knight, will thou
perform as much as thou have sent me word, to come a shore, and receive with a
good will the death thou know justly by thee deserved? I will assuredly made
answer Marcomyr, if thou will promise to sauega^^ me from the invasion and
injury of those who are (...) thee. I assure thee, quoth the giant, and
further by our gods swear unto thee, to do whatsoever is thy pleasure, it
fortune be so contrary, that I be vanquished in the fight. Marcomyr hearing
him say so, commanded that some of them would lanch out a boat upon the water,
and he would come a land to him presently, whereunto his mariners made no
great have, for fear they had to loose it: nevertheless seeing him so
courageous (for little was he affeard of this enorme and monstrous creature,
not respecting what inequality there was between them two) durst not deny
him. Quickly sailed he out of the ship, carrying along with him but only
Ozalias his cousin, who would never forsake him. In the mean time Baledon went
to attend him in a plain, hard under the castle, commanding upon pain of
death all those of his side should not once stir against his enemy. Who be
holding but only his countenance and grim looks trembled like an aspen leaf,
meruelling this knight had ever the heart to meet him face to face.

Already the two champions have drawn their swords, lie close under their
sheildes, and begin so drerie a battle, smoking one another, that you would
have judged a hundred smithes had been a work, beating their iron plates upon
their And-fields. But the giant raged, because his enemy held him so long
resistance, therefore he charged him such a blow, that if he had not cunningly
shrunk aside under his target, he had been in danger to have ended his life
there. Wherefore the prince feeling himself in this peril, his stomach and
courage came to him more by half then it was before: and finding himself in
such a fury as is the wild boar at the bay of the dogs when he is chased into
the toiles, hit him such a gash under his roundache, with his full force, that
peircing his harness clean through, he cut his flesh to the bone. So that
afterward he could not at his ease weeld his great buckler, whereby Marcomyr
never cast blow afterward in vain: whereat every one wondered much, seeing him
holding so long with the giant. At length Baledon saw he could not strike his
enemy as he would by reason of his admirable dexterity, wherewith he saved
himself, and beat aside still his blows: purposed to come within him, to the
end he might crush him in pieces with his foul great fiftes, so that he put
his sword in his iron hangers, and then fell loutishly upon him like a heavy
log of wood: but Marcomyr holding his point firm against the giants belly,
which by chance had lighted in the iointing between two plates, thrust it so
far in, that Baledon having his belliefull, waxed pale and changed his
color: And although he pulled it out with his hands, yet by the abundance of
blood that he lost by the two wounds which weakened more and more his
strength, he could not deal with him as he desired. Which in the end made
Marcomyr victorious, for he being strong and lusty, stirred so nimbly
between Baledons arms tugging and struggling that they fell both two to the
ground, where the ancient mother of us all, did so much favor Marcomyr, that
she received the giant first and nearest unto her, being very feeble by cha^ing
his last wound, from which the blood gushed out asfast as it could bubble. But
he got as well as he could out of his clutches, albeit not without great pain.
Nevertheless knowing he had now no more power to rise, cut a two the strings of
his morion and uncased his foul loggerhead, saying: yield Baled^n at my mercy,
and cause to be brought hither before me all the prisoners wrongfully detained
in thy dungeons, or thou shall die presently with the tranchant of my sword.

When the giant perceived himself in such doleful perplexity, and so bad
taking to defend himself, he murmured these words softly with a heavy cheer.
Ogodshow strange and diverse are your judgments, permitting my son and I to be
so easily vanquished by one only knight: Alas, I see all this proceeds from
the infinity of offenses and vicious acts I have committed against you, and
done unto men. But seeing by condign reward I lose miraculously my body,
suffer not I beseech you my soul to descend into the infernal lake to remain
there in tor^^^t perpetually. And you knight show me so much favor for my
souls last comfort before it depart out ofthis world, that I may once yet see
her whom I have heretofore loved as my self. When he had ended these
lamentations (which none could well understand, for death which had already
seized upon part of Baledons carkas, caused him to strammer and to alter his
speech) he called the people to him, commanding they should forthwith bring the
knight up into the castle to consigne into his hands, all the prisoners which
were in chains, and to obey him in all things as if it were his own person.
Then went Marcomyr and Ozalias with two or three oftheir people toward the
palace, where in ye great base court they met with the giants wife, who
lamented bitterly for the great mischance of her son and husband, cursing and
blaspheming the knight who had plonged her in that goulfe of sorrow and
anguish. But for all that, Marcomyr let not to go into a fair hall below,
where he commanded they should bring before him all the prisoners: of whom
there was great number as well of knights, merchants, and other traffickers who
had a long time remained in this captivity. And these poor souls came so sad
and comfortless, thinking ere long to be delivered to torment of death, but
when they heard say (by those who conducted them to Marcomyr) that the giant
and his son was slain, there was all, as many as they could find within the
prisons of the castle, their sorrow was turned into an vnspeakeabe joy.
Moreover the Prince commanded to be brought before him, the arms of all the
knights, to the end every man might recognish his own to arm themselves
quickly therewith who then perceiving this man should set them free from so
miserable slavery, fell down all at his feet to thank him, every one praying
his God to guerdon him, for so great a benefit as he did t^ them all. But
amongst the rest there were two young men, very proper and well favored (for
they were but arrived in that place not long before) who showed by their
Physiognomie to be descended ofsome illustrious and heroical race: both of
them said they were Moors, the one was Rifaran son to Trineus Emperor of
Almaigne, and ofthe Infant Aurencida, the other Lechefin son of the Sultan of
Persia, the youngest of the three, which the Princess Zephira had by him.
These young gentlemen were both two brought up together by the Sultan, because
he knowing the do^ilitie and good inclination of Rifaran, did hope to see him
one day a valiant knight. Therefore being both the son ofhis sister and of the
Emperor Trineus his great friend, he loved him as if he had been his own
child. This Rifaran being come to the age of ten or twelve years, became so
studious of all virtuous actions that upon a time talking with his mother, he
prayed her to show him plainly the cause why she was always locked up, and
clothed in mourning weeds, whereof she made him the whole discourse: deciphring
in few words unto him his genealogy, assuring him the prince Trineus Emperor
of Almaine was his father. When Rifaran understood he was son of one of the
principal houses in Christendom, he began to make better esteem of himself,
and to show himself in all things more sumptuous then before: so that being
come to the age fit to receive knighthood, he besought the Sultan he would
honor him therewith, who gave him willingly the acolladoe: and for the same
occ^sion was there made a great and magnificent feast, in the which he always
won the honor and price of many Iusts that were held there. Afterward he left
the court life, and continuing military profession he did so great and
marvelous acts in arms, that he was much renowned, and has his never dying
praise spread through all the Marches and Provinces of Persia, whereof the
Sultan was so glad, that he sought many times to marry him with the only
daughter of king Maulerin. But he would never hear on that ear, for he had
concluded in his mind, first to go visit the Emperor Trineus his father: the
which Aurencida his mother (who died not long afterward) did of all loves
persuade him to: to the end the emperor seeing the fruit of his loves, by the
object of his person, might know they were not vain in the time they were
acquainted together: Whereunto agreed most willingly R^faran, and after he had
finished the obsequies and funeral pompes, in such sort as the greatness of
so high a princess did require it (for he would never break her commandment)
he demanded license of the Sultan to pass to Constantinople there to see the
court of the Emperor Cleodomyr, and from thence to take his iourny to that of
his father in Almaine. The Sultan gave him license, albeit sore against his
will, but yet more against the will of Lechef^n, who loved Rifaran as his own
soul: therefore besought he most humbly his father to let him go with him
for company: for by this mean quoth he, I shall quickly move my cousin to
return, which pleased well the Sultan: wherefore incontinently he knighted him,
although he were yet very little and young in years: Beside before their
departure, he bestowed on them goodly presents, and Zephira his wife gave them
both letters directed to the two Emperors Cleodomyr and Trineus: after wards
when they were gone to shipboord with thirty knights well furnished and
equipped with all necessaries for them: there aro^e a mighty storm at sea,
which forced them to anchor in the goulfe of this Isle of De^phos, where being
locked in with the chain, and made fast by the giant, being all weatherbeaten,
they saw no other remedy but to go on land to refresh themselves there. And
being freindly entertained by the giant, as soon as they were disarmed, he
caused them immediately to be both put in prison: then going strait to their
ship, s^ue twenty of the knights who came with us, saving the life of the
other ten, to s^rue them with the same sauce as they had served their masters,
whom they made keep company in the prison, so soon as they had pillaged all
that was within the ship. Then were presented before him all the arms of the
knights who had been taken prisoners in that haven, out of which Rifaran and
Lechefin did presently choose out theirs, so did in like manner the other ten
who remained of thirty that came thither, who armed all themselves, albeit they
were brought very low and feeble through the long imprisonment they had endured
vnderthe giant.

CHAP. VIII. How Marcomyr establishes a very sage knight for governor of the
isle of Delphos, of whom he understood the great danger and difficulty of the
adventure of the temple, which he performs by slaying the enchaunted wild
boar, and vanquishing the knight of the horn.
MArcomyr then caus^^ the people of the Isle to be assembled, to whom he made
this oration: My freindes and brethren, I believe you are all ioifull to see
your selves free from the miserable slavery, in the which Baledon did detain
you, you shall be content to hold hereafter for your liege Lord the just and
good prince Cleodomyr, whom I will entitle unto this Isle, which I have now
conquested by force of arms: for you know the giant is already out of this
world, his wife son and daughter are my prisoners, and tied here in chains
to that stonepiller before your eyes, whom I mean to send shortly to the
Emperor for a present. I pray you in the mean space to live peaceably under
the government of this venerable knight Guillado^ by name, whom I have for his
singular wisdom chosen for ruler amongst you, upon condition he shall at the
Emperors pleasure consigne it over into his hands.

Unspeakeable was the pleasure and content they all received to become the
Emperors vassals, wherefore he caused them all presently to swear allegiance
to him, and then to burn openly the body of Baledon for the most enorme and
cruel a^^es he had committed in his life time. To behold which execution came
in all the people of the island, and also to know the knight Marcomyr, unto
whom they brought many presents and gifts who having pacified all things in
good order purposed now to try himself in the adventure of the temple: but
the new governor dissuading him from it all he might: besought him he would
not hazard himself into that peril, wherein many brave knights had most
unfortunately ended their days: Which made him the more eager to know wherein
did most consist the danger: whereupon Guillador made this discourse unto him:

My lord quoth he, know ye that the temple wherein lies the Priests rich
treasure, is environed round about with a heath full of bushes and shrubs, for
a long time no man has ever come near it. Within this heath lives a furious
and cruel wild boar, far more terrible then that which He^cules slew upon
the mountain Erymanthus in Arcadia, whose bristles on his back are so sharp
and prickly, and of so great and hideous form, that there is none in the world
but fears the sight of him. Such is his rage, that so often as any offers
himself to enter into the temple, this beast rowseth himself from his thorney
and wild leare, shaking his head, cracking his teeth, and foming in fearful
sort: then shaking his bristellie body, he launceth forth his bristles more
sharp then so many rasors or arrows with such a violence, that they pierce
quite through the best armor, which may be borne by any that shall make head
against him. But most of all, he torments them with his great tusks, wherewith
he commits such carnage and slaughter upon them, who assail him, that he
kills them as fast as they come near him. You tell me wonders, quoth Marcomyr,
yet is there no so difficult adventure in the world, which may not and ought
not to be by m^ns hand brought to an end: whereof being well assured and
trusting in the help the gods will give me, I will not ^ease for any obstacle
to try my uttermost force, and seeing this enchantment cannot be perpetual, I
will be somewhat the more hardy, hoping to provide me a good target to receive
the boores bristles as often as he shall shoot them.

Soon provided he what was necessary for such a voyage, for all his company,
both knights, merchants, and others which he had delivered out of the prisons
before, with whom they took some of the Isle to conduct them to the temple:
Now had Marcomyr caused to be made by subtle and meruellous cunning
workmanship, a coat of arms of many canuasses, glued together with wax
sticking fast together, with which he covered all his harness, to the end, the
boores bristles being launced at him, might not hurt him at all but stick fast
therein: and with this his new gabardine did he march very merry among the
troop toward the temple, near unto which they were now come, where he and
Ozalias, vewing the place round about as far as they could see, could perceive
nothing but thick briars, brambles, thorns and other prickly bushes, so
enuironing the temple on every side, that Marcomyr could find no way to enter
in with his horse, which grieved him much, wherefore he resolved to make abode
there two days, to see what might be done: in the mean time came thither to
him the people from all places near hand, who had before heard of his fame
spread abroad, for the victory he had obtained against the giant and his
son.

The third day after he armed himself with all his harness, and put on
uppermost upon his habergion his new iacket, then taking in his hand a great
mace of steel, wherewith he thought to aid himself in this passage, he went
coragiously toward the Temple, commanding all his followers to tarry behind,
whereat Ozalias and Rifaran were greatly grieved: nevertheless, not to contemn
his commandment they remained behind, and fell to devout prayer, that it would
please the gods to preserve him from danger of death. Marcomyr began to enter
the thickets (making way with his great Mace) when he saw a knight winding a
great base horn before him: at the noice whereof the furious and fearful boar
rushed out of his den, and setting his tail against the gate of the Temple,
staid there for Marcomyr, with such a horrible crackling of his teeth, that the
very sight would have affrighted the best man living.

The Prince in the mean time had scant gotten a place large enough, which was
on the side ofthe Temple, by which the brute animal spying him to come in
amain, showed himself far more fierce and cruel than before. For then
setting an end his sharp and inevitable bristles, he launced them so thick
against him, as you would have thought a dozen Archers could not so soon have
discharged their arrows out of their bows: but for as much as they lost their
force by the defensible strength of his coat made of wax for the nonst, they
did not pierce his armor, as they had done to many other knights: by means
wereof the boar having shot away all his darts, came furiously upon him with
an open mouth. Then Marcomyr (who stood firm without stirring one way or
other) lifting up valiantly his great Mace, stroke him such a blow upon the
groyne, that he took away one iawe, with part of his lower teeth. The boar
feeling such a deadly stroke, would have taken hold of him, to have pulled him
to the ground. But Marcomyr, drawing out quickly his falchion, saved him that
labor, by thrusting it deep into his throat with all his force, pushing it
still further in: The boar not able to endure the pain, recoyled backward
more and more, casting out so great abundance of gore blood at his mouth, that
the knight was alberaied therewith: nevertheless, holding still his falchion firm
in his throat with his left h^nd, with the right he redoubled such monstrous
blows with his mace of steel, that he laid quickly along the infernal beast
dead on the ground. And albeit this were a natural boar, yet he was
enchaunted by some devilish art: for being come into this place by the
exorcismes of the high priest, as were the Lions which slew the Duke of Fera,
he had afterward charmed him to guard his treasure locked fast within the
Temple, nevertheless he was fatallie to die by Marcomyrs hand. And even as
that of Calidonia, which was sent thither to plague that Country, died by the
hand of Meleager, who afterward sent his head in present to the fair Lady
Atalanta, to show her the experience of his strength: in like manner the
Prince of Tarsus, to make his valor appear to all those who should come
thither, cut off the head of this, and in sign of spoil and trophee, raised
it on the end of a pole, which he planted in the same place, where he overcame
him.

Marcomyr having then dompted this terrible monster, he thanked the gods for so
great favor, and pulled off his false jack, which he had put over his armor,
because the boares bristles sticking so thick therein, it did somewhat annoy
him. But he had no sooner laid it down, when he saw the knight of the horn
making toward him with a great club in his hand, calling aloude to him with a
horrible voice, In a cursed hour have thou entered this desert, caitife Knight,
for thou shall presently receive the recompense of thy presumptuous rashness.
With that he gave Marcomyr a vile knock which made one of his knees double to
the ground under him: but he being valiant and nimble, rose up quickly, and
began to fetch about so bravely his steel Mace in the air, that a furious and
sharp encounter began between them: The blows they laid one at the other
were very easily heard to those who attended without for Marcomyr, whose eyes
might very well perceive them by the sparks of fire, which they saw fly out
of their harness, no more nor less then does the lightning which goes
before the rattling of the thunder, when the thunderbolts crackes and breaks
asunder.

The battle between them was bloody and cruel, continuing so long, till in
the end being both weary and tired, they fell down near dead in the place,
where Marcomyr lay in a sownde till late in the evening, when he came to
himself again, and rising up very deftly (for he felt no hurt, nor
feebleness at all) he looked wishly round about him on all sides, and saw no
enemy: wherefore he took up his arms to enter into the Temple, the gates
whereof showed themselves already open, which did increase in him a far
greater desire to go in. As soon as he was come near the great portall, two
brazen images which were placed on both sides the wall, began to blow out
through two tru^pets which they held in their mouths, such a hot and sulpherie
air, that Marcomyr thought he was fallen into the midst of a furnace
perpetually burning. And albeeit by this air he was many times repulsed
backward, yet stood he not still in the way, but went forward with all his
force (with great weariness and pain of his body) and still thrust himself
onwarde till he past the threshold, where as soon as he had set his foot
within the Temple, he felt no more that vehement heat, but in a moment became
so cool and fresh as the day he departed from Tarsus. Going further in, he
^ound in the middle body of the Church, the magnificent Sepulcher of the Duke
of Fera, and of the high priests daughter, whereat he wondered much, seeing the
sumptuositie and riches thereof, besides the rareness of the Art wherewith the
building of the monument was supernaturally beautified. He beheld it on both
sides, and viewing upon the lamines of mettell which covered it, the rich sword
wherewith she slew the most perfect of all damsels, there came into his mind
an extreme desire to make it his own: so he mounted upon the iron bars and
grates which compassed about the sepulcher, and took it in his hand to view it
better at his ease: after he had curiously remarked the artifice thereof,
wrought and graven curiously, he put it to his girdle, and purposed to carry
it away with him. Then stepped down from the sepulcher to go further into the
Temple, to seek for the enclosure and cabinet wherein the treasure was hidden.
But ere he had gone far, he found in the Sanctuary thereof an altar where
the ancient sacrifices were offered up, very costly enriched, and an idol all
of massy gold, which wore an imperial crown upon his head, and a scepter in
his right hand, so rich and full of work, that it were impossible to behold
two jewels more rare: being garnished with great collers set with many
precious stones of inestimable value. Round about the altar were set in order
many Basins of gold, filled with myrrh, incense, and other sweet drugs,
which did yield a most sweet and redolent savor all over the place. Round
about on the walls, did hang lamps of silver always burning, the light
whereof did give such a divine splendor upon the pearls and precious stones,
that it seemed there was some divine majesty before whom they did shine.
Marcomyr was ravished in beholding these things, wherefore seeing it was then
late and within night, he advised not to depart thence till the morrow morning,
to the end he might contemplate better at his pleasure all the singularities
of that place.

CHAP. IX. The vision Marcomyr had in the temple.
MArcomyr had no sooner laid himself down at the foot of a rich pillar,
thinking to take his rest and sleep a little, but he heard the horriblest
noise and rumor that might be, and at the very instant fell such a crack of
thunder, that all the roof and pillars of the temple shaked, and the ^arth
trembled under him round about, so that he thought the temple would rent in
sunder, or be swallowed up into the earth, and that the four elements would
have all resolved into their ancient chaos. Such hideous cries, sighs,
gronings and lamentations were heard by him, as he was in such a maze he could
not tell what to do: and albeit fearing some new ambuscadoe, he drew forth his
sword, yet could he not for all his magnanimity and martial valor stand upon
his legs, but fell down astonished and out of all sense, as if he had been
stricken with a thunderbolt. During this trance, a fair damsel richly attired,
(whom the old beldame, who did threaten so many things to him in Tarsus, had
sent thither for the nonst) came to take him by the hand, saying*

Arise up, Marcomyr my dear lord, and come near to her, who seeing the fear
and trance wherein you are, prays you not to suffer your heroical and noble
heart to be discouraged for fear of these fantastical visions represented to
your eyes: for it behooves al so brave and accomplished knights as you are, to
pass thus thorrowal strange adventures. Be srolicke then, and repute the
happiness of your renown to surpass that of all the adventures of this age:
for since the first beginning of this enchantment was never knight able to
enter in here but you: wherefore by just reason is the treasure yours, which a
long time has been locked up here within, from whence you shall take away the
idol which stands upon the altar, together with all the other rich jewels
which accompany it to send them for a present to the Emperor your father.
Assuring you, hereafter shall be by your mean accessible and frequented this
temple, the which you shall consecrate to the name of Christ, who has been a
mediator to his father to direct all your actions so well: To the end he may
be reverenced and served devoutly in this place, wherein heretofore has been
nothing used but blasphemy and Idolatry, against his infinite bounty; in
making vows, offerings and sacrifices unto mortal men. And albeit you are now
no Christian, nevertheless from hence forth for my sake become one, for the
time shall come you shall say: O thrice and four times happy hour, you met
with me. And when you have given order for all that I tell you, make no longer
tariance in these countries, for in other dominions and climats is reserved for
you a triumphant scepter, enriched with all honor and immortal praise.

We need not ask whether Marcomyr did marvel, hearing the voice of the
Damsel, who came to succor him in this austere desert, to decipher to him so
well his affairs: For the ecstasy and rauishment of his spirits, (who had then
seen his countenance) did give sufficient testimony thereof. Yet seeing
himself in place fit to speak to this Damsel, he called his spirits again
to him, and embouldened himself to say thus: Madame, for the honor and
reverence you bear unto your God, I pray you not to conceal from me, who you
are that know me so well: and I beseech you therein excuse mine unwise
request, for your rare and perfect beauty, which does provoke me to demand
it, does draw me into greater admiration, then all the other strange visions
which I have now seen: the which I held for frivolous and Diabolical, in
respect of you, who seem to me celestial, and sent hither of the gods into
these base regions, seeing that you discoursing so well of the future event of
my destinies, do comfort my sorrowful heart with an incredible joy and
contentment.

Courteous knight (quoth she) think not strange at any thing I tell you, for
it is long since I knew who you are, and for your prowess and valor I love
you and esteem you more then any other knight of this round world, therefore
am I come hither, far from the country where I was borne, to make you
understand it: Praying you to pardon me otherwise if I do not tell you who I
am, for at this present your curiosity is not to be satisfied herein: well
will I assure you before long time pass, we shall see one another at pleasure
together, and then shall you know something of my doings, by a gift which I
will request at your hands, which is not now to be disclosed. It should be a
great joy and an unspeakable comfort to me, replied Marcomyr, if you would
command me something, in which I might employ the virtue of all my forces,
with the perfect devotion I feel already vowed to make the world know the
singular affection I have to obey you, and to rest always your faithful
friend: Offering my self for earnest of this obeisance, hereafter to serve you
as your knight, with promise not to transgress the least of your
commandments, as long as my life shall dwell in this terrestrial body. And
think not I will any more importunate you to tell me who you are, seeing that
it is not your will I should know it, albeit to have known it, had been to me
a thing most acceptable, so that every day to me shall seem a thousand
years, until I see the hour which you say is so happy for me: But in
attending it, I will accomplish for my part all that which it has pleased you
to give me in charge, and will dedicate this temple to the service of your God,
whose faith already has by your mean greatly edified me in this
Evangelical truth.

Whilst the Damsel gave him thanks for this good affection, and for his so many
amiable speeches, behold the old beldame came who enchaunted him with the love
of Celestina in his Kingdom, and taking this maiden by the hand says to her:
Come away with me my daughter, and leave this discourteous and foolish Knight
alone, who suffered me to be misued before his presence in Tarsus: for which
abuse I hope full soon to be revenged on him, by the extreme anguish and
passion his heart shall endure hereafter.

Scarsely had she spoken these last words, but both of them vanished away at
the very instant, whereat Marcomyr marvelled much, and from that time forward
entered into such a deep conceit of the lively and perfect beauty of this
Damsel, that he had almost died with the thought thereof: for it seemed to him
he had never seen her second, and in truth he was not deceived in his
judgment in this matter, as many young lovers be, who in their own loves
show themselves too favorable judges. By and by he thought with himself,
because the old mother had taken her away from hard by him, this Damsel must
sure be Celestina, her for whom he felt so lively imprinted in his heart, the
love which did increase in him more every day then other, at the only
remembrance of this lady, and forced him first to abandon his kingdom. So
great was then the perplexity of his spirit, because of this amourous
fantasy, that vnstopping the fludgates of his eyes, he shead a great stream
of tears, which were tossed with the impetuous wind of his sighs, so thick
one after another, that during this torment, he was feign to exclaim thus:
Alas, old mother, I know not what thou may be, but well I find thy
speeches to be true: O that in an ill hour for the happiness of my life did
Ozalias anger thee in my presence. Ah, cruel enemy, why have thou so soon
deprived my sight of the unspeakable content it received, beholding this
angelical and divine face? Thou did permit me to see her, that I should
love her past all measure, albeit I know not how thy words have pierced my
heart so far, that I could not taste of any more sharp and corosiue
bitterness: notwithstanding, if this be the object of Celestina, (who seemed
to me the fairest, and most exquisite piece, that ever presented it self to
mine eye) I will never rest, till I have met her once again.

In this anguish of mind remained the knight long time, so astonished, as if
he had come from the Antipodes, and accusing himself greatly of simplicity,
and want of courage, blamed the old woman, who had clean taken away his
strength, unable to stay the damsel with him: whose presence and gracious
speeces did so content him, as he thought him self in eternal blessedness
for the while. To be brief, as soon as he perceived the clear morning to
chase toward the West the darkness of the night, he resolved to effect all
that the vision did command him: wherefore he went straight to the Altar
where the riches was, and taking the golden basins, with all the other
sumptuous things, he laid them all on a heap, to carry them out of the
Temple, and spoiled moreover the idol of his scepter and crown which he had
about him.

In the mean time were Ozalias, Rifaran, and the other Knights very sad and
melancholicke, thinking they had lost Marcomyr their lord; wherefore they
purposed to go see what was become of him: and especially Ozalias, who
without delay called upon all the rest to follow him through the same way,
which he perceived his cousin had cut out to the Temple. And being come to
the place of the combat, they first found the horrible boar slain, whereof
being most joyful, and maruailing much, they amassed themselves there all a
little to behold rhis monstrous animal, except Ozalias, who being desirous
to see the Prince, entered as soon as ever he came thither into the Temple,
where searching within a great Chest which he found, he perceived the
principal treasure of the Priest, which did consist in so great riches, and so
many rare things, that the valor and excellency thereof did make them
incomparable, and all humane wits were not able to computate them.

Great was the joy that Marcomyr felt in his heart seeng Ozalias so near him,
so that running to embrace one another, they enterlaced a thousand courtesies,
joys, and amiable speeches to each other, when Ozalias first brake forth into
these words, Alas, Sir, how much have the Gods exalted this day your praise,
delivering you from the rage of this infernal beast, and from other monstrous
things which have repaired to you in this wild habitacle. So that Ozalias
blessed and thanked the Planet which did so much favor Marcomyr.

Then entered Rifaran, Lechefin, and all the other Knights, within the Temple,
who all thanked the heavens for so great a victory: And after they had all one
after another saluted Marcomyr, he recounted to them from point to point, all
that fortuned to him after he parted from them, except of the Damsel, of whom
he would say nothing, ^earing least they should have some suspicion of their
loves. But he hastening his departure from thence, prayed Guillador to send
abroad into the Isle to seek ^ome learned and virtuous man, to celebrate
divine Service in the Temple, and gave him large sums of money to repair the
same, and to make large high ways, that the people might have access
thereunto from all parts: And for that his mind could not yet be quiet, for
the extreme beauty of the Damsel, which appeared unto him in the vision, had
so fired his heart, that he took small pleasure in any pastime they could
devise to recreate him withal. Wherefore minding to depart thence suddenly,
he dispatched Rifaran and Lechefin for Constantinople to the Emperor, to
present unto him the young Giant, his mother, and the other knights, with all
the riches he found in the Temple, from a strange G^ntleman who desired
greatly to do him service. They having all taken their leaves of Marcomyr,
sailed with a prosperous wind till they were on the coast of Thrace. In the
mean time Marcomyr tarried behind in establishing Guillador thorowlie in his
government of the Isle of Delphos.

CHAP. X. How Rifaran and Lechefin arrive with their troops at Constantinople,
where they were honorably received by the Emperor, and all those of his
Court, who greatly maruailed at the news of those things which they heard of
Marcomyr.
AT the very time when Rifaran and Lechefin arrived at Constantinople, many
Barons, and Nobles were assembled there at a magnificent and solemn feast,
which the Emperor held at the marriage of the Prince of Hungary, the son
of King Frisol, the brother of Belcarin, borne at the same birth with him. This
brother who was called Ditreus, the first borne of the two, so soon as he was
made knight went to the emperors court, whoentertained him courteously, and
moreover being his nephue, loved him with an entire affection, because he saw
him courteous and civil in all good behavior: so that beginning to make some
assayes in the exercise of arms, he gave great likelihoode he would prooue^
in time a wise and valiant knight as fell out afterward to be true. When he
grew to be somewhat acquainted in his uncle the Emperors house, with most of
his household, he found himself so ravished and overtaken with the beauty of
Esquiuela, daughter of the Souldan of Babylon, and of Archid^anae his wife,
that he was constrained to love her with all his heart. By means whereof,
this young Prince being entered upon a time into the Chamber of his cousin
Philocrista, eldest daughter of the Emperor, to talk a little with her, and
her sister Melissa, who was brought up also in this Court: he found it a fit
time and occasion to give Esquiuela to understand his mind: to whom she
made answer modestly, he should not hope to obtain ever of her, a sign of
any other amity then chaste and honest, yet was she assured, he should be her
future spouse.

Ditreus who desired nothing else besought the Empeperour and the Empress
presenly they would make this a match, who being very willing to gratify
herein their nephewe, and also to help this Infant to a good marryage,
betrothed them together by the consent of King Frisol, and at the same instant
in very great haste sent expressly an Ambassador into Persia, to know the
Souldans mind, with command to return with all the speed he might.

In the mean time he sent word to the chiefest of the Empire, that they
should meet at the Tourney which he had appointed for this feast. For the
accomplishment whereof, he stayed for no other thing, but for the Ambassadors
return, whom he had dispatched to the Souldan. These matters were in hand,
when Rifaran and Lechefin arrived in the haven at Constanstinople, where they
purposed to anchor without giving the Emperor any advertisement thereof, for
they came not in such equippage, nor with so great train as they deserved.
Being therefore armed through out in all parts, except their helmets, they rode
through the city with two only squiers, who carried their helmets, and were
seen of every one. For they did show by their pace and countenance to be
nobles, strangers, and of a great house, which they made them well know at the
palace gat^, when they would have gone in without any leave at all. But the
guardes stayed them a little, to demand whom they would speak withal there.
We are (quoth they) two knights of a strange country, who come into these parts
to see and serve the Emperor Cleodomyr: you must then said the garders, leave
here your offensive arms, if you will go where he is, or tell us your name,
to the end we may go know whether it be his pleasure you shall come thus into
his presence. Our arms will we not give you, quoth Rifaran, for that were a
thing not beseeming knights. Nevertheless go tell your master here is
Lechefin son to the Sultan of Persia, and of the princess Zephira, and with
him Rifaran son to Trineus, Emperor of Almaine, who desire to kiss the hand
of his majesty: the Emperor had no sooner heard their names, but he was the
gladdest in the world, hearing these good news to come so fitly for his
purpose: so that he sent to meet them Diocles his son, with many other knights
to entertain and welcome them. Then the blackamoore princes perceiving how all
the rest honored him who marched foremost, they judged presently he must needs
be the son of Cleodomyr, wherefore they both lighted quickly: and Diocles came
to embrace them with the greatest courtesy he might, greeting them thus:
Gentlemen ye are very welcome into the house of the Emperor my father, who is
very ioifull of your arrival: then taking them by the hand, conducted them
into the presence chamber where the Emperor was, who seeing them come in, rose
out of his chair, and embraced them both graciously, and causing them to sit
down by him, welcomed them in this manner. Know ye my cousins that I find my
self in some thing greatly beholding to you, seeing you are come so far from
your countries to visit me, and to the end I miss not to call you by your
proper names, tell me I pray you which of you is Rifaran: albeit I cannot well
affirm which of you I love best. For desiring with a singular affection to
continue the love, which I bear to the Princess Zephira, I ought by
consequent to love and esteem all that comes of her. And on the other side
as well for the fi^me amity confirmed from our tender years between the
Emperor Trineus and me, as also for the near af^initie wherewith we are
allianced together, I am constrained to love his lineage and osspring. Assuring
you I could not at this present see any two young princes in the world of whom I
should be more glad at this present then of you two, descended from so royal
parents our good friends and confederats, the Sultan and Zephira: of whose
health I pray you let me understand, for it is long since I had any news from
them. My lord, then replied Rifaran, we left them in very good estate and
meruellous good disposition of their persons in Persia, from whence, kissing by
us humbly the hands of your excellent majesty, they write unto you only but
these three or four words, in sign of the great love and reverence they bear
you: and because they could not come themselves, they have sent Lechefin their
son, who is the same young man whom you see there. Then Lechefin kissed his
mothers letter to deliver it to the Emperor, who alter he had taken and
opened it, began the tenor which follows.

The Letter of the Soldanesse of Persia, to the Emperor Cleodomyr.
TO you most happy and fortunate Prince, Cleodomyr Emperor of Constantinople,
the flower of courtesy, and the peereles paragon of knights, Zephira wife to
the Sultan of Persia, the most humble and perpetual friend of your Imperial
majesty, kisseth your hands and wishes increase of all happiness. The great
affection Lechefin my son has had within this two or three years to travel
to Constantinople, there to offer you his service, and t^ see the magnificence
of your court, has induced the Sultan my husband and me, to send him over to
you at this present, with Rifaran son of the Emperor Trineus, to satisfy
the earnest desire he had to visit you in our behalf: and albeit both of them
had deserved more royal train to perform such a voyage, yet would they not
carry along any more company with them, then thirty knights, knowing full
well the number of followers should not cause you to esteem them any thing the
more, and under this pretext we have more willingly granted they should
undertake this navigations. Nevertheless if the sincere amity, which it
always pleased you to show me, has been occasion you have more manifestly
known the integrity of my heart, and by this means deigned to place him
amongst the chiefest of your most affectionate seruitors, I shall pray you most
humbly from the entierest and best zeal thereof, to receive them both two
together, with this simple present, as coming from the hand of her, who has
not her peer in good will toward your excellency: and for* more ample
testimony of the amity in the which I shall find my self bounden to you in
doing this, I will vow once more my self, and all mine to hold to you
faithful obedience for ever, assuring my self your gentle and courteous
nature will not suffer you to disdain the offer I make you.

The most obedient of your lovers, Zephira, Soldanesse of Persia.


When the Emperor had made an end of reading this letter, Rifaran began to
make relation to him how they met in Delphos, a knight called Marcomyr whose
valiancie and Prowess had no second in the world (except the Emperor
himself, who was the myrrour and paragon of all chivalry) to be compared unto
him: but they were sorry for one thing, they could not tell who he was, for so
much he himself would not let them understand, but kept himself as close as
might be: then having all their prisoners and presents in a readiness, he framed
this speech unto him: Most illustrious and generous monarque Marcomyr the
magnanimious and hardy champion who delivered us out of the most cruel prison
of the giant Baledon in the Isle of Delphos, sends us now (with all these
prisoners, goods, and riches which you see) to your majesty's highness, as to
the prince and lord of the universal world, whom he has known by your
renown most worthy thereof, assuring himself so far of your natural lenity,
that you will pity our disasters, and help to conduct us home to our own
houses again.

The Emperor then and all the asistance, beholding the crown, the scepter,
the book, and the chair wherein the Idol sat in the temple, beside the great
abundaunce of other rich jewels and vtensies so exceeding rich, excellent and
rare that they never had seen the like before, (...) into great admiration
thereof, and taking upon his hand the clasped book, with all the strength he
had could not unclasp it, nor any of his barons who were present with him:
whereupon he said, This book, in mine opinion, cannot be opened but by the
hand of him that has conquered it, wherefore I command that it be safely
kept till his coming. By and by sent the Emperor to disarme these two
knights, and commanded that they should have two rich Turkish gowns put on
them, in the which it was a goodly ^ight to behold them. In the mean time came
the Empress, and all the young Ladies her daughters, to the end they might see
the precious and rare things which Marcomyr had sent, and hearing Rifaran
relate unto the Emperor, how Marcomyr had conquered the Isle, overthrown the
Giant and his son, achieved the adventure ofthe temple, spoiled it, slain
the enchanted boar, and vanquished the Knight ofthe Horn, she was in a great
wonder who he should be: no less was the Emperor, being entered into so
extreme a desire to learn what he might be, that he enquired of Rifaran,
whether he were Moore or Christian. As I think, then quoth Rifaran, he is a
Moore, nevertheless, he understands perfectly well your tongue, and withal
nature has framed him so fair and well proportioned in all his lineaments,
that I never in my life beheld a more proper person.

Might it please God to grant us the favor, quoth the Queen, that this
Knight would once come into our Court, to the end we might give him condign
guerdon and thanks for the great honor he deserves. Still the Emperor was
bethinking himself who it should be, at the last calling to mind the words
the Damsel spak^ in his Court, and departed away suddenly without any
answer, he doubted the Knight whereof she spoke, should be him who sent
thither this present: for having finished the adventure of Delphos, he could
not choose but be as brave a Knight as any living. In sum the Emperor did
not so much marvel at the magnificence and riches of this present, the
sumptuositie whereof might not only compare with all the treasure of Xerxes,
Julius Caesar, or Alexander, but also did far exceed all the revenues of
his Empire, as at the aduenturous feats of arms and renowned chivalry of the
Knight whom he yet knew not, but did desire to see him in his Court, to the
end he might honor him according to his desert.

To many Knights of the Emperors train seemed these words very
peremptory and odious, who from that time forward purposed in themselves (if
peradventure Marcomyr came into the Court) to prove their valors against him
so, that the Emperor might have occasion to remember himself he had spoken
but by way of affection: Nevertheless he did not perceive their conceyte, but
replenished with a maruailous joy, commanded by all means they should give
order to get all things in a readiness against the next Triumph which was then
at hand. To the which flocked daily many Knights from diverse Countries,
whom the Emperor entertained and feasted royally, Rifaran and Lechefin,
showing themselves the most brave and sumptuously apparelled amongst them all,
next after the Emperor himself, which proceeded of the liberal presents
bestowed upon them, albeit most of all for the great favor toward Lechefin,
who after the Empress with her three daughters Philo^rista, Florida, and
Basilia, had with many courteous and gracious words welcomed and entertained
him, discoursing with him long time about the strange adventures of Marcomyr,
he was so enamoured and ravished with the beauty of Philocrista, that he could
not hold his eyes off her, from surueying her exterior virtues and graces,
judging himself happy and favored by the Planets, who had brought him
thither to see the divine Sun, whose radiant beams had already so dazeled
his eyes, and set all his vital spirite^ on fire, that he felt for
Philocrista an extreme passion in his heart, yet durst he not disclose it by
any means, which did inflame him so much the more.

To conclude, the Emperor sent presently unto Delphos one of his principal
Knights, with a great troop of armed Soldiers, to assure it unto himself,
for fear least if any rebellion chanced, he should hardly possess
himself of the Castle, and of the whole Isle in his own name. Giving him
great charge, (if Marcomyr were there remaining still) to pray him by all
means to come visit the Emperor: but the Knight was not found there, for he
had before hoysed sail to hasten himself to Constantinople, as we shall
hereafter declare. Then the Knight invested himself, and took possession of
the Palace, whether all the people of the Isle resorted to see him, and to
accept the Emperor for the peaceable and liege Prince of that state, who in
the end translated it to one of Marcomyrs children, and it was indeed a very
goodly and rich country.

CHAP. XI. How Marcomyr sailing in the Egean Sea, rescued the Souldan of
Babylons son from the hands of Ocurites King of Culacin, who was a rouer on
the coast of Greece. How Ocurites fleet is overthrown, he taken prisoner,
and sent to the Emperor Cleodomyr, with diverse other prisoners by Marcomyr
delivered ou^ of his captivity.
MArcomyr having established Guillador for chief Iusticer and governor in the
Isle of Delphos, till the emperor should send some other thither for ye same
effect in his name, he embarked himself with Ozalias upon a Monday morning.
Six days they sailed with a fore-wind very prosperously toward
Constantinople, when Marcomyr resolved to anchor in any port of Thrace, whether
soever it pleased Fortune to guide them, to the end they might understand there
some news from the emperors Court, and of the adventure of Celestina,
resolving to govern himself according to his occurrence of things which he
should learn in those countries.

Eolus and Neptune were so favorable unto him, that on the seventh day he came
to surge within the strait of Sestos and Abidos, where having given
commandment to strike sails, one of his Pilots, who was above in the topmast,
espied at sea many foysts and ships skirmishing courageously together:
whereupon Marcomyr got into ye forecastell, to see if he could perceive what
should be the matter: and hearing the great stir and noise which they made in
these vessels, especially intwo of them which seemed the principal, and better
equipped with warlike munition the^ the others, he had great desire to make
toward them. Therefore commanded his master to the helm incontinent, to go to
aid him whosoever had the worst in this fight.

Here must you know for your better understanding of this passage, when the
Sultan of Babylon, and Archidianae his wife understood of the match that the
emperor was about to make of their daughter with Ditreus the prince of
Hungary, they were very ioiful of so good an alliance: and because they would
further it thebest they could, they purposed to send him many gifts of great
riches, by ye yongst of their sons, who had not yet received the order of
knighthood. He being called Abenunq a fine young ge^tlema^, made suit to his
mother, to get leave o^the sultan his father for him, that he might after the
marriage of his sister soiourne somewhile in Constantinople, which Archidiana
liked very well, to the end soon after the Emperor might give him the order
of knighthood with his own hand: So she obtained this request of her husband,
and soon after sent him to sea accompanied with a train of many other
knights.

Abenunq then sailing merrily toward the coast of Thrace, he met with
Olurites king of Culaquin, and son in law to the great Turk, who was
esteemed one of the most valiant and noble knights amongst all the Turkish
nobility, and therefore had the barbarous tyrant bestowed on him his daughter,
one of the fairest ladies which was in all the Heathen dominion. This king
Ocurites, who knew the emnitie and old grudge between the Emperor and his
father in law the Turk, rigd out a navy, to gratify him the more, and
keeping along the coast of Greece, sent always before him pinnaces and
frigates to discover the Christian fails: so that he carried along with him
many slaves and captives then, when he began to lie in the wind for the
Soldans son. So soon as this Rouer knew the Prince of Babylon by his flagges
and streamers he purposed to set upon him with a great fury, for he knew his
father was the Emperors great friend, and as he had cheered up his men to the
fight, he came upon Abenunq his ship, who seeing this unlooked for encounter,
set his men bravely in order to receive him:

During this conflict, behold arriueth the valiant knight Marcomyr, who being
astonished to see these combatta^ts so hot, had a meruellous desire to defend
the partakers and welwillers of the Emperor Cleodomyr: wherefore he commanded
his mariners to grapple his ship to the kings. Which they did quickly: then
drawing his good sword which he found upon the Duke of Fera his tomb,
suddenly he leapt into the vessel where Ocurites was: then began he to lay
about him furiously on every ^ide, calling thus to him with a stern look.
Evil for thy profit did thou ever think, king Ocurites to damage so good a
prince as is the Emperor of Constantinople: and seeing Ozalias at his side
ready to second him in all attempts, they ran pell mell into the thickest of
the troop, where they made so sharp and cruel a battle, that they forced
the enemies to retire toward their admiral. Who giving over the Christians
with whom he fought, those whom the Sultan had sent toward the Emperor, began
to reproach and revile his own men, who ran away like dogs from the presence of
two single knights. He purposed to come forward to meet them himself, and mist
going to the pot as narrowly as might be, for Marcomyr deeming him by his
brauing and rich arms which he saw on his back, to be the king, ran upon him
incontinent with his sword in his hand, and crossed him such a blow over his
creast, that he made him feel it smart to the flesh, where he carried a skar
afterward, as long as he lived.

Ocurites being not able to resist the fury ofthe strokes which his
adversary lighted on him so thick and threefold, was forced to kneel on
ground with one knee. He thought to rise up quickly again, but Marcomyr
disappointed him, for he gave him such a knock with his shield, that he laid
him along under his soldiers feet, who seeing their king so easily vanquished,
were put into such a fear, that it was not long after before they carried away
the worst, and were taken prisoners for their labor. For the Christian knights
which defended the poup, came down to their aid, so that their ship was taken,
and in Marcomyrs hands, who went presently to the king, and for he would not
kill him nor do him more harm, only uncased his helmet from his head, and
caused him to be put into a cabban near the keele of the ship, under the guard
of four valiant knights. Whereof Alenunq being advertised, who looked every
hour for his own death or imprisonment, leapt quickly upon the orlop of the
ship where he saw Marcomyr, and thanking him a thousand times, for this good
succor, requested very courteously to tell him who be was.

As the knight began to answer the Prince of Babylon, perceiving him to be
the chief of al his crew, he heard a great noise about his ship, it was the
brother of king Ocurites who having understood the overthrow of his brother,
and how he was prisoner, grappeled himself to Abenunqs vessel, into which he
entered bravely maugre all those who did make him resistance, knocking down on
every side, as if it had been upon some iron bar hammered on the smiths
Antfield. And as Marcomyr saw so many enemies ready with their arms in hand,
he left the Soldans son to run upon them, which he did with such a rage,
that no man can recount the warlike exploits and wonderful feats of arms he
performed in this recharge: for with one blow which he smot Ocurites brother
between the cuirasse and the head piece, he cut his head clean from his
shoulders. Many others forced he to feel the strength of his arm, for ere
they had long stood before him, he sent their souls one after another into the
infernal lake, making such a bloody anatomy of these dogs, that it was a
great horror to behold what a slaughter there was. Neuerthelsse so great was
the fury he was feign to abide in this skirmish, that he could not escape
without two wounds, which were the first he received, albeit he had before
fought with the fierce giant Baledon.

Now when Marcomyr had so manfully behaved himself in the dispatch of so
mighty an enemy, he still continued his point upon some other ships of war,
which he saw yet in fight with those of the Sultan, therefore went he aboard
Ocurites gallion to relieve them with some speedy succor: whereof as soon as
the Turks were aware, they began to run into such a fear and perplexity, that
part of them were forced to fly disorderly, and run foul one of another, part
to suffer wrack, and the rest to remain slain in the slaughter, or prisoners
in chains. Then Marcomyr commanded his master, to board the gallie he met
first, and after he had delivered out of the hands of the captain thereof,
many slaves, Greeks, who were tie^ by the necks, to bring them to him unto
the ship of Abenunq; who verily had been quickly captive and in the mercy of
Ocurites, without the valiancie and Prowess of the Prince of Tarsus, who thus
spoke unto the Souldans son:

Gentleman I would willingly bear you company to Constantinople, had I not a
voyage of greater importance another way, whether I was sailing, when I saw a
far off your knights so hot in skirmish to defend you from the hands of the
Tyrant Ocurites, from whom, thanks be to God, you are now safe delivered.
Wherefore I pray you do me this honor, to conduct him safe to Constantinople,
together with all these Christians, which the barbarous pyrate had made
captives, beating up and down the streights of the Leua^t sea. You shall
present them from me to the Emperor Clodomyr, and shall moreover humbly
require him, it would be his pleasure to commit this kankered and brutish
enemy of the Christian faith under good guard, till I come to his majesty, to
serve him in all things wherein I may b^st: which shall be speedily as I hope to
show him my promise in effect, as you also may certify him.

Sir knight, quoth Abenunq, it displeases me much your navigations falls not
now out toward Constantinople, because I should deem my self very happy to
bear you company thither, as him of whom I will confess the greatest part of
my life to depend for ever. Being undoubtedly assured (beside you should be
very welcome) you would win the honor of the triumph, which is holden at the
wedding of one of my sisters, whom the Emperor matcheth with Ditreus prince of
Hungary. In good faith I am sorry replied Marcomyr, I cannot be present in so
good company, as I believe will be there assembled, therefore. I beseech you
excuse me for this once, and another time I will requite your courtesy.

These words came from his mouth, but in his mind he had another determination,
for as soon as he heard of the iousts in Constantinople, he determined to go
thither secretly without any other manifestation of himself, but only in show
of a strange knight, called Marcomyr: with this excuse he took leave of
Abenunq, who offered him many presents, but he would accept none, thanking him
much for his good will, especially of the assurance he gave him not to depart
any way from the Emperors court, until he arrived there, for he made him a
promise before many days were past, he would appear there in person, as he
requested him to give the Emperor to understand, then bidding him adiue,
entered aboard his ship, commanding his master to lanch out a contrary way.

CHAP. XII. How Abenunq arriueth in Constantinople, at whose coming the
emperor is very glad, and Esquiuela his daughter most ioifull, and how Linides
the lord of the island Liquia, and the County Pelides his cousin, ioust against
the knights of the court, and win the best.
ABenunq marvelous glad of the good succor which came at such a pinch, sailed
with a favorable wind till he came to Constantinople, where as soon as he
was arrived, he commanded king Ocurites and all the Christian slaves to be
landed in skiffes: whom he appointed to march toward the Emperors palace, to
acomplish the message which Marcomyr had given him in charge: whereof the
emperor being advertised, demanded what meant this troop of prisoners, when
one of the principal knights of Abenunq who went before to make them march in
order, answered in this sort, If it please your majesty, it is the king of
Culaquin, son in law to the great Turk, who departed his country with a
puissant and huge army to endomage and ruin your empire. By this traitor had
the prince Abenunq son to the Souldan of Babylon your nephew, and all his
train ben put to sword or to the chain, had it not ben for the succor of a
knight called Marcomyr, second to none other, who rescued us, and has now sent
him prisoner to you.

These good news much pleased the Emperor, thinking Marcomyr had been come
with Abenunq, nevertheless, as soon as he understood he had left him beehind
at the straight of Sestos and Abidos he was wroth and sore displeased: surely
quoth he, albeit it greeueth me I cannot have him in my house to recompense him
as his prowess and courtesy deserves, yet hereof may the king Ocurites well
vaunt himself: for were it not for respect of the knight by whom he is
vanquished and sent unto me, I should torment him all the days of his life
with sharp and cruel punishment, to make him call to mind the fellonie he
has heretofore showed toward my vassals friends and confederats.
Nevertheless seeing I receive him from the hand of so valiant a man as
Marcomyr, he shall be committed to safeguard until his coming. Then sent he to
lock him up in a high tower, commanding he should want nothing needful for his
life and ease.

But to return to Abenunq, after Diocles and the other lords had with all
courtesy entertained him, and welcomed them al more quaintly for his own
part, he conducted him before the emperor of whom he was received most
honorably, who caused him to lodge in his palace, in a lodging near his son
Diocles, who as yet was vnknighted as was he himself, whereby grew a great
love and acquaintance between these two, hoping both one day to be companions
in arms together. Abenunq discoursed then the sum of Marcomyrs message, and
could never satisfy himself with sufficiently commending his liberal bounty
and unspeakable valor, so that the good prince was still inflamed more and
more to see this knight, for whom he blessed and praised God, who had infused
so many perfections into him: the which Rifaran and Lechefin did confirm by
this little word, that there can never be so much good and honor spoken in his
praise, but the merit of his virtues would far exceed the capacity of the most
learned and eloquent tongue which should be employed to that purpose. After
that Abenunq had delivered some other matters of his embassage to the Emperor,
he went to see the Empress in her chamber, and as he would have bowed himself
to kiss her hand with the more reverence, the honorable lady rising up from
her seat to save him that labor, received him wonderful courteously, and at
large demanded him the newesfrom Archidiana his mother: whom the prince
answered in all points very sagely, as from his childhood he had been learned to
do: then came to embrase him sweetly the infant Philocrista and Esquiuela her
companion, who could not tell what countenance to make for the extreme joy
she felt in her mind, having before her eyes the second highest hope of her
heart: and albeit she did all she might to dissemble it, she was constrained
notwithstanding in the end to fill the ears of the assistants with these
speeches:

My dearest brother I know not what greater conte^tment might happen to me at
this present, then to behold your presence in the assembly, which shall be
here one of these days holden for me, where seeing our parents cannot be
present, it has been their pleasure to honor me so much as to send you in
their place, who I know are as well welcome to every one, as all our company of
ladies is glad to bid you welcome. Sister quoth Abenunq, the Souldan our father
having understood the honor which the Emperor does you in matching you with
the prince Ditreus his nephew, has sent me to give him hearty thanks, and to
offer on his part upon conclusion of the articles of contract, such agreements
as shall like him well, being assured these things so well handled by him,
cannot choose but be acceptable to both parties contracted. As for madame
Archidiana our mother, she presents you by me many Jewels, rich stuffes, and
other exquisite singularities suitable to a princess of so great a house as you
are, to the end on your marriage day, you may show the majesty of the race
whence you are descended: hereof Esquiuela and Dit^eus rested well pleased and
satisfied: and now they did but long for the happy hour which should bring
them that joy and contentation which they had so long in heart desired.

In the mean time the Emperor he caused a triumph to be published thorowout
all Greece, and upon the fifteenth day following, should the marriage be
solemnly celebrated, so that you might have seen what an infinite number of
knights flocked daily to the court from all parts. Amongst others thither came
Linides lord of the island Liquia, he that had done more valiant acts in the
adventure of Celestina then any other aduenturer: And of a truth was thought to
be one of the best men at arms at that time in all the Empire, through the
which was already spread the fame of this feast. This knight took with him in
company only his cousin, the County Pelides a hardy gentleman, and so
esteemed and accounted of all in martial affairs, albeit he was yoonger then
Linedes. When they were both arrived at Constantinople, they would not enter
into the city, but encamped themselves in the plain a great way from others,
and near unto the high way, by which the travelers did pass, there they
raised their tents, and dispatched presently a squire to the court to make
known, that whosoever would ioust, attending the triumph, he should find two
knights ready in the field, who would hold them play: for so had they the
night before laid their plot.

As soon as the squire had published his message in the palace, the Duke de
Pera understanding thereof, made this answer to him: Gentleman my friend,
return you to these champions, and tell them from me, there will be one in the
field by and by, who takes delight in that exercise, and will not refuse to
break a lance or two with the^. With this answer came back the squire to the
two cousins, whose embassage when the emperor had understood, he imagined with
himself, these two knights must needs be Marcomyr and Ozalias his cousin,
whereof he was exceeding glad: and sent Rifaran to take a view of them, who
mounting quickly on horseback, found Linedes disarmed at the entrance of his
tent, and his cousin the County ready armed at al points, except his helmet,
which was off his head, whom when he knew not, he demanded whether they were
the challengers who had sent to defy the knights of the court: whereunto the
lord of Liquia answered, They were ye men: to who^ replied Rifaran again: You
have undertaken a matter which you shall at your ease enjoy but a small while,
but I believe you have done it expressly to meet with some one quickly, who
might apparently repress and abate your pride. When it shall fall out so,
quoth Linedes, we shall but keep others company, who when they cannot bring to
pass their enterprises, remain only frustrate of their desseigns: therefore we
pray you take no care for our affairs, or else go arm your self: for it is
the act of a knight to fight with his sword, and not with his tongue, otherwise
you shall infringe the order which every valiant man ought to hold dear as his
life.

When Rifaran had ended these words, he took his leave of them to return
toward the Emperor, whom he assured it was not Marcomyr nor Ozalias: albeit
they seemed to be both two brave and hardy knights, and could not be but some
puissant and great personages, by their outward appearance. Then went forth many
good knights to prove themselves against the County, who for all that carried
away the honor from them all without any aid from Linedes at all, who all the
while never laid hand to shield nor lance, so that the Emperor who was there
in the field to see them run, said he never saw knight in his life that carried
his lance better, nor ran with a better grace then did this champion, of whom
he had much marvel, considering his small corpulence and young age. Through all
the court there was almost none other speech but of the dexterity and fine
carriage which he used in his Iousting, whereupon Rifaran and Lechefin
determined to run against him: notwithstanding they would not do it till the
last day, to the end the County and Linedes his cousin being vanquished by
them, their Prowess might be known, and spoken of above all those who should
have received any foil in the Iousting. But there came by chance thither some
who put them out of that pain, as we shall hereafter declare.

CHAP. XIII. How Arnedes son to the king of France, and Recindos his cousin,
the king of Castiles son, came to Constantinople, where Arnedes vanquished at
the Ioust, Linedes and the County his cousin, for which occcasion they were
greatly honored of the Emperor.
THe French king, father to Lewis Duke of Burgondie, in the latter end of his
age, after many other things called to mind, how when the peace was established
between the emperor Cleodomyr and him he concluded to ally themselves
together by marriage, if God ever gave them issue so to do: to the end in the
Heroical and generous house of France might be seen to reign, children issued
out of two of the most illustrious ofsprings in feats of arms, which were
between the two celestial poles: for this cause did he give his son Lewis
charge, seeing the time and occasions fell out fit for the purpose, that he
should call upon the emperor to fulfill his promise. The prince marrying with
the daughter of Castile, had issue of her three male, and two female, both at
one burden, and fair in all perfection. The elder of the brethren had to name
Arnedes, who was a wise and valiant knight, and set all his delight in managing
arms, and continual exercise of matiall discipline. Now king Lewis seeing his
son was marriageable, withdrew him one day aside into his chamber, where he
began thus: My son, so extreme is the natural inclination of the good will I
bear toward you, that I would by no means seek to do any thing which might
not content you as well as my self: this I speak, because your most
honorable Grandfather of good memory being in his latter age, gave me charge
to match you in marriage with the Emperor of Constantinoples daughter, to the
end the children which should be borne of you both, might ressemble in some
things their famous and so much renowned ancestors. Wherefore I am determined
speedily to send mine ambassador to him for to solicit this marriage,
whereunto I believe he will give consent most willingly, and well can I assure
you my son, that this Princess, named Philochrista, of age between fifteen
and sixteen years, is one of the fairest and most beautiful creatures, which
nature ever brought forth under the motion of the spheres. Arnedes when he
heard his father deal so secretly with him about such a matter, besought him
humbly not to trouble himself any further therein, as yet, for he would put
him in mind thereof another time more fit for the purpose: the king seeing him
so cold, desisted the matter. But the young prince who had heard of the
surpassing beauty of Philocrista (who had not her like in all the regions of
the leuant) and of the deeds of Chivalry done by knights in the court of the
Emperor Cleodomyr her father, he could never remove her out of his mind, but
in him from day to day, still increased a most seruent desire to pass to
Constantinople, with intent, if this lady liked him to demand her in marriage of
her father, whereunto if he would not give consent, to exploit such feats of
arms in the countries of Greece, that the honor thereof should at his return
accompany him homewards. Such was the project of his desseigne, which he
imparted very willingly to Recindos his cousin, son to the Castilian king,
and a most valerous and hardy knight, who encouraged him to put it in
practice, that it might take effect: vowing he would til death always keep
him good and loial company: and the worst were, they could govern themselves
so wisely by disguising of their persons, places, and diversity of language in
this business, that no man living should be able to descrie their persons, or
discover their drifts. The plot thus laid between these two cousins, to take
upon them this voyage, he went strait to his father, who very willingly gave
him his leave, upon condition he should stay as little while as might be in
those countries of the leuant.

So kissing his father the kings hand, took his leave in the secretst manner
which might be, taking along with him but only three or four persons, with
his dwarf, and Recindos his cousin, whom he loved from the entierest of his
heart. Toward Marsilia they made with as much speed as might be, where finding
a ship ready for them equipped, they waighed ankers, and set sails, but had
the weather so contrary, that being weary of traveling the tempestuous sea,
they were feign to put into the first port of Greece, and send away their ship
by sea to meet them at Constantinople. One whole day soiourned Arnedes and
Recindos in this haven, and on the morrow having put on their rich armors, they
road so great a journey, that by the way they heard news of the triumph which
was to be holden in the Emperors court: whereof being meruellous glad, they
road so great a pace, that they came to Constantinople three days before the
marriage of Ditreus and Esquiuela were celebrated, and just at the time of their
arrival was the Emperor gone abroad in the evening with many of his Barons,
to behold the County in his Io^sts, where he took pleasure in the good
adresse he saw this knight had to manage a horse, albeit he was somewhat angry
to see those of his court so foiled by him: wherefore his mind could never be
at quiet till he knew who these Iousters were: to whom he used many
courtesies, after he knew they were descended of the lord of the island Liquia,
whom he vanquished in his conquest of the Sagitarie. As the emperor then was
beholding this Ioust, and the county had dismounted the sixth knight who entered
the li^ts, came in Arnedes and Recindos, who had not traveled far that day:
quickly had they put on their helmets, and to one end of the carrier went
Arnedes, flucing and vauting his horse in the air, as who would say, he
demanded ioust. The County seeing a knight appear upon the bars, mounted
presently on horseback, with a still presumption to cool quickly this
assailants brauadoe, but he was far deceived: for gallopping as fast as they
could, they made such a furious encounter, that they brake their lances within
their gantlets, finishing their carier without other harm: then said the
county to Arnedes, Sir knight it is at your choice to have another bout, if
you think good. Content, I am ready, quoth the prince of France, seeing I have
done so little good with the first: then to show their best before the emperor
and other good knights who were there present, they made the second encounter
with a far greater fury then the first, in such sort, that the very earth
seemed to ^inke under them as they met in their race: the County had the worst,
for that without breaking, Arnedes carried him to the ground with his courtelax,
nevertheless he lost his stirrops without ever stirring out of his seat.

The Emperor and all the other lords were very glad seeing the pride of the
county laid along, so that they did al highly commend the unknown knight.
Linedes was full wroth when he saw his cousin lie on the ground before him, in
very ill taking by reason of his fall, wherefore causing his helmet to be laced
(being before armed at al other points) he was soon mounted, and taking a
great lance in hand, Arnedes and he rusht upon one another in a great rage.
Linedes was so chollericke; that he mist his blow, nevertheless his enemy
mist not to hit him so full that he bore him backward over his horse crouper,
and because he would not let go the raines of the bridle, thinking to save
himself from the ground, his horse rose an end, and ^ell backward upon him,
which bruised him very sore, whereby he felt great pain a good while after. But
Arnedes was as fresh after this Iousting, as if he had not ben in it at all,
therefore retiring to his companion, thus quoth he to him: Come let us go
kiss the Emperors hand, for here is nothing more for us to do. Off did they
their helmets, and went toward the troop* who marvelled greatly at the
valiancie of the Frenchman: For every one knew how much Linedes was esteemed
through all the land of Greece.

The Emperor seeing they made the next way to him, went before apace to
welcome them: when they offered to kiss his hand: he would not permit, because
he did not know them, but embraced them both lovingly, saying: My friends ye
are most welcome into my country, where you have made me wonderful ioifull by
your great valor performed in your persons: therefore I pray you tell me who
you are, and I shall love and esteem you a great deal the better: then quoth
Arnedes, It is the grace and virtue of your majesty, who honors always
knights, although they little deserve it: we are knights of the house of the
king of France: for my part I am a near kinsman of Lewis duke of Burgondy. In
good faith quoth the Emperor, your phisiognomie, feature, and all the
lineaments of your body do bewray you: for that in them you do very much
resemble him, and therefore do I love you so much the more, for the great
honor and pleasure that I have heretofore received of him and his brother. So
taking the one in his right hand and the other in the left, he conducted them
both into his palace, where after they were disarmed, he did them the greatest
honor which he and all his might possibly devise.

CHAP. XIIII. How Marcomyr and Ozalias arrive within four days journey of
Constantinople, from whence they depart after that they had changed their
arms. In their way they lodge in an old knights house, of whom Marcomyr
understood the whole discourse of the adventure of Celestina.
MArcomyr after he left Abenunq in the straight of Abidos and Se^tos, commanded
his pilots to thrust in with the nearest port to Constantinople called Saint
Lordin, a coast town four leagues distant by land from the city. There did
he make them cast anchor, with charge not to stir thence till his return. In
the mean while he and Ozalias disguising their armours, for fear to be
discovered, departed with four squiers only for their service. That night
they lodged by chance at the foot of a hill in the house of a knight, poor in
goods, but noble in heart and person, who invited them very cheerfully, and
entreated them though not sumptuously and with exquisit dainties, yet
courteously, and with great humanity. The greater part of this good
entertainment, proceeding from his wife, and one very fair daughter, which
did exactly mark the demeanor of these knights.

At supper time after much other talk, the old knight demanded of his guests,
if they went to the triumph at Constantinople, for, quoth he, I came from
thence yesterday, wondering much at the great number of nobles, who are come
thither already to be present thereat. Then he began to make unto them the
whole discourse of the Iousting between the county Pelides and Arnedes,
wherein Marcomyr took a marvelous delight to hear him talk: nevertheless he
could not forbear to say thus much unto him: I wonder much in all the Emperors
court there cannot be found any knight, who might in valor and chivalry
excel the two cousins and the Frenchmen. Of a truth sir, answered the good old
man, it is even as I say, nevertheless I am of this belief, if Belcarin son
to the king of Hungary, and brother to the betrothed Ditreus had been there, he
would have deprived the French man of the victory, which he won from the County
and Linedes his cousin: seeing they haunt chiualries and worthy feats of arms,
for the which he is more and more renowned daily, in guarding the adventure of
Celestina. Nor was there ever knight who arrived there to prove himself in the
enchaunted combat, since he made his assay in the enterprise, whom he has not
surmounted and happily vanquished, so that Celestina is yet fast enclosed
within the Fairies tower, and shall be until some knight morefortunate and
aduenturous then Belcarin, deliver her thence. For he has sworn to employ so
well all the sinews of his strength, that none shall fetch her thence, (seeing
he failed therein) if he do not surpass him in valor and prowess.

Think you whether Marcomyr were ioifull or not, hearing him speak of
Celestina, when a sudden and vehement heat (which proceeded from the flame,
wherewith he felt his heart fiered before for her love) ^eised in such manner
his members, that in an instant he changed his color many times, and his very
soul altered all her powers at this only word of Celestina. Wherefore with all
instancie the knight prayed his host to declare of what race this Damsel was
descended, and to discourse at large to him the adventure, wherein these
knights went to try themselves, thinking to deliver her: likewise in what
country was the castle where the Fairies had devised this enchantment, for
that oftentimes he had heard speech thereof, but never man could tell him the
truth thereof. Sir, then quoth the old man, understand the damsel (one of the
fairest and most gracious princesses, as is known in this terrestrial
habitation between the two tropicks of heaven) is daughter to the king of
Thessalie, now prisoner to the great Turk, and was from her cradle fatally
enclosed in the castle of Carderie by three enchanteresses, ladies of that
Isle: who foresaw by their art Magic, that her father who was their great
friend, should never get out of captivity from the infidel, but by the mean
ofsome accomplished and perfect knight. So did they devise the enchantment,
that the fame ofthe beauty of this damsel, which they had spread throughout all the regions round about, or else the desire to win the kingdom of Thessalie
(for he who could set her free from thence, espousing her to wife, should
inherit it after the death ofthe captive king) would provoke good knights to
try their fortune in that adventure: and indeed many repair thither upon hope
to exploit so happy a conquest, as Belcarin himself, who thought to atchieue
it at the first: but his strength coming too short, as also that of many
others, he resolved to make the access to this* fortress more difficult,
until he for whom the princess of Thessalie was destinated, should arrive
there, endued with so much valor and magnamitie as should make him by force
avoid the place.

This good gentleman told Marcomyr many stories of Celestina, the which he
heard attentively: with the which his spirit was so much moved, that then he
believed the words of the old beldame would prove true, and seeing she was able
to tell him so many things of Celestina, she might be very well one of the
Fairies which did devise this enchantment, the abolition whereofhe supposed
ever afterward was only reserved to him: whereof he felt an incredible joy in
his heart, which prict him forward to prosecute the adventure. Wherefore he
called to him one of his squiers, commanding him to lay upon the table all the
rich jewels and rings, he had at that time, whereof he frankely gave away the
greatest to the good old man and to his daughter, praying him to marry her
honorably, and he would furnish a sum of money for a dowery, and all other
things necessary for her marriage. From thence he took his journey very
secretly with Ozalias toward Constantinople, and lodged that night within two
miles of the city, where they advised not to show themselves, but only upon
the two first days, and then to depart away to take their voyage toward the
isle of Carderie.

CHAP. XV. How Marcomyr comes unknown unto Constantinople, where he won the
price and honor of the first Iousting, and the morrow after departed the
court, fearing to be sought out for the same cause.
THe marriage day of prince Ditreus and the infant Esquiuela being come, the
Emperor and all his knights put on their richest robes, but above all others,
Arnedes the king of France his son appeared sumptuous and magnificent, hoping
to have a sight of the princess Philocrista, her to whom the conquest of his
heart was already vowed. All things were in a readiness and good order, when
the Empress came forth with Philocrista and her two other young daughters to
accompany the bride to church, who was so gorgeously attired with jewels and
other rich ornaments, and likewise the three infants with many other ladies of
the blood royal, that the great riches which was about their persons that day
could not be valued: nor could any humane tongue, were it of the eloquent
Demosthenes or Cicero, once approach to tell the worthy praise of their rare and
perfect beauties, and especially that of the lady Philocrista. Who coming in
sight of prince Arnedes, did draw him into such admiration, that but he had
seen her, he could never have believed she had been endued with half so
natural perfection. For even as the sun, the most excellent of all planets,
showing himself upon the Horison, through the great and inextinguible light of
his beams dimmeth the light of all other stars, dazeling the eyes of those
who long time behold it, even so was it with the infant Philocrista, whose
celestial portraiture, did obscure al other ladies near about her, and
moreover did much alter the judgment of Arnedes, who being confounded in his
sensure, did esteem the perfect beauty of this princess far above that of
the goddess, who appeared to Paris Alexander in the mountains of Ida, when
she had title to be fairest of the three.

Esquiuela and Philocrista arraied in this sumptuous manner, with all curiosity
of jewels and women's ornaments, were mounted upon two white hacknies, bravely
harnessed and trapt to the ground with stones set in collets and buckles of
gold, finely wrought and embrodered over. Next unto whom rode Diocles mounted
upon a great Barbary horse, caparassond after the turkish manner, to conduct
the bride, and Abenunq her brother came next the Princess Philocrista: but
Lechefin who loved her not the least, put himself on the other side to go
front by front with her, yet for all that, Arnedes (whom Cupido did impatiently
master) wrought so cunningly by his amourous devises, that he got the place
finely from him, whereby he might behold her better at his ease: whereat
Lechefin fell in so marvelous an indignation, that from thence forward he began
to bear him more then a mortal grudge, perceauing thereby very well he loved
her as well as himself. Recindos sorted himself with the infant Melissa,
Ditreus sister, for she seemed to him exceeding fair and gracious: with whom
Rifaran, who was her conduct, made her quickly acquainted by saying: it was the
knight who vanquished the earl, and that for his laudadable virtues, he well
deserved some favor above the rest. By means whereof she began to make him
discourse of many excellent matters, which she could do meruellous well by
reason of the ripe understanding and fine grace wherewith nature had enriched
her. For she needed not to betaught to use her tongue affably and discreetly.

Here by the way, Recindos was so enflamed with her love, that as long as he
lived, the heat so lively kindled, dwelt in his heart that it could never be
quenched after that time. Now if he were well pleased in mind, the prince
Arnedes was no less glad for his part, beholding himself in that pearl of
beauty, which his dear lady Philocrista inherited from the day of her birth:
whom he gave well to understand by his curious and often looking on her, that
he was her entire and perpetual slave, yet never was so bold to tell her the
least word in the world thereof, such a strange humor felt he in his soul,
which forbad him to speak.

But in the mean time Lechefin, whose eyes fed of her beauty, much grieved at
such an object, did rage with grief and intolerable frenzy, multiplying in
his stomach more and more the rage and hatred he bore against him.

When all this honorable troop was arrived within the principal church of
the city, the solemnity of the marriage was incontinent celebrated with great
ceremony, then after the same order it came, returned with as goodly pomp to
the palace where they did cover for the feast, which was so sumptuous and
magnificent in all things, that it might almost compare with that of the gods,
held at the marriage of Peleus and the goddess Thetis. The tables were served
in, and the princes and princesses all set and placed in their order, then
began a ioifull music in the which were instruments of all sorts: here might
the lovers behold their ladies, whereby they received an exceeding joy in their
hearts, which they could not dissemble after dinner, when they showed by the
agility of their bodies in dancing, the great desire every one had to win the
favorable judgment of his mistress, to be reputed the finest reueller.

In this iollitie past they that day away with great pleasure and content, till
the hour the bridegroom and bride were to go to bed: when the Empress her
self brought the Princess Esquiuela into the bride chamber, where she left
her in a bed, which was richly prepared for her, and the Emperor himself
brought Ditreus into the same, and soon after every one retired into his
lodging: Arnedes amongst the rest, the ioisullest man living in his mind, brake
thus with Recindos: How like you cousin, the beauty of Philocrista? did you
ever see a more rare and perfect piece? Ah, I must needs hasten the end of this
my most urgent business: to give some hours of quiet rest to the anguish of
my poor passionate heart, wherefore I am determined to dispatch a post to the
king my father, to the end he send hither honorable ambassadors, who shall
conclude this marriage with the Emperor. Mean while I will sound the depth of
this amourous river, and I will see whether the knowledge and wisdom of the
spirit of Philocrista be correspondent to her singular beauty: and if so be
her inward virtue second the excellency, wherewith nature has outwardly
endued her, I may repute my self the most happy and fortunate knight, who
lives under the zones of the heaven, having her once in my power.

Surely sir replied Recindos, you may truly praise her, and I pray unto God in
devout and humble prayer, our coming may succeed as well in my behalf, as I
believe it will fall out shortly in yours: for as touching my matter, if the
grace and courtesy of Melissa do not give me some succourable comfort, I may
well assure you, it had been better for me I had never set foot in these
countries. Then Arnedes took him in his arms and embraced him, saying: O how
glad and eased am I by these your words, which have pleased my hearing above
all other: Seeing by them I see you are my companion in all things, repose I
pray you your firm hope in him, on whom depend all things, who by his divine
bounty shall direct our actions so well, that with time they shall sort a
happy effect. And if it please him to favor mine affairs that they carry aright
and succeed, I will work yours till they compass the matter you level at.
Courage then, and let us make the Greeks know France breeds as good knights
and men of as great valor as any nation in the world.

Upon these speeches, they went to take their rest till the morrow, when the
Emperor went forth into the fields with the Empress and the new married
couple, who were conducted by the three infants to the scaffolds which were
richly hanged with clothes of state and tissue, where they might behold the
triumph better at their ease. Hard were it to count the number of ladies,
gentlewomen, and others, who were assembled without the city to view this
goodly sight: the scaffolds were thoroughly replenished, and the press on every
side the stages so great, that it could not hold half the people, for the
knights only who came within the lists to Ioust, made up the number of six
thousand; all choice men and brave champions, when they began to come to hands,
you might hear the air ring on every side with drums and trompets, which
sounded the assault, and forthwith the combattants run together, crashing their
lances, hacking and hewing one another with their cemitories and courtelaxes.
There might you have seen a thousand blazing stars, by reason of the
glitring of so many brave frontstals, helmets, sheilds, and gilded armours,
fair burnished and shining bright as the sun, or as the Carbuncles in a dark
place. Then might you see upon their helmets so many rich plumes, mottoes,
pensels and favors, where hanged the devises and coulors of the ladies of many
knights, that it was an admirable thing to behold them: and most impossible for
us to recount all the other excellencies and sumptuosities of this assembly:
neither is it of the substance of our history to report.

At the first encounter were many knights strangers laid along: the Courtiers
behaved themselves gallantly, and had surely carried away the honor of the
day, had not Linedes and the Earl his cousin stepped in, who resembling two
furious lions, brusht them so thoroughly on every side (to be revenged of the
shame they had received by Arnedes mean) that no man durst come near them.
These then did maintain the field, and did meruellous feats of arms: but
Arnedes who of purpose held on the contrary part, seeing himself in presence
of his dear Lady Philocrista, in place where she might well judge of his
Chivalry, thrust himself without fear into the thickest of them, and did
marvelous acts with his person.

Now the Emperor who knew well the valor and dexterity of the best, seeing
the great and admirable feats of arms exploited by the ready address of his
body, thought with himself the words of the lady who came into his court,
would be now verified, to wit: that there should arrive knights from strange
countries who should surpass his in magnanimity and prowess. Nevertheless
he did greatly rejoice to see Rifaran make his valor so well known amongst the
rest, for he never couched lance in vain, but some knight went to the ground.
So violent was the martial fury of these men at arms who held on the
Courtiers side, that their adversaries had never ben able to stand before them,
if Marcomyr and Ozalias had not by chance joined to their succor. Ozalias came
first to the conflict, where he began to strike such full strokes, that
quickly he made them know in what sports he knew best to employ the force of
his arms and by and by arrived Marcomyr, carrying a coat of armor red, and upon
a shield in a green field painted with a little flower argent, which he
devised for this purpose, because he would not be known of Abeuunq nor of
Rifaran, who had seen him often in the other equippage. Before he entered into
the Iousts, he staid a good while to behold the city of Constantinople, then
casting his eyes very curiously one while upon the Emperor his father, who sat
aloft upon the scaffolds, with many nobles and Barons round about him, another
while upon the empress, and her ladies and gentlewomen, who were there to
accompany her, meruelled to see there so great number of nobility and
magnificence, wherefore he said thus to himself: O sovereign God, creator and
director of all things, I find my self infinitely bounden to serve and obey
you, and to reverence you more then any other of your creatures, having given
me such a father, who beside he is reputed the best knight borne under the
stars, you have moreover created him the greatest Prince who reigns this
day upon the earth: now seeing you have granted me so inestimable a favor to
be borne of so rare and excellent a personage, I must do my best endeavor to
resemble him, and to show in something I am his son: for albeit I now Ioust
against the knights of his court, I believe he shall have none occasion to
reprehend me in ought, when he shall know the good zeal I have to do him
service in all other things: his courage increased so much, as he had spoken
these words, in seeing himself before the Emperor his father, that setting
spurs to a strong courser which carried him, he roughly entered the lists, where
before he had broken his lance, he sent many knights to the ground, then began
to lay about him so lustily, and with his great cemitorie to do so many
wonderful acts, that those of his part taking courage, raunged themselves into
order by him, and came upon the courtiers till they abandoned the place.
Knowing then Arnedes surpassed all the rest in feats of arms, he gave him so
sturdy a blow upon the helmet, that he made him go against his will astonished
to the ground: at the same instant with another stroke smot Pernedin eldest
son to the duke of Pera, besides his horse, who was esteemed one of the brauest
knights in all Greece. Which hardy Rifaran perceiving, came upon Marcomyr, his
sword charged in his hand, wherewith he hit him two such blows one after
another, that he made him feel the smart thereof a good while after: but he
had quickly his revenge: for Marcomyr was in such a fury against him that he
never left him till he had his payment and was dismounted. Then angry as a
lion, he stroke on every side with such a great might, that none durst stand
before him. Recindos seeing his cousin Arnedes disarsoned, took in hand a
great lance, to run against his adversary with a poulder: but Marcomyr spying
him come toward him, took as good a one out of his squiers hands, (who
always attended near him with sword and lance to furnish him at his need) and
running furiously one against another, they encountered as mortal enemies,
Marcomyr pierced Recindos shield and armor, and giving him a little wound,
bore him over his horse crouper to the ground: he was also a little wounded in
his breast with his enemies sword, wherewith he was so mad, that with the first
blow he stroke afterward, he sent Lechefin to bear him company in the place,
who albeit he were but young in years, he was nevertheless skillful in arms
and hardy, and till that hour had behaved himself most valiantly at all
assaies.

Who could ever declare the admirable chiualries Marcomyr did in this martial
conflict? certainly the Emperor wondered much at them, (being ignorant who it
might be) for he auered he never saw accomplished knight of so great prowess.
The like did Diocles, who had an extreme desire to know his name, whereunto
Abenunq answered, he thought it was Marcomyr: for quoth he, he resembles him
very much in the proportion of his members. Uery glad was the Emperor of that
news, determining to send a messenger to desire him to conceal himself no
longer, being so near him, but should come to make himself known in place
where he was so much desired.

Abenunq would needs go himself with three or four other knights in his
company, but he found it so hard to pass the throng, that he could never come
near him, whereby he was constrained to return without him. But Marcomyr
hearing the voice of all the people giving him the honor and price at the
triumph, having three little wounds, whereof the greatest was that which the
spanish prince gave him* returned in have to the good old knights house, where
he had lodged before. Whether Ozalias the same night retired also in good
health, whereof Marcomyr was right glad: in this place he soiorned two days to
cure his wounds, from whence he took his way toward the kingdom of Macedon
with the same arms he bare in the triumph, having Celestina continually in his
thoughts.

CHAP. XVI. How Arnedes had conference with the infant Philocrista after
supper: whereupon he sent away with all speed a post to his father the king of
France: and how after that he, Recindos, Rifaran and others had won the price
at the second tourney, they purposed to put themselves in quest of Marcomyr.
AShamed and greatly abashed were the vanquished knights at the hard usage they
had received of Marcomyr, and Arnedes more then the rest, for he had bentwise
unhorsed before his lady Philocrista: whereupon he purposed to avenge himself
or to die in it, as likewise did many others afterward, who fell in a mutiny
against him. The Emperor soon perceived it well, and came to Arnedes, Recindos
and Rifaran to remove this fantasy out of their heads: he showed them a
smiling and merry countenance, bidding them never to be vexed further for the
matter: because they had well made known their great valor and chivalry, and
therefore he requested them at the next tourney, by some mean to recognish the
knight who was vanquisher. If he come quoth Arnedes, it shall be peradventure
smally to his advantage, for having foiled so many as he has, the sport cannot
well end, but he will smart for it After these speeches the Emperor conducted
them to his palace, where he feasted them very lovingly, and long continued
this royal feast throughout all his court, wherein was heard no other talk
butof the knight of the Flower.

Mean while arrived Abenunq, who assured he could not find him, whereat the
Emperor was very angry, saying: I shall never sleep soundly till I know the
name of this valiant knight, and if it might not be imputed to my folly and
lightness, I would go to seek him my self. Many meruelling at these speeches,
purposed to go in quest after him so soon as the tourney was ended, if
peradventure he returned not in the mean season thither again: and those who
had this determination were Arnedes, Recindos, Rifaran, Lechefin and Pernedin
the Duke of Pera his son, who without saying word to each other resolved to
die every man, or to bring the knight of the Flower before the Emperor, if they
could meet with him in any part of the world. Supper done, Diocles and Ditreus
took with them Arnedes and Recindos, and went to sit among the ladies, where
Arnedes compassed so much favor as to sit next his Philocrista, and Recindos
hard by the Infant Melissa. There received they unspeakable pleasure and
content, seeing themselves near the quick and burning flame which heated them
more strangely a far off, then near hand: so that through the extreme joy
which by little and little crept into their hearts, they began somewhat to
blush, as falls out most often in such amorous alarmes. Nevertheless letting
their eyes gaze their fill, to glut them with the lively beauty object to them
(albeit the heart desired ioissance of a far greater joy) they began to chat of
many things with them, and among the rest of the great prowess which the
unknown knight had performed in the tourney: but the infant Philocrista
perceiving how these purposes might be griefesome to Arnedes, wherefore she
encountered him thus:

Sir knight, you have none occasion to be vexed or angry for any thing
happened unto you, for the best knights remain sometime surmounted: we have
well beheld your valiancie, nor have the vanquishers less cause to be sorry
and grieve at your coming thither; then the vanquished had at that of the
knight with the Flower: whom none of us know. Arnedes was so glad to hear
these words out of Philocristaes mouth, that scant could he answer one word:
yet love which had fast hold of him, embouldened him in the end to speak (with
a voice which well might witness the delight his heart conceived in this
sudden and unexpected joy:) Madame quoth he, the courtesy and excellent
grace wherewith nature has deuinely accompanied the perfection of your
beauty, inciteth you to give me this praise, albeit my valor merit not to
approach the least part of that which it pleases you to say: and if I have
never so little, I should there show it, seeing my self before her, who has
such pre-eminence over me that with one wink of her eye she may augment my
courage, and make my force invincible: therefore shall my desire never be
satisfied, till I have reconquered my fortune which has brought me from so
far to this tourney, the success whereof gives me a pain and grief more
intolerable, then does to Sisiphus the stone which he rouleth continually in
the infernal lake. I pray God hasten your attempt therein, proceeded
Philocrista, I wish it with all my heart: for it were against al reason (having
taken so great pain as you have, to come from so remote a country to see my
father the Emperor) you should reap so bitter fruit of your travel. With this
sweet and favorable reply the joy of the French prince was redoubled, so that
he softly thanked Philocrista with many amorous signs and tokens, whereby she
strait knew the passion of his heart whence they proceeded was vehement, and in
a meruellous disturbance. Recindos in like case entered so far in discourse
with Melissa, that he discovered to her the affection he had to be her knight,
which she accepted most willingly, pleasing her self more then of any other,
with his beauty, valor, and modest behauior, whereof the continual and
steadfast regard of his eyes beholding this princess were a manifest argument.

Whilst these did swim indelights with their ladies, solacing their hearts
inflamed with the burning sparks of love, Lechefin felt himself gnawne with
an insupportable jealousy, seeing Philocrista talking with his corriuall,
insomuch that he wished to have him at his ransoming in the strongest prison of
Persia. When bed time was come the Emperor retired himself with the Empress
into his chamber, and every one likewise to his lodging, especially Arnedes who
held himself so content of the good and laudable perfections, which he knew
were infused into his lady Philocrista, that the very same night having his
memory fresh, he wrote to his father to send his Ambassadors to the Emperor to
conclude the marriage, moreover he wrote how he would attend their coming in
that court, not making himself much known till they should be there arrived:
and after he had sealed up his packet as he would have it delivered into the
kings hands, he commanded on the morrow one of his servants to ride away post
for the dispatch thereof: who made such speed, that this business was soon
brought to the issue that Arnedes had dessigned. When the post was departed, he
took aside B^uquel his dwarf, whom he charged not to bouge from
Constantinople, before he returned from a place whether he must needs go for
some matter of great importance. And if the Emperor did call for him in the
mean time, he should make him that answer: in like manner to his cousin
Recindos, who was for his part in a great perplexity, seeing no mean how he
might quickly enjoy Melissa to himself. Moreover that he should in any wise
speak oftentimes to Philocrista, giving her always to understand the sincere
and perpetual devotion he had vowed to her service, and for to be able to
satisfy the same in better manner, he was by manner of recreation, gone to take
a little the air of the country: which the dwarf promised to accomplish in
every point, for he desired never to disobey him all the days of his life in
the least thing he should command.

The next day following, the whole city went out into the field to behold the
iousting, where met of the one and other side, a great number of very brave
knights: but those of the Court won the honor of the ^ield through the great
prowess and valiancie of Arnedes, Recindos, and Rifaran, who did all three
that day marvelous feats of arms, which were not buried in oblivion by the
lookers on. Those who did look for Marcomyr in that conflict, purposed to put
their enterprise in execution, and caring not to return into the city, for
fear of finding some cause of stay there, departed as soon as the tourney was
ended, without knowing one of another mind in any thing: every one took a
contrary way, which he thought was the best to find him out.

Great was the joy and pleasure of the Emperor that his knights had gotten the
honor of the day, and he did never cease to praise sufficiently, the two
gallant knights of France, and the others also who had done their uttermost
endeavors not to let the victory slip out of their hands: but when he arrived
afterward at his palace, and could set eye of none of these ^iue (who were
already departed in quest of Marcomyr) he was much abashed: he demanded of
every body to hear some tidings of them, but there was none found who could
tell him any news, except Bruquel only of the prince Arnedes his master: by
means whereof he straight judged what the matter might be, whereof he was very
glad, hoping to know by this mean, who was the unknown knight.

In brief, when the solemnity of the marriage was finished, all the strange
knights departed, every one into his own country, and soon after departed the
new espoused Ditreus and Esquiuela, to go for Hungary, accompanied with many
hardy knights, whom the emperor commanded to guard them, least peradventure
some Turkish pyrat should set upon them to take away their great riches that
the Souldan of Babylon had sent them after the departure of his son Abenunq.

Greatly was Philochrista displeased at the departure of Esquiuela, for the
love which she bore her appeared to be no less then that of sister to sister,
having been both from their tender age brought up together: and Abenunq her
brother might bear her company no farther than to the haven, because Diocles
(who loved him so entirely) would have him tarry to keep him company. King
Frisol received his son Ditreus and his fair daughter Esquiuola, with
unspeakable joy and gladness: for the same occasion he purposed to hold open
court, to the end to make a more sumptuous and magnificent feast for the time.
Then thanking much the Emperor (by a letter which he wrote unto him) for the
honor which he had done his son, sent back all his knights enriched with
many goodly presents, which he gave them. Such largess showed he very
liberally, for he esteemed himself the most fortunat prince who ever reigned in
the country of Germany, in that he heard of the wonderful chiualries that
Belcarin his other son did in Macedon: for the prosperity of whom, he prayed
God daily to preserve him from all evil incombrance. But let us return to the
five knights who were gone before in quest of the unknown knight, Marcomyr.

CHAP. XVII. How Arnedes meets Marcomyr, by whom he is left half dead. How
he had afterward slain Lechefin cowardly (as he did a good Hermit who came by
chance that way whilst they were in combat) if Pernedin had not come in the
mean time to his succor.
IT has been said before, how Arnedes seeing his enemies vanquished, and the
victory of the turnie apparent on his side, departed the iousts secretly, and
taking his way as he thought best for the accomplishment of his desire, lodged
that night in a fair green meadow at the sign of theseuen stars: although
he were very weary and tired with the sore travail he endured all the length
of his journey. He past away a great part of the night in thought of
Philocrista, so that he little felt the Serena or any other night blastings,
and in the morning betime betook himself again into his way, along which he
demanded of all he met, if they had not seen a knight wearing a coat of arms
red, with a little Flower Argent upon his shield, but he found none who could
tell him any tidings. So traveled he on two days, the second whereof he lodged
in an hermitage built upon the top of a little hill, where he took a poor but
a ioifull refection: the morrow morning he took up into a narrow way, not
knowing well whether he went: and as he was a good bow-shoote from the
hermitage, he discovered two knights coming a long way, which crossed over
his, for whom he purposed to attend at the place where the ways met:
recognishing Marcomyr as far off as he could discern his shield: whereat he
was the gladdest man in the world, hoping by force or fair means to bring him
to Constantinople: therefore he stepped out and thus saluted him.

Sir knight I hold my self highly favored by fortune, having here met with you
now, who for none other occasion am departed from the Emperor Cleodomyrs court,
but to seek you, and that for so much as he has a singular desire to use you
courteously with the kindest entertainment he can make you, since he saw you
last in the tourney. So that I pray you for the courtesy and amity you may
bear him, to come now with me, to the end I may acquit my promise, by which I
find my self for the same effect bound to his majesty. You have done evil quoth.
Marcomyr, to promise a thing which depends of another will, for at this
present (having very urgent affairs abroad otherwise) I cannot obey his will,
albeit I am ready to do him service in all other things, as I lately sent him
word, and as I request you to tell him again from me. Knight replied Arnedes,
I pray you take a little better resolution herein, and think these words do
in nothing discharge me of mine obligation, wherefore determine with your self
to come quickly with me with a good will, otherwise you must go thither by
force. By force never, replied Marcomyr, but of mine own accord thither will I
go when I shall think good. I requested you for your own good quoth Arnedes,
and your valor did induce me to pardon the hatred and grudge I bear you,
notwithstanding seeing you will come to none other point, prepare your self to
the combat, and think not the reputation of the discomfiture you gave me in
the Triumph the other day can avail you here any thing.

Seeing you force me quoth Marcomyr, yours be the wrong, for as for me for the
love of the Emperor, I have no desire to sight with you. This said, they
encountered so violently, that it seemed the earth should open under their
coursers, and breaking their lances in a thousand pieces, they went both to the
ground, where Arnedes had his shield and armor pierced through with his
adversaries sword, (which he carried always with a sharp edge) and moreover a
wound in his breast: for all that he was quickly up again and running with a
great viuacity of stomach roughly upon him with his naked sword, fought with
him courageously a good while, making him to know what was the amity he bore
him. But by reason of the great abundance of blood which gushed out of his
wound, his heart began much to fail him, by means whereof Marcomyr had him so
much at advantage, that in the end he gave him a mighty blow downeright upon
his creast, wherewith he fell down astonished in the place: which when he saw,
he cared not to give him any more, but after he had made clean his sword,
which was all bloody, he put it up into his sheath, saying: I believe you will
have little list to force any knight hereafter, but you will remember your
payment at this time: then remounting on horseback (albeit he was hurt in the
encounter) he pursued his way with Ozalias, who highly commended Arnedes for
an act of a right good and hardy knight, which he had seen him do in this
combat.

But the Hermit who beheld the battle, moved with charity and compassion,
made apace down the hill to succor Arnedes who lay all along upon the grass,
and untying the strings of his helmet, he pulled it off his head to know in what
state he was in, whereby it fortuned that the vigor of the sun sending down
his beams perpendicularly upon his face, restored him in an instant and made
all his spirits come to him again. Then seeing no more the knight who was
conqueror in the ioust, (but an Hermit hard by him) he judged him to be very
courteous and humane, who would not kill him outright, being in his power so to
do: yet felt extreme pain and was in vehement choler to see himself so
foiled and hardly used, not so much for his wound, as for the fortune of the
victory which had been so contrary to him, that he began to lament in this
pitiful manner: What should I now do, but complain of the inconstancy of
fortune? Am not I accursed to come into these countries to purchase fame and
renown, and have as yet done no act, which does not redound more to my shame
and ignominy then to any honor and praise of Chivalry? Ah seeing my forces
will not be correspondent to the courage of my heart, and I cannot otherwise
demean my self more valiantly, it were better I surcease the exercise of
Chivalry, then so il to employ my self in the upholding and augmentation of
so noble estate.

Further would he have prosecuted the exclamation of his bad fortune, detesting
the enormitie of his life, when the Hermit exhorted and comforted him in this
manner: My son, thank our Lord who has delivered you out of the knights hands,
who having you at such advantage, has showed himself very pitiful and
merciful, in that he did not separate your soul from your body. Cease I
beseech you these discourses, which cannot avail you otherwise then to nourish
in your heart anguish and sorrow, but think upon God, who in a moment can make
you invincible, and give you all your hearts desires. Having said thus, he
wrapped up his wounds as well as he could, thinking to conduct him more easily
afterward to his Hermitage: but as the devil would have it (one mischance
comes seldom alone) even as he was getting up on horseback, there arrived
Lechefin, who bare him a mortal grudge for the love of Philocrista. Who
knowing him well, and seeing him in so evil taking, was very glad of his
meeting, to the end to be revenged at his good advantage: for otherwise he had
not the heart to have met him face to face. Wherefore coming near him, he
began with this proud and presumptuous language: I declare thee as much my
capital and disloiall enemy, as thou love her, whom thou art not so much as
worthy to serve: this much I hope I shall make thee quickly confess: and pay
dearly for thy rashness and too audacious attempt in addressing thy love to a
lady, whose least grace of a thousand, surmounteth in merit the most brave and
excellent of all French men.

These words ended, he couched his lance thinking to nail him fast to the
earth, which he had assuredly done if Arnedes (who saw himself overtaken thus
unprovided) had not shrunk a little on the left hand, whereby he began to play
his part so nimbly that in traversing every way he gave his adversaries horse
such a sound blow, that he laid them both under feet: by which mean he had
leisure to put his helmet on his head: for he supposed it stood him greatly
upon to defend himself. In the mean time Lechefin leapt up quickly again,
sore bruised with the fa^l, and came with a great fury upon his enemy,
intending to massaker him cruelly, or to die himself in the place,
nevertheless Arnedes who was a valiant and hardy knight (albeit he were
grievously wounded) began with a courage almost invincible to deliver him many
shrewd and dangerous strokes, which did so much the more augment the feeblenes
of his members, whereby he could not long time hold out against him.

The good Hermit who perceived him loose his blood thus, put himself
incontinent between them, praying Lechefin for the honor of God to hold his
hand, for that the knight of himself did much abridge his own life: but
Lechefin who was a Moore, and by that mean more inexerable, would in no ways
hear him, but raging in great choler, stroke the poor Hermit such a blow
upon his head, that he claue it asunder down to his teeth. Ah, thou traitor
and disloiall dog (quoth Arnedes, seeing the act of so pitiful a tragedy)
ah, what blood^e cruelty is this, to murder thus basely a servant of God who
had in nothing offended thee: Assuredly I have such hope in his divine goodness
thou shall quickly receive the payment, and guerdon for all thy vile demerits.
Saying this, he goes courageously to charge him with three so strange blows,
that he made him feel the last smart: nevertheless by reason of the blood
which streamed incessantly from his wound (especially at the chafing and
choler of his recharge) he waxed instantly so weak and feeble, that if the
pity and mercy of God had not succored him, he had been verily cut off by the
hands of this infidel Moore.

There did the sovereign dominator of this round Machine, show a most
miraculous adventure, bringing thither just at that hour Pernedin the duke of
Peraes son, one of those who had enterprised the quest of Marcomyr: who as
soon as he had recognished the two combattants (all amazed to see them two in
fight together) came between them, crying out with a loud voice: Eternal God
what means this? Have you thus sworn your own death knight? Then Arnedes
who could no longer stand on his legs, falling down on the ground, breathed
out this complaint: Alas Pernedin, I beseech thee avenge me of this inhumane
Moore, who has without any cause assailed me, being before mortally wounded in
a combat I lately had against the knight who won the tourney: and this cruel
Moore not content to have set upon me unjustly, has beside slain the holy
Hermit whom you see lie stone dead by this hedge here, because he would only
have showed him how he had done amiss to assail me, being thus wounded as I
am. O what tirannie of a knight is this? quoth Pernedin then, I swear my faith
to you, were it not the respect of the amity which I bear unto Ri^a^an who
brought him into the court with him, I should make him nowin a cursed hour to
end his days: but I promise you, I shall make known this treason before the
Emperor and all his Barons, assuring me (he proceeded still, speaking in great
choler to Lechefin) you would never have dared for your ears to have set on
him, if he had been unwounded: so that avoid from hence quickly, otherwise I
shall make you die a shameful death.

These words made Lechefin so ashamed, that being mounted quickly upon Arnedes
horse, he went away with a flee in his ear without any word saying, as him who
knew he had done great wrong to his honor: and that night he retired himself
into a Nunnerie, where by reason of the wounds which he had received of
Arnedes, he found himself very il at ease of his person. But when the Nuns
knew he followed the Emperors court, they did him all the honor they could
devise, and one of them who was learned and well experienced in the art of
Physic and Chirurgerie, took charge to tend him carefully until his perfect
recovery, and there she remained some days with him before she could recover
him to his former health.

Pernedin was very sorrowful and displeased much, seeing the good Hermit
slain, and the knight most dangerously hurt: notwithstanding with the help of
a Nouice, who helped daily the old Hermit to mass, he brought Arnedes into the
Hermitage, where they buried their dead corpse, after they had wrapped up the
knights wounds: whom Pernedin counseled, because there was no mean to look
unto him there, to go fair and softly to Constantinople. There quoth he you
shall quickly recover, because you shall find Physicians, Chirurgions, drugs
and all other necessaries at hand which you cannot come by in this solitary
place. As for me as yet I cannot resolve to return, although I have hitherto
ben never the near in that which caused me to depart the city. I shall
repute it a great shame for me, quoth Arnedes, to go to the Emperor in this
taking, nevertheless do as you shall think best: for I see it out of my
power and possibility ever to satisfy or recompense the infinite merit and
good you have now showed toward me being in so great danger as you see me at
this present.

CHAP. XVIII. How Pernedin conducted Arnedes to Constantinople, where he was
forthwith visited by the Emperor, and on the morrow after by the Empress with
the infants Philocrista and Melissa, and how Bruquel Arnedes dwarf, and
Amenada Philocristaes dwarfesse, had much prattle together, and what was the
issue thereof.
AFter that Pernedin had conueighed Arnedes into the Hermitage, he ceased not
to run about in all places near hand to get people and al things necessary to
transport him easily to Constantinople, for he could not endure the pain to
sit on horseback. Wherefore he caused a mourning beer to be made, litter
fashion, and used so great diligence, that within two days after he got him to
the court: where when the Emperor had heard what was befortuned him, he was
highly displeased against the Moore. Of a troth quoth he, Lechefin cannot
resemble any one better then the Souldan of Persia his father, who was never
other but a receptacle and harbor offellony: and I cannot devise who has
moved him to outrage so honest a prince as is this knight of France, then
presenly he went to visit him, and gave his Physicians charge he should be
carefully looked unto, and beside provided of whatsoever should be necessary
for his speedy recovery.

Then began Arnedes the discourse of his encounter with Marcomyr, upon the end
whereof the Emperor answered him: I marvel greatly this knight shows so
ardent a desire to do me service, and yet will conceal himself in this
manner and fly from me? Undoubtedly he goes to try himself in the adventure
of Celestina, seeing he follows the rout you tell me, and it may be by his
great Prowess he will bring it to an end. If so it be, God keep my nephew
Belcarin out of his hands: herein many of the assistants were of the same
opinion: and from thence forward was Lechefin esteemed of al for a coward and a
fellon.

The Emperor returned into his chamber, and would that the Empress should go
on the morrow to visit Arnedes, which she did with a right good will
accompanied with Philocrista and Melissa, to whom this mischief and injury
done to the French knight greatly displeased, and pierced them to the very
heart, but to Philocrista most of al, albeit she was free from all sinister
thought, for the amity which she already bore him, proceeded of no other
cause but of the gentility and virtue which she saw shining most apparent in
him: and moreover there was nothing in this world, which she had in more
singular recommendation, then the keeping of her own chastity both in thought
and deed incontaminated.

You may well judge whether Arnedes were glad or not, seeing before his eyes
her whom he loved so ardently, to be sorrowful for his hurt, to blame
Lechefin as a traitor and disloiall: for the sole object of her countenance,
and the feeblenes of her speech, did sufficiently bewray what an alteration the
heat of the fatal fire had already wrought in her. These four discoursed a
long time together, mean while Amenada the dwarfesse of Philocrista and
Risdena her nephew came to Bruquel, Arnedes dwarf, whom they saw strangely
lamenting for the mischance and disaster befalne his master. Amenada comforted
him as well as she could, telling him it was nothing, the worst was past, and
none of the wounds found to be mortal, how the Emperor had sent him excellent
Physicians and Surgeons, who promised to set him quickly on foot again.

Were it Gods will quoth Bruquel, it were so, and that my master might once
find the mean to sup up the Antidote, which alone might corrupt and annihilate
the so penetrating force of the sweet poison which was lately given him: and
then leaving this circumstance of words, he fetched a deep sigh almost from the
ground, for he had very short legs, and would use no more circumelocution, but
followed this point in this sort: Ah my lord Arnedes, how dearly do you buy
her beauty, for whose sake you departed out of your countries? Where the only
reputation of your high estate, and illustrious lineage whence you are
extracted, did suffice to obtain her, without ever coming so f^rre to expose
your self to so many perils and dangers. Am^nada marvelled much at these
speeches, and presently had a curious desire to know who this knight might be.
Wherefore she prayed Bruquel of all favors to tell her, to the end they might
show her lady Philocrista, who had an extreme desire to understand of what
race he was descended. I will do willingly for you all things I may, quoth the
dwar^e, except this, which without his commandment I dare not enterprise, for
I should do that I am forbidden: I will make you this promise to speak to him
hereof, and according to his will and intention will I satisfy your desires.

Melissa also who desired with a singular affection to know who Recindos her
lover was, having seen these two Myrmidons prate together, and understanding
some inkeling of their talk in passing by them, so soon as they were retired
into their chambers, demanded Amenada what were the matters debated between
her and Arnedes dwarf. Whereupon the dwarfesse made her a long discourse,
whereof Philocrista was wondrous glad, hoping thereby to understand something
of the French prince. And as she heard say, he was departed out of his house
for the love of a Damsel, imagined this imediately meant by her self: for it
falls out always every one best favors himself in judgments relying upon
bare co^iectures: for this cause she bid Amenada that she should call upon
Bruquel to perform his promise. The dwarf as soon as he had opportunity to
speak unto his master, made him understand at length all which had past
between himself and the dwarfest of Philocrista: whereat he was the gladdest
man in the world, and gave him now a great charge to be careful to bring this
practice to a good end.

The next day when the Emperor and Diocles dined together, Amenada went to
take Bruquel in his lodging, who seeing her come, began thus to prattle aloud:
madam, I have given order for that I promised you the last night.
Notwithstanding before I can satisfy you in your desire, I must crave one
thing at your hands: demand hardly whatsoever you please, quoth the dwarfesse,
for of nothing which is honest shall you of me be denied. I have then obtained
of you, replied Bruquel, you shall not manifest to any living creature, but to
Madame Philocrista, that which I am now about to tell you: it is, that for the
love of her only my dear lord and master, the first borne son of the king of
France is departed from his house: for the fame of her unspeakable beauty
which has already pierced beyond those countries, did on a day so cruelly
wound his heart, that forthwith he resolved to make a voyage into the leuant
sea, to see whether such bruit did egall or surpass the fame spread abroad of
her. And having afterward well beheld it, he found nature had so cunningly
embellished this perfect piece of work, that she has taken away the power
from any humane tongue, were it never so eloquent and fluent, to accomplish
ever the entire praise of her desert: by means whereof he has written by a
post sent of purpose to the king his father, that he would send Ambassadors
h^ther, to the end to conclude the articles of marriage with the Emperor, to
whom until he see the commissioners of this embassage appear, he will not
make himself known, nor to any other person living, but to her only. And
requires her in the humblest manner he may, she would use with some little
courtesy and benignity the heart that she has so secretly ravished from him,
and if in the mean time she will employ his body in any other then familiar
and domestical affairs, it would please her to send back his heart with some
comfort, accepting the offer which it has now lately made her: so shall he
repute himself the most happy and fortunate champion, that ever entered
battle in the service of any lady, moreover should find himself quickly
recovered and healed of all his wounds: otherwise should not be able to live
four and twenty hours in this world, which were a way to purchase the death
of infinite others besides his, especially that of Recindos his cousin, son of
the king of Castile, who loving him as himself, would needs bear him company
in this voyage, and be partaker of the same travels and diseases he endured,
for the great amity and near parentage between them. So cunningly could this
Pigme file his language to second his masters intention, that it reaped that
fruit to these two young princes, as hereafter you shall hear: which might well
be compared in loiall and perfect amity to the two pithagorean companions,
Orestes and Pilades, or to Nisus and Eurialus, who would die the one for the
other.

Greatly wondered Amenada hearing him tell how so high and illustrious a prince
had thrust himself into so many travels and dangers for the accomplishment of
this marriage, which he might have effected by his agents employed therein. Then
she made this answer, Assuredly if I had not promised to tell my lady and
mistress this, I should not dare for any thing in the world adventure my self
to discover or manifest so great matters as these, for I should never be able
to show her the one half, but Melissa who never stirs far from her, would
understand or presume something. It skilleth not for Melissa, quoth the dwarf,
I care not if it were done in her presence, for I esteem her so modeste and
sage a princess, that she will show her self rather silent to disclose it,
then inconsiderate and giddie headed to reveal it to any, and I assure my
self she will but take all the matter in good part. This spoke he, to the end
she should be an act or in the comedy, for the love of Recindos: and if
peradventure Philocrista were slack and backward in her loves, she might
counsel her not to refuse this good fortune offered her: breifely they should
reciprocally take advise the one of the other, as having both their hearts
pierced with one dart: for it falls out many times two thoughts afflicted
with like martyrdom, receive mutually more comfort, then being with others who
feel not the like torment.

Bruquel having so well done his deuoire for the winning of Philocrista to his
masters bow, returned incontinent to him, whom he found attending in great
devotion to understand the event of this amourous stratageme. After the dwarf
had recounted from point to point all his business, Arnedes was so ravished with
an unspeakable gladness, that he thought himself the most happiest man in the
world, to have met with so fine and ingenious a Truchemant. On the other side
Amenada when she espied her fittest opportunity, interpreted so well and
faithfully the intention of Arnedes and of his dwarf to her lady Philocrista,
that she remained a pretty while exacticke, and her tongue could not speak
one word, so much perplexed and distra^^ed was her spirit, with variety of a
thousand new thoughts. And albeit the knight had always greatly liked her, and
ben pleasing to her eye, as well in his beauty and good grace, as by his
prowess and chivalry, and now freshly this sudden joy unlooked for had
pierced her heart to the quick, she resolved nevertheless to make him answer
and to demean her self wisely herein, by this mean to prevent a future
inconvenience which might otherwise have ensued. For seeing her lover in so
evil estate of health, she feared to put him in greater danger, in giving him
a severe and rigorous answer: for this cause she says to the dwarfesse, It
displeases me thou did not promise Bruquel to tell me this tale, but seeing
the effect is ensued, now we cannot alter it. Thou shall then go to Arnedes to
tell him from me, how I marvel much he has enhazarded himself to so many
perils for my sake, wherein I hold my self much beholding to him, and thank
him for it humbly with all my power, promising him for guerdon of his pain, and
irksome travels which he has endured, to accept him willingly for my loiall
spouse, if the Emperor my father, and the Empress my mother will consent:
upon this condition notwithstanding, that he never adventure to speak the
least word in the world to me thereof, but let it suffice him only therein to
know my will. And to the end I be assured of the vehement and excessive love
(which as he says) ^e bears me, pray him from me, he take this news in
steed of the most sovereign balm or of some perfect cataplasme which may the
sooner knit up his wounds, and hasten his recovery and health, hoping to go
see him to morrow morning, if I may possible by any mean.

After Philocrista had instructed Amenada in her message, she took Melissa to
her aside, to whom for that they loved mutually with a sincere and affectionat
heart, Philocrista discovers this aumourous affair, making her a discourse
thereof from the very beginning. Whereof Meli^^^ was meruellous well apaid,
specially hearing that Recindos came of so noble and royal a blood as was that
of Castile. The dwarfesse seeing her time fit and convenient to acquit her
self of the charge her lady and mistress had committed unto her, went to do
her message, not missing a word thereof to the French prince, unto whom she did
deliver it as wisely as Philocrista had laid it down in words unto her: By
means whereof, the knight entered into so extreme joy, that within few days
after he left his bed and got up on his legs again, but before she departed
from Arnedes chamber, he entreated her of all favor she would carry to her
mistres a French sonnet, which he had for her love composed the same day,
praying her to command the master of the Emperors chapel to set a descant,
according to his art of music, to these French verses, which did say thus: As
is the purest gold by touchstone tried,
And as the adamant draws to his side
The heavy iron, if placed near it be:
The like we may of mutual lovers see.
Sweet loving lady well you may behold
That I am touch, and you are perfect gold,
You adamant, I iron, draw unto you:
And that you may this virtue better view,
But think fair lady on the amourous end
You draw me to: your heart I prove my friend.


After Amenada had read this sonnet, the answered the French prince, she knew
not whether her mistress would be pleased with her enterprising so
presumptuous a message, yet although she were a little discontented, she would
counterfeit the pageant so well that every one should in the end be glad
thereof: as it happened out, for she went her way to the princess Phlocrista,
to whom making many discourses of the extreme love Arnedes bore her, she put
her into more comfort with that sonnet, then if she had been made queen of all
Asia. But on the morrow the Empress went to visit Arnedes, taking with her
Philocrista so fair, and so richly attired, to make him understand her gladness
and content, which redoubled the joy that the knight had in his heart conceived
the day before. Then after the visitation of the Empress, she blushing asked
him how he felt himself in his wounds: Madame quoth he, thanks be to God and
to you, I find my self in good case, that were it not the inhibition of the
Physicians whereby I am constrained, I would rise now presently out of my bed
to walk abroad. Philocrista knew right well to what end tended these speeches,
therefore a lively blush of her countenance graced far more her face then it
did before: whereat Arnedes who judged rightly the passion whence proceeded
this change of color, reputing himself the happiest of the vassals of Cupid
the great Monarke, beheld her so steadfastly, and with so glancing and amourous
eye, that he thought himself placed in the highest stage of wordly bliss and
felicity. But Philocrista durst not look upon him, to the end not to bewray
the evidence of her passion, nevertheless she attended in good hope the
French Ambassadors arriual, to make an end of her dissembling, which Arnedes
desired in his heart as much as she, for not to displease and infringe the
commandment of his lady, he saw that to be the only remedy of his tedious
afflictions, wherein he was still enwrapped, till the king his father sent some
of his peers to Constantinople to procure his greatest joy, and the true
recovery of his health: so there will we leave the to come to Rifaran, who is
far traveled in the quest of Marcomyr.

CHAP. XIX. How Rifaran after he had put himself inquest of Marcomyr, passed
before a castle which appertained to the countess of Iseland, for whom he
combated a brother of her husbands, and five other knights, who besieged the
same: and how the countess entertained him very courteously into her castle,
where he fell in love with her at the same instant.
IT grieved greatly Rifaran to have made eight or nine days journey without
hearing any news of the knight whom he sought, and as he perceived his travel
was in vain (for in troth he held a contrary way to that Marcomyr had taken)
knowing not what to resolve on, whether to return to the court, or to go on
still to seek his man, it chanced he p^ssed hard by a fortress ioining to a
little city, albeit very strong and defensible, belonging to the countess of
Iseland, a very fair and gracious damsel.

This countess was a widow, and had been but two years without her husband,
who in the end of his days, for that he had no children, and loved his wife
with a singular affection, made her the inheretrix of all his estate and
siegnorie: whereat was greatly wroth a brother of the earls, called Diolas, a
fierce and hardy knight, who as a younger brother, was little the better by
succession of his father, but for a small farm, being al he could pretend for
his part, and willingly would he have made war upon his sister, had he not
seen her well beloved of all her vassals. By reason whereof he feared to loose
his labor, and all the time he should employ therein, thinking to get more
another way, caused her daily to be solicited and advertised, if she did not
forsake quickly that possession she held unjustly (surrendering it willingly
into his hands) he would cast her out by force and violence: as he who next
after the death of the deceased earl his brother, ought by right and reason to
inherit.

The countess was in a great perplecity through these threatening speeches, yet
determined to defend her self, if he went about to molest her, and by good
fortune the same day Rifaran came that way, when Diolas went the round without
the fortress, with five other knights well appointed, to epsy the feeblest
part where they might scale and surprise it. The countess thereof advertised,
presented her self presently upon the battlements of the wall, where leaning
over the top of a rampire, just at the arrival of Rifaran, she began these
pitiful and sorrowful lamentations: Alas why will you thus ruin me? What
has moned you to be so angry and furious against a poor damsel, a widow, to
dishonor her, to outrage her vassals and best friends, who never committed
against you the least offense, which in any thing might exasperate the choler
of a man (were he never so malicious or mutinous) to take so austere and
rigourous vengance, as you seek to offer me? I pray you in the favor and for
the deuoire of that honest and virtuous amity, you have always seen in me
toward you, you permit me to live in peace, suffering me to enjoy without
disturbance during my life, that little which it pleased him to inuest me with,
by the ordinance of his last will, and I promise to render it you undoubtedly at
the end of my days: for now to depart with it, were to me a heartsgriefe
unspeakable.

Diolas returned her a thousand villainous speeches to terrify her, saying she
had empoisoned her husband, and that he would otherwise have dispossessed her
of all that she did wrongfully possess by the law of the twelve tables. The^
Rifaran who staid there to hear those alterications between them, perceived
well what the cavil meant. Wherefore moved with pity toward the damsel
could not contain to reprehend Diolas for his discourtesie, in outraging with
such vile speeches the lady, who showed far more modesty and wisdom then
he, counselling him if by her he found himself wronged, to take his way to the
emperor who would minister good justice to him for his right. The explorator
was in a rage and full of indignation, hearing Rifaran speak to him in this
sort, who in great choler cut him of thus:

You who speak before you be bidden, will you take upon you to maintain the
right of this lady? surely I will quoth he, and albeit I know not the cause
whence proceeds this quarrel, yet I understand you offer her violence,
wherein for as much as I have taken upon me the order of knighthood, with
intention to aid to my power, those whom I see iniuried without cause, I cannot
nor I ought not to fail but succor her. And if hereupon thou will enter the
combat with me, I hope by the help of God (in whose hand are all victories) to
make thee repent this villainy offered her. I will never be accounted knight
quoth Diolas, if I do not make thee pay too dear for this thy foolish
rashness: and to the end thou may be an example to all other presumptuous and
witles fools, such as thou art, to defy a gentleman whom thou know not,
resolve now to defend thy self well, for I cannot think otherwise but thou
art of the faction, and one of those who with this disloiall and accursed
woman, have murderously slain my brother. Knight you surmise too great a lie,
quoth Rifaran, seeing that I know not this lady, nor have I ever seen her in
my life but now, no more then you, which I will make good in any form of
combat which you like best. Upon condition notwithstanding, that for any
accident which may befall you, none of your accomplices shall once stir in your
behalf to offend me, more then your self alone. No sooner had he spoke these
words, but he commanded all his companions to withdraw themselves from the
place, and that none of them should be so hardy as to come to his aid,
whereat the countess greatly meruelled, because she knew not the knight who
undertook her defense. Mean while the two knights who had great desire to
grapple, encountered with such courage and fury, that breaking their lances to
their gauntlets, they brusht one another so puissantly with their shieldes and
bodies, that Diolas was dangerously wounded in one of his shoulders, and
turning bridle incontinently began to hew on another fiercely with their
swords: all the time of this recharge, the countess, who well knew how valiant
a knight her enemy was esteemed in these countries, prayed God devoutly for
her champion, wondering much how without great cause his heart served him to
enter this combat. But Rifaran being valerous, and a perfect warrior, showed
within a little space, he would quickly carry away the victory, for he made
his fight with meruellous dexterity, and never proffered blow but hurt his
adversary: so as in less then half an hour he tamed him so well, that with
a stroke which he lighted aloft on the creast of his helmet, he made him fall
from his horse to the ground: Then Rifaran alighted from his, and running
hastily upon him, cut a two the laces of his helmet, and withal his head from
his shoulders, saying to the countess, who looked on through the loopeholes of
the platform: Madame, now are you secure from the vexation which this peasant
did work you, so that from henceforth you need not fear him any more.

The lady was much abashed at his sudden spectacle, and much more afraid
were Diolas five knights, who seeing their master already dead, came like mad
dogs to charge upon Rifaran, crying to him: thou art dead, cruel and inhumane
Barbarian, seeing thou have not had pity of a better and more courteous
knight then thy self. He knowing it was time to bestir something else then his
tongue, and not to be all day in doing it, put himself bravely in defense:
when with the first stroke of his sword, he sent one of them to keep Diolas
company in the other world. But the other four held him so lively play, that
he received two or three wounds, yet not mortal nor dangerous, for he drove
them so before him, that neither one nor other could once come near him, but
they should find him ready to receive them. And although they gave him his
hands full, as doubtless the match is too unequal of four against one, yet
he never showed himself coward or fainthearted, but in warding still their
blows, mist not their bodies an inch, at every advantage where they lay open,
and he made the sweat drop down his forhead for fear, whom he could sometimes
by chance light upon.

The countess seeing her champion in peril of death, sent many of her people
to his rescue, so that there salied out of the fortress more then twenty
knights all very well armed to go sacage and take prisoners those four
assailants: for all that, they could take but two of them al hewn and
massacred of their bodies, whom they carried afterward within the castle: for
as for the others, very fear had made to take their heels so soon as they
saw the supply of enemies come forth of the castle to assail them. In the
mean while two young knights, kinsmen to the countess, came humbly to thank
Rifaran, and to inuit him to refresh himself within the fortress, as well
because it was needful for him to rest, as also because the lady and
mistress thereof had a great desire to know him, and to do him all the honor
she might devise, for the sudden and miraculous aid she had received at his
hand. Gentleman quoth the knight then, small matters are these I have now
exploited, in respect of that I would endeavor to accomplish, as far as my life
would go, for her and her peers. Notwithstanding I will go willingly to
visit her, to the end to do her that reverence which I ow to all the honest
and virtuous paragons of her sex. So he walked forth toward the castle, and as
he drew near it, behold the countess who met him, who thanking him in most
humble manner for the knightly act he came from performing in the defense and
maintenance of her good right, required him most instantly and with a very
amiable grace he would declare her his name, to that end her spirits might be
settled, knowing him by whom she had received this aid.

Madame quoth Rifaran, I am a gentleman of the emperors court, whence I am
come not long since to seek a knight who departed thence very secretly this
other day: and arriving here by chance as you may see, I could not endure you
should be thus villanously outraged by your adversary, against whom I have as
I think without all blame attempted that which every advised and noble knight
is bound to do in the like occurrence. With this talk they mounted up the
stairs of the great hall, where being arrived, the countess did with her own
hand disarme Rifaran, then laid him in a rich bed, and caused his wounds to be
looked unto with all care, giving command the same evening to make an
honorable tomb, to inter therein the body of Diolas her brother in law, with
ceremonies of funeral pomps, as were requisite, for the younger brother issued
of so high a house as that of Iseland. And afterward causing al her vassals to
be assembled, she advised that Rifaran and the two knights which she held
prisoners should recount unto them the discourse of this battle, the happy
issue whereof made them more then content: In respect whereof they all again
swear and promised unto her loiall fidelity, and she remained in tranquillity
and peaceable possession of her estate. So that hereby her thoughts being no
more troubled with the continual vexations and alarmes that Diolas was wont to
give her, she occupied her self altogether in tricking up of her natural
beauty, and in doing of things which might please the knight, whom she
perceived already a little entangled in her love, which on the other side
fiered her own thereby with an unquenchable flame, having understood he was
nephew to the Empress of Constantinople, but she knew not he was a Moore: this
reciprocal amity grew so hot between them, that it ravished quite the
spirits of this countess, even to make her forget the chaste and undefiled
laws of her widdowhood: for the impatient desire of Rifaran, and the guerdon
of his merit, whereof she was in silent manner required, did provoke her so
lively that she was persuaded to let her heart swim in the stream of all
delicious ioissance: so it fell out afterward by the subtlety and secret
practices of Cupid, whereof not any living creature but they two, and one of her
most faithful ladies of honor were privy: and Rifaran loved her afterward so
strangely, that for the love of her, fearing least his departure might cause
her sorrow and insupportable grief, he soiourned a great while longer in that
place then he was determined to do.

CHAP. XX. How Marcomyr arrived in the island of Cardery, where first he
dismounted Tiraquel at the ioust: afterward vanquished the knight G^rdian at
the bridge, and some others who assailed him at the third turre^: how he had at
last a sight of fair Celestina, and was set upon by two great enchanted dogs.
YOu have heretofore understood, how after Marcomyr h^d vanquished Arnedes, he
went on his way with incredible desire to arrive quickly in Carderie, so that
he made tarriance in no place, before he came thither, which was upon a monday
at afternoon: full glad was he as ever he was in his life to be come thither:
wherefore he put himself in devout prayer, praying unto God with all
sincerity to give him so much grace that he might happily atchieue the
victory of this adventure: for a memorial and sacrifice whereof he promised
with a contrite heart to offer up the purity of his soul to the holy character
of Christianity, and to be baptized as soon as by any mean possible he might.

At this same time was not Belcarin in guard of the bridge as he was wont
before, for he was importuned to go some days before to visit the king and
queen Griana, his ouncle and aunt in Macedon: who having every day news of
the great and meruellous chiualries he did in defense of this bridge, had sent
for him by an express messenger to come unto them. And indeed he had not gone
(so obstinate he was in his enterprise) if Alderine had not requested him
privily by a letter, which the very same page brought him, who had spoken unto
him in her behalf, when he depareed out of the tourney at the marriage of the
infant Denise, as you have read before. For she discovered her secret to the
Queen Griana, and by all means humbly entreated her, she would under some
apparent color retain the duke her father, till Belcarin were arrived from
Carderie. Whereunto the queen most willingly granted, and seeing her nephew
could not find a more honorable and virtuous match then Alderine, she spoke
with the duke and duchess of Pontus, who were very glad of that alliance: and
therefore dispatched in have a gentleman of the queens, and Gratian, Alderines
squier, with a letter which she gave him, the words whereof were ofthis
substance.

A letter of the princess of Durace to Belcarin the king of Hungaries son.
TO the most valiant and renowned prince Belcarin son to the king of
Hungary, a maiden very easy to be deceived, sends a greeting condign his
merit. Excuse me seignior Belcarin if I write not unto you but that which is
most abounding in my thought, for if it were any thing else, I fear me I
should hardly be able to finish it without many confused vagaries in this
discourse, so much do I know my mind ravished and provoked with impatience,
which gives it no moment of rest. And if you would exactly think whence
proceeds this distress, you shall find it to be by the violent and excessive
love, where with full well you know it is seized toward you, that and it were
Gods will I could wish it were so reciprocally between us both: I should assure
my self at the least you would read these lines as willingly and with the lik
contentment as I have endited them. Understand then I cannot have but great
occasion to complain of you secretly, for so much as it seems you are a
falsifier of your promise, or a dissembler of love in my behalf: as the
reading of this letter shall make you confess, if you estrange not from your
judgment, Reason, which ought to be the mainesaile of the ship, which you have
set on float in the perrillous waves of this wordlie sea. For what think you
is now the vulgar opinion of your doings? But that you desire to purchase the
name of a true champion of Celestina, by the meruellous exploits of arms that
you do daily in garding her, by this mean making a more memorable fame of her
excellence, and kindling a greater desire in all gentlemen to come to that
island, to be for her adventurers? so it seems to me you are not my knight,
nay by good reason you may be called Celestinaes knight, which induces me to
believe the words reported to me in your behalf, when you took your leave of
the tourney at Macedonie, were but fained and dissembled: which I must think
to proceed of a very sufficient act (if speedily I perceive not the contrary)
to place you in reputation of the most ungrateful and disloiall prince who
ever entered into quest of Chivalry: but least the persuasion (wherewith the
popular voice has already filled me, touching your absence) should take a
deeper impression in my soul, I pray you come hither with as much speed as you
may in any wise, before my return to Durace: to the end we may find some
remedy for the continual torment which my poor heart feels, fiered with the
coals of lady Venus fire, for your sake: or else presently send me word of your
meaning touching the principal points of the premises, and by none other but
by the bearer hereof: whom I have given charge to deliver you a little word by
mouth: whom I beseech you to trust, and commit safely your secret to him, as to
the faithfullest messenger that may come from Her whom you know
in brief must die:
If pity none you show
to bring her remedy.



This letter and some word of message beside, wherewith Alderine could well
instruct Gratian, were the only mean to bring Belcarin into Macedon, who in
the mean time left Tiraquel in guard of the bridge of Carderie, hoping to be
quickly there again: but there will fortune something to him which will save
him all that pain, as hereafter you shall further understand.

To return to the prince of Tarsus, as soon as Tiraquel saw him approach the
bridge, he made out against him, as he did against all others who in great
number resorted continually into this place, rather to combat with Belcarin
then to try themselves in the adventure of Celestina, and had already
vanquished six since his companions departure: whereof Marcomyr advertised at
his lodging the night before, resolved rather to die then to take the place of
the seventh. Wherefore he laced his helmet, then gallopping to the end of the
carrier (for at the other end he beheld Tiraquel all in a readiness) gave him
such a brave encounter, that with a shrewd blow he sent him to the ground: for
all that he lost one of his stirrops by the counterbuffe which he received of
Tiraquel, who lay there a good while before he could rise again, he felt such
pain by his fall.

Those who beheld this encounter meruelled much, especially the Queen of
Thessalie, Celestinaes mother, who arrived there four or five days before:
for that the last of the three Fairies who wrought the enchantme^t of the
castle, foreseeing she could not live longer, procured the arrival of Marcomyr
as before you have read, and afterward sent the queen word that soon after her
decease she should see all her desires accomplished. No sooner was the death of
the Enchaunteresse known by the good lady, who had an extreme desire to see
her daughter out of these enchaunted prisons, to the end by her means her
husband might also soon after be delivered out of the captivity of the
misbeleeuing pagans, but she departed from Thessalie to take her journey
toward this isle of Carderie: where she nor none of her train could ever set
one foot upon the entrance of the bridge only. By reason whereof causing many
ten^s and pauillions to be raised in the plain field, she there staid
attending in good devotion the end of the adventure, when Marcomyr was come
thither, and as suddenly she saw Tiraquel vanquished, who was very valerous
she had much joy in her heart, praying God the creator, he would put into this
new knight so much force and courage, he might free her daughter from that
enchantment. Marcomyr breathed a while to see whether his enemy would rise
again from the place, nevertheless knowing he was too long a while before he
could do it, made approach to win the gates of the first ^urret, where he spied
a great knight sturdy on foot already ready to combat him: therefore he
alighted his horse, and with an invincible courage drawing his sword he began
to pray thus with a loud voice:

O lord God if thy providence has destined me the discomfiture of this
adventure, suffer not I beseech thee any fainthearted cowardice to accompany me
in the deliverance of this gentle princess which is here within enclosed: but
let my eyes this day enjoy the presence of Celestina, whom they desire so
ardently to behold, and I shall fulfill my promise, as soon as ever I have
opportunity to do it: these words ended, he advanced himself with incredible
hardines, albeit the knight of the bridge repulsed him most stoutly, whereat
the prince was so encouraged, that there began between them so cruel and
bloody a battle, that it was a terror to behold it: because there was no plate
of harness (were it never so well tempred with steel) but flew in pieces to the
ground.

Marcomyr who was valiant and magnanimious, and on the other side pricked on
with an exceeding desire to finish this adventure, hewed so long on his enemy,
that he began to be greatly weary, and as he heard the dwarfes horn, who
looked out of the turret top (knowing the forces of the knight his adversary
were redoubled thereby) he let his sword hang at his iron hanger to get within
him and to gripe him fast in his arms, which he did with a brave courage. And
these two wrastlers tugging together a long time, at the l^^t to the ground
they went together, where Marc^myr, who was always fortunate and favored by
the destinies (as was also his father before him) fell uppermost upon his
enemy, from whom (albeit he held him very h^rd down to him by reason of the
double strength he had recovered by the winding of the horn) he did wind
himself out from him nevertheless gallantly: and setting his knee upon his
breast, began cruelly to pommell him with his sword. Which the knight of the
bridge perceiving, clasped about him again with his arms, so that there they
were a good while roling together, and foiling one another in the place, nor
could one get the better of the other: notwithstanding Marcomyr disdaining to
have clawed one another so long while, and flouenly to lie along taking measure
of the earth, by the only remembrance thereof, doing a thing so repugnant to a
noble and heroical heart, put too such admirable strength, that he lifted
himself once again lively out of the gripes of his adversary, who lay along
on the ground tired clean out of breath with striving and wras^ling.

Then whipped Marcomyr along the bridge, praying unto God with all his heart to
succor him in this happy and so famous conquest. And as soon as he had done
his prayer, going a pace neither too swift nor too slow, he came to the gates
of the second turret, which clapped together with a more horrible creaking then
they were wont to do at the coming of any other knight: for all that, he who
saw them going a far of before they were quite sparred together, pusht between
his sword, which he then bare naked in his hand, therefore could they not shut
close together: and being nothing amated at the noise, he quickly thrust his
fingers between the two doors which he opened so easily, as if they had been
two leaves of paper. Quickly was he in at them, thrust on with an unspeakable
gladness, knowing never any other knight had gone so far in this adventure.
Whereof no less was the pleasure and gladness that received in their hearts
all those who were most desirously attending to behold him at the end of the
bridge, and especially the good queen of Thessalie: who embracing Ozalias the
tears standing in ger eyes (for the unspeakable joy of her heart) blessed and
praised God who had sent thither so perfect and accomplished a knight: then the
prince told her moreover, she would without all comparison be so persuaded, if
she were once advertised of his parentage and offspring: ^or if she ^aw him
valiant and magnanimious in the highest degree, he was no less illustrious and
generous of blood. So far exceeding seemed the gladness and content of all the
beholders, that it may not be expressed.

And if he had cause to rejoice at this strange accident in the behalf of the
prince of Tarsus, Tiraquel who was co^^eighed by his squiers into his tent,
felt in himself an extreme agony, and so great a hearts grief (seeing
himself so quickly vanquished) that he was more then half mad, and would have
died for mere rage. In the mean time was Marcomyr come to the last turret,
which he saw was guarded with three knights all in complaet armou^ down to
the foot, having every one a short lance couched against him. Pass he could
not further onwards unless he would put himself upon the very point of their
lances, which terrified him a little: yet knowing no better remedy, he
encouraged himself* thus: On what do thou pause Marcomyr? What fear thou
now man? Be not affeard of any thing, seeing thou hopest in brief to see her,
who in beauty surpasses the most perfect of all the world: for if in getting
hither thou have done more then any who ever hazarded before in this adventure,
the divine bounty shall help and make thee strong enough for the rest.
Speaking these words, he ventred himself forwards, when the three knights gave
him such a furious charge, that they quickly laid him along: yet his hap was
still so good, that none of them gave him any wound: nevertheless he had as
great shame of that misaduenture, as if he had then ben before the Emperor and
all the ladies of his court.

Seeing it would be no better he recovered himself with a trice all in a fury,
and without fearing any encombraunce or peril which might befall him,
traversing his ground a little on the one side, he delivered so mighty a
stroke on the lance of the first who was next him, that it went in two pieces
almost at his fists: to be short, without long standing he did as much for the
other two, who then setting their hands to their swords, began to lay about on
all sides: but such was the prowess and valor of Marcomyr, and so cunningly
he knew to ward his adversaries blows, that he kept them far enough off him:
albeit so sharp and cruel did this battle seem unto him, that he affirmed
oftentimes afterward, he never saw himself so sore handled in any assault,
where ever he had been before nor afterward. In fine, he used so well the force
and dexterity which God had given him, that he made them cease the fight,
forcing them to recoile to the end of the bridge, from whence they vanished out
of sight, and at the same instant with them the knight guardian of the bridge,
and the dwarf, who never boudged from the watch tower, being then heard a most
great and horrible earthquake in all parts round about the castle.

The queen perresuing the same, fell down on her knees to the ground to thank
God of this good beginning: as did also those who were in company with her,
especially Ozalias, who being desirous to follow Marcomyr, would leap
incontinently after upon the bridge, nevertheless could not plant one step
sure, for that neither he nor any others of the company might pass over at
that present, albeit many assaied to do it, and yet took much pain in vain.

Marcomyr on the other side was so ioifull he had set his foot so far, that he
never remembered to take any rest: whereby he went directly to the castle, and
going almost round about to seek the entrance into it, seeing the countermure
and the enclosure of the walls which did enuiron the great chamber, were very
high and too steep to be climed up, past a little farther, where he found the
posterne gate of the garden guarded by two enchanted dogs, through which he saw
(hard by a fountain within) many Damsels standing up. Among whom she in the
midst (sitting upon a chair wrought with imbroderie) was Celestina, so
passing fair, and most sumptuously attired, that she had not only provoked the
tender and passionate hearts of inamoured knights, but also made ioifull, yea
moved stones, plants, and other insensible creatures. The prince Marcomyr then
having thus seen and curiously beheld her, as a body ravished and frantic,
thrust from him the door so violently without al fear, that at the third time
he brake it open: and entering ioifully into the place of his bliss, the dogs
ran upon him forth with, tearing with their sharp teeth, all the plates buckles
and leathers of his harness. Notwithstanding he who saw himself in eminent
peril of life, fearing to be torn in pieces and devoured by these beasts
(which seemed to him more terrible and mad then the infernal furies) began to
lay at them with downright blows, and then thrust upon thrust so lively, that
he rather wearied himself then hurt them in any wise, for that his sword could
not pierce their skin, being diobollically enchanted. Wherefore not well
knowing what to do in this perplexity, he said in great bravery, How is
this? Now I am before the eyes of the most excellent of all ladies, shall my
force and stomach fail me, that I cannot defend my self against these hideous
and brutish animals? Ah too great an enemy should be to me that old mortal
Chimere, if she should make an end of me here before her, in whom lies the
perfection of all my future glory. As soon as he had ended this speech,
letting his sword hang at the chain of his arm, and taking in either hand one
of these savage and horrible beasts, he put them finely under his armepits,
where he thratled them so hard, that they were quickly strangled: nevertheless
he remained so weary and senceles, that scantly could he well stand upon his
feet a good while after.

CHAP. XXI. The gracious greeting and talk that passed between Marcomyr and
fair Celestina in the garden, where they supt both together, and how after he
had given her to understand who he was, he gave her the ring which his mother
had given him at his departing from Tarsus.
NOw to come to Celestina, she had already felt the flame of love as well as
Marcomyr, for the Fairy (knowing the time of the ceasing of this enchauntment
to approach) gave her to understand, she should be quickly conquered and
delivered out of that prison by one of the best knights of his age, to whom
from her nativity the destinies had absolutely vowed her for wife in
recompense of his labors. Which made this amourous destiny sparple more and
more in the spirit of Celestina, to see her self surprised with this new and
marvelous disrest: for the little god Cupid, who maistereth and domineereth
over the hearts subject to his bow, did study to make appear in like degree
the reciprocation of Marcomirs love in this princess: Who being assailed with
such unusual passions, did nothing but wish for that so happy hour when the
knight should arrive there for her deliverance. So that even as the pilot
tossed long time with the impetuous storm and tempest at sea, mounteth
sometime into his mainetop to see whether he can discover a far off the port or
haven, he desires so much: likewise this damsel disquieted with the wauie
floates of this amourous sea, gets to the top of the platform of the castle,
to look whether she might see any knight from far in the plain champaine and
sea coa^t coming toward her. And by good fortune being there when Marcomyr
arrived at the bridge foot, her heart began to leap for joy, which caused her
to imagine strait, he should be her deliverer and future spouse: wherefore she
soon got down into the garden with her damsels in gallant array, to see what
might be the issue of the knights exploit, who did presage unto her so much joy.

By this time the beams of the great planet, running swifter then they were
wont to do, gave place to the light of Phebe his sister, when the princess
(who was before advertised by the Fairie of that which beseemed her to do)
seeing the dogs vanquished, rose from her place, and with all her damsels came
toward the knight: showing by the gesture of her countenance, she came to
welcome him with many amiable courtesies. But Marcomyr who saw her draw near
him, feeling his heart stricken with a sudden motion, set one knee on the
ground, thinking to kiss her hand: whereat Celestina blushed a little, and did
the same to him, saying: it is to me sir knight, to whom it belongs of duty
to begin this, wherein through your courtesy I see you have now prevented me:
for by that aduenturous act, from the finishing whereof you now come, you show
your self evidently to be in perfection of Chivalry second to none of those,
who at this day bear arms: so that before I rise from hence, I must entreat
you to grant me one favor, which I beseech you not to refuse me, seeing it
shall not be any thing, that may take from you or make you loose that which
shall be for ever entirely yours: for having set me free from this enchantment
(after my suit obtained) you shall dispose of me as may a loial spouse do of
his wife.

Madame quoth Marcomyr, I esteem my self no less at this present loved of
the heaven, then fauorised by fortune, hearing you say, that (I am yours and
you mine) which makes me think my self fully guerdoned for all the travels
and troubles it behooved me to suffer in coming into this place, so that demand
what it shall please you, for I being your slave and voluntary seruitor,
cannot but obey (without exception) all your thoughts.

Ten thousand thanks gave she to reply, albeit it is not needful to use this
language in my own behalf, conconsidering I am her, over whom you have so full
power, that according to time and all things else, the least proof you will
make shall demonstrate the true effect: but it seems to me more then time you
take some rest (as it is good to have always respect to the end and period of
all things) wherefore shall I pray you humbly to refresh your self a little
for the preservation of your health. The^ they walked together toward the
fountain, where Marcomyr was disarmed by Celestina and her damsels, and having
washed his hands and face within the same basin, he put on a long and rich
gown, which was brought thither for him, then sat him down with his lady upon
two magnificent and pompous chairs covered with wrought gold: and because that
Herebus had sent his daughter to hide the day, and to spread his darkness all
over their hemispheare, there were brought thither many candles and torches
lighted. The sweet smelling and oderiferous sent of roses, violets, and other
natural flowers of the garden, with the unspeakable beauty of Celestina,
then the melodi^us harmony, which proceeded from the music well consorted
with diverse instruments, whereupon the damsels played most perfectly, and could
moreover sing most sweetly thereunto (so that you would have thought of
purpose, Orpheus, Arion, and all the other divine musitions had been there
assembled) did ravish the spirits of the knight up to the heavens, and made his
memory forget al his travels and labors past, thinking himself in a place of
all joy and bliss, where he seemed to behold not the perfect beauty of a
goddess, but of a shadow only which did steal away his heart, and charmd his
eyes to look upon it.

The like was it with the young lady, maruelling as much or more, at the
beautiful form and the well accomplished proportion of the knight, not for all
that, without inwardly thanking the God of heaven to give her such a husband:
and in verity these two lovers were one of the most beatifull couples that
ever man saw matched together, worthy to compare with Hero and Leander, those
two glistering stars of their time.

In this trance of joy, and content past all conceit, did they remain, till
the damsels, aduertising them the supper was ready, spread before them a very
fair and rich table of wood made of a Citron tree, naturally crisped in and
out, smelling like balm, which they covered with many rare and exquisit
dishes, making at one of the ends thereof, their dresser, replenished with
basins, cups, and plate of gold and pearl, whose price and valor was
inestimable. But small cheer served the two vassals of the son of Citherea,
for that they saciated themselves with looking one upon another: for there is
nothing more delicious to a lover, then to behold the object which he loves:
because love making a breach upon the body, and planting his seat round about
the heart, debarreth the passage to all nourishment, while it is fed with this
amorous conceit, which is such, that all you who have tasted it, may judge of
the sweetness or bitterness thereof. So supped Marcomyr and Celestina, and
strait were the Tables taken away by the damsels, who afterward going to take
their refection, left them both alone to devise together at their ease.

Then approached the knight to her who had even now ravished his heart, and
taking her by the hand thus he began: Alas Madame, well aspected may I call the
Horoscope of my nativity, seeing so great and sovereign is the happiness
whereunto the celestial bodies would forepoint me, in making me win by force
of arms your love: I know now that to be most true which you told me lately in
the temple of Delphos, to wit, I might see you breefly at my will. Command me
then I pray you, all that it pleases you I shall do^, and show me the way
whereby I may reap^ some fruit of the perpetual service which I vow to your
surpassing and most excelling virtue, that I may pacify and give some
solugement to the inextinguible flame, which kindles more and more in my
heart. Fair knight, replined Celestina, as touching the fire which you may now
feel, think from the same spark proceeds the heat which burns me
reciprocally, whereof I cannot so much marvel (considering the will of the
destinies) as of you, to hear you say you saw me in some other place, for since
I was three years old, the Fates have enclosed me within this castle, whereinto
never knight nor other person ever e^^r^d since, but your self alone. As for
the boon which you (...) granted me, it is, that you shall not attempt any
thing against mine honor and chaste will, till the day when ^he marriage shall be
solemnised between you and me, which cannot be before you have rescued my
father the king of Thessalie out of the hands of the great Turk, whose
prisoner he has been a long time.

Wherefore you must enterprise this adventure, which you shall bring to a
fortunate end, in making your self lord of me, and of the whole kingdom of
Thessalie, whereof I am lawful heir after the decease of my father, so that in
testimony of this my transporting hence, from this present I put my self
wholly into your power, upon condition notwithstanding, you shall not infringe
the promise you have made me. Marcomyr gave great ear to all this, and for a
while answered not a word, thinking if he should send away, or himself
conduct the damsel toward the Emperor, and in the mean time not to disclose
himself to any body, before he had performed the voyage of Turkey, bringing
with him at his return the king of Thessalie, if God did favor him so much
that he might set him free out of his captivity. And as he was marvelous glad
of this secret resolution which he had laid down he brake silence in this
manner.

Madame so fervent and deep is the love I bear you, that to get the monarke
of this inferior world, I would not cause you the least grief which might
move and displease never so little your virtuous mind, second to none living*
so that albeit I had not promised you that which you have demanded, I would
never for all that have disobeied your commandment. For I repute my self the
most fortu^ate knight living under the zones of the heaven at this day, not for
the honor or glory which I think to purchase by this adventure, but only to
see my self captiued with the perfect beauty and supernatural grace wherewith
I see you are divinely enriched: which from hence forward shall give me such
courage to attempt d^^ficult and magnanimious enterprises, that the farthest
distant of my race, shall be greatly bounden to you for the glory which by this
mean shall redound unto them. And assure your self well, Madame, for any
pain or travel which may present it self before mine eyes, I shall not
refuse to employ the best of all my forces to set the king your father in his
pristine liberty: wherein so contrary effects cannot succeed my desires, but
the only remembrance of the incomprehensible felicity I shall win in
exploiting it, will make me esteem them less then nothing, or else very weak
and feeble things, which may never in any wise alienate my mind from
remembrance of you. In the mean while I hope to leave you in the power of the
Emperor, whom I love and desire to serve most affectionately, to whom seeing I
cannot more surely send you, I will conduct you my self, foreseeing already
the extreme anguish my heart shall suffer, finding it self in exile from your
presence: but I must tolerate for a while this violent and bitter passion, in
the which the hope I have to enjoy hereafter the happy and perpetual fruition
of you, shall warrant me from death.

Be you hereof most assured quoth the damsel, I will never love other then
your self, to whom the irreuocable fates have destinated me, and that during
your absence I shall feel no less torment then your self, so that have me
whether it shall please you: For when I would I could not mislike of it, having
already translated the conquest of my heart into your free will and gentle
disposition. Judge you whether Marcomyr were glad of this answer or no, for
the continual changing of his countenance, with many other tokens proceeding
from a vehement flame of love, were true witnesses of the joy which seized all
his vital spirits: so that this joy striking into him a sudden courage, he
embraced Celestina graciously protesting to her, he would never disobey her
commandments, but from thence forward did pretend to believe and reverence
them as if they were the divine Oracle of Apollo. So he led his eyes with the
object of this princess at the light of those burning torches which were
there, and judging her beautiful above all creatures whom he could call to
mind he had ever seen (by reason of her lively purple color, that the heart
which felt it self constantly loved of so perfect a knight sent often into the
surface of her cheeks more whiter then alabaster) he was more then before
inflamed with her love. So that from point to point he began to discourse unto
her all which had happened to him in the temple of Delphos, where he saw, if
not her proper person, yet at least her true shape and representation, with the
which he assured himself he talked a long time: whereat the Damsel greatly
admired, praising unto the skies the wisdom of the three Fairies, whom she
thanked sincerely for procuring her such a knight to be her husband.

Then she praid him with a singular affection to tell her who he was, which he
did most willingly, recounting unto her the history every word, without
dissembling or disguising any thing at all: upon promise nevertheless she should
not show it to any creature, before he was returned from the conquest and
rescue of her father the king of Thessalie. And then he gave her a sweet and
gracious kiss, with a fair ring which his mother the queen gave him at his
departure from Tarsus, praying her to keep it carefully: because he said she
charged him to present it one day into the hands of the Emperor Cleodomy^ his
father: as in very deed it was the true token whereby he was recognished to be
the Emperors son, as hereafter you shall hear.

CHAP. XXII. How Marcomyr and Celestina going toward the queen of Thessalie
who was yet at the end of the bridge, met at the issuing out of the castle many
ladies and knights of that isle, who attended there for them: and how the lord
of the same island after he had done great honor and reverence to them,
brought them to the queen, who carried them back to lodge within the castle,
and of the sequel.
SO great was the joy of Celestina (hearing her future spouse to say he was son
to the Emperor Cleodomyr) that all that night no sleep nor any desire to
sleep could enter into her head: by mean whereof she and Marcomyr past it
away in devising together what they had best to do, and in the end laid down
the plot which liked them best.

After the clear morning had chaced away the darkness of the night, and spread
over the horison his blew and azured mantle, to prepare a passage for her sweet
lover Titan against he left his ruddy couch, they both together went into the
dungeon of the castle, where Marcomyr wondered greatly at the riches and
magnificence of the lodging of his lady Celestina. There would she needs search
him to see if he were wounded in any place dangerously, and finding none but
brusing blows she caused him to be bathed diligently with sweet herbs, to be
comforted with many sorts of fomentations, and to put on a rich black armor,
which the Fairie left there expressly for him, with a sword by which he might
cast a sleep whomsoever he would: the helmet and lance were born by two
damsels: then descending out of the tower, passing through the green garden,
they came away by the bridge holding all hands together. Celestina was finely
tricked up with a carcakenet full of great collets set thick every where with
carbuncles, diamants* Rubies, Emerawdes, and Oriental saphires, clothed in
cloth of gold cunningly wrought over with many little precious stones, embossed
in figures set like unto Silenes, or little apothecarie boxes, whose fashion
and rare artifice surmounted far the valor of the things. In one whereof was
seen so great quantity that you would have judged nature had bestowed in that
place the most excellent and rarest gems of her treasure. Having moreover which
a fillet garnished with great pearls, quainlie attired her hair yellower then
the gold-twind hanging round about adowne her shoulders, and upon her two
little apples on her breast, more to be desired then those of the garden
Hesperides, thus she marched with a grace no less gracious then beseeming a
Uirgin, who saw at her side so valiant and magnanimious a knight to defend
them, better then any dragon could do.

As they then came forth in this pomp and joy second to none other, they found
many gentlemen and ladies of the island, who attended there for them in great
devotion, and among the rest one fair and very brave knight kin unto the
Fairies, whom they did inuest with the siegniorie of that place after their
death: he bowed himself very low, and set one of his knees to the ground
before Marcomyr and Celestina, uttering with a very good grace these speeches:

Aduenturous and most fortunate knight, benign and happy was the planet which
reigned at the hour of your birth, seeing by your Prowess and inestimable
valor you make now accessible, and in his proper nature, the place whether we
could not go and come well at our ease. Sir quoth Marcomyr, it has pleased
the divine bounty to do you this benefit through my mean, and for that I
repute my self a man much favored of the planets to have set foot within the
castle, if you be by any way of pare^tage allied to these noble ladies, who
have by their knowledge wrought we so much good (being not able to render such
personagesthe guerdo^ meet to recompense the good will they have showed me,
since the enchantment in this isle) I give you all the right which I may
pretend in conquering of Caelestina. I thank you most humbly, quoth the knight
of the isle for so great a benefit and courtesy which it pleases you to
present me: whereof notwithstanding I know neither my self nor any of mine
worthy, for that far above their knowledge did pass your virtue and
valiancie, as being him only who should accomplish the adventure of this
castle, wherein the Fairies had employed all their secret philosophy.
Nevertheless let us omit these circumstance^ to some fitter opportunity, and
let us go to the end of the bridge to give some comfort to the queen of
Thessalie who attends your coming thither: for that neither she nor any
other whosoever, can enter within the bridge before you be first come forth
with her daughter, and then shall all these enchantments cease, except the
castle which shall stand for ever firm in his foundation, for an eternal memory
of her who was once therein so long enclosed.

O God, quoth Celestina alowd, is the queen my dear mother then here? Surely
I see the heap of all my bliss by little and little come to perfection. And
as she showed (still in her going) many signs of congratulation to her lover,
the knight certified her how ten or twelve days past her officers arrived at
the end of the bridge, and she her self the next morrow after accompanied with
many Barons and ladies, whereof Marcomyr was well a^aid, hoping to send away
Celestina with her mother to the Emperor, and to depart himself quickly to go
to deliver the king of Thessalie.

When the queen saw her daughter come so pompeously attired, she was seized
with so much pleasure and joy, that her spirits incapable to conceive it, she
fell down in a trance between Ozalias arms, who had almost born her
company through the content and ease suddenly stricken into his heart, seeing
Marcomyr seated upon the top of Fortunes wheel. But as soon as Celestina was
come to her, she knew right well it proceeded of the vehemence and
superabundance of sudden joy, therefore she took her mother by the hand, and
kissing it many times, began to weep for compassion: but she soon came to her
self again, and seeing her daughter hard by her, she embraced her with so
ardent a motherly zeal, that she could not choose but vnscopping the sludgates
of her eyes, let the tears trickle down her cheeks, when her mother began
thus:

Alas my dear daughter, how long a time it is that mine eyes ^round in tears,
do seek by all means to see you? O how many times has my heart quailed with
continual anguish, in vain sighed and powered forth complains and cries into
the air for the absence of you and of your father, wishing that which I see
may in brief bring some remedy to my grief, by the means of him who has now
delivered you out of prison? Ah pitti^ull mischance, when I remember I was so
cruel and severe a mother to you the true substance of mine entrals, as to
suffer you to be banished and shut up in prison so far from me. Alas, God had
predestined it in this manner, which was cause, the love of the mother nor
the abundance of feminine pity, could not in any thing prevent the will of
the fatal destinies. And thereunto was I forced to consent, not without
enduring extreme heartsgriefe, which I suffer patiently since the three Fairie
sisters had undoubtedly persuaded me I should recover your father again by the
mean of him who should deliver you from the charms and enchauntments which
they should lay upon you. So that there rests nothing now but to see whether
these magitians are here in veritable: wherefore fair knight (whom God bless
from all mischance) seeing you have brought into so great gladness the soul
which floated among the waves of this tempestuous sea of adversity, restoring
Celestina into my hands, so also I must entreat you with an affection
proceeding from a heart, which shall feel it self for ever bounden to you, to
do so much that this joy may be entire and perpetual, to give me her father
as he is by the fatal destiny appointed: to the end we may live together the
rest of our old age in all tranquillity of spirit.

The knight had great pity on the queen, and quickly took her up by the
hand, saying: Madame, I pray you vex not your self any further, for I have
determined to die or to work these matters so about, that you shall pass the
rest of your old years with more content then of the queen of Thessalie may
be imagined. Then the good lady thanked him, and kissing his cheek very
courteously she replied thus again: I believe undoubtedly my son, you will
assuredly hold your promise, seeing our Lord has so well accomplished you in
all things, that he does not permit you to speak ought with your mouth but your
heart is pricked with a desire ready to perform it to ye uttermost.

While they were upon these purposes, althe Barons and knights of ye queen did
approach to kiss the hand of Celestina being the ioifullest me^ in the world to
see her so fair and so sage, for ye hope they had to be one day under the
siegniory of so perfect a couple of lovers. And at the last the knight of the
isle besought the queen and Marcomyr, seeing many had by this time passed
easily over the Bridge, to come long within the castle, to refresh
themselves there, and to the end they might both forget their sorrows and
pains past. Which they did right gladly with all their train, who marueled as
much as at some great miracle, seeing yt rich houses of ye Fairies built and
wrought with ^^mirable architecture: and if ye building did show stately and
magnifice^t, that part of ye island where it was situated seemed no less
delightful and a place of pleasant recreation. By means whereof, they
remained there three days with as much pleasure and solace, as any humane
spirit might wish: nor could they saciat themselves with beholding the strange
things, especially those of the dongeon wherein Celestina had been so long time
enclosed: whereby it chaunsed that Marcomyr finding the seat of this isle in so
good and fertile a climat, purposed to transport thither a colonie of people
out of his kingdom of Tarsus, to inhabit it the better, and to the end also
this country might immortalise the remembrance of him and of Celestina, to the
future ages of his posterity.

There were they served sumptuously, and with all abundance by the siegnior of
the island, but the queen could not glut her self in beholding her daughter,
and talking to Marcomyr, who loved her surely no less then her self did: in
such manner that they two one day being both together far in talk, he prayed
the queen most lovingly to conduct her daughter to Constantinople, to put her
on his behalf under the protection of the Emperor, whom she should tell
moreover, that so soon as he could dispatch his voyage into Turkey, he would
kiss his hand, and so acquit himself of that promise, which he had by the
mouth of others made unto him diverse times. Lord Marcomyr quoth. the queen then,
I will with all my heart do that which you prescribe me, yet would I feign
know, whether you mean to go against the Turk with a puissant army, for as
much as if the case stand so, I will send into Thessalie for as many companies
as you will have, and for a need will demand aid at the Emperors hand, who
will succor me willingly with so many legions as I would demand.

Madame replied Marcomyr, my mind is to take none other company with me, then
such as I brought hither, considering this business shall be brought to an end,
rather by aduenturous hazard, than by any forces which I may march into the
field: and were all those of the Emperor united together, they shall not be
able to bring it so quickly about. Nevertheless, see here my resolution: You
must understand how I met not long since at sea with the king of Culacin son in
law to the great Turk, beating up and down the coast of Thrace, accompanied
with many other Rouers, and a great consort of like faction, that with all his
power he might endomage the Empire: I took him by fair war, and sent him
forthwith fast bound and manacled as an arch pyrat and king of Rouers unto the
power of the Emperor. If perhaps I cannot by my carriages and secret drists
prevail in mine attempts, being in that country, I will politickly seek to
make exchange of these two kings, under pretext of some good and colorable
practices. In brief, I will work as the occurrences of time and place will
give me leave: wherein I beseech the divine bounty to show me the speediest
and directest course, whereby I may quickly bring to a fortunate end this my so
affectionat desire.

Exceeding glad was the Queen to hear of the exchange of the king of Culacin,
so that being put in great comfort through this hope, she hastened with all
diligence the departure of Marcomyr, thinking every day as long as a thousand
years till she saw at liberty the king her husband: the same thought
Celestina also, who with her amorous becks and signs showed unto her lover all the favor she could devise, for that never going from her mother, they could
not give such contentment to their hearts as they desired in amorous talk and
devise only: and more privy habitude then kissing, had not as yet been
permitted in their sportings, nor did it happen at all till the day of their
marriage, when Marcomyr undid the impolluted girdle of her virginity, which
till that day she had ever worn untouched.

CHAP. XXIII. How Marcomyr and Ozalias accompanied the Queen of Thessalie and
Celestina her daughter, departing from the isle of Carderie, half a days
journey: and how after they had one taken their leave of another, the Queen
and her daughter went to the Emperors court, whether they were most welcome and
excellently well entertained.
THe queen of Thessaly considering Marcomyr would never depart first, she and
her daughter Celestina took their leave in good sort of the lord of the
island, giving him many rich presents for the great benefits they had received
of him: the like liberality felt he from the prince of Tarsus, who bidding him
adie^ as well as the ladies, would needs bear them company half a days
journey. But before their departure the spirits of this trinity could not
contain, but they must pour out a great stream of tears, which was so tossed
by the wind of their sighs, that the storm did deprive their tongues of their
office, and especially that of Celestina. Wherewith Marcomyr had his heart so
griped, that he could not endure to see her in such pain, but departed without
further adieu, and took his way with his cousin Ozalias toward the seacoast
of this isle, where he had commanded his mariners to attend him with his ship.
All that day did Celestina nothing but sigh and sob, and for ought her mother
could do, she could not be merry, but so well as they could, they continued
on their way, in the which they had every where great honor done them all
along as they passed: for they knew before who they were, and the occasion of
their voyage to Constantinople.

By means whereof the people ran out before them to see Celestina, who had
remained so long prisoner within the enchanted castle: and every one said if
the knight who set her free were adorned with so high valor, she did not
appear to be endued with less beauty, and that it should be a pair as rare
in all perfections, as ever nature might couple together in matrimony. Then
being arrived at the last near Constantinople, the queen sent before one of
her knights to advertise the Emperor of their coming, who meruelling much
thereat, demanded the name of him who had conquested Celestina. My lord, quoth
the knight, he is called Marcomyr, one of the most valiant and courteous
knights who lives this day under the firmament. You say true, replied the
Emperor, but comes he now with the queen? Surely no, answered the knight,
for that the future deliverance of our king has constrained him to pass into
great Turkey.

Then the Emperor commanded Diocles and all his Barons to go forth to meet
the queen and her daughter, which they did most gladly: for upon the famous
renown already spread of her every where thorowout all the regions of the
leuant, every one was enflamed with a great desire to see her. Amongst the rest
would needs venture out to behold her, Arnedes, who began but ^o recover of his
wounds, notwithstanding he found himself much perplexed, because he thought
his fathers Ambassadors stayed a little too long, as also for that he heard no
news of his cousin Recindos. And if those of the court were all richly araied,
the Queen and all her ladies on the other side came in clothed in black and
mourning weed, except Celestina only, who by the knights entreaty must enter
into Constantinople in all her gorgious attire, and in her ha^^^ments of most
exquisite and costly stuff.

As ^oone as Diocles had given first entertainment to the queen, he came next
toward Celestina, laying his head upon the bridle of her pal^rie, the like did
Amedes to the queen, being both astonished at the excellency of Celestina,
when Diocles began thus: Madame it seem to me the Fairies committed a great
oversight to empr^^son thus long so lively and admirable a beauty as yours,
considering every gentle heart should rather endeavored to have gone to deliver
the king of Thessalie in seeing you, then deprived of your presence, seeing you
are the guerdon of his exploit, whereof indeed may Marcomyr esteem himself
fortunate, if he deliver out of prison the good prince your father. So also am
I most fortunate, quoth. Celestina, winning by this mean the most valiant and
gentlest knight who marches upon the surface of this habitable earth, wherein
were many learned Fairies who shut me up fast within the castle: for that a few
exposed themselves into peril of death, having once seen me abroad openly,
whereas to win honor many have proved themselves in the adventure which was
destinated to Marcomyr, as to him who surpasses them all in Prowes and
braveness of Chivalry. God forbid, quoth Diocles then, I should gainesay you
therein, seeing the virtues and graces of Marcomyr are such, as well merit the
felicity, wherewith the divine providence would make him happy now in all
fulness. And you have just reason to love him, as indeed he loves you: but
seeing her so firm and constant in her affection (albeit her beauty had almost
made a wound in his heart) he would not parley with her any longer of that
matter.

The Emperor and the Empress came forth with Philocrista as far as the
palace gate to go meet them, where the Queen and Celestina her daughter
alighted quickly from their palfries to do them honor and reverence, but the
good prince Cleodomyr and his honorable wife Griana welcomed them, and
entertained the^ most courteously. Then they lead them along into the great
chamber, where the Queen began to the Emperor in these speeches: most happy
and illustrious prince, Marcomyr the choice Paragon of knights, who humbli^
kisseth the hand of your imperial majesty by us, sends you this damsel my
daughter, praying you to keep her under pour protection, until he return
from Turkey with the king of Thessalie my dear spouse, if God give him leave
to free him out of the hands of the Infidel: the which I pray devoutly with
all my heart he briefly permit him, as well for the extreme desire I have to
see the king my lord as for the great desire I have to come to do you service,
which he hops in short time to compass.

With these words she consigned up her daughter into his hands, whom the
Emperor received very amiably, and showing himself most ioifull of their
arrival, offered them frankely all things which might be necessary for the
content of their spirits. Moreover prayed God he would so well direct all the
actions of Marcomyr, that he might quickly set free the king her husband out of
his long captivity: assuring her, if the knight had been willing to have had
forces along with him in this enterprise, he would have aided him with a huge
army. Then the queen answering he would have no other company with him but
that of God and of his cousin, the Emperor began again to pray in form like
unto this: He which makes me live in great desire to know him (for the good
services I have received at his hands) by his divine power happily conduct
him, and after his exploit reconduct him hither again: then taking Celestina
as his daughter, says: To you Philocrista do I give the charge to guard this
princess till the return of her knight. My lord and father, quoth. the Infant, I
will obey with all my heart all your commandments, and beside I shall make
dear esteem of so good company, nay I shall be passing glad to see a damsel
near me, for whom so many excellent exploits have been worthily achieved.

The Empress took the queen by the hand, and Philocrista Celestina, then
they went to sit down together upon the rich seats of tapistrie which were in
the presence, where the knights beholding these three ladies, thought there
should be amongst them a second judgment of the apple of beauty. And who had
taken Arnedes for the gentle shepherd Paris Alexander, his dear lady
Philocrista should full soon have been in possession of him: because love did
so sway his heart, that he found her the perfectest of al, though Celestina
excelled her in some gifts of favor: so that all the assistants concluded by a
common resolution, they had never seen a fairer lady, except the Empress when
she was in flower of her young years. And a thing most true it was, Philocrista
never attained to the perfection of her mothers beauty, but she had two
sisters, named Flerida and Basilia, which resembled her very much, especially
Flerida, which was judged the fairer, as you shall hear hereafter. The
emperor entreated Celestina to tell him who this Marcomyr was, if she could
show him so much: whom the princess answered very modestly, If it please your
grace, I cannot give you any thing to understand of him, but this, he
commands a kingdom and many other seigmories of very great estate, and when
I should know of him more, yet were I to be excused though I did not discover
so much (for it is his pleasure to conceal it) till he come himself in person
to manifest his country and his progeny.

For this modest answer was Celestina greatly commended of the emperor, who
judged her to be very wise and well advised, when he began to behold heedfully
her gestures: so that spieng on her finger the ring which her lover gave her to
keep in testimony of his service, he deemed it presently to be much like that
whereof the queen of Tarsus made him a present at his departure from her.
Therefore he could not choose but demand her in what place she had recovered so
rare a ring, and so near resembling one which he esteemed the fairest of his
Cabinet. The damsel answering him Marcomyr gave it her at her delivery out of
Carderie, he much marvelled thereat, imagining in his spirit, whether the knight
might be son to the same queen of Tarsus or no, wherefore from thenceforward
he doubled his great desire to see him, having not beside forgotten the good
turns he received at her hands in the kingdom of Pasmerie: so that causing
his ring to be brought and matched with Celestinas, he found them so like one
another and conformable, that putting themboth together, you could not discern
the one from the other: as also in very deed it was all one making, and so
cunningly wrought by art Magic, to serve for the true token and cognizance of
the paternall stock of Marcomyr, whereby the emperor began to think he might
well be his son, calling to mind the secret sport the queen and he had
together, when she first practiced to come by his acquaintance: yet he never
imparted so much to any body, but did daily greater honor then before to the
queen of Thessalie, for her daughter Celestinaes sake, to whom he did show
like love as to Philocrista, so that the Empress seeing the great content and
pleasure she received, passed the greatest part of her time in great joy and
solace with the queen, and Philocrista with Celestine: who began to love
together with a love more then common. In fine the emperor was very glad,
hearing Belcarin was not in ga^d of the bridge when Marcomyr arrived there, as
being also very sorry for Tiraquels misfortune, albeit he esteemed the knight
courteous, that would not further aggrauate the ill success of the prince of
Micene, and to say truth of his nature, he made little account to kill or wound
any knight after he had once brought him to the ground, whereof the Emperor
would still talk to his barons, commending him above the best in his
knowledge: but let us suffer him fair and softly to take his way toward
Turkey, to speak a little of the good Recindos prince of Castile, which now is
far gone in his quest.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Recindos arrived in the isle of Carderie, where
understanding Marcomir had performed the adventure of Celestine, he resolved to
go meet Belcarin in Macedon: and how he had a combat against him by the false
persuasion of the damsel who pursued the revenge of her brethrens death.
REcindos being issued out of the tournie at Constantinople (as you have heard
before) with good hope to find out Marcomyr, and to do his best endeavor to
bring him back to the court, missed not much the way that he held, for lying
one night by chance in a certain castle where Marcomyr had lodged before, he
was at supper demanded by his host, into what part he traveled: I seek (said
he) a knight who won the honor of the Tourney which was lately held at
Constantinople, in the which he bare a white Flower in his arms. Truly (quoth
the master of the house) he took his repast in this place the other night,
and is one of the most courteous gentlemen that I ever saw in my life, which
makes me think God may well make him finish the adventure of Celestine,
whether he assured me he went directly from hence, to prove himself therein.
Right glad was the Spaniard hearing this news, so that he thought it a long
time until it were day, that he might go after him.

Day being come, he mounted to horse betimes in the morning, with full purpose
to make stay in no place before he arrived in the isle of Carderie. Eight days
he traveled without any disturbance, hearing in every place certain news of
this knight. He spurd on lively, hoping either to perform the adventure, or
else to meet with him whom he sought: but as soon as he was arrived in the
isle, he understood that Celestina was delivered, Marcomyr had taken the rout
of Turkey, and T^raquel was retired into the castle of Lipes whether his
sisters had conducted him so soon as he was vanquished.

This was strange news for Recindos: but the good knight Tiraquel conceived so
much sorrow and discontent hereby that he had almost died for grief*
nevertheless as speedily as he knew certainly of the conquest of Celestina,
he dispatched away a squire to advertise Belca^in thereof, praying him of all
affection, to stay himself in the court of Macedolite, from whence he stirred
not, bathing himself in the flood of all delightful pleasures. Nevertheless
these delights were nothing in respect of those of Alderin: who for the virtues
which she heard were every where spread abroad of him (besides her own eyes
saw them to be far greater) she loved him as her proper life: and if seemed
to her to arrive at the very top of al worldly bliss, being to have him one
day to hu^band: ^uery hour of which time was a thousand years to her before
her desires came to effect. Therefore upon a time after dinner, she besought
him in any ways, he would return no more to the isle of Carderie, giving him
to understand secretly the great love she bare him, and how the ^uke her
father and the duchesie her mother were content to give her to him in marriage,
with their whole estates and siegniories, as his own true hereditarie
succession after their decease.

Madame quoth Belcarin, I repute my self this day the happiest knight whom
ever fortune advanced to the top o^ her wh^^e, seeing my self required of
that, wherein I would employ all my best en^^^ours to attain some happ^^ end,
so I besee^h you most humbly (for that I have long since cho^en and desimated
you for the only mistre^^e of my heart) to speak before your departure
something touching this t^^nes to the king, that he putting to his helping
hand, it may sooner sort effect according to our desires. As touching my
return to the garding of the castle of Celestina, Madame you know I cannot
surcease without somewhat impairing mine honor, seeing I have made promise and
vowed before so many, which may hereof reproach me and impute it to my disgrace:
but I hope some man's hap will be to accomplish (before it be long) that
adventure, in guarding which if I do my best endeavor, it shall be that only
which shall save me blameles.

In the mean time I pray you trouble not your mind, nor despair not of his
firm and indissoluble amity who shall be yours for ever. Whereof may give you
sufficient testimony my coming now to this court, whether I had not come for
any thing in the world, without the especial command which I received by your
letter.

Alderine was overcome with joy at so good an answer, and as she was recounting
it to the Queen Griana, arrived Tiraquels post, he doing his message to
Belcarin, made him very heavy with the news: for that he would feign have
then ben present in the guard of the bridge to have tried himself against this
so redoubted a knight: albeit it fell out better for him: for although he was
of all men reputed for valiant and skillful in Arms, yet his valor never could
come so high as to make compare with that of Marcomyr.

But the damsel that pursued to have Belcarin slain, if you remember in the
beginning, to revenge the death of her brethren, whom she supposed had been
felloniously slain by him, being advertised of his departure from Carderie,
followed him hard even into the court of Macedon, where seeing him so welcome
to the king, the Queen, and all the chiefest nobles, went thence in despair
never to be avenged of him: therefore did she full heavily still weeping and
wailing take her way homewards to her friends, and the fourth day after her
departure, she found Recindos near a fountain, making the most grievous and
lamentable complaints that any ear had ever heard. For when he heard that
Celestina was gone to Constantinople, he purposed to pass through Macedon,
where peradventure he might yet find the knight whom he sought. Recindos then
seeing this lady wring her hands and take on so terribly, demanded of her the
occasion of her moan: she who had learned her lesion perfectly and could play
her part without book (knowing him already by his look to be pitiful and
ready to do for her any thing to deliver her out of this anguish) told the
like tale as she had before done to Tiraquel and Sergio, whereof you may very
well remember: in conclusion that the knight who had traitorously slain her
brethren, soiorned in the king of Macedons court. Recindos then who was very
desirous to purchase honor in every place, made her this answer* if it be so
as you tell me, that the knight slew your brethren by treason, I promise you
upon the faith of my knighthood to work your revenge according to my power,
for every Gentleman receiving knighthood, binds himself to succor damsels
oppressed by their enemies and all others that shall work them despite.

The dissembling woman cast her self down at his feet to kiss them, swearing
and blaspheaming many times, that what she had showed him was most certain and
true: Come then along with me, and show me the knight quoth Recindos, and I
promise you again to die in the field, or to make him confess in presence of
all, the dis^o^all act he had committed: seeing the folly of his counsel had
so much blinded his eyes as to neglect the true honor of his nobility, before
so soul a note of infamy. The shameless woman remounted upon her palfrie, and
they road so many days iourneies together until they arrived in Macedon,
where they came to alight right before the palace against Belcarins lodging,
which the damsel knew full well: wherefore they went presently up together into
the great chamber, and meeting the king as he came from masie accompanied with
Belcarin, the foolish woman turned toward Recindos, saying: Seignior, see there
the knight who slew my brethren, I pray you of favor make him know before the
king that it was by treason, which he had a great while before devised against
them: for the good prince ignorant of this foul offense, reputeth him
wrongfully one of the most courteous knights of his court, as I have plainly
perceived since I soiorned in this place.

Then Recindos bowed himself down before the king Florendos with a most humble
reverence, and turning his face toward Belcarin, who was on the other (...),
spoke thus to him: Sir knight this Damsel has swo^^e unto me that you have
slain two of her brethren by great treason, after they had in most courteous
manner entertained you in their fathers house: if this be true you commi^ted a
most cowardly oversight, which I mean to make you confess by force of arms, if
you have the stomach to enter the close field with me. Belcarin was highly
offended, to have this outrage vpbraided him so often, and always by her means
who put him many times in danger and peril of death: wherefore he answered,
not without some little choler proceeding from a stomach feeling it self
greatly iniuried in this manner: Surely knight you seem as much simple and
sturdie in saying, if I have the stomach and hardiness to enter into combat
with you, as is the damsel false and disloiall in accusing me wrongfully:
notwithstanding I hope to make you pay dear for this your rashness of belief,
and likewise the lying and froward woman for her sugared speeches, whereby she
has deceived you.

In heat of these speeches he took his arms, to present himself soon after
in the combat: which the king would willingly have hindered, if by any means
possible he could: but Recindos was so eager against Belcarin, that the king
who could not dissuade from his attempt, at the last entreated him thus much,
Seeing you will not fulfill my pleasure herein, at the least let me know the
name of him who will so little gratify him that would not be ungrateful if
occasion did present it self to do you the the like pleasure. I am quoth he,
a knight of a strange country, who arrived in the court of the Emperor of
Constantinople at the nuptials of the prince of Hungary, whether by chance
came another knight unknown, bearing a white flower upon his shield, who after
he had won the honor of the Tourney, departed secretly from the assembly,
which constrained me to follow incontinent in his quest: and for that I follow
the way of knights errant, I beseech you let no man wrong me in the battle.

Assure your self thereof quoth the king, that you shall have to do with your
adversary only: yet it v^xeth me to the heart, that coming from the court of
the emperor Cleodomyr my son, you will enter the field against him who is one
of his greatest fauorits. When Recindos heard Belcarin named, on the one side
he was exceeding glad he had to try himself against so famous and renowned a
knight, and on the other he was meruellous sorry, because his enemy was
brother to Me^is^a whom he held dearer then himself: (...) that he would
willingly have surceased the combat* if he could with his honor: but in the
end the king requested the duke of Pontus and another very brave knight of his
court, to judge between them according to their conscience and without any
exception of persons. Then the knights appearing within the listes, set upon
the one side of the palace, when the sign was given, they ran with such a
tempest one at another, that their lances flying in pieces, they fell both
down to the ground: nevertheless both of them being quick and nimble, they were
with a trice up again: So they began to strike at one another without all
pity, and desiring both to be victors, they burst and beat asunder their
armor on their backs as in open war at all defiance: so that they were both
wounded in diverse parts of their bodies.

Therefore the king and the other lookers on, maruelling to see them so
obstinate in their fight, said they never saw so much magnanimity in any two
knights before: whereupon the king supposed that Belcarins adversary was the
very same who had delivered Celestina out of the enchanted isle: for reputing
his nephew a most brave and hardy man at arms, he saw him then in great
danger of his person. The two knights tired and almost done, withdrew
themselves to breath a little, which was not long before Recindos renewed the
assault, saying it was a mockery to breath so long before a king, but the
battle being begun again, by reason of the abundance of blood which issued
from them in every ones sight, they could not strike such fell str^kes as they
did at the first: By reason whereof king Florend^s perceiving Belcarin waxed
feeble, and that if they should be let alone to decide this controversy, they
would die both in the place, desiring rather the life then the death of the one
or the other, he cast his rod of peace between them: and going from the
window, through which he beheld them combatting, he descended down unto them,
requesting of all affectionate love, they would cease this cruel battle: Sir
quoth Recindos, that cannot by any means be, unless the Damsel would pardon
him first the injury she had received at his hands. I will my self go speak
to her quoth the king, in mean time do not fo^le your selves any more in this
quarrel, considering you have both sufficiently showed your manhood and
haughty Chivalry. Then he went strait to the damsel (who was the ioifullest
in her heart that might be, seeing her enemy Belcarin in such an ill taking,
for of a troth was never knight brought into so low an extremity) and began
thus to tempt her: Fair gentlewoman I pray you let me entreat you not to cause
the death of two so valiant champions as those are, and I beseech you pardon
Belcarin (for my sake) if he has in ought offended you, for I hope he shall
make you such amends, and do that penuance which you shall please to put him
unto: and for my part I promise to show you such courtesy, as you shall one day
have occasion to thank me for that it was my hap to move you therein.

To that will I never consent while I live (quoth. the damsel) for I had rather
see Belcarin die presently before my eyes, then to have the monarchy of the
three parts of the world under my power, considering the heinous and detestable
treason whereby he has so villanously abused my father, and all his
posterity: and less will I ever absolve my knight of the promise which he
has made me. The king entreated her once more with great instancie, and so did
likewise all those who did accompany him: nevertheless it was all in vain, for
she was so fixed in her most deadly grudge, that she took no pleasure in any
thing, but in exaggerating the heinousness of the case.

When the queen (who felt her self in a great agony through the peril
wherein she saw Belcarin was) understood the refusal of this damsel upon the
truce and accord of the two knights, she herself went to speak to her with
the duches of Pontus, and the princess Alderine her daughter, entreating
altogether that she would acquit Recindos of his promise, and the queen would
retain her for one of the ladies of honor of her house. But all those
entreatings auailed no more then those of the king, to move that inexorable
damsel to pity, whom when the queen saw her so full of mutiny and
cruelty, she swore in great anger, unless she would pardon quickly both the
knights, she would make her die a shameful death, for there was a murmuring
before, that the accusation laid against Belcarin, was false and malicious. The
Damsel hearing the queen speak in so great a rage, was greatly affeard, and
had also some compassion on the tears which she saw stream incessantly down
fair Alderins cheeks, so that alighting from her palfrey, she prostrated her
self at the queens ^eet, craving pardon for the great error and offense she
had committed against her majesty by ingratitude, refusing her a thing which
was in her power to do, and that she did with all her heart pardon the one, and
acquit the other of the knights.

Then the queen embraced her in token of thanks, and causing comm^undement to
be given Recindos should proceed no further in the battle, took her along
with her ladies into the palace: and the king taking the two knights in either
of his hands one, brought them into the great chamber, where he caused them to
be disarmed, and being laid in two rich beds, which he commanded to be made
presently ready for them, he caused his learned physicians and chirurgi^ns to
look diligently unto the healing of their wounds, which were in no small
number: Whilst they were in cure, he visited them both so continually, that
they were accorded and reconciled together: likewise the queen and the
duchess of Pontus and Alderine her daughter, came every day to pass the time
away telling many merry tales and pleasant discourses one to another, to
release and assuage their minds of that foil they had so vnmerci^ully taken
one o^ another in their combat, wherein having both made trial of one another
prowess and strength they much esteemed and commended each other. The queen
who retained with her the damsel, married her a^terwards honorably, and
Belcarin so soon as he recovered footing, made her confess before the king
the queen, Recindos, and diverse others, how she had always accu^ed him
fals^y, because the same night he lodged in her fathers house, he never (...)
nor knew at all any brethren she had.

CHAP. XXV. How after Marcomyr and Ozalias had embarked themselves to sail
into Turkey, they arrived in a haven very near the castle of Albase where the
king of Thessalie was prisoner, and how Marcomyr purposed to be at the ^ourney
which was held for a daughter of the captain thereof, and the sequel.
MArcomyr having left the queen of Thessalie and Celestina her daughter,
traveled hard till he came to the haven where his pilots stayed for him with
his ship, thinking upon nothing still but the great beauty of his lady, and
how he might deliver the king her father, to give some release to his ardent
and passionate desires. It happened as his mariners arrived in the same place
where he appointed them to cast anchor, they found upon the sand a Turkish
seaman very grievously sick, where he was cast out of some Christian ship,
which had past that way the day before: Those of Tarsus knowing him to be a
Moore, took him up, and incontinently carried him into their ship, to the end
to recover him unto his former health, who by that time the prince came aboard
to them, felt himself strong enough to endure labor at sea. By means whereof,
understanding Marcomyr would put over into Turkey, besought most humbly to do
him the favor to suffer him to go along with them in his ship thither, and for
r^quitall of such a benefit he would when he was over, c^^duct him every where
through al parts, whether it should please him: ^or he did perfectly know a
rutter of all the cr^^kes and turnings which way they were to sail, and knew
moreover all the seacoast of Turkey.

The knight was very glad of this good hap, accepted of him for the master of
the ship: and not concluding any thing toward what coast they should first set
sail, at the last advised to thrust into the nearest haven to the city of
Tubanta: wherefore he demanded the Turk, if there were any port there abouts,
which was a good and safe harbor. Sir quoth he, I will carry you if you will
into a creek of ye sea very secret, where very seldom come any great vessels:
for that on the shore there is none other then that of my father, who fisheth
there abouts: and this creek lies within one days journey of Tubanta, and
within another of the castle of Albase, in which the great Turk holds at
this present the king of Thessaly prisoner, and al his treasur, under the guard
of a hardy knight who is captain thereof. And well can I assure you sir
knight, there is not any handful of earth in all that country which I know not
(as well by night as by day) as well as the coasts of the haven, whereof I
speak unto you now: Where you may remain in safety, and do whatsoever you
shall please, no man to say you nay in any thing, for the benefit which I now
receive at your hands.

Marcomyr was still more ioiful, seeing so good a beginning laid before hand
for the execution of the matter he went about, therefore he prayed his Turk
that he would make a short cut of it. All his equippage was soon in a
readiness, and as good luck served, hoising up his saileyards, a prosperous
and favorable gale blew them so far, that in few days they came to surge in
the coast of Tubanta, and afterward to cast anckers in the same port. There
went the Turkish mariner a shore to give order to prepare a chamber for the
knight, and finding not his father at home, advertised his mother and two
younger brethren he had, who showed themselves very glad of his return: but far
gladder was Marcomyr, seeing himself in so secret and remote a place, moreover
near the castle of Albase, wherein was captive the king of Thessaly whom he
sought.

Orican was the Turkish mariners name, who having told his mother of the great
favor that the knight whom he conducted had done him, returned aboard
presently, praying Marcomyr to come a shore to refresh himself a little in
their house, which he willingly did, being weary and annoied with the pestred
air of the ship: after that he had equipped himself with his rich black
armor which the Fairies left him in the castle of Carderie, and with the sword
which had force to enchant and cast in sleep whomsoever he would, by
unsheathing it: It was a large one, and short like a cemitorie, but graven very
artificially and gilded, garnished beside with three sorts of adamant, whereof
she sheath was made of the one, the hilts and the pommell of another, and the
handell of a most rare and precious Calamite that might be found, the blade of
most pure and fine steel, and the best temper that was ever given to a sword:
in brief it was judged the rarest piece of work that ever was seen in that
kind.

Oricans mother received Marcomyr and Ozalias with the greatest entertainment
and welcome she could devise, and in the evening came home the old fisherman
who was very glad to see his son whom he accounted forlost and forlorn:
notwithstanding he was much abashed to see what company he had gotten and made
to come ashore, to entertain them after mariners manner in so poor a house
as his. And as he began to ask of his wife whence proceeded this good fortune,
Marcomyr demanded of him from what part he came, whereunto the good man answered
him very courteously: from a city sir, not far distant, whether I went this
morning to sell some fish, which I made away quickly, because there is
assembled a great number of knights to be present at the marriage of the
daughter of the lord thereof, whom he marieth to the son of the captain of
Albase: and there I staid some what the longer, to the end to see the
bridegroom and a sister of his which he brought with him who is esteemed the
most beautiful and the finest young Damsel of all the round world. The which
is of very many great lords demanded in marriage, but she will not accept of
any, saying that she will never marie with any but with him, who shall deserve
her by his Prowess and dexterity of arms: so that many brave and valiant
knights are come to see her for this intent, and have ordained upon the third
day of the feast, a triumph for the love of her, who in the mean space goes so
pompously attired, that she draws into great admiration all those who look
upon her: and I tell you sir, there is such a concourse of people, that it
seems to be the court of the great turk with his bassoes and Ianissaries.

Marcomyr who listened to him most attentively, remained some little while
pensive, and afterward bethought himself, if he might but once by his subtle
devises enamor this Damsel, he might easily at his pleasure enter into the
castle of Albase, where he should have better mean to set abroch his
statagems ^or the deliverance of the king of Thessalie, for this cause he
purposed to be at the Triumph, and in going to his bed, he imparted all this
affair to Ozalias, who commended and liked highly his politic invention.

The morrow morning Marcomyr made the fisherman know he would be one at the
triumph, by reason whereof he bestowed something on him in gift, praying him to
have in special regard his ship and mariners: then departed accompanied with
Ozalias and Orican, who was his guide and did him much service in his practices
about this business. They were not far gone before they met by the way one of
Leifidaes pages (so was the Damsels name who was daughter to the lieutenant of
Albase, for whom they should Ioust) who was sent from his mistres to go see a
sister of hers married there near at hand, lying then in childbed. Marcomyr
coming toward him, gave him a courteous and affable salutation, and demanded
of him if the triumph were held the next day following. Yea verily quoth the
young youth, at least they have all so agreed, and if you come thither you shall
find many hardy knights within the palissadoe: but I believe the partakers of
Ripolo (so is the name of the bridegroom) will carry away the honor of the
tourney, because many hardy and valiant champions are come to this feast for
the love of Lefida his sister my mistress, and to the end to find better mean
to present him their service, would take his brothers part being one of the
chiefest in the triumph.

Then the prince recalling in mind the perfections of his Celestina, breathed
forth a deep fetched sigh, and on the other side was marvelous glad to have met
with the messenger of this damsel: wherefore by this mean to win his
acquaintance, he proceeded thus with him. Gentleman I may deem the excellent
graces of your mistress to be so amiable, that in an instant they will
captive and entrap those who do behold it, but I can well assure you, there is
one ready with his entire will and most sincere affection to serve her, who
never yet appeared before her face: which I speak for my self, who abandoning
the place of my nativity, have trauersed (wish almost insupportable travel)
many and diverse countries, to come hither to make her understand the extreme
devotion I have to be her perpetual and faithful servant. Whereunto only the
renown of her excellent beauty, which I think has pierced through the whole
circuit of the earth, has induced me. And seeing my good hap is so favorable
at this present as to meet you so fitly, albeit you know me not yet, and that
I have toward you merited nothing, I would nevertheless of favor entreat one
thing of you, which you should do for me: by the effect whereof beside you
shall purchase notable reputation of courtesy and gentleness, which all noble
borne of your age ought to have in singular recommendation, I hope to make you
know it is no ungrateful person whom you shall gratify with such a pleasure,
and that you should not repent to make me your debtor in a far greater good
turn. What would you have me to do, quoth the young man? For as much as you
seem to me virtuous and a man at arms (if it be to me a thing possible and
honorable) I will do my best endeavor willingly.

Thanks for your good will replied Marcomyr, and know that I would obtain of
you nothing else, but if it would please you to tell your mistress, a strange
knight who comes into this country but to see her graces and virtues,
commends himself most humby to her good grace, and prays her with a most
inward affectionate love that she would accept him for her knight in the
tourney: with intention to show himself second to (...) in exploit of arms,
having no readier mean to manifest unto her the insufferable passion of his
heart: and to the end she may know me, I shall not be of her brothers side,
but against those who take his part, hoping to make them forsake the field one
after another, by means of the force and hardiness that her lively beauty
shall give me, if she grant me so much favor: Whereby I shall repute my self
the most fortunate knight into whom the planets have ever infused their
celestial influences.

The page seeing Marcomyr beautiful, and richly armed, deemed that he must
needs be some great personage, wherefore he framed this answer thus to him
modestly: Sir, I should not dare to enterprise this for any man living, without
some acquaintance before, or knowing that he had some familiarity with my
mistress: nevertheless, esteeming it a thing of small consequence, and that
you deserve more favor at my hands then this, I will willingly carry her this
message, for your sake who entreat me with such instance* Marcomyr thanked him
again, and to make him more beholding to him, that he might bear well in mind
this business, caused his Squiers to give him something for a present, which
well contented the messenger* and devising together of many other matters, they
came at last to Prissa (so was the city of the father of the bridegroom
called.) They found there, all a large plain covered quite over with
pauillions: where Marcomyr chose out for himself a place which liked him best,
commanding to erect there a rich and fair tent.

In the mean time the young man took honestly his leave, and entered full glad
into the city, where was heard of every side great triumph and magnificence,
for that was the first day of the marriage. Leifida had no sooner spied him, but
she asked what news from her sister? Whereunto he answered, that he left her
making good cheer, and praying him to present her humble commendations to all
those whom she knew would be glad to receive the^. When he saw her withdraw her
self late in the evening into her chamber (knowing the^ or never was the
fitest time to deliver his other message) he followed her at an inch for the
same purpose, and taking her aside a little from her damsels, as though he would
have imparted some secret to her from her sister, he made the whole discourse
unto her as Marcomyr had informed him. I cannot bethink me quoth. she then, who
may this knight be who has been so hardy as to send me these presumptuous
messages, being he says he is a stranger, and that he has for my love
abandoned his country. In sooth nor I, quoth. ye young man, of this can I well
ensure you, he shows himself descended of great pare^tage, and is one of the
most beautiful and fairest personages that I ever saw in my life. As for his
courtesy and liberality, behold here (in showing her the earnest of their
deaths, albeit neither of them thought thereof) what largess he has used,
causing to be delivered me by his Squiers these rich presents which he has
given me.

Truly I wonder much replied the Damsel, that this knight comes from so far
a country to see me, well might I be reputed very ungrateful (whosoever he
be) if I did not think well of his so great travel. Therefore fail not to
show me him to morrow, so soon as he shall enter within the lists, to the end
I may mark well his doings.

Most willingly will I do your command, answered then the young man, and I
can better then any other satisfy you, for I know him very well by the rich
arms which he bears, and by a goodly courser upon which yesterday he was
mounted. So did the page begin the train which came to end in the damsels
brain, who (after that she had set it on fire her self) felt such a burning
all that night, that she could not sleep any wink: thinking and imagining
still who might this knight be that came so far from a strange country to see
her.

CHAP. XXVI. How Marcomyr comes to the tourney which was held for Leifida,
wherein he vanquished all that appeared against him, winning her love thereby:
and how they spoke together by the devise of their messenger, who was cause
that Marcomyr and Ozalias entered easily into the castle of Albase.
THe morrow being come which was the triumph day, Leifida attired her self most
sumptuously, as well with rich habiliments, as with all other her precious
ornaments: and after dinner, at the just hour when the sporting should begin,
she wet with the bride, and with many other ladies and gentlewomen upon the
scaffolds, and into the pauilions which they had pitched for them in the
plain. Then assembled the knights together which were for both parties, about
two thousand, all men of chief, and very brave champions, and being entered
within the bars, every one began to show his prowesie and dexterity: but
because the number of valerous champions was far greater on the bridegroomes
part then on the contrary side, they fetched about the adversaries so well,
that they had borne away the price of the battle, if Marcomyr and Ozalias had
not come into the bickering: who knowing this kind of skirmish a little better
then those of that Region, made themselves known what manner of men they were by
the trial that they made of them, especially Marcomyr, who employed himself in
such marvelous deeds of arms, that before the page said any thing, Leifida
knew him by his incomparable exploits, whereof she and all the lookers on, were
in a great wonder: because if he shocked fiercely, yet he knew better to
manage and voltidge his horse, so well, that there was no knight who durst
stand before him, so that at last being thoroughly heated, as a tiger following
his prey, he chased all his enemies to the retreit. Then seeing the tourney
ended to his honor, he returned into his tent with Ozalias, who had behaved
himself also for his part very valiantly, but they did not disarm themselves
till night, mistrusting least they would seek to lay some ambuscado for them:
as happens oftentimes in such sports and pastimes, when the vanquished being
provoked with malice and envy, conspire to lay rods in piss against the
vanquishers.

When Ripolo perceived his people were put to foil and vanquished, he was very
angry in his stomach because he loved affectionatly Leifida his sister, and
doubted least she would impute the fault to proceed from him: notwithstanding
she had not her heart upon any other thing but on the knight to whom the honor
of this victory was truly due, commending him to the heavens for his admirable
address and magnanimity.

Feign would she have understood the whole process of his history, and
knowing no better mean, took to her aside her Ambassador of the day before,
whom she sets thus aworke: unspeakable seems to me the generousnes of
this strange gentleman, who knew full well how to put in effect the resolution,
whereof he sent me word yesternight by you, for which you must needs go
thank him from me, and also for the great travel and pain which he has
sustained, to come for mysake thus far: moreover as he has in ample sort
showed me his force and prowess in arms, tell him that I desire no less to
see his person being disarmed: Wherein to satisfy me, (if he will be this
evening at the banquet with my brother who is newly espoused) he shall do me
this pleasure* which I will not fail to account in the number of the kindest
which I may receive from him.

The young man went to dispatch this message. In the mean time while they did
cover in the great chamber, al their talk was of nothing else but of the great
prowess of the knight who had won the Tourney, and that which drew the people
into more admiration was that no body knew him, not Ripolo himself, who would
very feign have known the certainty what he might be, but none could give him
any certain news. At the last Leifidaes page being come to Marcomyrs tent,
delivered him his message in wise manner, whereof the knight was marvelous well
apaid, and returned him this answer. Gentleman, I pray you certify your
mistress from me, that I would not for any thing disobey her commandment,
because no other thing in the world forced me to come so far from mine own
country, but an extreme desire I had to present unto her my humble service,
reputing my self most happy if she will but employ me in any thing which may
be pleasurable unto her. To go sup with the Bridegroom, it seems to me a
thing a little repugnant to the small acquaintance which I have as yet with
him, and with those of his company: nevertheless I think verily to be there
soon after supper, to the end mine eyes may take their full repast at the
object of the celestial visage and comely grace of your mistress, beseeching
you in all dear affection, that you do not make known to any who I am. And
if peradventure I may speak a little in secret with her, I shall tell her
things which shall make her live in ioifull content all the rest of her life.
Wherein if you will be a third agent, loiall, and favorable, to be a mean of
her good and your own, I will return you such recompense that you shall call a
hundred and a hundred times happy the hour, wherein through appointment of the
destinies you met me by the way: for albeit you see me now alone, and in this
simple equippage of a knight errant, I possess nevertheless great wealth, rich
provinces, and great state. Sir, answered the messenger, I will employ
willingly my person, to do you all the service I may devise in things which
shall not empaire mine honor, nor that of my mistress: and I will take beside
very good order that you shall not be known of any but of her who desires
extremely to come to that point. Then Marcomyr disarmed himself, and cast a
Turkish gown about him, carrying under it his sword only, and came along with
the young man into the great chamber where the feast was kept: there standing in
a corner, where he might see and be seen of Leifida, began to eye her with
none other then a demure, smiling, and fained look, to the end thereby to
work a cautelous mean to deliver thence ere long the king of Thessalie.

And whilst he played his counterfeit pageant very circumspectly, the page went
unto Leifida his mistress, telling her softly in her ear: See yonder madam
the knight vanquisher of the Tourney, who prays you in all dear love, you
will not disclose him to any of this country, whether he directed his voyage,
only to see if your beauty and excellent graces did second your renown which
resounded into his ears, even into his own countries, hoping if it be so,
(for he has already opened to me the most secret gate of his heart) so to
employ himself in matters of all difficulty to come by your acquaintance,
that you shall have none other occasion but to love him, at the least to think
your self much beholding to him for the travel you your self shall see him
take for the same effect. The rest that he told me, I will recount it you at
leisure in a place that may seem fit to make unto you so long a discourse.

The Damsel who was sage and well advised, left off at that time to confer
any longer with her new secretary, fearing least the assistants might misdeeme
the love which had already too lightly overcome her: but being not able to
dissemble it long time, she cast her eyes upon Marcomyr, who imagined still
his plot how he might bring his matter about. And she perceiving him so
pensive, interpreted this Saturnine stilnes to her good, thinking it proceeded
from the rauishment that her beauty and graces might have driven him into,
according to the news which her messenger had brought her before. Over and
above, judging in him more comeliness, form and sweetness of phisiognomie,
then in any other whom she knew, she was so enamoured in the very place with
his entising look, that for the quenching of this flame, she desired then no
greater thing, then to speak unto him to know who he was.

Marcomyr never departed from the place, till every body almost was retired,
and his long tarying there seemed not to be in vain, assuring himself it
would return some ^ruit unto him, for he conceived already in his
understanding by the amiable and often eyings of the damsel, that he should
obtain of her the greatest point of his desire, the which he must needs
communicate to Ozalias, who never boudged from him.

In fine, when she saw them depart, afterward she entered by and by into her
chamber, who calling aside to her the messenger of her love, she began thus: Ah
page, most true are the words thou did tell me of the knights beauty, whose
comely gesture and seemly gravity (if I deceive not my self too much) with
his prowes and valor in arms, make me deem him the flower of the best
accomplished gentlemen that I ever yet beheld: Madame, said the young
counselor, if you will see many perfections infused into one body, I beseech
you speak unto him as soon as you may, and let not slip out of your hands the
happy and inestimable good which the destinies have sent you hither fatally:
wherein his eloquent and fluent tongue shall witness sufficiently the rest of
his virtues, whereof you shall find your self so well satisfied, as he may not
require that thing at your hand, which you can well deny him. How can I speak
unto him, quoth Leifida the^, without incurring blame, and wronging mine honor
which I have hitherto carefully preserved, if it be not by your mean in some
secret place, whether he may be brought, to take away all suspicion from
people, who are now adays so prompt and ready to make the very innocents
examples of their malice? I will tell you quoth the young man: you remember
that my lord your father prayed you the other day to return to him as speedily
as you might possibly: that will serve you in steed of a good occasion to take
your honest leave of this company, and if you will depart too morrow in the
late of the day, you shall go to bed to my mothers house, whether I will go
before you with the knights, to entreat her to say: they be her two nephews who
come thither oftentimes to visit her. So may you at your discretion devise and
parley together. You say well replied Leifida, nevertheless you must look you be
very discreet herein, least our devise be discovered.

This plot being taken and concluded upon for good, the young man went the
morrow morning to be with Marcomyr at his vprising, and having made him a glad
man with this news, they mounted incontinent on horseback to get betimes to
his mothers house, being seated in a very pleasant place, just in the half
way between Tubanta and the castle of Albase, near which streamed a fresh
river, whose banks were planted with many goodly trees, whereof all that
country therabout was abundant, which appertained to the father of Leifida who
was lord thereof: when the good gentlewoman saw the two cousins she was greatly
abashed, but her son had advertised quickly how she was to behave her self in
that business, and well might she call such knights her nephews, being that
she was a stranger, and of a country far distant from this place.

The mother having had her sons instruction, how to govern her self herein,
said only this one word: God grant this business come to a good end. Doubt you
not thereof mother, quoth the guide, but it will succeed even as you and we
would wish, for this gentleman is one of the honest and best governed knights
that I ever saw in my life, Marcomyr and Ozalias liked marvelous well the
situation of this place, where they tarried alone with the good gentlewoman of
the house, for that the messenger was gone back to his mistress, who made
such diligence to depart that the new married couple could not get her to stay a
day nor an hour longer, for she thought the time so long before she was with
him, for whom her heart felt so extreme passion, that by no mean he could be
removed out of her fantasy: Therefore taking her congie of all the company,
she would take along with her but four of her Damsels and two of her fathers
squiers. And she took the time of the day so just, that she came about
sunsetting to the place appointed, from whence her pages mother (who had made
good provision of all things she thought might seem necessary against her
coming) went to meet her, with show of marvelous gladness: the entertained her
with no less joy and welcome then she would have done her own daughter,
because that in her infancy she suckled her always with her breast: and after
many welcomming and entertainments, Leifida demanded her who might these two
knights be, who had saluted her so graciously. They are quoth she, two of my
nephews, who come oftentimes to visit me, to know if I need any thing that
they may do for me, and likewise to present their service to my lord your
father, if he may please to employ them.

They are very welcome quoth the Damsel, and for my part I thank them with
all my heart for the good will they bear to my lord and father: by means
whereof and of the near affinity between them and you, I shall love them no
less, then mine own proper brethren and kinsmen. Then Marcomyr bowing himself
toward her with a lowly reverence, thanked her courteously for the honorable
offer she made him, and so entering into further talk Leifida could not hold
her eyes off him, his seemly countenance, good grace, and natural beauty did
ravish her so much, that from thence forward the lively portraiture of his face
was so far imprinted in her thoughts, that she did inherit nothing else
thereby but an excessive love, which by this occasion did increase daily more
and more in her.

Whilst they were in treaty of their amors, the gentlewoman commanded to
spread the table amidst a pleasant tuft of trees, which was hard by the castle,
where Leifida did eat very little, by reason of the sovereign pleasure which
she took indeuising with the knight: and afterward seeing they were both by
themselves alone (because Ozalias and their hostess were walked together
abroad, and the rest went to supper presently after) the Damsel bespake him in
this manner: Sir knight, I marvel very much at one thing in my self, that I
being never moved for the love of many brave gentlemen, who have heretofore often
times offered me their service, I feel now for you (whom I have seen but these
two days) my heart so wounded with love, that I cannot hear nor think upon
any thing, but the continual and vehement remembrance of you does strait
interrupt it. Therefore I pray you do not therein repute me declining from that
true chasti^y, which a pure Uirgin ought to have above all other things in
recommendation: For as much as the valor and chivalry which I see worthily
lodged under your beauty, second to no other, has fatally ravished from me my
liberty, with the which I kn^w full well how to defend my self against the
sharpda^ts of Cupid, and now since yielded your handmaid and captive, never to
strive against the honest affe^tions, which it shall please you to show toward
your so prompt and voluntary prisoner: Assuring my self you will not offer any
thing to me which may hinder me from marching among maidens of honor not
ashamed to look the best in the face. And I pray you moreover to satisfy the
extreme desire I have to know you, imparting to me the most secret and inward
meaning of your heart, and further to tell me what it will please you that I do
in recompense for the pain you have endured for my sake, whereunto (mine
honor being not trodden under foot) I will condescend as willingly, as for any
that lives in this happy age.

Madam replied Marcomyr, I repute my self so much favored of the celestial
bodies, considering the favor and pi^^ie it pleases you to show me without any
merit, that I fear me I shall never be able to accomplish the services which I
will frankly from henceforth enterprise, to make you know the good zeal I have
not to remain ungrateful for your so great courtesy: The which if you have
easily granted me, as the only remedy and salve of mine afflicted heart* I hope
before it be long to make you part of ame^ds: as you shall undoubtedly perceive
being invested with the great riches and high estates which you may understand
are prepared for you, so it may please you to go along with me into a place
whether I hope ^o conduct you in safety, for albeit you see me now in simple
equippage, yet so it is that God has made me to be borne a king, and a
soueraign ruler over many provinces: not for any other end but to continue more
honorably the unremovable amity that I shall bear unto you all my life.
This said he upon hope to marie her with his cousin Ozalias and to have given
them the kingdom of Tarsus, if she would have consented thereunto.

Fair knight then quoth Leifida, I can but meruell at you, who being a king
and so valiant, as every one who shall see you manage arms may easily judge,
are come hither for me simple damsel unworthy of so great honor: yet not to
dissemble unto you my resolution, assure you without my fathers consent I will
never go with you by my good will: for that otherwise I should commit a too
disloiall and heinous offense. Thus much will I willingly do for you, which I
never yet offered to any other knight, to go along with you to my father whom I
will advertise, that you are nephew to my nursing mother, who desire to serve
him in whatsouer it shall please him to employ you, being assured when he shall
see your Prowes^es and chiu^lries, he will be very well content to accept you
for his son in law. And then with his sufferance and the consent of all my
friends, you may carry me whether you shall think best, promising you for my
part never to make him further privy to your doings: Notwithstanding it would
be far better to manifest unto him the verity of all.

Then Marcomyr who desired nothing else but to get within the castle, by any
mean whatsoever, played upon her thus* Madame the heat of my passion is so
vehement, that I neither see nor can find any good thing which proceeds from
any other fountain, but from the source where it took his beginning, my
vital spirits receiving no force and vigor to execute their functions, but
from your gentle and virtuous discretion: to which I refer the going when it
shall please you before your father, and to say unto him whatsoever you shall
best devise for the assurance and peaceable fruition of the good which I
prete^nd. These words did he utter with a marvelous grace because of the joy
and gladness which had seized his heart, seeing the carriage of his business come
to so good pass as he could desire: and the damsel on the other side she found
her self so much ravished with his love, that she could never glut her eyes in
surueying his beauty, and less forsake his company, so that constrained at
last to go to bed, could not sleep of all the night but a little, all sleep
being driven away by plurality of amorous discourses swimming in her fancy,
which had before gotten so much the upper hand of her spirit, that incontinent
they put away all other imaginations from her. With the rigor of this scourge
did Leifida feel her self most grievously plagued: a far diverse torment to
that of Marcomyr who sought but by his dissimulation to work in short time the
recovery of the good king of Thessalie: so that he past almost all that night
in conferring with Ozalias about his sleights and stratagems which he was to
work for that effect: Praying him of all dear love (being entered once into
the castle) to show himself hardy and valerous, putting all those who came
before him to the edge of the sword, so soon as ever he should hear him give
the word of assault.

The morrow morning being come, Leifida attired her self very richly, and
before she did depart, took her walk through the delectable enclosures of her
lodging, with the two knights alarmed, except their helmets, who prayed her
agood to take them both with her to Albase: to the end they might have better
and more honest mean to present themselves before the captain of the castle,
to whom they desired so extremely to do service. Leifida thanked them very
graciously, and said her father should be right glad of their coming: then
mounting alt^gether on horseback, they arrived about noone at the castle, the
situation and building of which edifice drew Marcomyr into great admiration:
for the groundworke and foundation thereof (being planted upon the top of a high
and fearful rock) did of it self only, strike a fear into the beholders: and
being garnished with victuals and other munitions was indeed inexpugnable.
Approaching the gates, the Damsel alighted from her hackney and the knights
took her quickly by the hand, whom the garders suffered to enter, without
making any reckoning nor enquiring otherwise of their estate, seeing them so
well acquainted with Leifida, whom the lieutenant loved so dearly, that
whatsoever she commanded or did, might not in any wise be gainsaid. Presently
were the draw-bridges pulled up, the gates well barred as they were wont, and
the princes were carried into the hall, where Marcomyr vewed every place
exactly, and thinking every hour a thousand years before he were at the
skirmish in so sure a place, thanked God who had so well and prosperously
conducted him thither.

CHAP. XXVII. How Marcomyr and Ozalias slew the captain of the castle of
Albase, and all his guard who were then within, delivering the king of
Thessalie father to Celestina out of the tower, where he had remained twenty
years captive.
WHen the captain of the castle of Albase, who was a very honorable old
gentleman, and therefore the great Turk established him chief of the guard of
his treasure, saw his daughter in company of the two knights of Tarsus, he was
in a meruellous mase, as if that accident had presaged unto him the conflict
and cruel slaughter, which was to be made soon after in the fortress. Which
made him quickly say unto her. Why daughter how are you come hither without
your brother? Father quoth she, the desire I had the last night very late to
see you, made me presently to hasten my return hither in the company of your
two squiers, of my four Damsels and of the knights nephew^s to my nursing
mother, whom I found at her house passing that way: and well can I ensure you
that this (she showed him then Marcomyr) is one of the ^est and most courteous
Gentlemen whom you ever knew in your life: whereof gave me assurance the
victory that he obtained in the ^ourney at the marriage of my brother, beside
the honest conference he held me this morning, declaring to me the extreme
desire he has to present to you his service: so that upon this hope I have
willingly brought him in here, esteeming it a thing of very rare and great
consequence, the purchasing of such a personage to augment so much the more the
forces of your guard. He is then quoth the father, very welcome hither, and in
recompense of his good will, he shall have the best cheer we may provide for
him.

For all that his purpose was otherwise, because the more his daughter
commended them, the more angry was he to see them within the castle, their very
presence striking into him a fear and suspicion: nevertheless to dissemble it,
and not to let them perceive thereof, he proceeded thus with a pleasant
countenance: daughter go you in to salute your mother, and in the mean time
these knights well disarme them. This he spoke, meaning to cause their arms to
be locked up, and kept safe from them till they were out of the castle. But
Marcomyr who heard those speeches, doubting some such event, cared not much to
talk with him any further, but went strait away with the page of Leifida, who
brought him up into a very fair chamber, where in steed of disarming
themselves, they caused their squiers who carried their arms always after
them to lace their helmets quickly, then betaking them to their shields with
unconquerable courage, they salied out having their naked swords ready drawn in
their hands. Which the young man seeing, (was more amassed then if at the same
instant he had lost his form by some new metamorphosis) began to cry out in
strange manner: O detestable and vile act of disloialtie, running down amain
to advertise the guard, wherein he was soon prevented: for Marcomyr knowing he
might not delay his enterprise any longer, made speedily down into the court,
where he saw the captain blaming and rebuking the porters for letting him in,
who made their excuse upon Leifida that brought him in with her. And perceiving
him to make furiously against him, he cried alarm, O my loiall and faithful
knights take arms, slay me these vilaines who are come to betray us in this
rash manner: then the prince (having instructed Ozalias before to win the
wicket and keep it against all those that would come in to succor or go
forth to fly) remembering his lady Celestina, that he must either die in the
place, or deliver the king her father out of prison began to strike without
pity those of the guard: the captain seeing his honor and life reduced to so
pitiful an exigent, laid suddenly hold on a p^leax which by chance he found at
hand, wherewith he went to give Marcomyr such a knock upon his morion, that had
not the creast thereof ben tempered with fine steel, he had separated his
soul from his body. This constrained the knight (who would not have stroke
him otherwise, for the love of his daughter) to strike again, so that he gave
the old man such an ataint with a blow returned to his head that he cleft his
skull down to his jaws, giving the like entertainment to three or four other
knights who let drive at him, thinking to massacker him quickly: but in a small
space he made so cruel a slaughter of al those which came to encounter him,
that the most hardy and valiant remained in the place either dead or
dangerously wounded. And if peradventure any coward made to the gate, thinking
to get out that ways to save himself by flight, he fell into Ozalias hands,
who showed them but small courtesy: so that in this skirmish there remained
not one man of the castle alive, except the page which was master of the ship
that brought the two cousins into this good haven: who ran imediatly to his
mistres Leifida telling her thus. Madame we are all traitorously betrayed by
the false and inhumane knight whom we have brought in hither: Therefore I know
my self worthy of a thousand deaths, if I might have so many one after
another: for I was the cause that my lord your father and all his guard are put
to the edge of the sword. When the Damsel and her mother heard these piteous
tidings, they ran forth almost out of their wits not knowing what to do, and
seeing this horrible discomfiture, they began to wring their hands and pour
forth the most pitiful complaints that ever any living person heard.

Leifida who accused her self of all this blame, fell down half dead upon
her fathers corpse, uttering a speech in this sense: Alas dear father, pardon
me who am the only cause of your death, which seeing I have advanced innocently
through the ^ained and cautelous circumuention of a Tyrant, I will presently end
my days, and to accomplish better the expiation and ceremony of your
obsequies and funeral pomps, I will let this transitory life and freely offer
up my soul unto the gods, to accompany yours before their throne.

Pronouncing these words with a spent voice (by reason of the continual sighs
which from her breast followed one another so thick) she would have moved the
most pitilesse and diamantine heart to compassion. Marcomyr who reposed
himself at the foot of a pillar, went directly to her where she made this
moan: who perceiving him come, ran upon him, as a lioness enraged when her
whelps are taken from her, crying out amain: Ha cruel and fellonious knight
seeing thou have slain my father all his guard and people, why do thou not
make an end of me also? How long will thou linger before thou send my woeful
soul out of this languishing passion which it endures in this my dying body?
Tell me Barbarian, what moved thee to render this sorrowful recompense for the
extreme love I bare thee, now converted into all deadly hatred, and more then
mortal malice? How durst thou deceive a poor maiden thus trecherously,
considering the great familiarity into which I so soon admitted thee at the
first sight? Ha dissembler, that have thus surprised me through the false
appearance of thy fair and sugared words, saying thou were a king, a prince, a
great siegnior, I think it well, but of thieves and murderers, who camst hither
but to pillage the treasure in this place. O foolish and more then miserable
girl, to credit so lightly thy cogging and deceitful persuasion: whose issue
is but too tragical and full of calamity. Surely if all those who knew me ever
have reputed me a sage and an obedient daughter, now they shall from henceforth
account me for the most disloiall and wickeddest maiden that lives, having thus
wrought the death of mine own father. And although it be against my will,
shall I for that cease to exclaim of the inconstancy of fortune, which by the
only report of, I know not what cloked and frivolous ostentation, has so
easily changed my heart: What will you my lord the great Turk say, when you
shall understand the tidings of this massaker, which has been so cautelously
wrought to steal hence your treasor? Alas why do I not call to mind the
adversity and dommages that your brother received by the Emperor of
Constantinople, when he traveled the world as a knight errant, I should feel
no more the perplexity which this too sudden confidence that I reposed in
this stranger drives me into: but what! The fatal judgment which yielded me
so soon subject to him would not fauorise me therein.

Marcomyr having no regard to her reuiling speeches, praie^ her in humble
manner to quiet her spirits, and promised her again (if she would condescend
to go with him) to a^^ance her to so high estate, that the world should see the
crown of a Queen upon her head: assuring her he would take away nothing out
of the castle but the king of Thessalie, whose deliverance encouraged him only
to execute this bloody discomfiture, which willingly he would have forborne,
if he had understood her father would have yielded him without contradiction.

Leifida hearing this purpose, Alas Mahound, quoth she weeping most pitifully,
how do you permit these Christians to make so many incursions and pillages
upon the very countries and persons of your Turks? Why have you created and
lodged women so near men, seeing that for them they pass through innumerable
torments? The brother of the Gran-siegneur died cruelly for a Damsels sake, and
by my means his Castilion of Albase has been murderously slain and
traitorously dishonored, the king of Thessalie being forcibly taken out of his
prisons: ^o that I had rather die a thousand deaths, then live any longer in
this world to have still the bitter remembrance of this afliction troubling my
spirits. When she had made an end of her speech, she like a mad woman ran as
hard as she could drive to graspe the knight in her arms thinking to have
taken away his sword to kill her self therewith, and him also if she had could:
but Marcomyr would not strike her, thinking to make her leave her hold, and
died many fair speeches and entreatings to her, which did no whit assuage her
choler: which made her so furiously rage against him and her mother also, who
set on also to succor her, that he could in no wise be rid of the^. He knew
not well what to do (for he would not hurt them) when his squier who saw such
gentleness might be prejudicial to him: not showing himself so courteous
toward them as his master, pulled with all his might the mother off him, then
with the poleax that he wr^^ed ^ut of her husbands hand, he cut her head from
off her shoulders: which was such a grief to Leifida that she fell in a dead
swound, and being surprised with such a shaking fear, that she died without
ever speaking a word afterward to any body. With this piteous accident was the
poor page stricken into such a grief, that he purposed not to live long after:
but would write some memory upon the wall, whereupon were afterward composed
these verses which follow: O Jupiter! seeing the Destiny
Of my mishap, I could in no wise fly:
From heavens vawt throw down thy speedy fire,
To give me death for my deserved hire.
For here I see the monstrous Chimere stand
And will not hence: his naked sword in hand,
To send ere long unto the darkest hell,
My foul, that does in bitter anguish dwell.
O sovereign gods, do me this favor show,
When it shall pass grim Charons boat below:
Safe conduct it, whilst it is ferr^ed over,
That to th'Elisian fields it may recover.
O ye that dwell in the infernal city,
To you I echo forth these plaints for pity.
Proserpina the lady of the lake,
I call on thee: may thou compassion take
Upon a damned soul, that feign would die
A thousand deaths, out of this misery.
Guilty I am, and yet am innocent,
I will not live, to die I am content.
Thou Cerberus, the triple-headed hound,
Dwelling in darkest horror under ground,
Call home to thee the too too cruel fates,
And keep them prisoners fast within thy gates.
Clotho unkind, and Lachesis, that did
Both twist and spin forth our unhappy third:
Which Atropos cuts off with bloody knife,
Depriving us poor Turks of sweetest life.
Else ser on work the angry Tisiphone,
Alecto, Megare, and the fearful Gorgone,
To torture them send forth all thy Furies,
Dislodge me hence, who caused these cruelties.
But must I needs be made the mean? Alas!
To bring this woeful tragedy to pass.
Why had I not some skill in Magic art,
Him to prevent that played this blooddy part?
To murder me, why were they not content
Who of this woe was the chief instrument?
And not in fellon guile thus to have slain
The Turks Castilion, with his guard and train.
But for I see my death before mine eyes,
Dispatch (my hand) to do the sacrifice.
Dispatch my body that my soul may go
Into the stinking gulf of hellish woe.


The page having fixed this sorrowful sonnet on the wall, ran quickly to take
up the sword of one of the dead knights, the point whereof he set right against
his breast, and so thrust himself to the very heart.

This was the tragicomicall act that Marcomyr began to play at Prissa and
continued at Albase, where the Castilion and his gards of the castle, finished
miserably their lives. Having then dispatched them all, they made search in all
corners of the castle to find out the prison wherein the king was enclosed: at
the last they found him locked up fast within a tower, whose windows were all
iron barred, so lean and poor that he made them almost aghast to behold him.
Marcomyr who seeing him in this pitiful taking, remembering how he was father
to his dear lady Celestina, could not choose but weep for compassion.
Nevertheless the king did not perceive at all of this humanity, but
wonderfully astonished to see them with their swords ready drawn, thought they
came to make an end of his languishing and miserable life. Therefore most
willingly preparing himself to the sacrifice, he cried out alowd: Redeemer of
humane nature, I commend unto thee the poor soul which must presently pass
out of his vile prison, vouchsafe then pitiful father to accept the travels
and miseries that I have so long time patiently suffered for penance of my
sins: and seeing he has known my body unworthy of his protection in this
world, be to him a mediator for my soul in his celestial kingdom, to the
end his Judgment may not banish it, from the place of eternal felicity,
which he has promised to the blessed.

Marcomyr being stricken dumb at this lamentable speech, Ozalias began to
speak thus unto the king: let not your majesty fear that we are come to
wrong you, but to deliver you out of this sufferance, and to bring you to
Constantinople, where you shall find your Queen with Celestina your only
daughter (by whose mean you are presently set at liberty) who attends there
for you in all devotion. He proceeded to tell him how there was no body alive
in that castle whom they should fear more then a feather, which the king did
hardly believe: but being assured by them of the certainty, they opening a
little iron door, put him forth of the irksome chamber which he had kept
twenty years together, without ever going out of it, so vindificatiue was the
deadly grudge of the great Turk against him. Yet he did not firmly believe
his deliverance, until he saw the Castilion and all his guard lie as dead as
dogs in the court, then falling on his knees (lifting his eyes up to heaven,
and spreading abroad his hands in sign of more sincere devotion*) he began to
thank God who had after so long time remembered him: beseeching him not to take
regard to his offenses, for that the least which he had committed against his
divine law since he had reason, did deserve a perpetual and a more au^^ere
captivity then that. After he had made this goodly speech, he rose up and came
cheerfully to embrace the knights, whom he thanked with great honor for
restoring him to his pristinate liberty, praising them much for so singular
and notable an enterprise: whereunto Marcomyr answered, it was not best to
stand further to talk there, but to be gone from the place with all speed*
Which they did as soon as one of Marcomyrs squiers had brought one of the best
steeds in the Quirry to mount the king, who felt his strength but feeble, so
had his master commanded: who remembering the words wherewith the Damsel
Leifida reproched him, would not permit any thing else to be taken out of the
castle.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Marcomyr being departed with the king of Thessalie from the
castle of Albase, found the great Turks daughter by the way, whom he took away
with him by virtue of his sword, and carried her with him to Constantinople.
AFter Marcomyr had bethought himself well of his return to Constantinople,
in the late of the evening, leaving the gates open, and the drawbridges down,
they mounted on horseback: and riding a good pace, they came about midnight
near unto the manor of Leifidaes nurse mother: there they saw many torches
lighted amongst a tuft of trees, and a very costly bed in the midst of them,
which cas^ forth a most radiant splendour: all the company past by it, except
the gentle knight Marcomyr, who desirous to know what it was, gave his horse
into the hand of one of his squiers, who remained behind with him, and went
strait to the place with his sword in his hand which had the handell of adamant
s^^ne: So casting them thereby into a profound sleep round obout him, he came
near to a rich couch wherein he saw a young and very beautiful Damsel lying.
She was called Marencida, eldest daughter to the great Turk, and wife to king
Ocurites, the very same whom Marcomyr found rouing in the Gulf of the Taken and
Fennes of Meotis, thither she went to take some recreation with her mother, the
Turks wife, who was not far from thence, for some days before she was
retired from the court, taking snuff at her husband because he loved another
better then her, whom he espoused after her nuptials.

Marcomyr then came as softly as he could to her bed side, where he lifted up
softly the covering, and because the virtue of his adamant did draw humane
flesh to it, the Damsel came close unto him, who took her fair in his arms,
staying her face against his: something she felt, yet perceived nothing what he
did unto her, and turning to and fro in his arms, she embraced him, casting
her self more upon her right side, because he carried in that hand the sword,
whose handell did draw her close unto him, and the blade provoked her to
sleep: in so much that she was forced to remain between his arms as did
fair Daphne between those of Phoebus, when Jupiter turned her into a bay tree.

So did Marcomyr bear her unto the place where Orican attended him with his
steed, mounting in the same sort, and riding amain gallop, he soon ouert^lke
his company, who marvelled how in so little while he had gotten such a booty:
which he laid behind his squier, whilst he put up his sword into his sheath:
she was not so soon from him but she awaked before she was aware, and seeing
her self in the hands of them she knew not, in a great ^eare she cried out:
Out alas, quoth she, where am I: O wretched creature, I see none of my own
people about me, nor know I whether I am thus str^ied so far. Who are you which
have been so rash as to ^^eale me away thus out of my bed? Truly your ouerbold
indiscretion has purchased you nothing else but the most cruel and inhumaine
death that may be devised for you.

Madame replied the prince, we will save us from that as well as we may, and as
for me I am a prince of a strange country, who hearing the lamentation you
made for the captivity of the king your husband (to see whom, as you said, you
desired to go to Constantinople) I had pity of your affection. Moreover
being careful to please you therein, and in all other things whatsoever it
shall please you to command me, I did imediately take you out of your bed:
Promising you by the faith that I ow to God and to knighthood, not only to show
you the king Ocurites, but also to guard your chastety vnde^^led, and your honor
as safe as I receive it now into my hands.

Thou false and disloial knight, quoth she again, how is it possible I should
not hereby incur great shame and dishonor, seeing thou have already
outraged me, taking me away against my will from the midst of my guard: for
if I desired to go to the king my husband, it was only to content the heart
which provoke incessantly the spirit of my vehement affection, not that I
would make my words true, considering I cannot in that respect go one step
without the congy of my father: but I had rather end my sorrow^ull life in this
place, then go with thee whom I know not, from whom I can expect no goodness,
having thus theeuishly set upon me. I am neither robber nor thief answered
Marcomyr, but a knight who will obey you faithfully, if I see you take my
service in good part: further seeing I have you now in my power, resolve to go
with me with a good will, or by force: assuring you I will take keep of you
that you shall not die as you say.

Then Marencida began to pull off her headgeare, to fear her hair^* wring her
hands, an^^rie as one out of her wits: but the prince caring little for such
feminine importunities, wrapped his squiers cloak about her, then commanding
him to ride on, drew forth his sword, so that the Damsel was cast into a
sleep again, even as if she had swounded or fallen into a trance. And for that
Ozalias discoursed unto the king of Thessalie the whole fortune of his daughter
Celestina (which he willingly heard, because that since his imprisonment he
never understood any news of the affairs of his kingdom, and knew not he had
issue of her) he went with the tears in his eyes to embrace Marcomyr
courteously, saying: Truly son, all the miseries and irksome torments which I
have hitherto not without great pain endured, seem nothing to me in respect
of the extreme joy and gladness that I receive now, having found for my son
in law a man of so tender love and affection: being moreover a very glad man of
the prise of this lady, for I hope by this mean to be revenged on the Turk.
In this conference they rod so long that on the point of day, they were on the
top of a mountain, at the foot whereof came the sea washing in, where the
knight putting up again his sword into his sheath, Marencida awaked once
more, still in her lamentable tune, nothing could comfort her, no not the
promise of showing her husband to her: and because she had nothing upon her but
her bare smock, which was of so fine linen that all might well behold as well
the excellent beauty wherewith nature had enriched the lineaments of her
body, as the feature of her countenance in the most perfectest graces
accomplished.

This proper piece made such an impression into Ozalias breast more then all
others, that from that time forward he loved her most ardently. Being then
arrived at the haven and imbar^ued, Marcomyr put upon her one of his nightgowns,
yet for all that favor she never ceased to sigh and lament still, no more nor
less then Ariadne did at the coming of Bacchus, when she was by Thetis
abandoned at the seashore: but renewing more strongly her imprecations she did
make many petitions to the gods of the salt waters, to Neptune and The^is, and
to the Tritons their heraults, to all Seamonsters, Waternymphs, and Mermaids,
that Marcomyr and all his crew might be ^^allowed up in the waves, and her
self to be viand and meat for fishes* Whereat Ozalia^ having some pity,
bowed him upon his knee very low before Marcomyr, and (...) a request in this
manner: My dear cousin, of your ^au^^r I must entreat you to accord me one
boon, which is presently to give me this woman in marriage, for whom I know the
des^ini^s have reserved me, considering the sudden change that my passionat
heart indureth, wherein the object of so many perfect ladies could never any
whit heat the cold ye, which this in a moment has resolved into warm and
almost a boiling water.

Most willingly shall you obtain your request of me, answered Marcomyr, were
it for a far greater matter then you require at my hands, and assure you I
shall show my self always so zealous a furtherer of your honor and
advancement, as of that of mine own person, hoping never whilst I live to see
any divorce between us two to make a difference of our estates.

Ozalias thanking his cousin, would feign have kissed his hand, yet Marcomyr
would not suffer him, but embraced him lovingly for the cordial amity
reciprocal between them. In fine, this new ^ouer resolved to employ himself
in all things decent for the service of Marencida, omitting nothing which might
by any means be pleasurable to her. But for all he could do, she would neither
see him nor hear him, the rigor of her stony and adamantine heart could in no
wise be mollified through any continual disquiet and anguish of mind.

To return to the gards and company of Marencida, they awaked all at the
first and second time that Marcomyr put up his enchanted sword into his sheath,
and the third time was all the very hour, when he ca^e to the sea side, where
being to apparel the Damsel and to give order for his speedy embarking, he
put it up for all together: so that they then awaking thoroughly, and seeing not
their lady in her bed, you may imagine in what perplexity they were. Some ran
like mad men among the trees, thinking she had hidden her self under the thick
bows: and finding her in no part, they began to pull off their beards, tear
their hair, strike themselves on the breasts as hard as they might with their
fistes, calling oftentimes for death which was their last refuge: knowing there
was no way of escape for them, if the Turk were once advertised of this
misaduenture: to be brief in this pitiful spectacle was there seen nothing
but tragical actions.

Thus did these poor desolate men remain and could not tell what were best
for them to do: for none of them durst carry these sorrowful news to the
Turk: till at the last some going one way and some another, all scattered
themselves and never would return unto the court afterward, leaving behind
them, the heavy and woeful damsels of Marencida bewailing the loss of their
Lady and mistress in that unfortunate place. Where we will leave them to
return to Marcomyr, who is now ready to hoise sails to go for Constantinople.

CHAP. XXIX. How Marcomyr arriueth with his company in Constantinople, where
he was honorably received by the Emperor, who went to the harbor to meet
him: the speech he had with the queen Marencida after they were arrived at the
palace, and of the great joy of the queen of Th^s^aly and of Celestina her
daughter, at the arriual of Marcomyr and the king of Thessalie.
MArcomyrs ship being under sail, there blew such a prosperous gale in her
poupe, that she snigled quickly into the main sea, where he sailed the most
ioifull man in the world, calling to mind the happy fortune which followed him
in delivering out of prison the king of Thessalie: who for his part was no
less ioifull, all things represented before his eyes, seeming to be but
dreams and false visions, through the remembrance he had yet of the sorrow
which he suffered in his so long captivity. Yet could he well judge of the
inestimable valor of Marcomyr, and therefore he reputed himself blessed above his
fortune to obtain such a knight to be his son in law: so that after dinner
walking both together upon the hatches, he prayed him in all courtesy to tell
him the name of his family: but he with gra^ious and honest excuse constrained
him to dwell in his desire, until they were arrived before the Emperor. So
that this humanity and many other courtesies which Marencida saw him
continually use, did give her much consolation in this her heaviness, deeming
thereby she was not fallen into the hands of so barbarous people as she
supposed: ( Cupid also began to lure her a little) showed afterward some sign
of amity to Ozalias, who would never be far from her, to make her know the
good devotion he had to her service.

They had fair weather and a calm sea, so long together, ^il^ they came to
surge without any let within Bosphorus of Thrace, whence Marcomyr soon
dispatched his cousin toward the Emperor, most humbly to entreat him that he
would receive the king of Thessalie who come in his company, with the honor
he knew did appertain to so great a siegnior: aduising him moreover he should
request C^lestina to send him her palfrey, to conduct a great lady to the
court, which he brought away from Turkey with him. Ozalias armed himself
incontinent at al points except his helmet, and lanching a skiffe into the sea,
went accompanied with two squiers strait to the haven: where going ashore, he
took his way toward the palace: and there kneeling before the Emperor,
demanded to kiss his hand, which the emperor would not suffer him to do before
he had heard his message.

He had good hope to understand some good news of him, because the enchaunted
bird had that day presaged many signs of gladness: Therefore demanded what
tidings he brought. Sir, quoth the knight, I am the affectionate servant of
Marcomyr, him whose renown already has so much resounded into your ears, who
next after you (the peereles paragon of chivalry) is esteemed to be the best
by trial and touch: he sends me in all humblenes to beseech you that you will
entertain the king of Thessaly, whom he brings backfro^ Turkey, with such
honor as his worth requires: assuring you they cannot be far from the haven by
this time, for they were entering the mouth thereof, when the pilots began to
strike their sails and to cast their ankers as fast as they could.

What good tidings is this I hear, quoth the Emperor? and so rose up from his
chair of state: In truth I could not wish that thing which might more content
and satisfy my mind then this. Rise up, knight my friend, that I may embrace
thee in recompense of the great joy thou bring me now. As he had spoken
those words, he turned himself toward his Barons with a laughing and gracious
countenance, going on in his speech thus: Come my lords let ^s all go to
receive this courteous Thessalian prince, and the knight whom I have so long
desired to see, remitting the discourse of his deliverance, to some other time
of better leisure. If it please your majesty. quoth. he, this has been one of
the most admirable adventures you ever heard talk of, and fortune has been so
prosperous and favorable to him, that he has not only delivered the king of
Thessalie, but he brings with him moreover a very fair lady which is
daughter to the great Turk. Of this was the Emperor more astonished, when he
prayed Ozalias to tell him by what mean he had conquered the damsel: which
when the knight had very quickly recounted him, he went to put on his robes,
commanding Diocles and all the other Nobles of his court to do the like. At
the last Ozalias withdrew himself a little toward his cousins lover, to tell
her the news which she longed so feign to hear of a certainty: but she who
had been advertised of all things before by one of her pages, came hand in hand
with her mother toward him, being both lifted into so sudden joy, that they
therewith seemed both ravished of their senses. The Queen embraced him not
without apparent token of great amity, demanding him if Marcomyr were near at
hand, and whether he brought in his company the king her husband: whereto he
answered, they might well be both in the haven, and it will not be long before
they arrive in the palace, for they are here expected.

By the help of God I shall go meet them, quoth the Queen, for I cannot
remain so long idle until they come: saying thus she took her way with
Celestina and all her damsels, as quickly as they could set forward, so that
Marcomyr (who was in the forecastle of the ship with the king beholding the
godly city) knew them as far off as he could diserue them. For the ardent
desire wherewith he loved Celestina, did administer probable conjectures to
his judgment therefore he said thus to the king, my lord behold without doubt
the Queen and your daughter, who as far as I can see now, could not tarry for
our coming. I request you let us go on shore to entertain them, and let us
not make the time long, which they thought to abridge, taking the pain to come
so far to meet us. So presently they went both on land, for the great desire
they had both to be near her, whose remembrance could never out of their
minds, by no distance of place which might deprive them of their presence.

So that the Queen who scantly knew the king her husband (so much did his long
grisely hair, and his beard grown out of fashion mishape him) meeting him at
adventure, thus bespake him: fair lord are you that king of Thessalie for whom
this woeful heart of mine has endured so much sorrow? I beseech you tell me
quickly and hold not her long in suspense, who now knows you not, being so
much changed as you are. Madame answered the king, I marvel not if you misknow
me now, considering the lapse of time that your eyes have discontinued their
office upon me, the which surely the integrity of love has made it seem far
longer to us both, albeit the accustomable revolution of years does never
augment nor diminish his natural course one only minut: notwithstanding I am
the same king your husband who have felt more passions ^or your absence, then
for the anguish or torment which his miserable captivity could yield him. But
seeing the immortal God does me this favor to see you yet once again, before
this passible body abandon my soul (the most affectionat desire that it had
during my tribulation) let mortal Atropos come now when she pleases: Assuring
you I shall not feel the stinging prick of his dart if she fauorise me never
so little between your arm^s. When this speech was done, they embraced one
another by the middles, remaining a good while in one another arms so fast,
that none might behold them without sheading some tears of compassion: in the
mean while Celestina entertained Marcomyr with so many amourous cherishings,
that the ease and content she received in her heart did make the superficies of
her cheeks, and all the rest of her visible parts very good witnesses thereof.
So that this mutual and reciprocal bliss of their spirits, ^^^^ming in the
current of joy did keep (...) from their duty, which passion seeming too
b^tter to the (...), she would fetch them out of that trance, when she took
the knight by the one hand and Celestina in the other, saying to the king her
husband thus: my lord, see here a daughter which you begat at your departure
out of Th^^salie, who may think her self happy above all other living inthis
world, seeing by the mean of her destiny you are gotten out of prison, I
reduced to my former joy, and she accompanied with the best accomplished knight
that bears arms.

Great was the gladness of the king, seeing a damsel so beautiful and well
nurtured being his daughter, whom he held long time in his arms before he could
let her go, taking both of them such pleasure in this recognisance, and
natural homage of father and daughter, that with simple reiou^ssaunce their
hearts had almost both failed. And so fell it out also between Marcomyr and
the queen, who could never sufficiently thank him, and commend his
unspeakable prowess and magnanimity.

In the mean time the Emperor had commanded two hacknies and a palfrie
richly harnessed to be brought to the haven, and would by all means go thither
himself with all his barons: by means whereof, ^rriuing upon the ^ay, he
alighted from his horse to do the more honor to the king of Thessalie: and
seeing him so poor and transfigured, could not choose but let the tears run
down his eyes. Then went the king to bow himself before the Emperor, who
embraced him in most amiable manner, saying: My dear brother let us praise our
sovereign Lord God, who has delivered you from out of the hands of our common
enemy, wherein if I be now a most joyful man for your recovery, I received no
less displeasure and gree^e for your imprisonment, being my self as you know,
in the Turks power at that time, albeit he granted me far greater liberty
then you, which he did only to and himself with my right hand: the desire
whereof to escape his servitude, constrained me to commit against you a most
signallerrour, and such as I know is most truly reprehensible: but the
merciful God who pardons freely the offenses of the repentant, has in his
pity looked upon us, and by his infinite bounty has brought all unto a happy
end.

Sir, quoth the king, I have already understood all this whole discourse from
Marcomyr, whereof I can give you no blame, seeing you could not do withal:
notwithstanding let us omit these occasions past, now it has pleased the
sovereign and just judge to show an apparent miracle by my deliverance, to the
end that I should come my self in person to present you the extreme affection
I have to obey you in all things to me possible. Be certain brother, then
replied the Emperor, that the most melodious harmony which ^he celestial
organs can turn to rejoice me, did never make my spirits more glad, then does
now your coming with the knight who has been your deliverance, to whom I am
content to forgive the sorrow (these words he spoke smilingly) he has caused
me, frustrating mine eyes until now, of the fruition of his presence.

Marcomyr who demeaned himself very modest and humble before him, setting one
knee on the ground began sagely on this manner: Redoubted prince, if I have
sometimes provoked your Majesty's displeasure, I confess I have inc^rred such
punition as it shall please you to lay upon me, and I will most willingly
endure, to fashion my self the better unto your service, wherein I desire to
employ my self indistinctly, according to your thoughts, yea when it were to
go knock furiously against the gate of death: whereof I suppose shall give you
a good testimony the command you shall give me when it shall best seem good
unto your Majesty hoping to execute it in such sort, as you shall well know
with what affection he speaks, who finds himself greatly bounden unto you.
And to the end you know the name of one of your most voluntary slaves, I am
Marcomyr, destinate to serve you before my nativity* who pray you in all
humility, to pardon and banish out of your memory, that wherein by the
disgrace of Fortune, I may have offended you: for I never did it for any other
respect* bu^ because I wanted the hardiness to appear unworthily before your
Majesty, so that I shall never rise from this place again, before it please
you to give me your hand to kiss, in sign of your free and liberal grant of
pardon.

The Emperor seeing him so fair and gracious speaking what he would,
marvelled most of all how nature had lodged in one only body so many graces and
perfections: Wherefore casting his arms about his neck: you do me quoth he,
so much honor offering me for service your unspeakable Prowess and valor,
that I should overmuch forget my self if I did not pardon you (seeing pardon of
me you desire) albeit by you I am nothing at all endommaged (...): and I d^e
not only impart this favor unto you, but f^rther I accept and retain you as
min^ own proper son. At the end of these words, Marcomyr kissed his hand by
force, then embraced Diocles, who gave him like honorable entertainment: and
next came Abenu^^ toward him almost transported with joy, saying: Truly brave
knight, as glad am I of your coming into this cou^^, as great is ^he
obligation whereby I shall find (...) all my life beholding unto you: for a
beginning of the satisfaction whereof, I could not at this time show better
evidence then to render praise to the director of all things, to fill you with
the happiness that this company wishes you, having desired so much your
presence in ^^en sight without longer concealing of your self. Marcomy^
^ecognished him incontinent, and so showed him again many tokens of amity and
good will then approaching A^edes and all the other knights and ^arons, he
saluted them most courteously: and if they were abashed at his prowess and
magnanimity the day of the i^^s^ing, far more were they now astonished at
his goodly appearance, and lively beauty, after he had disarmed himself as
you shall hear by and by.

In the mean time Ozalias went to ^etch his Marencida from the ship: who much
marvelled to behold so brave and magnificent a crew of nobles, when she
demanded in what country they were landed. Madame quoth. the Prince, this city
is called Constantinople, and among that ^^ourishing troop of knights who
attend for us at the shore, you shall anon know the Emperor Cleodomyr, who
has vouchsafed to come so far to receive the king of Thessalie, and the
knight who has delivered him out of prison: and you your self shall judge him
so prudent and virtuous a prince by the honor, gracious entertainment and good
welcome he will give you (if once he know who you are) that you shall not
repent this your voyage, were it but for having knowledge of him only. Ah
wretched creature that I am quoth she then, how accursed and disastred am I to
fall now into the hands of so capital an enemy of my father? And continnuing
her inuectiue with many sighs and sobs, Ozalias did all he might to comfort
her by all way of humanity, replying to her thus, Be not grieved for any thing
Madame, but be of good cheer, hoping your affairs shall prosper better then
you think. And what can there befortune me, quoth she incontinent, which does
not agrauate my matyrdome? If I see Ocurites my dear husband, it shall be but
with insupportable heart sorrow, that we shall both feel, finding our selves
both captives to the worst adversary we have. Forget the king Ocurites I
beseech you then said the knight, seeing in his steed is found a se^gnior, who
loving you without comparison more then he ever did, desires nothing else but
to advance you to the height and sumptuositie of the brauese estates: to the
end that seeing your self obeyed, nay reverenced of no small number of
subjects, who are already yours, you may think thereby how you may live
content all the rest of your life. And therefore fair lady ouerwearie not
from henceforth your spirit, rejecting from your imagination those things
which bring with them no joy, especially now that in humble sort I request you
to entertain with comely and ioiful countenance the Emperor Cleodomyr, of
whose royal virtue I assure my self so much in this place that he will show
you great honor for my sake.

The God Mahound refuse me then replied she, if I ever speak unto him by my
good will, nor unto any of his court, for I feel my spirits too weak in their
powers to carry my life far from this place: which I may esteem the best
content that might come to me, it being to me so woeful a thing to live in
this servile misery, that I repute my self worse then a senceles creature,
and without reason altogether* Ozalias who heard her utter these speeches with
such a countenance and affection, which seemed not counter^eit, had some
compassion on her, when taking her by the arm, he brought her to shore more by
force then by her free will, where the Emperor and the other nobles received
her very graciously, but she would never bow before him, nor make answer to any
thing they said unto her, whereat the troop both of the Barons and of the
people also who looked upon her, were much astonished, so that calling her a
woman of a manly and robust courage, they said nature had failed in making of
her a woman. Then being mounted all on horseback, they took their way all in
most royal array toward the palace, whence the Empress descended into the
base court to receive the king of Thessalie and the knight Marcomyr his
deliverer: who after the welcommings and embracings of the king, kissed
honorably her hand, and likewise Philocristaes, whom he besought in most
humble sort to accept Marencida for her companion, and to give her some
privilege to be near her, being she was a lady extracted of an illustrious
and royal blood.

Seignior Marcomyr answered the infant, I most willingly grant you your
request: for the love of you both, and can esteem my self very happy to have
so noble and precious a gage near me, of you the most perfect among the best
accomplished knights: so that assure your self she shall not have in my company
any worse usage then mine own proper person. And you madam, quoth. she to the
Turkish princess, esteem that you come to be now near her who will honor and
love you as her self.

Marencida hearing these gracious words of Philocrista* and the sequestration
whereby Marcomyr did consign her up to this lady, thought she must needs be
the Emperors daughter, by means whereof making a low courtesy, she showed her
a more ioifull face, then she had as yet done to any body, whereof Philocrista
was glad, and did interpret it to her advantage, taking her straitewaies by
the hand: and afterward when every body was gone up into the great chamber,
lead her to sit down hard by Celestina, to whom she said thus, smiling: Madam
I take this Damsel in your place, now the knight Marcomyr is come, for I know
that hereafter our company shall discontinue, more then it has done, because
reason and your fatal loves will you to prefer him before me, albeit I cannot
think therefore you will forget me.

Madame replied Celestina, we are both yours, and in him have you so good part,
as you shall find your self no less abashed then content when you know him,
who shall put you out of all fear that I should ever forget our reciprocal
amity, albeit the singular devotion which I have to remain perpetually your
humble cousin and better friend may advertise you sufficiently of my constancy.

I thank you in all kind affection for your offer, quoth Philocrista, for the
acception whereof, I can well assure you, there is no Damsel in Europe more
yours then I am: whereof shall give you certain knowledge, the first thing
wherein you shall assay my more then little power, in regard of the good will I
have to do you any pleasure* and as touching this point wherein you say I
shall make undoubtful proof of the conservation of our mutual amity, you may
think I shall be most glad to understand it presently.

Therein shall you see your desire soon satisfied replied Celestina, for
things cannot now be any longer dissembled, whose happy success shall
testify their good and laudable beginning: During these gracious enterparlies
of these ladies, sent the Emperor to disarme Marcomyr and Ozalias into a place
whether Diocles and Abenunq would needs conuoy them: and in the mean time the
king of Thessalie made to them the whole discourse of his miraculous
deliverance.

But the princess Marencida who cast her eyes al about in every corner,
calling to mind the riches and high estates of her father, did not make any
great account of the emperors court, which was then unfurnished of knights for
that this sudden arriual was not expected nor known of but one hour before.
By means whereof Marencida easily supposed his magnificence and statelines not
to be such as it was deemed, as oftentimes it comes to pass to those that
are carried away with any particular affection in the judgment of things, the
which they always interpret against the sounder opinion. So this damsel
having her spirit most occupied and ^loid with the remembrance of her
misfortune, censured the reputation and wealth of the Emperor, such as you may
infer by the speech which she began, fetching a deep sigh from the center of
her body in this sort. You know Emperor of Constantinople how the pomp and
sumptuositie of my fathers house exceeds the richest princes of the world,
and what a number of puissant kings yield him hommage and fealty, for you have
haunted his court long enough to know so much. Where if you were so hardy and
aduenturous as to s^ay without dread of them (as all the world knows) the
great Turk my deceased ouncle, do but think I pray you what must be the
perplexity and heartssorrow of his miserable Damsel injuriously taken away
from his countries, and afterward by stealth brought into your dominion.
Wherein me thinks to veryfie the renown that is daily spread abroad of you,
you ought to take pity at mine adversity, and rather to lament and be sorry
for it, then to glory and mock as I see you do: considering inconstant
fortune is so fickle and variable that she turns her smiling and favorable
countenance at every wink of an eye.

This I say not to induce you to gratify or honor me the more in your court,
because death were far more acceptable to me then any life, such as I already
endure: wherefore I require you again (if request I must needs make to such an
adversary) to advise hereafter to conserve your reputation so, that I purchase
no blame which may offend mine honor, and you shall do much as well for my
sorrowful consolation, as for the increase of your own praise. When she had
uttered these speeches, the princess began to complain in such strange manner,
that the emperor himself did pity her, and could not choose but answer her
thus: I understand very well what you say, and I know better that feminine
choler which now enrageth your spirit, making you transgress the limits of
good manners and modesty: not being ignorant how the puissance of princes is
less then nothing, when God does resist and stand against them: whereupon we
must make our full resolution, that we cannot do any good act but according to
his will, by the which I was carried as it pleased him into the Gransiegniors
your uncles court, and I swear and protest before him to whom all things are
known (I will not otherwise be saved at the end of my days) if I slew him, or
ever thought to do it, having then intoo too fresh memory the honor which a
little before I received of him: this indeed, I deprived him of the damsel
which he detained by force, to put her again into his hands, to whom by right
she appertained: wherein in mine opinion, I committed none offense, seeing he
unjustly withheld her, profaning the sacred laws of royal equity. And for
that the sage and wise always take in good part as well adverse as prosperous
fortune, I assure my self madame, you shall have no more cause to be sorry
hereafter, when you shall understand you were conquered by the most courteous
and brave knight who lives at this day under the stars, Marcomyr by name, the
very same who vanquished in Hellespont king Ocurites your husband. O thrice
accursed that I am (exclaimed the damsel then) whose rauisher, who has shut
me in here by the means of an inexorable gut of sea, caused the imprisonment of
the king my dear husband: Now should I assuredly hasten on the last hour of
my life, seeing that having him in my country, where by a cruel and shameful
death I might have been revenged of him easily, I knew not he was the rouer
and pyrat who betrayed my husband. O Fortune how dooest thou in all things show
thy self too much mine enemy, bringing me into such perplexity that I cannot
give my self the mortal attaint, to send my soul out of this gulf of
affliction, in which I feel my self so deeply plunged, that I see no better
remedy to get out, then to launch my self cruelly upon the dart of the
implacable A tropos. Surely thou art so spightful against me that I can have no
hope by prayers to move thy mercy, but may say justly, the heaven has been
far better aspected toward me then thou prosperous or favorable: and so it is
better I resolve to endure patiently my mishaps, seeing all things cross me
so, that I cannot in them find the least spark of favor.

The end of these words brought down such abundance of tears from Marencidaes
eyes, and so great number of sighs began to rise from her heavy heart, that
she remained a long while resembling nothing but some mad senseless creature,
filling the air with such lamentable cries and sobs, as no human ear has
heard the like. Therewith was Philocrista much moved to pity and compassion,
carieng her suddenly into her chamber, where she so labored by all good
counsails and consolations to quiet her, that she diminished part of her rage
and madness. There will we leave them together in this paci^ication, to
return to the good knight Marcomyr, who disarmeth himself in the mean time,
to the end to appear in presence before the Emperor, with such pomp as his
royal excellency did require.

CHAP. XXX. The honest and gracious conference had between Marcomyr, the
Emperor, the Empress, and D^ocles: and how afterward he caused himself to be
baptized, to be f^anced immediately after to his fair lady Celestina.
MArcomyr being disarmed, he put upon his back a sumptuous and rich iacket,
beset round about with pearls, and other rare precious stones of great and
inestimable valor: the which he caused to be made before he departed out of the
kingdom of Tarsus after the modern and newest fashion, used then amongst the
most magnificent kings of Asia, with intention to were it the first day he
came before the emperor: such a splendour did this royal vestement give to the
natural beauty of Marcomyr, that he drew all the beholders into admiration,
and exactly to remarke the Phisiognomie and lineature of his countenance, one
might have easily judged him to resemble much his father who engendered him: but
they were out of this thought: so that Diocles taking him then by the hand,
they went and sat down both so by the Emperor, who hearing all the court to
speak of nothing but of the extreme desire which they had to know of what
race he was descended, began to speak unto him in this manner.

Marcomyr my dear friend, it behooves you now no more to cover your self from
me, having your famous and flourishing renown pierced so the four corners of
this base and terrestrial region: tell me then I pray you of what parents are
you issued and all the rest, whereunto you may think our ears will be
attentive to hearken. Gracious lord quoth he, to you whom I hold for my liege
s^egnior can I not cloak honestly any thing which you may desire to know of
me, for I should think my self unworthy of your presence in dissembling unto
you the sincerity of my heart: Know ye then I am son to the Queen of Tarsus,
the most affectionate handmaid and perpetual lover of your majesty, who by a
strange adventure am come f^r from the confines of my kingdom, so soon as I
knew who was my father: whereof I was always ignorant before. The occasion of
my coming into your court was the renown and high praises of Celestina, to
whose service I firmly believe the fatal Destinies have submitted me ever
since my nativity, for the love of no other lady living did ever get place in
my spirit, which has felt an intolerable passion in knowing it self unworthy
to purchase her grace, and less to gain access and favor in your court.
There made he unto him the whole discourse of the old beldame, who appeared to
him sitting upon the foot of a stone pillar, in the cloisters of his palace,
and what she told him, blaming him for the idle and delicious life he led.
Keeping silent nevertheless how she certified him to be his son, because he
reserved that to manifest it unto him last of all other matters, if he did not
solicit him more instantly. He farther proceeded, how having till that day
lived like an infidel, and after the Alcoran of Mahomet, he did purpose with a
sincere devotion to become a Christian, and to receive the holy sacrament of
baptism. Whereunto a certain divine instinct did provoke him, which the most
highest of all gods did put in his mind: and also not for to loose her whom he
loved with so cordial a zeal, that without her only he could not live one
half quarter of an hour: albeit in doing so, he lost the hope of ever
returning again into his kingdom of Tarsus.

When the Emperor understood these things, he assured himself incontinent,
Marcomyr must needs be his son by the prompt and summarie suppu^ation he made
of his age and of the time he was in the prou^nce of Pasmeric, where the Queen
his mother by a subtle devise had iouyssance of his love: by means whereof he
became shamefast a little in beholding the Empress, whereof the purple color
which made his face blush showed a clear sign, for the vermilion tincture
thereof went and came in such sort, that the Empress and al those of the same
side where her chair of state was set, perceived it well: but she only
suspected what the matter might be, calling to mind the fine tricks the Queen
of Tarsus played her, as the Emperor himself had sometime told her: albeit she
as a lady prudent and of great discretion made as though she had known
nothing: and the Emperor then remembering at the same instant the perfections of
Marcomyr, accused himself of great simplicity to be ashamed of so perfect a
piece of a work: therefore calling to him again his former gladness and
speech, bespake him thus: My dear friend Marcomyr, surely I love and esteem
you much more then before, hearing you say you are son to that Queen which
has honored me so much in her countries: whose only name* resounding in mine
ears make me call to memory the exploits I did there: so that I cannot
express my joy, especially seeing you resolved to renounce paganism and the
heathen sect of your gods, to reduce your self totally to our faith. And mine
advise herein is, that things be not prolonged too much, but that to morrow
morning you receive the holy charactor of Christiandome, and by the same mean
under one to be celebrated also the solemnity of your affiancing with madame
Celestina: for reason wills in this case we hasten your attempt, seeing for
her sake you have endured so many travels, and forsaken such a kingdom as
yours is, the ertendue, riches, and fertility whereof is not a thing unknown
to me. To understand Marcomyr was a king, were meruellous glad the king and
Queen of Thessalie, and far more without comparison when they were certified
of the first degree of his genealogy: of which the Emperor would not yet make
any further inquiry, until he had better conjecture of the truth: but well he
knew how to alter his talk: and falling with a good decorum from one thing
into another, they conferred ioifully together till supper time when the tables
were spread through the court.

In mean time the Empress and the Queen with^rew themselves into their
chambers, leaving the king and Marcomyr to ^up with the emperor, where they
were magnificently served, not only with exquisit and rare dishes, but had also
of all sorts of musical Instruments, which they use at the repastes of great
princes. The tables being taken up, the Emperor praid the king of Thessalie to
retire himself to the Queen his dear wife, seeing the time did then require
to be a little together without any beholders to stand by. Whereunto he
willingly accorded, as well to gratify him therein, as to quench the desire
which might stir him forward to reconquest the place, where no refusal was
made at the entrance, and where the long distance of years wherein he endured
such sufferance, did so much more augment his forces. Yet he did at his wifes
request cut his hair and trim his beard, and for him were quickly made very
rich habilime^ts, to be on the morrow present at the betrothing of his daughter
in such array and sumptuous attire as did beseem his roial estate.

At the length Marcomyr remained alone with the Emper^r, who desired so
affectionately to know if he were his son, that being not able to endure any
longer this disquiet thought which troubled his spirit, he took him a little
aside with instant prayer to tell him the very troth Sir, quoth Marcomyr then,
Surely I can no longer conceal it from you, seeing you so careful to know,
albeit I had rather hold my peace a great deal, knowing my self unworthy of
such generation, by reason of my too little valor: notwithstanding to obey your
request, know that you your self begat me in the city of Al^arin in the
kingdom of Pasmerie, the same night you took very graciously your congie of
the Queen my mother. Who being duly advertised of the perfections which Nature
had bestowed upon you above all others, was so ardently enamoured of you, that
being unable to resist the impatient desire which made her more yours then her
own, she found means to acquaint her self with you by the virtue of a
certain potion mixed with many drugs, that a most expert Magitian had composed
for her: the working whereof was so vehement, that your vital spirits could not
preuai^e so much, but they remained attainted, and oppressed with such an
assured forgetfulness, as she had craftily of you, that which by prayers she did
despair to obtain. And this act has not so much displeased God, but he has
permitted to be procreated thereby a devout creature of his, who evidently
knows the Predestination, unto which ever since his nauitie he submitted it.
Which is my self your most humble son and obedient servant: to whom it seems
impossible this extreme desire, should not give you some presumption of the
matter, when you shall have certain assurance, by the remembrance which may
now refresh your memory of that which happened between you both. But she gave
me moreover at my departure from Tarsus a gage, whereby you shall further see
more apparent tokens of the truth, commanding me to deliver it unto you by the
which you may call to mind the like whereof she made you a present, when you were
to depart from her countries: and Celestina now has it in possession, if she
have not lost or put it away.

Of all this mystery would she not tell me the least word, till the old
beldame which put Celestina into my thoughts, had before given me to
understand. For she dreaded (a thing which soon after came to pass) that I
would abandon my kingdom to take my journey toward you to serve in the suite
of your court. The desire with which I found my self afterward inflamed for
the same purpose, has so without all cease night and day provoked me forward,
that never peril or any aduenturous danger might divert my spirit from
employing it in those things which might a little recommend me to you, till the
time that this should come to your notice: wherein albeit I have sh^^ne less
then no Prowess and magnamitie, it must be to you referred whence it is
derived, and to the desire I have therein to be known for your son.

Eternal God, then brake the Emperor forth for joy, how happy have I reputed
my self, recovering in so small time a son so perfect and accomplished? Surely
far more then any humane tongue is able to express: for the unspeakable joy
wherewith I feel my heart overcome, surpasses the capacity of the most
eloquent and learned clarke who ever for this effect might put pen to paper.
Ah, Marcomyr my dearly begotten son, undoubtedly I believe that which you tell
me, considering you much resemble me by your complexion and many other gifts,
wherewith nature has endued me, and chiefly your martial and heroical
courage, whereof all those of my blood have been heretofore partakers, and
albeit this laudable and precious fruition which I presently enjoy of you,
redoundeth a little to the dishonor of mine Empress, yet that does a little
pierce my heart, assuring me her prudencie and modesty will not permit her to
tax nor disdain me very much. Now I perceive how much I am bounden to love
the Queen your mother, seeing she has taken such pains for me, that of her so
cunning deceit wrought on me by night, there proceeds so goodly and rare
fruit. At the end of these words, he stroked him with his hands on both his
cheeks, and giving him many sweet kisses with a more singular affection then
can any father show to his child, he prosecuted his speech thus: My son I
pray devoutly the creator of all the world to accept you hereafter for his
true and faithful servant, to the end your Prowes and valiancie may shine and
augment in you every day more and more, by the communication of our Christian
faith, which you shall receive in the fount of holy baptism: and albeit in
doing so you forsake your own kingdom, assure your self you shall find no
less crown herein, beside that which I shall give you, during my life, and the
future succession which you shall inherit after my death.

Marcomyr made humble obeissance down to the ground to thank him and to kiss
his hand, which he did with such humility, that the tears distilled from the
Emperors eyes: brought down through the great joy wherewith his heart felt it
self ravished: which being not able to abide so secretly shut in, forced him
to go take the Empress in her chamber, whom at his first entrance he kissed
in all most honest amity, telling her this: I believe madam you have
heretofore held so good opinion of my firm l^ialty, and how cordially I have
all the time of my life loved you, that hereafter ye will not seek any better
or more sufficient proof: so that to speak this unto you, induces a little
scruple which is not long since crept into my brain, fearing least you misdeem
mine honest carriage when you shall understand ye discourse. But not to suffer
this fantasy to imprint it self further in your spirit, I protest before God
the only searcher of men's hearts, and I swear unto you again by all ye creatures
which assist before his tribunal seat, that never to my knowledge and will, I
have not de^iled our marriage bed: And less I have infringed in word or deed
the holy laws of matrimony, nor polluted the inviolable faith which I have
promised you. But if I have been sometimes so unfortunate, that some other woman
beside your self had of me by charms and deceit, that which to you only
appertained, you ought not now to be so severe and rigorous, but to pardon me,
seeing I confess mine indiscreet offense and oversight. Albeit the fault did
not proceed from me, and that in that behalf I shall always be sound innocent.
Madame, you may well remember what heretofore I told you befortuned me with the
queen of Tarsus in her countries, wherein the dream that you dreamed was not
altogether false and vain: for so much as by the acquaintance she had of me by
mean of her sorcerie and sophisticated beuerage which she commanded the
yeoman of her seller to give me, has been engendered Marcomyr the gentle knight.

My lord, answered the Empress, with a smiling and very gracious countenance,
so soon as ever I saw Marcomyr, I assured that to be true which you say, he
resembles you so nearly in all lineatures of his person: so that not only I
have pardoned you, being ignorant of bringing into this world one so excellent
and perfect creature, but when weetingly you had forgotten me in a thing whence
proceeds so rare and precious trea^or: being long since assured of your
integrity, that by your good will you will never work me anger or
displeasure. As for Marcomyr I accept him most willingly for my son, and I love
him already with no less zeal then Diocles his brother, beseeching you my
lord, to send him hither to me speedi^ie: for I will receive him for no less,
and declaring mine affection to him, give him the maternall kiss, and
embracing which his good manners and commendable virtues do merit.

Glad was the Emperor without measure of this answer, and sending for Diocles
and Abenunq thither (after they had heard the discourse of this good news)
sent them for Marcomyr to bring him before the Empress: They went to fetch him
with a marvelous gladness, and as far off as Diocles saw him, he ran to him
with open arms, saying in this manner. O the incomprehensible bliss that now
brings me the neerenes of lineage, which would extract us two out of one and
the selfsame original sourse! O the inseparable brotherly amity! What two
persons might you combine and unite to hold better together with your
affectionate hands then us two? Surely when you should wander over the bottom
of this Hemispheare you should never ^ind the like couple more inclined to
reverence you, especially I, who therein feel my self above all other so much
favored by the divine providence, that I hope my dear brother and friend, you
shall never know in me any other will then your own. Ah dear brother answered
Marcomyr then, the felicity which you say is the contentment of your spirit,
constrains me to strive therein against you in this only (that in any other
thing I should cross your desires God forbid) wherein it pleases you to
term your self the most affectionate whom fraternall amity may at this day
find on earth: for when the extreme desire which I have in this behalf should
be measured by the elle, or poised in an even balance, you should plainly see
it wey down and surpass yours by far, the which for all that I esteem to be
no less then you say. But for as much as mine has exceeded the height of all
measure, and that it is impossible to mount above it, I would feign give you to
know what did urge me to assure you, you shall always find my body a prompt
servant of your souls desire: whereof shall give you loiall testimony the
first commandment which I shall receive from you, wherein I pretend to employ
my self so well, that you shall discern the little difference I put between
doing and saying. As then Diocles and Abenunq had enterlaced many courteous
speeches and gratulations, they came all three toward the Empress, to whom as
soon as they were arrived, Marcomyr fell on his knees to kiss her hand, which
she would not have had him done, but she lifted him up quickly again, and
embracing him with her most gentle and gracious entertainment, she began thus:
My son Marcomyr the virtues and gifts of the heaven whereof the sovereign
God has known your body worthy of, seem unto me so well employed in your
person, that with great reason they incite me to love you naturally, as I do
with all my heart willingly, and conceive in my self a marvelous great joy,
that you are now come to show the true office of a son: which is to recognish
your father, and to present the humble obeissance which you owe unto him, being
things whereof your father and I feel our selves so well pleased and content,
as of nothing else so much which might happen unto us at this day. Madame
answered Marcomyr, it is of your accustomed bounty, that it pleases your
highness to account me in the number of your most humble and af^ianced servants,
albeit I do not merit the least part of any such favor. Nevertheless if a
sincere devotion and zeal of a love more then of the son to the father (which
I have, never day of my life to transgress your commandments) might purchase
me so much happiness, to contain me always in your grace, and in that of my
lord my father, I should content my self as much with fortune, as the richest
prince of the earth, therein have I set down and hidden the limit of my
riches, thinking there can be no more precious a treasure found for me. My
dear child, then replied the Empress, you are so forward, that you need not
use any service therein toward us for this matter, but henceforward you shall
take such habitude and familiarity with us as you shall seem best, for I see
you are very worthy of that ^auor, and so modest, you will in no wise abuse
it. Much more honest and gracious conference had they together. In the mean
while this news was spread all over the palace: by means whereof Philocrista
went (as though she would fly) to embrace and receive Marcomyr for her
brother. The like did the king and Queen of Thessalie, all running to him so
filled with gladness, that when they came to him they could hardly open their
mouth to speak to him. So great was the ease and pleasure of those who
understood this good news, that all the night they could not sleep nor take
any rest, for that some made bonefires, others sounded trumpets, and many other
instruments for joy and gladness, in brief he did not think himself the son
of a good mother who did not welcome Marcomyr as the Emperors son: or who did
not show some sign of reioicing at that unexpected parentage: but all this was
nothing in respect of that which the Emperor did on the morrow morning, who
sent one of the richest and most sumptuous presents to Marcomyr and Ozalias,
that every one might easily discern common love from that which is natural:
wherein Ozalias showed himself not too much pleased, for no other cause but to
see Marcomyr thoroughly resolved to become a Christian, presaging already in his
heart what would befall the Queen his aunt, when she should be advertised of
that misery: nevertheless Marcomyr comforted him in the most amiable sort he
might, assuring him to crown him king of Tarsus, where he might lead a ioifull
life with his fair Marencida: which assuaged his miscontented mind a little.

And if the Emperor did give rich presents unto Marcomyr, the Empress sent no
less to Celestina, some whereof were presently bestowed upon her person, which
was the^ to be adorned to go to the ceremony of the baptism of her love
Marcomyr, who should be affianced to her presently after: for this occasion did
all the Barons and knights of the court mount on horseback, who did much more
honor to Marcomyr, then before when they knew not his descent. And being all
arrived in gallant order within the church of Sancta Sophia, he was there
catholicklie baptized (having for godfather his brother Diocles) then presently
by the hand of the most reverend patriarch was he fianced to the fair
Celestina: who was so richly attired, that she drew into more then a strange
admiration al those who regarded her. And we need not to compare her in
perfection of her graces, corporal beauty, and rarenes of jewels and habits to
the sage Andromecha, when the valiant and redoubted knight Hector of Troy
espoused her, nor to Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, when she contended in
magnificence and sumptuositie with Mark Antonie

Triumuir her husband, eating one of the pearls which hanged at her ears,
esteemed worth two hundred and fifty thousand crowns: nor unto many others of
the ancient time, whereof the historians both Greek and Latin make memorable
mention: for even as the Carbuncle, the most rich and precious of all Oriental
stones, set in a darksome and obscure place does send forth such a glistering
and clear splendour, that not only all the place round about is made light and
shining, but also the eyes of all that look upon it are comforted and reioiced
thereby: likewise might they esteem of Celestina, not so much a Carbuncle
within this temple, as the only and true Phoenix of her age.

The troop then returned to the palace in the same goodly array as they
departed thence, there began such a feast as never was the like^ seen before:
in such sort that every one enioied part of the pleasure, except Arnedes the
good prince, who felt himself in intolerable pain, and in extreme
diffidence ever to see his fathers Ambassadors arrive there. By means whereof
beholding a whole hour of the day together the now affianced in such content,
and his dear lady Philocrista leaning upon them (one arm upon Celestina, and
the other cast about Marcomyrs neck) to show him the greatest signs of love
she might devise, the sorrowful lover attainted to the heart with that sight,
fell at the same instant in a trance to the ground: but he was by many knights
quickly helped up again, and forthwith carried into his chamber, where after
he was come again to himself, fetching a broken sigh from his very heart, he
says: Alas, my God, and will the succor which should come to this poor
afflicted soul stay any longer? How do you suffer thus my passible and frail
body to see death before it eyes, and yet cannot die as it desires? ^iij thou
searcher of hearts, permit I beseech thee, that death may cast quickly his dart
against mine, and imprint therein for whose sake I die, that I may have no
grief to forsake this world, but that only she may have some compassion to see
breathless the servant more devoted to her service, then any other whom she
may find in these lower regions, when she should seek from Boreas to Auster,
and from the Indians to the Moors. So he held his peace, when Diocles and
those who did accompany him, demanded of him the occasion of his so sudden
trance: whom he answered not a word, he felt himself so perplexed and
confounded in his thoughts: as no less was Philocrista for her part, knowing
her self the principal cause of his malady, with which he had quickly
finished his life, had he not had speedy remedy as you shall hear by and by.

CHAP. XXXI. How the Ambassadors of France arrived at Constantinople, where
they were honorably received by the Emperor, who having understood the effect
of their embassage, and thereupon conferred with the prince Arnedes, immediately
affianced to him his daughter Philocrista, by whose hand the Ambassadors
presented him their kings letter of commission.
THe post which Arnedes had dispatched from Constantinople into France, made
such expedition that within few days he arrived in the famous city of Paris,
where the king understanding the will of his son, resolved soon upon the
conclusion of this business: and did choose out incontinent for the chief of
this embassage, the duke of Orleans a very sage and prudent Siegnior,
commanding the Marquis of Oliuet and the County Peter (one of the best
knights of his court) should accompany him, and many other Barons of Mark, so
brave and richly suited in their habilliments, that they showed evidently how
much the French exceed all other nations in magnificence, and many other good
parts, which now we will not speak of, being besides our purpose. The king
having delivered them their letters of commission and instructions in the state
of their embassage, sent them away with many attires and precious gifts which
he sent to Philocrista and to the prince Arnedes: but before they were
departed, there arrived in his court a knight who came from the court of the
Castilian king, to advertise Recindos how his brother being departed without
issue, all the people did much rejoice that the scepter of such a kingdom fell
into the hands of so valiant a prince as he. When the king of France understood
this news by the Spanish gentleman named Pinedes, he answered him that
Recindo^ was gone with Arnedes his son into Constantinople, where as he had
since heard they won daily great honor and renown, this was cause that Pinedes
purposed to pass over into Greece with his Ambassadors, and for the same
occasion they went to Tolla^ in Province to embarke themselves in the
Mediteranean sea, where sailing with a prosperous wind, they arrived at
Constantinople almost at the same time that Arnedes fell into the same trance
you read of before. Being come within the haven, two little Frigates, which
went always before the vessel of the Ambassadors, were the first who cast
ankers there, and soon after by commandment of the duke of Orleans, began
those within board tokens of joy, to render thanks to God for their fortunate
navigations. Whereof the Emperor being advertised, sent incontinent to see what
might those actions of joy mean: And understanding they were the Ambassadors
of France, he felt a great gladness in himself, hoping Arnedes might recover
some amendment by the report of this news. So yt he comanded they should
forthwith let him know thereof, praying him to be of good cheer, seeing ye
nobleme^ of his country were arrived the^ in those quarters.

We need not ask whether Arnedes found himself any thing eased at these
tidings, seeing the sudden recovery he had in a moment by that mean, skewed
well therein did consist the true Physic of his grief: the which he left the
same hour behind him in his bed to go with Diocles toward the Emperor, who
seeing him come so lusty, was a glad man of his amendment, when he said unto
him: siegnior Arnedes, it seems to me the arrival of these French Gentlemen
has made you strong, and to recover of your malady. You say true my lord,
quoth he, it is that which is mine only restoritie and sole remedy.
Philocrista who knew full well the meaning of Arnedes affectionate desire, was
not glad a little of this occurrance, so that to behold her in face and
countenance, one might plainly have read in her heart, and soon known whence
this her gladness proceeded: wherein she secretly declared to the French
prince, that which his tongue durst not manifest alowd, a thing wherein he
needed no interpreter, but thanking her with like signs, went strait from
thence toward the haven to see unto which of his servants the king his father
had committed this legation. The Emperor sent with him many of his barons, to
the end to accompany the ambassadors to his palace, for the greater honor of
who^, Diocles himself would needs go with Arnedes, who sent his dwarf before to
advertise the^ of his coming toward ye port: for this cause ye duke of
Orlea^s and his other two co^mpanio^s came quickly aland in one of ye two
seigats* where seeing ye prince first of all, ran unto him bareheaded to kiss
his hands, in ye which doing he embraced the^, then said to ye duke of Orleans?
Ah my sweet cousin how many pleasures does your arrival in this city bring
me? Surely many more then you may think: but tell me I pray you without
passing farther, how does my lord the king my father? My lord, the ioifullest
man in the world answered the Duke, and as he who has an extreme desire to
see you ere long: sends you word that so^orning as little as possibly you may
in these parts, you would take your journey quickly to return into your good
country of France. Therein will I obey him willingly replied Arnedes, before
any long time pass after this day: in the mean time do your honor unto
Diocles the emperors son, who of his grace would needs take the pain to come
so far as hither to receive and entertain you. The^ Diocles maruelling all
these knights and French Nobles did so much honor and reverence to the prince
Arnedes, imagined presently he must needs be their kings son. And in regard
thereof using many amiable speeches to the duke of Orlians, and the other
Ambassadors, he praid them very graciously to advertise him of Arnedes business,
who until that hour would never manifest himself to any body.

My lord answered the Duke, he is our prince and sovereign siegnior, who
through the ardent desire which he had to offer his service to the Emperor
your father, determined to come unknown into this court, and to remain here,
dissembling his person till he might see the things designed by him to come to
so good issue as he desired: wherein I hope according to the embassage, which
the king his father has committed to our charge to set some good and happy
end, with the help of him whom I pray to send us so good success that we be
not therein made frustrate of our attempt. In good faith quoth Diocles, turning
himself toward the French prince, I have great cause to complain of you
Arnedes, who have hid your self so long time from me: for although you had
resolved in coming hither not to discover your self to any person, me
thinks you should not comprise me in the universal number, considering the
familiar acquaintance between us two, albeit I was ignorant of the splendour
and nobility of your heroical race. My good lord, replied Arnedes, embracing
him* I pray you excuse me herein, for so much as that which has brought me
hither so far distant from the French court, to do some exploites of arms
which might honor my lineage before it were by me manifested, has incited nay
rather constrained me to conceal my self the more: considering I could not
surge at the port of my desire, not employing my self in that which did not
still redound rather to my dishonor then commendation.

Assuredly quoth Dio^les then, if by your laudable and valerous feats of arms
you desire to publish your name, it seems to me that the very day of the
Iousts you should not have deferred to give so fair a luster (declaring your
royal descent) to the prowess and incomparable valor you showed there. There
Arnedes interrupted him and said, Ah? My lord, it is of your grace that it
pleases you to place me in the number of those who did there well their
endeavors, although I deem not my self worthy to second the least of the great
troop which was present there: nevertheless if good will not to suffer an
illustrious and generous heart to abase it self, has sometime power to
increase a man's forces, I think my self was none of the feeblest in all the
company. No indeed answered Diocles, but of the strongest, as every one
knows, witness the honor of the victory which served you then in steed of a
triumphant crown: but I pray you let us sur^ease these things to an other
time, and we will go find the Emperor, who shall be a most ioifull man of these
tidings. Then they mounted on horseback with the Ambassadors, who came all to
alight before the palace, where there was good lodging appointed them by
command of the Emperor: and in the mean time Pinedes gave the prince Arnedes
to understand how he past through France, ^ thinking to find Recindos there, to
whom he came to bring the news of his brothers death, and how all the Barons
and the common people of Castilia did most willingly accept him for their liege
soueraign, after the decease of the king his father. Of this news was the
Frenchman very glad on the one side, seeing his cousin Recindos (whom he loved
as himself) inheritor of the scepter of Castilia: but very sorry because he
heard no news of him. Nevertheless assuring Arnedes that he did hope shortly
for his return, put him out of fantasy of going any further to seek for him:
for that quoth he, very hardly will he fail to be at the tourney held at my
marriage* the which I have purposed to publishe thorowout all the marches and
frontiers, bounding this empire of Greece.

But the Emperor who had knowledge before of some that made have before him to
the court, concerning the business of prince Arnedes, when he saw him enter into
the presence with his son Diocles, he rose up from his state to embrace him,
saying: What means this siegnior Arnedes, you would so cunningly dissemble
your state with us, we could never perceive your carriage therein, procuring us
thereby to commit a great discourtesie, in not honoring you according to your
merit? Tell me I pray you wherefore did you conceal your self to me, very well
knowing how happy I should have deemed my self to know you without any
fiction of your person?

Gracious lord replied Arnedes, I beseech you in all humility not to use these
speeches unto me, for I acknowledge not my self worthy thereof, and less of
the honor which I have received in your countries, assuredly far surmounting
that little which I know I have merited: assuring you my spirit had never taken
rest, before I had come to see the magnificence of your court, to do you my
best service according to my power which is but small. Small indeed in respect
of the good will which surpasses that of the best affectionate servants which
you have: in whose number, I beseech you to account me the very first as him
who by devotion and sincerity of heart none living can go before in this
behalf: Wherein I find my self greatly disfauored of the heaven, ^or none
occasion has as yet ben offered to show it you in that sort as* I have lively
imprinted it in my thoughts. It suffices then quoth the Emperor again, of
that which you have done already: being proof of a truth very sufficient to
raise you to this reputation of one of the best and most perfect knights of
this our age: and as for me, if I be not shent for this favor, considering the
amity I bear you, I shall be always the foremost in this opinion, wherein I
do not think my self much ouerseene, as I should repute my self very happy to
purchase you for my son in law, when you would give thereunto your consent.

Arnedes who saw the passage opened, by which he hoped to conduct his soul
into rest, and by none other but by him who had the true key thereof, felt
himself almost ravished with joy, whentaking the Emperor by the hand to kiss
it in sign of thanks, went on thus: well may I now vaunt my self to attain
the perfect fruition of al worldly bliss, seeing I am by you offered so
honorable alliance, for which I cannot return you so many thanks (to acquit
my self thereby of the obligation wherein I am yours bounden) but I shall find my
self still more and more beholding to you in a new bond which shall bind me in
performing this kindness. Nevertheless if the extreme affection I have to
continue for ever your obedient servant and humble son (if it seem good unto
you) may by any mean serve you in steed of an earnest, I beseech you accept it
such as I can present you, to the end hereafter you may use me as your right
hand and as your left, as readily as your two eyes at the only thought of your
spirit. For even as the thunder crack following the lightening which goes
before it, strikes more suddenly then any thing else his blow where he
hitteth, far more prompt shall I be at the only conjectures which I shall gather
of your desires, to satisfy you therein without attending to be commanded
thereunto.

The Emperor meruellous ioifull to hear him profer these honest speeches, knew
very well with what arrow he was wounded, and that which moved him to come and
seek in his court the balm and perfect cure of his wound: therefore he caused
him to sit down by him, where he related him many other matters, whereat the
Emperor marvelled not a little, especially when he understood the history of
his cousin Recindos. Of this was Melisla exceeding glad, for she loved the
Spanish Prince most ardently*

But we must not compare her to Philocrista in gladness and contentment of
spirit, because the object of their inward spirits did witness sufficiently,
which of them two did conceive more unspeakable joy, wherein both their hearts
did swim. On the morrow the Emperor caused all his palace to be hanged round
with cloth of gold, and all his most exquisit jewels and sumptuous riches to be
set openly sorth, to the end the French Ambassadors might see his magnificent
pomp. Who coming into the presence all clothed with magnifick and precious
habits, were honorably entertained by the Emperor, to whom they caused the
letter of the king of France his commission to be delivered by Philocrista:
the tenor whereof said thus: Letters of the king of France to the Emperor
Cleodomyr.
TO the most high and magnanimious prince Cleodomyr Emperor of Constantinople,
the true mirror of chivalry, Lewis by the grace of God king o^ France sends
condign salutation to his excellency. The assurance which the renown of your
generousnes has given us, most dear brother, having spread it self already
to the (...) regions of this (...) over Embassado^ (...) you to condescend
(...) time studied upon (...) be your good pleasure (...) last will of the
king, (...) left behind him (...) to nature. And for that we have most (...)
them in the points and articles which we desire on our side to be imparted unto
you, we will make no further discourse by letters, remitting our selves to
their sufficiency. Only we must entreat you to credit them in this behalf,
and in other things which they shall propound unto you touching the
capitulation of the marriage of Arnedes prince of France our son, as if it
were our own proper person. Wherein we shall repute the honor that is done
unto them in your countries, so high, as if it were done to our selves. But
because you may find it somewhat strange, that an elder brother of such a house
as mine, is come into your court with so small train, I pray you thereby to
know the desire he has to perform things thus unknown, by the which you may
clearly understand how much he is above all others:

Your affectionate and perfect friend, the House of France.




This letter read, the Emperor led the Ambassadors into his chamber, where
after he had understood at length the full discourse of their Embassage, he
called a counsel of his princes and nobles incontinent, to communicate unto
them his intention concerning this business: the which they confirmed by their
aduises as very good, as well to accomplish the promise he had made to the
defunct king of France, as also for that the match seemed very (...) and so
valiant a (...) as Diocles most (...) alliance of his (...) is sister had to
see (...) in resemblance. (...) be called in beauty a (...) (...), they were
affianced to (...) with the greatest triumph and magnificence that any humane
tongue might express, so that in the palace and every where in the city they
did occupy themselves in nothing but in making joy and gladness: whereat the
Emperor and the Empress were so exceeding well pleased and content, as they
were ever in their lives: as well for the arrival and knowledge of Marcomyr as
for the betrothing of Philocrista with this royal Prince of France: wherein
Diocles determined to be armed knight, to the end to employ himself from that
time forth, in all warlike and martial affairs.

FINIS.

