THE Valiant and most laudable fight performed in the Straights, by the
Centurion of London, against five Spanish Galleys.

Who is safely returned this present Month of May. Anno. D. 1591.



The valiant and most laudable fight performed on the Sea, by the Centurion of
London.
IN the month of November last past, there were sundry Shyps appertayning to
several Merchants of London, which were rigde and fraught, forth with
merchandise, some for Spain, and some for sundry other places of traffic,
who together having wind and wether, which oft-time fell out very uncertain,
arrived safely in short space, at such places as they desired, among whom was
the Centurion of London, a very tall Ship of burden, yet but weakly manned,
as appears by this History ensuing; wherein God showed a most wonderful
accident of his merciful love and favor toward them, giving them the
victory, and delivering them from the hands of their Enemies, at such time as
it was thought impossible for them to escape.

This aforesaid Ship called the Centurion, safely arrived at Marseelis, where
after they had delivered their goods, they stayed about the space of five
weeks, and better, and then took in lading, intending to return to England.

Now when the Centurion was ready to come away from Marseelis, there were
sundry other shyps of smaller burden, entreated the Master thereof, whose name
is Robert Bradshawe, dwelling at the Lime-house, to stay a day or two for them,
until they were in a readiness to depart with them, thereby persuading them,
that it would be far better for them to stay and go together in respect of
their assistance, then to depart of themselves without company, and so happily
for want of aid fall into the hands of their Enemies in the Spanish Galleys.
Upon which reasonable persuasion, notwithstanding that this Ship was of such
sufficiency as they might hazard her in the danger of the Sea, yet they stayed
for those little Ships according to their request, who together did put to Sea
from Marseelis, and vowed in general not to fly one from another, if so they
should happen to meet with any Spanish Galleys, being resolute rather to
fight it out, then once to be taken by the Spaniards to endure their accustomed
cruelty.

These small Ships accompanied with the Centurion, sailing along the Cost of
Spain, was upon Ester day last in the straights of Iebualtare suddenly
becalmed, where immediately they saw sundry Galleys make toward them, in very
valiant and courageous sort: the chief Leaders and Soldiers in those
Galleys, bravely apparrelled in silk Coats, with silver whistles about their
necks, and great plumes of Feathers in their Hafs, who with their Calliuers,
shot at the Centurion so fast as they might: so that by ten of the clock
and somewhat before, they had boorded the Centurion, who before their coming,
had prepared for them, and intended to give them so sower a welcome as they
might. And thereupon having prepared their close fights, and al things in a
readiness, they called upon God, on who^ only they trusted: and having made
their prayers, and cheered up one another to fight so long as life endured,
they began to discharge their great Ordinance upon the Galleys, but the little
Shyps durst not come forward, but lay aloof, while five Galleys had hoorded
them, yea and with their grapling yrons made their Galleys fast to the said
Ship called the Centurion.

The Galleys were grapled to the Centurion in this manner, two lay on one side,
and two on another, and the Admiral lay full in the stern, which galled and
battered the Centurion so sore, that her maine Mast was greatly weakened, her
sails filled with many holes, and the Mizzen and stern made almost
unserviceable.

During which time there was a sore and deadly fight on both sides, in which,
the Trumpet of the Centurion, sownded forth the deadly points of war, and
encouraged the^ to fight manfully against their adversaries: on the contrary
part, there was no warlike Music in the Spanish Galleys, but only their
whystles of silver, which they sounded forth to their own contentment: in
which fight many a Spaniard was turned into the sea, and they in multitudes
came crauling and hung upon the side of the ship, intending to have entered
into the same, but such was the courage of the Englishmen, that so fast as the
Spaniards did come to enter, they gave them such entertainment, that some of
them were glad to tumble alive into the sea, being remediles for ever to
get up alive. In the Centurion there was in all, of men and boys, forty and
eight, who together fought most valiantly, and so galled the enemy, that many a
brave and lusty Spaniard lost his life in that place.

The Centurian was fyred five several times, with wild fire and other
provision, which the Spaniards threw in for that purpose: yet God be thanked,
by the great and dilligent foresight of the Master it did no harm at all.

In every of the Galleys there was about five or six hundereth Soldiers: who
together with the shot, spoiled, rent, and battered the Centurion very sore:
shot through her maine Mast, and slew four of the men in the said ship,
the one of them being the Masters mate.

Ten other persons were hurt, by means of splinters which the Spaniards
shot: yea, in the end when their provision was almost spent, they were
constrained to shoot at them hammers, and the chains from their slaves, and
yet God be thanked, they received no more damage: but by spoiling and over
wearying of the Spaniards, the Englishmen constrained them to vngrapple
themselves, and get them going, and sure if there had been any other fresh
ship or succor to have releiued and assisted the Centurion, they had slain,
suncke, or taken all those Galleys and their Soldiers.

The Dolphin lay a loofe of and durst not come near, while the other two small
ships fled away, so that one of the Gallyes went from the Centurion and
set upon the Dolphin, which ship immediately was set on fire with their own
powder, whereby both men and ship perished: but whether it was with their good
wills or no, that was not known unto the Centurion, but sure if it had come
forward, and been an aid unto the Centurion, it is to be supposed that it
had not perished.

Five hours and a half this fight continued, in which time both were glad to
depart only to breath themselves, but when the Spaniards were gonne, they
never durst return to fight: yet the next day six other Galleys came and
looked at them, but durst not at any hand meddle with them. Thus God delivered
them from the hands of their enemies, and gave them the victory: for which they
heartily praised God, and are now safely arrived in London.

FINIS.
Present at this fight, Master John Hawer Merchant, and sundry other of good
account.

