PALESTINA WRITTEN By Mr. R. C. P. and Bachelor of Divinity.

FLORENCE Imprinted by Bartelmew Sermartelli 1600.

TO OUR MOST Gracious, and Sovereign Lady and Princes, whose dowry is little
England, and the largest heavens her fairest inheritance, all happiness and
heavenly bliss.
ALl fair and fortunate Princess, the glory of England, the gemme of all the
world: so worthy of the highest renown, as no one is worthy to pronounce thy
name. By whom next unto God we not only live, but labor with joy our hearts
ease, our souls peace. Live under whom England lives in the farthermost part
of the world* and reign for ever under whom it has been a long time most
graciously governed at home.

Vouchsafe noble Princes, who descendest of a princely race. Vouchsafe gracious
Sovereign, who condescendest to thy poorest subjects requests. Vouchsafe
worthy of all praise, this small-worth present, which although it be but a
harsh discourse of a sometime happy country, yet it is with a hearty wish it
were not so greatly weaned (...) thee.

Too much presumption it may seem, to press upon a Princess so slight a
works protection. But the common lying in the wind to take advantage against
whatsoever is written, compels men to fly to those who can and will defend,
which none will sooner then such a Princess, as takes to her heart her
meanest subjects love, and thinks their harm does touch her own honor,
none may better then such a Princess, as whose gracious look can make it a
most pleasing lure, and whose ready favor can fast-locke all others
judgments in aliking.

A pleasing subject are thy praises, if by any they could be worthily
desciphered, but they do so much exceed the art both of pen and pensell,
that men should wrest their wits in vain, that would do more then wonder at
them.

Thy felicity then being so great, thy bounty so gracious, as no one who
needs thy patronage may justly either distrust, or despair thereof, having
declared what most humbly I desire, and earnestly wish I may deserve, I cease
and admire thee, with those who never cease to admire thee, and wish unto thee
what thou have not, above all men's wishes.

Your Majesty's humble servant not worth the naming.

PALESTINA.
Written by Mr. R. C. P. and Bachelor of Divinity.
IN the heavenly Jerusalem dwells an Emperor, so worthy, and so wealthy,
as in his presence, both the rarest majesty seems base; and the richest
Monarch a beggar. The cite wherein he abides is so stately, and so strong, as
neither Niniuie without a lip, nor Babylon ^r Ec^atane, may without a blush
either be named, or numbered with it. It is of a glasse-like transparent, but
the purest tried gold, that he rests free from all doubt of ever having it
wasted with fire, and void of all fear, that it will not last for ever. The
streets of the cities are of the same gold, through them runs a river as
clear as crystal, on either side of which grows a tree, which for every of
the twelve months gives a several fruit, and according unto the effect it
works, is called the tree of life: it is watered with the river which is of
no less virtue then the tree, and has his first vent from under the Emperor
his throne. The city is square 375. miles as well in height, as length, and
breadth, the compass is 1500 mile: about it is a wall 216. foot high, all of
Jasper stone, which beside the firmenes thereof, is of a most fresh and
beautiful green color, that it moves the beholders to wish, as much as to
wonder. The wall is built so low of purpose, that the stateliness of the City
may appear the better unto all passengers. The foundation of the wall is of
twelve precious stones, the Jasper, the Sapphire, the Calcedonicke, the
Emerauld, the Sardonix, the Sardius, the Chrysolith, the Berill, the Topaze,
the Chrysophrase, the Hyacinth, the Amethist. In this wall were twelve gates,
in all points correspondent unto the stateliness of the wall, three toward the
East, as many toward the West, also three toward the North, and three toward
the South: every several gate is one of those twelve several precious
stones, and no one of the gates without all the rest of the stones, but they
are not so much beautified by them, as by the presence of twelve princes, which
stand in every of the twelve gates one, who seem there to abide, only as
allurements to their city, if any being weary of the worlds illusions* should
endeavor too seek their safety, for neither have they any cause to look unto
their gates, nor any custom to lock them.

And no worse then princes can stand at his gates, all whose household ^re
princes, every one of them rich, because they cannot enjoy more then they do:
all happy, because they cannot become less then they are, and only contend,
who shall to their power give him most praise, who has filled their hearts with
such joy, as neither eye has seen, ear has heard, nor heart, (but their
own) can conceive, and furnished all their senses with such delight, as still
they covet, but never want, still they taste, but are never glutted, because
they no sooner wish, then have, and every taste gives a fresh appetite. If the
ver^e pauement of their streets be of most pure gold, and the foundation of
their walls of most precious stones, think what ornaments are those which are
within their Palaces. No night succeeds their day, no winters cold, nor
summers heat, disturbeth that temperature, which an everlasting springtime
maintains in lively vigor. One Kingdom contenteth them all, and because
they all hold it of one, in whom* only they joy, and by whom they enjoy it;
they know not how to live, but as one; no one enuyeth at another good, both
because every one has what his heart can desire, and also for that they all
have one object, which so mightily draws all their powers to the continual
love, and looking thereon, as they have neither power nor leisure to apply
themselves to any other, more then that they love each other, in respect that
every one loves him, who, as each thinks, cannot be loved too much.

How daintily do they feed, whose meat and drink is love? for if any thing
delight without any likelihood of ever loathing it, it is his love: if any
thing do please without danger of poison, it is his love: if any thing be
able to quicken what seems quite dead, it is his love. O how well did the
Poets aim at the truth, when they said that love was a God, but shot much
wide, when they feigned that he was blinded, whose seeing only, and being
seen is that, which gives life to all men, but never wounds he any against
their wills, and whose heart he wounds, he salueth with the joy of such a
love as is far more noblethen themselves, and will not leave the least love
unrequited.

This soueraign Lord over so many happy Princes, his estate is such as cannot
by any art be described, his glorious throne, no eye is able to behold, his
profound wisdom no understanding is able to comprehend, his authority no
power is able to resist, he lives in light inaccessible, he rules with
majesty incomparable, and because his very name is ineffable, too much
presumption it were to attempt to set ^oorth the worthiness of his nature. In
his works he has showed himself so provident, as all may justly admire him,
so good, as all may above all love him, so sweet as all may joy sufficiently in
him, but for any inferior unto him self perfectly to know him, w^ere to limit
his perfections, which are beyond all bounds, because they are infinite.

With this Emperor lived the above mentioned Princes, without any
tediousness, desire of change, or any kind of sorrow, being incapable of any
thing but happiness, until a maruailous rare and rigorous seeming accident
befell them, for their Emperor having one only son, equal unto his father
in power, might, and authority, and in no one point of perfection,
degenerating from him, from both whom, for the infinite likeness betwixt
them, proceeded an infinite love, he deputed him to a public, shameful, and
a painful death, which did so amaze the Princes attendant, whose love was no
less unto him, then unto his father, that (might they have been suffered)
they would all have sustained that punishment to have saved their Prince, but
their offer was refused, for the sentence was irreuocable.

The motive of this vnnaturall^seeming judgment, was an exceeding great love,
which he bare unto a Lady his adopted daughter, who was so enchaunted by her
own folly, as of a most comely and beautiful creature, she became so
misshapen and so ugly, that she was loathsome even unto her self. This
enchauntment was by eating an apple, of which her father before had given her
warning she should not taste, upon peril of that which should ensue thereof:
but her pride was so great, that ungrateful to so good a Lord, and disobedient
to so careful a father, she followed the motion which was made unto her by a
false, though a fair spoken enemy, and eat thereof contrary to her father
his commandment.

The Enchantment was so devised, that having taken effect, it should not be
dissolved but by the death of the only son of an Emperor, who should
exceed all the princes in the world in gifts both of body and mind: he
should be peerless for his birth, riches, beauty, wisdom, and might; whose
father should never know any woman, nor his mother any man, and should in the
very self same instant both have and want both father and mother. The liking
by any such prince of such an unlovely Lady being unlike, and the birth of any
such prince or other seeming impossible, made the Enchanter secure, that this
his work should endure for ever.

The Enchanter himself was one of more malice then might, but yet of more
might then an unruly assailed could well resist. He was sometime a prince of
the Emperor his court, and among princes a prince, being endewed with far
more excellent gifts then any his fellow princes, and exalted unto that honor,
as he was reputed the chiefest under his Lord and Master: but bearing
himself so proudly against his maker, he found by too late an experience,
that he who bestowed those graces upon him, could also again bereave him of
them, and because he had once abused them with intolerable pride, he should
ever after be abridged of them to his eternal pain. To revenge which disgrace
he assayed the Lady the Emperor his daughter, and won her love so far
forth, as she gave more credit unto him, then unto her father, and would do
more at his request, then at her fathers commandment, for although she seemed
at the first to have a small liking unto his motion, yet with fair promises,
and too far above his power to perform; in the end he made her give a
consent unto her utter overthrow, had not the Emperor his son being deputed
by his Father thereunto, undertaken to release her by the loss of his own
life.

The ransom being appointed to be disbursed infinitely exceeding that, which
was to be redeemed, too gracious for so ungracious a creature, and too
bountiful for her, who wilfully made herself bondslaue, by selling outright a
royal and real good for a proud imaginatiue Godhead, a great difficulty
arose in what manner it should be paid, for the prince being of so excellent a
nature, that he was not capable of the smallest annoyance, and in so strong a
hold, that he could not sustain the least harm, much less the loss of his
life, it was needful he should both take upon him a nature, and abide in such
place, as in which, and where he might effect his desire,

Here love (which makes every one it possesses to conform themselves unto
their love) quickly determined what was in doubt, and make this conclusion;
that he should take upon him the same nature, of which his sister was, and
her peruersenes only excepted, he should in all things be like unto her,
which conceit love made so conformable unto his former counsel, as the more
he thought upon it, the fitter the means seemed to bring his purpose to a
good pass. For first he thought that hereby he might in a most lovely manner
enjoy her company, whom he so entirely loved without giving any cause of
jealousy to her ouerdiligent keeper: Secondly, he thought, that the keeper
taking him for his captive, might the more easily be overtaken by his
carelesnes: Thirdly, he thought this nature fittest for his purpose, that she
whom he loved being of the same nature, might the better guess at the torture
he should suffer for her sake; because, by the shedding of his blood, he was
to work her safety, and fancy him the sooner, who would adventure so far to
win her love, who was not worthy of a good look.

Wisdom therefore guiding the stern as carefully, as love seemed continually
to fill the sails, the prince proceeds with no less policy then speed, and
searching who of vnworthies was least unworthy, (for no one was worthy to
mother such a son) he found a maiden so far exceeding all the rest, that
he thought it both needles to seek any further, she was so fit for his
purpose, and impossible to find her peer, she was so pure a creature, she
was descended of a princely race, but lived very obscurely, and although she
were espoused to a mate, yet meant she to remain a maiden A princely offspring
was fittest to conceive such a majesty, and a poor maiden meetest to cloak so
high a mystery, of her he determined to be borne without a Father, who before
all beginnings was begotten without a mother.

This maid dwelt in Palestina the chiefest Province of Syria, environed with
Syria and Arabia on the east side, on the south with the desert of Pharam, and
Egypt, on the west with the Mediterranean sea, and on the North with Mount
Libanus: it was sometime called Chanaam, after the name of Noah his grandchild
by Cham, who possessed this country after the great flood, which drowned all
the world except Noah, and his family, but by the principal Lord thereof it
was promised to Abraham the great Patriarch, and to his offspring: whereupon he
forsook Chaldea his own country, and came into Chanaam, where he and after
him his children continued until the famous dearth, which was in all the world
for the space of seven years drove them into Egypt, whereafter 400. years, as
some say, or as other some say, after 200. years, their children returning
(guided first by Moses, then by Iosue) overthrew above thirty kings, and
destroying many nations made a reentrie into the land, and every family took
a portion unto them and theirs, as Iosue by cords allotted it, which he did
with the greater facility, because it lay in length with little breadth,
betwixt the river Jordan, and the middle earth sea, for Jordan having two
heads, the one from the mount Libanus, (not far from the tower of Libanus)
and was called Ior, the other from a mountain not far off also from Libanus,
which was called Dan, both met at a city called Dan, (afterward Caesarea
Philippi,) and made one river, which is called Jordan, and runs from these
north parts of Palestina, by the East be^weene Iturea, and Traconitis, into
the sea of Galile, (otherwise called the poole of Genazereth,) through which it
runens, keeping a straight course until it came to the dead sea, (which also
was on the East side of the country, and reached unto the mountains which
parted the south borders of Palestina from the desert of Pharan.) The place
where this sea is, was sometime both so pleasant and profitable, as it was
compared unto the highest his Paradise: insomuch as Abraham giving his nephew
Lot his choice, where he would go feed his flocks (willing to prevent such
strife as was likely to grow between them by the falling out of their
shepherds) Lot preferred this part before all the rest of the country, but
the inhabitants increasing in wickedness, as much as in wealth, provoked God
to so great wrath against them, that he consumed them all with fire, and all
the country for the space of four or five days journey in length, and five
or six miles in breadth, and this is the quantity of the dead sea, which
casts up many times great clods of clay, in color like pitch, in smell like
Brimstone, in holding together that to which it is used (for it was long before
used in place of mortar in their buildings) so strong as neither any force,
fire, or water could dissolve it: and these valleys (where the sea is) were
very full of this kind of clay, before the country was destroyed. This sea
breathed out very often great flames of fire, as if it had within it many
furnaces, that, what with fire, and the filthiness of the water, the trees
within five miles compass, did either bear nothing, or only a likeness of
fruit: for when it was touched or opened, nothing appeared but ashes, although
before it were touched, it had an exceeding fresh, and lively color. Moreover
this quality had this sea, that what heavy thing soever was cast into it (so
that it were no dead thing) it would never sink: for trial whereof, Vespafian
the Roman Emperor (by whom the country was last spoiled of her peerlesse
beauty) caused certain men to be cast alive into the sea, with their hands
bound behind them, who risse presently unto the top, and lay there as securely
from drowning, as they could have been upon any dry land, and therefore
perchance is it called the dead ^ea, not because no quick thing lives in it,
but because it will not brook any quick thing, nor any thing which has any
similitude with lite, as sufficient trial has been made by those, who when
they threw in one candle lighted, and another not lighted, saw the candle which
was lighted swim; and the other sink.

The middle earth sea kept as straight a line upon the west side of the
country, so that Reuben being seated without the river Jordan, upon the
south, and half the tribe of Manasse upon the North, and Gad in the middle
betwixt them, the rest of the twelve tribes or familyes (for so were the people
distinguished) took their portions in this sort between the river Jordan, and
the middle earth sea, Judah and Simeon, had the farthest south parts, next
unto whom were Benjamin and Dan, Nephtalim and Aser, were placed in the
farthest North parts, and Zabulon bordered upon them, the other half tribe of
Manasse enjoyed the middle of the land, and was neighboured on the south by
Ephraim, and on the North side by Issaehar: Leui, who had the Priesthood, had
no portion of land in this division, but had out of every portion certain
towns and commons about them, and in the division of the country, one of
Joseph his sons supplied his room, and the other his own fathers.

The whole country from Dan to Barsabee (that is from the farthest city north,
unto the farthest city south) contains 67 miles, and the breadth betwixt
Jordan, and the middle earth sea, is in some places sixteen miles, in other
eighteen, which (every mile esteemed a long hours journey) seems to be of
no great quantity. But this small compass was sufficiently recompensed with
the great commodity which the country did yield, for neither did the seas
want great store of fish, nor the land great plenty of fruit, both of such
things as did breed, and also of such as did bud, and for proof of the latter
two of these which were sent to take a view of the land, while the rest of the
Israelites remained in the desert of Pharan, brought betwixt them but one bunch
of Grapes upon a Lever, and thought that both had their full load, yet were
they not the least of such a stock; as people now living are nothing like
unto them, either for strength or stature. And Jonathan, Saul's son, by no less
then the loss of his life (had not the people saved him) proved the Oracle
true, which said, it was a land flowing with milk and honey. To conclude,
what soever the world could afford, either to please man's sense, or delight
man's mind, was within the compass of this little portion of land, which having
equally round about it the East, west, north, and south, it self like a
Princess, sat in the midst of the whole world, to be admired by all for her
beauty, and honored for her sovereignty, now lately triumphing that it
could yet excel it self in bringing forth a flower, which passed all the rest
in virtue, beauty, and sweetness, the fruit whereof being beaten down, would
of it self rise again, and being eaten would nevertheless remain for ever,
it would give sight to the blind, lims to the lame, ease to every diseased, and
life to those who are dead.

This flower grew in the top of a mountain in the north part of this (for this
special cause) a most sacred land, 3. days iourny from Jerusalem, the
chiefest city in the country, in a city of the tribe of Zabulon, called
Nazareth, for the beauty thereof, and pleasantness so called, for Nazareth
signifies a flower, yet has it her principal worth in being a guard to her,
who was for that time the flower, not only of that country, but of the whole
world, at the appearing of which upon this mountain, the lillies of the
vallyes were ashamed of their whitenes, the roses in Hiericho blushed, when
they ordered their leaves to breath out their sweetness, the Cedars of Libanus
would never have mustred themselves to make known their starelines, had not
nature commanded them all to do this honor unto their princess, that they also
appearing in the^r richest, beautifullest, sweetest and comliest att^re, she
might the more easily be discerned to exceed them all, having in one what
perfection was in them all, and what was not.

The seed of this sacred flower was Judas, son to Israel, who was grandchilde
to Abraham by Isaacke; the root was Iesse, the stalk king David, and his
offspring, the bud Anna wife to Ioachim, otherwise called Hely, or Eliachim, who
having together from their youth lived in plenty, as well of heavenly grace, as
worldly goods, only felt this punishment of God, and this reproach of the
world, they had no issue, for which cause Ioachim coming according to his
religious custom to offer in the Temple, was vpbraided by the priests for his
barennes, and judged unworthy to increase Gods offeringes, whom God thought
not worthy to increase his people, which struck so great a sorrow into his
heart, that forthwith he forsook his house and friends and lived as a man
forlorn among his shepheatdes. His wife also retired her self unto a private
kind of life, best fitting the humor which now had gotten the maistery in her,
yet she frequented the Temple at Jerusalem, where she seasoned all her
prayers with this solemn vow, that if it would please God to take from her
that reproach she would consecrate her child unto him in the Temple, and she
was the more importunate in this kind of devotion, because she had heard, that
one of like name and condition by fervent prayer, and such like promise made
unto God, obtained her suit, and she hoped she might (if so also God would)
make her husband Ioachim as glad a Father, as Anna the mother of Samuel, made
her Husband Elcana.

How often did Ioachim also accompany his wandering pensive thoughts with a
little, and that scant-settled comfort, when he considered that Sara when she
was past childbearing, had a son by Abraham? how often would he increase
this comfort, with calling to mind that Rachel, (for whose love Iocob served
her father Laban fourteen years) was numbered among the barren until she
brought forth Joseph? Sampson would also offer himself many times unto his
thoughts, whom his father Manue never looked for, nor any other, because his
wife was barren: and Samuel the Prophet and last Judge of Israel, borne of a
woman who was a long time barren, coming to poor Ioachim his made, made him
think it a thing possible unto God, to give him also a child, if it so pleased
him; and herewithall he refreshed sometime his spirits, until his imagination
recoyling back upon him, gave him to understand that Isaac was promised to
Abraham, as one, from whom should spring the bliss of the whole world. Joseph
was ordained to save the world from being destroyed with famine, when the earth
yielded no corn for seven years together, and therefore might it be a great
mystery, that he made a joyful mother, who had been barren before, whilst
Lya Jacobs other wife, had brought forth seven children: the last only of
which being a daughter, imported a defect after plenty, which Joseph supplied.
And although he saw that the dissension betwixt the Asamones (who were both
priests and princes did threaten utter ruin of their estate (being already in
subjection to the Romans, and under the government of Herod an usurper of the
kingdom) and therefore looked for a mightier then Samson, to deliver them, as
he thought from that temporal bondage, yet withal he thought his part to be
least in this work, because that worthy which was to make this conquest, was
to be borne of a Virgin. But neither conld he hope for an other Samuel, because
the Messiah approaching near by all accounts, would speak no more so much by
others as before he had done but by himself, upon which discourses (his
sudden joys failing him) he fell into his former griefs, and persuading
himself that he was unworthy to father any great worthy, he could not
think that God would extraordinarily open his wives womb, after she had been
so long a time barren for a child, who should not extraordinarily excel other
children, wherefore having a conceit only what God of his omnipotency could
do, and not so much as any little hope of that which God of his clemency
would do, he thought his misery was so great, as justly he could complain
himself of it, although he was so just a man, as he would not repine against
God for it.

So lived Anna frequenting the temple among saints, and Ioachim the fileds
among sheep, fit places for such as were ordained to bring forth a Saintlike
mother of a sacred Lambs until the young Prince, who began to do some
honor to his mother, before she was his mother, sent as solemn an Embassage
to her parents, to foreshewe her coming into the world, as he did afterward
unto her herself to further his own. For while Ioachim, and his wife were at
their woonted devotions, a Prince appeared suddenly unto them, sent from him
whose meanest subject was no less then a Prince, who told them that they,
should have a child, who should bring them more joy, then the want of one
had bredde them grief, and that the reproach they had sustained by an infamous
barrenness, should be most honorably recompensed with a gracious fruit, and
therewithal departed.

So strange a message brought unto them by a stranger, might have seemed
incredible, had it not been pleasing unto them, but being so welcome news,
they persuaded themselves that he carried as much truth in his mouth, as
comeliness in his person, and was so like one who would not deceive them, that
with most joyful minds they well accepted the message, and expected what was
promised unto them, meeting therefore at the Temple, whither both repaired to
give GOD thanks for what they had heard, and embracing each other in sign of
great joy, likely to succeed an exceeding great grief, they returned home to
Nazareth, where at her appointed time Anna was delivered of a daughter, whom
her parents named Mary, whose gracious priueledges were such, as no man is able
worthily to express them and her perfections, so great, as the most perfect
Angels did admire them: for to which of the Angels ever was it said as unto
her: Thou art my mother, this day was I conceived in thee. Let it suffice then,
that she was to mother a son, who was most loving, and therefore would, he
was of infinite power, and therefore could not only mende whatsoever might be
amiss, but preserve her also from whatsoever was hurtful: the first was a
favor which he showed unto some of his servants, the second was thought a
privilege, meet to be bestowed only upon his mother, and he was worthy of
as great praise for preventing a mischief, that it should not light where he
loved, as if he had remouedit, after it had chanced to the otherwise utter
peril of the patient, and no less to be accounted to save a soul, in
awarding a deadly blow, then if he had cured the wound, which without his salve
was incurable.

Think loving children, what, moved either by natural affection you would
work, or by supernatural love ye could wish, if one way or other your
intention might take effect, to honor your mothers as well for your own
dignity, as for theirs, and that no doubt did this Prince for her, toward whom
he bore as much love and duty, as any child could bear unto his mother.
After that she was three years of age, she was brought unto Jerusalem, and
consecrated unto God in the temple, that famous temple, whose building was so
stately, as it might very well be admired by all, but whose ornaments were so
costly, as they could not be valued by any, whose riches were so great, as
they were able to enrich the greatest Monarch of the world, but whose
situation was so strong, as without famine or treason it was not to be won.

It was builded upon a mountain called Morea; where Abraham was appointed, to
sacrifice his son Isaac, in whose seed he had promised all nations should
be blessed, and upon which the Angel was seen put up his sword, who by
Gods commandment slew 70000. of the Israelites, because they made not their
offering (as they were commanded by the law) at what time King David caused
them to be mustered from the one end of Palestina to the other.

This mountain was situate in the middle of the world, and was inaccessible,
but on the East side, for the exceeding great steepness, and ouer-hanging of
the top thereof on all the other sides. The Temple was built by King Solomon,
son, and successor to King David, whom God chose to rule in place of Saul,
the first King of the Jews, and gave order unto him, in what sort he would
have his temple built, and every thing fashioned, which was thereunto
belonging, which order King David le^t with his son King Salomo^, and infinite
treasure for the performing thereof.

The first part of the mountain, where the going up was, lay open for all men,
as well Gentiles as Jews, which came for devotion unto the Temple, where they
might behold right before them Westward a goodly great porch, which was built
cross the mountain from the South part thereof unto the North, vpholden with
three rows of pillars, which made the walks double, the roof was curiously
wrought, it was of Cedar, a wood which rotteth not, fair to the sight, and of
as profitable as pleasant a sent, for being burned, it drives away all
venomous Serpents or kills them, the gates belonging to the Porch were many
and high, all of silver and guilt: within the porch were certain places of
good receite, between the doors, where the Priests, or other appointed for
the purpose, received of the people their voluntary offerings, and of every
one above the age of twenty years, when they were mustered for the wars
half a sicle (which is at the least account a groate, some say two groates)
and laid it up for the repayring of the Temple. Here lived those Priests,
which in their turns did minister in the Temple, and in these places were also
seats, wherein the Doctors did reason of the law, and expounded it unto the
people, and this porch was ever after called Salomons porch, even when it was
destroyed, and another built in the room thereof, and the Court within it
distinguished by that name from other places of the Temple.

Through this porch was it lawful only for the Jews to pass forth by those
gaets into a court, which they accounted as an holy place, where they did their
devotions, as well women as men, but the court was so divided, as each sex had
their part severally from other, and a several entrance into it* but in such
sort, as both might look into another open court westward, which was divided
from the^ with a wall 3. cubits high (a cubite is ha^^^ yard in measure) made
with three (...) stones one upon another: and the top of (...) wall was a
Cedar: At this wall stood such singing men as belonged to the temple, when
their feast came, in which they used music at their sacrifice, and over the
same wall did those lean, who sometime took occasion to speak unto the Jews:
but into the court which was divided from them by this wall, it was not lawful
for any to enter but the Priests, and such as served at the altar, or such of
that tribe, as upon some accident only were unfit for that service, as by
being blind, or lame, or having such like impediment: but although these were
admitted into the Court, yet it was not lawful for them to put on any
apparel belonging to their function, but they sat together in their lay
apparel, and had part of the sacrifice which was offered, yet some do think
that they were not admitted into the court. Some say that the Nazarites were
admitted into this Court, when they had ended their time, for the which they
had made their vow never to drink any drink which might diste^per their
brain, or eat grapes or of grapes kind, but to serve God in a more peculiar
sort then they did before: during which time also it was not lawful for them
to cut their hair, but when they were to begin it again. In some this vow
was perpetual, in others but for a certain time, and this time of their vow,
they were to begin again so often as they went to any dead body, although
it were of Father or mother, or so often as any should by chance in their
presence be slain: for in all such cases a Nazarite who had lived 5. of his
6. years in this profession (for some vowed for more years, some for fewer as
themselves would) was to cut off his hair the same day, and the seventh day
after, and offer a sacrifice commanded by the law, and begin his time
again, which after he had finished, his hair was cut off by the priests,
and burned, also a sacrifice was then offered, and he restoted to live
afterward, as he did before he made his vow. Those men who were able, offered
also 50. sickles, the women 30. if they were not able, the priests were to use
their discretion.

Also those women were licensed to come into this Court, who could not by any
other means satisfy their jealous husbands, then with certain circumstances
to offer a sacrifice in the temple, appointed by the law, which sacrifice the
priests took out of their hands, and offered after that they had drunk the
holy water which was given unto them to drink, with certain imprecations,
first written in parchment, and read unto them, then washed out of the
parchment into the earthen pot of water which they held in their hand to
drink, the curses were, that if the woman were guilty, her belly should swell
with a dropsy, and her right thigh rotte, both for a punishment to her self,
and an example to others, but this experiment was not seen until the tenth
month after that she had drunk the water, and then if she were not guilty,
her health did sufficiently show it, and many times it chanced that the
innocents were blessed with a young son. This water had this virtue by Gods
appointment, not by any thing which was in it, for it was as other water in it
self, and had nothing but the ashes of a red cow in a peculiar sort
sacrificed, cast into it, by which it was a^^^nted as holy water, and other
things also were sanctified, or purified upon which it was sprinkled with a
branch of Isope, but beside all these things mentioned in this aforesaid
ceremony some of the dust of the tabernacle or Temple, was taken up from the
pauement, and put into the pot of water, which the woman had to drink.

But notwithstanding, that some had thought that the Nazarites and those women
entered into the Priests Court, it is not unlikely that they passed no further
then the gate, where all those ceremonies might with sufficient conueniency be
perfected, but this is not much material.

This Court had but one gate, and it stood in the east side thereof, whither
the people brought the sacrifice, and delivered them unto the Priests, and the
wal^ was made so low of purpose, which divided the priests from the rest, that
the people whithout might behold the priests at their sacrifice, beside the
advantage which they had by the situation of the mountain, which always did
rise the higher the nearer the top, where only stood the temple it self, so
that those which were without the outmost court, might behold both the temple,
and the priests at the altar in the court.

The altar was of brass, 20. cubits long, 20. cubits broad, and 10. cubits
high, to which the priests ascended upon plain and even ground, when they went
to offer sacrifice: likewise all things, which they used about their sacrifice,
were of brass. There was also a great Vessel of exceeding pure and clear
Brass, such as with which women sometime used to dress themselves, as now
they do in glasses, which they offered up unto God, when living in the world
they forsook the world. The vessel was round, five cubits high, and thirty
cubits in compass: it stood upon the hinder parts of 12. brazen oxen; which
looked three toward the east, three toward the west, and as many toward the
north and and south, here did the priests wash their hands, and their feet at
cocks before they offered sacrifice: and because it was so great, and
contained so much water (for it held for the most part eighty tun, and was
capable of thirty more) the Jews called it a Sea, as they did every great
quantity of water, and as it was spent it was supplied again by the
Gabaonites, a people which dwelt among them by this flight.

When the Gabaonites heard that the Israelites were come into the country, and
overthrew all who resisted them, they apparrelled themselves in old clothes,
took stale bread in their bags, and sower wine in their bottels, and came as
if they had dwelled in some country far distant from Palestina, to crave
peace and friendship of the Israelites. Iosue and the rest of the people seeing
their attire as if it were oueworne with iournying, and their provision for the
stalenes thereof scantly to be eaten, granted them their demand: but afterward
understanding that they were inhabitants of the land, and could not call back
their word, they deputed them for ever after to cut and carry wood, and water,
and do what drudgerie soever belonged unto the temple.

In this court were also 10. other vessels of brass, every one of them
containing about the quantity of a tun and a half, wherein they washed the
beasts after that they were divided to be offered, for before they were
quartered they were washed in a ponde, which stood below the mountain on the
Northeast part thereof in a great market place (which served for the use of the
temple) and were brought up to the priests by the Gabionites. These ten
vessels were each of them four cubits high, and four cubits at the top
between the brimmes. They were the narrower the nearer they were to the
bottom, and set upon broad square pieces of brass of a great thickness,
and very curiously wrought with image work: they stood upon wheels, which
were so perfect in all points, as if they had been to remove from place to
place. Five of these vessels stood in the North part of the court, and five in
the South part, the brass whereof these vessels were made, was esteemed more
precious then gold, and the quantity thereof belonging unto the Temple, was
so great, as no man knew it.

Close by these vessels of brass, and by the altar, were conueyances under the
ground for the blood of the beasts, which was shed, and all the water which was
spent, and it passed without any annoyance through the mountain into a brook
called Cedron, which ran along by the East side of Jerusalem into the dead sea.

At the west end of this court the priests ascended by stairs into a porch,
which was 120. cubits high, where stood two pillars, one upon the right hand of
the entrance, and the other on the left hand, each of them 18. cubits high, and
12. cubits in compass, they were hollow, and not above 4. fingers thick, the
head upon each pillar was 5. cubits high, made like unto a lilly, compassed
with a network chain, which went 7, times about the lilly, adorned with
Pomgranates, one hanging down, and an other made in the border going about, to
the number of almost 200. all were of brass, pillars, and al things belonging
unto the^.

The length of this porch, was from the south to the north, 20. cubits, and the
breadth from the east unto the west 10. cubits: the ornaments of this porch, are
not any where mentioned what they were, more then that it was gilded, but no
doubt it was conformable to the house to which it did belong: for full west
from this porch was a building 60. cubits long from east to west, and 20.
cubits broad from south to north, it had 3. roofes one over another, all which
together contained in height 120. cubits, and in the two upper rooms were kept
the chiefest riches belonging to the temple. It was built with square white
stone to the top, which was flat, covered with cedars (as the manner of building
was in Palestina) and had battlements round about it five cubits high. About
this (except the east side) were other buildings as great as the narrownes of
the mountain would suffer, 3. st^^^es high, whereof the lowest was 5. cubits
broad, the middle 6. the highest 7. they were all of them severally five
cubits long, and 20, cubits high, they had windows only northward, and
southward, but they were very great, because through the^ came the light to
the middle building, which was divided in two parts, with a wall which left a
room of 20, cubits square toward the west.

The outmost part had the walls covered within with Cedar, which was carved
with image work of Cherubins, palmtrees, and other devises, upon which were
plates of gold carved in the like manner, and laid so close as if all had bin
but one piece of work, every image in the wood had the like in gold, so fitted
unto it, that when al were covered with the gold, they showed as perfitly, as
before the gold was fastened unto them. It had a roof 30. cubits high of
Cedar carved after the same manner, and covered with gold; the wall next unto
the porch was 10. cubits thick, wherein were two double folded doors of
firre-tree, both the folde^ of equal breadth, five cubits, which were covered
as the walls were, and so artificially made, as whether they stood wide open
or close shut, they could not be perceived to be dor^s, for being shut, they
seemed part of the forefront of the wall, and being opened, they covered the
thicknes of the wall, in such sort, as by no means it could be seen where
they hung, or where they were joined. Some say that in every one of the 4.
corners of the entry was a single door, five cubits broad, that the inside
toward the temple, when these doors were shut, was as one wall, as well as the
outside toward the porch. The windows were only in the South, and north-wals
very broad within, and narrow in the outside, right against the great
windows in the out-buildings. Within the south part of the wall which was ten
cubits thick, was a pair of round turning stayres, which se^^ed to all the
out-buildings, for they were so made, as one opened into another, even unto the
farthest on the same flower. In the north part of the same wall was another
pair stayres, to go up into the middle rooms, which were right over the
temple, yet some are of opinion that the former stairs did serve also for those
rooms.

In the middle of this temple, near unto the inward room, was an altar of
Setim, which is acconnted the lightest, cleerest, and most beautiful of all
trees, and has this property, that it never rotteth, it was one cubit square,
and two cubits high, it was covered within and without with gold, and made
like unto a censor, but that at the four corners for the greater ornament,
were four pillars of the same wood, covered likewise with gold. Some do say
that this altar stood within the inmost Temple, and that in this place was an
altar made of Cedar by Solomon, and covered with gold as the other: others say,
that Solomon only covered that of Setim with Cedar and gold, so that both were
but one altar, and stood in the middle of this outmost temple. It was sometime
called the golden altar, sometime the altar of incense. In the south side,
toward the west, stood a candlestick of gold, wherein on each side were 3.
branches or arms carved, as also the body thereof, with lillies, cups, and
balls: in this candle-sticke were seven lights maintained day and night, the
snuffers, the vessel that held the oil, that which received the snuffings,
and whatsoever else belonged unto the candlestick, were of gold. In the north
side, right against the ca^dlestick, was a table of Setim 2. cubits long, one
cubit broad, and a cubit and a half high, it was covered top and sides with
gold, and round about upon the top of the edges of the table, were two crowns
of gold, the undermost was wrought, the uppermost was plain. Upon this table
every Sabbath day were set 12. new loaves of unleavened bread, every loaf of 8.
pound weight, 6. in a heap, one upon another, and were called bread ^f
proposition, because they were always set by the Jews in Gods sight in the
temple, to acknowledge that they lived by him, upon the tops of those heaps
stood 2. cups of gold, full of most pure incense, and at the end of the week
the bread was taken away for the priests use, and fresh set in their places,
but all the incense was burned. Here also were ten other tables, little worse
then that, five stood in the North side, and five in the South side, whereon
stood a hundred cups of gold for the Priests to drink in: also here were
ten other candlesticks of gold, which stood in the like order: before the
door of this temple hung a veil of image work, in four most lively and rich
colors, white, scarlet, read, and skie-colour.

The inmost building divided with a wall full west from the former temple, was
twenty cubits square, and differed nothing from it, but only that the doors
were of olive, and the pauement of Cedar, but covered with gold as the other
were: it was accounted the holiest place in all the temple, and no man might
enter into it, but the high Priest, nor he but once in the year.

In the middle of this temple stood the Arc, which God taught Moses to make
in the wilderness, after he had led the Israelites out of Egypt through the red sea dry-foote, at what time Pharao King of Egypt pursuing them, was
drowned, and all his army. It was made of Setim, two cubits and a half long,
one cubite and a half broad, and so high: it was plated within and without
with most pure gold, at every corner was a ring of gold so big, as on each
side of the Arc a strong bar of Setim covered with gold, might go through
them, for the convenient carriage thereof, when it was removed. The cover of
the Arc was plain and of fine gold, so long and broad as the Arc was, upon
which stood two Cherubins of gold with their wings spread from one end of the
cover unto the other, and they stood as if they were one loking toward the
other. This cover to the Arck they called a propitiatory, because from thence
did God promise mercy unto his people, when he was sued unto by the high
priests: Within this Arc were the two Tables of the law, which God himself
carved in a stone, and gave to Moses. Here was also a golden pot with Manna,
which was the only food, by which the Israelites lived after they came forth
of Egypt for the space of 40 years, it was of that quality (as some say) that
in the eating, what delicious meat soever the eater desired, he found the
taste thereof in his mouth, certain it is, that it was a most pleasant food,
and although it would not remain above one day uncorrupted (except only when
they gathered to keep for their Sabboath days victual) yet not without a
special miracle it continued in this pot many hundred years. Aaron his rod
was here likewise kept, which was set in the tabernacle with twelve other, by
the flourishing of which, his election to the Priesthood was manifested unto the
people, and he preferred before the other twelve princes which stood in
contentiou with him. In this Temple stood also two other Cherubins of Olive
covered with gold 10. cubits high, their wings spread in breadth every one
five cubits they looked both toward the east, on each side of the arc stood
one, so that they filled the whole breadth of the Temple with their wings, and
covered with them the top of the Arc. The doors stood always open, and
before the entrance hong such a veil as hung before the doors of the outmost
Temple.

Four hundred years, and more continued this Temple in this glory, until
Sedechias (who was left king of the Jews by Nabuchadonosor king of the
Chaldees) rebelled against him (encouraged perchance by mistaking the Oracle
that he should neither be slain in fight, nor see Babylon) for which cause
Nabuchadonoser pressing the City with famine, forced him and his children
with others to fly by night, and understanding so much afterward by his
espials followed them, and took them in the chase, and when they were brought
before him, he slew Sedechias his children in their Fathers sight, then put
out his eyes, and led him captive to Babylon, whether before he had carried
Ioachim, otherwise called Ieconias, who was nephew to this Sedechias, and king
of the Jews, and had yielded himself unto Nabugodonosor. The victory
obtained against Sedechias, the Chaldees returned to Jerusalem, and took the
spoil of the Temple, and afterward burned it down to the ground, for which
cause and other abuses offered by Nabuchodonosor and his children, unto those
holy things which belonged unto the Temple, himself lived abroad seven years
amongst beasts, eating nothing but what they eat, nor having any other defense
against hard weather, then what they had and his grandchild in short time lost
his life, and left his kingdom to the Medes and Persians, who setting the
Jews at liberty, gave them leave to build their Temple again, but not in
that ample manner as before it was, being informed by those who were bad
neighbors to the Jews, that the majesty and strength thereof would encourage
them to reuolte from their obedience, but neither had they been able to perform
it if they might have had license, having been in captivity seauenty years,
and spoiled of all their substance, yet had they to help them until it was
built, thirty talentes yearly allowed them by king Darius, whereof 20. were
for the setting it up, and ten for their sacrifice, and all the vessels which
were remaining of the spoil, which Nabuchodonosor carried out of the first
temple, were restored unto them.

Being this second time builte it continued above five hundred years, but it
was many times in danger of utter ruin, as by Alexander the great king of
Macedon, who in his voiages in which he conquered all those east parts of the
world, came with a full resolution to spoil Jerusalem and the temple, although
at the sight of Iaddus the high Priest, attired in his priestly ornaments, he
altered his purpose and allighted from his horse, and worshipped him on his
knees, saying that in the same attire God appeared unto him, and encouraged him
in his valourous enterprise. It was also in danger, when Antiochus (called
Epiphanes) did tyranize over them, for they were oppressed sometime by one,
sometime by an other, and in the end became subject to the Romans, who were
contented they should observe the rights of their law, but appointed Herod a
stranger to be their king, yet was he much worse welcome then acquainted in
the country, for he had borne office before in some part thereof, under
Antip^ter his father, but he was willing in what he could to win them unto
him, and for that cause he circumcised himself, and became a Jew in
profession, who was an Idumean by birth, and framed a new temple of square
white stone, some 25. cubits long, some 4^. with breadth, and thicknes
correspondent, which appeared a far off like unto a mountain of snow, where
it was not covered with gold, and when it was al framed, he pulled down the
other, and set up this, for the Jews would not suffer him to destroy the old
temple, until they see a new ready to be erected in the place thereof, which
was so goodly a thing, that it was reverenced by the heavens, for never fell
any rain in the day time, while men were at work about it, but only in the
night, some small showers, lest their work should be hindered.

It was much bigger then was that, which Solomon built, for the people in time
had enlarged the mountain with earth, which they raised 400. cubits high, but
Herod altogether observed the same order in the temple and the courts, saving
that he enclosed one court round about the temple, which was curiously paued
with all manner of rich stone, and compassed it with double walks, divided
with white marble pillars, one stone in a pillar, 25. cubits hie, out of which
were some gates opening toward every quarter. In the east part hung such
spoils as the Jews had taken from barbarous nations, and dedicated unto the
temple, where also Herod placed such as himself had taken from the Arabians,
but in the south side were the principal walks, for they were divided with
such pillars as the other were, but where the other were double, in this side
they were triple, and the middle much higher then the other two, yet all made
so stately, as it was a wonder to behold them, and into this court might any
whosoever enter. He made also the entrance out of one court into another with
stayres, for out of this court the Jews did ascend fourteen steps round about
the temple, unto a plain, which contained ten cubits in breadth, from which
they ascended again five steps, to come to the porch wherein were the gates,
by which they entered into their court, which they called holy, and into which
no Gentiles might come upon pain of death, and because no man should plead
ignorance, being deprehended past his limits, this law was written both in
Greek and Latin, and hung in a table at the foot of the lower stayres, that
all the Gentiles might read it. Every Alien which shall presume to enter into
the holy place, let him die, which law was so straightly observed, that the
Romans, who were their rulers, dared not to go any farther then the first
Court, but neither could the Jews enter into it, which were not pure according
unto their Laws.

To this Court were four gates in the North side, and four in the South
side^, covered with silver and gold, as also the posts over the gates, and on
which they hung, but two gates which stood in the East, one right before the
other, far exceeded them all: by the first whereof, entered both men and women
into the porch, and from thence by two private doors, into the place allotted
to themselves, and this was called the great gate of the Temple, by the other
only men usually did enter into their Court: and this gate was of brass;
called brass of Corinth, a confused metal of gold, silver, and other metals,
of which they of Corinth framed their Idols, and with which they adorned their
temples melted altogether, when the Romans took the City, and burnt it down
to the ground. This gate for the worth and curious workmanship above the rest,
was called the beautiful gate, and was so great that 20. men could hardly shut
it.

To this gate the men ascended by fifteen steps, and entered into their court,
which was divided from the court where the Priests offered sacrifice, as in the
first Temple, but although it were not lawful for the women to pass through
the beautiful gate, yet they might come unto it, to deliver up what they
offered.

Here did Ioachim deliver up his charge, and dedicate his child to the
service of God, and Anna his wife was not a little proud, when she had
wherewith to perform her promise, wherefore with no less joy then Ioachim,
she fulfilled her vow, and made a present unto God of the first fruits of her
womb, for many places were prepared in the Temple for such purpose (several
from the Priests and Leuits, who lay there while they performed their weekly
function, for whom, during the time, it was not lawful to drink any wine,
nor accompany with their wives, much less might they be in continual
danger of committing sin, such purity and sobriety was required of those,
which ministered at their altar) and in those places lived many, both young
maidens, and grave matrons, such, (no doubt) as having forsaken the world, and
the pride thereof, continued at the door of the tabernacle (before the Temple
was built) in fasting and prayer, yet was this difference among them, that the
younger sort might after their religious education, be given in marriage by the
Priests, according to the accustomed manner, but the elder women continued
there until their dying day, as appears by Anna the daughter of Phanuel.

It is manifest also, that those places were not open indifferently to all
comers, because that Iosabe wife unto Ioiada the high Priest, and sister unto
Ochesias king of the Jews stole away Ioas, who was son to Ochesias, and
hid him and his nurse (for as yet he was an infant) six years in the
Temple, lest that Athalia (Ochesias his mother) should also murder him, as
she had many of the kings lineage, because she would both be sole Queen, and
rule the more securely.

But now the temple is not a secret receptacle for Ioas, who after should be
king of the Jews, but it is a stately habitacle for Marie, who afterward
should be the mother of God, and therefore inferior to none who was no better
then a creature. Both censors, and sents, altars and sacrifice, gold, silver,
and setim, and whatsoever was valued precious in the Temple, was nothing worth
in comparison of this virgin. A person worthy so noble a house, and a most
rich house enriched by the presence of so noble a personage. A common thing it
was among the Jews to lay up in their temple in a dangerous times their
chiefest Jewels, but now the temple is become Gods chiefest treasure-house, and
a defense for a more sacred temple. That temple was built by Solomon, and this
by a greater then Solomon, that was daily ransacked, yea and sometime raised to
the earth. This daily rose until it reached above the heavens. The treasure of
that was such, as it allured men to vice: but the treasure of this was such, as
it provoked all to virtue. And it was so much more excellent in all points then
the temple of Solomon, by how much it is a more worthy thing to be Gods mother,
then his manor* although also she wanted not this title of honor, which every
faithful soul is said to have, when it is called Gods temple: for being
pronounced full of grace, no doubt she was accounted also the chiefest of Gods
temples in that degtee.

In that temple was the arc, wherein were kept the tables of the law, which God
delivered to Moses; but she was temple and arc, wherein was the Law giver
himself to be included. There also was kept part of that Manna, which fed the
Israelites in the desert; but now is she presented in the temple, who was to
keep a bread of so much more perfection, As Manna was but a shadow of bread in
comparison of it, and to counteruaile Aaron his rod, a rod of more favor, then
was that which King Ahasuerus held out to Queen Hester, and which has given
more encouragement to demand whatsoever we want, and hope to obtain it,

She remained in the temple until she was fourteen years of age in prayer
and meditation, carrying as much lowlines in her mind as chastity in her
thoughts, never less idle then when she was alone, and yet never weary of her
company: for in that she seemed afterward to be troubled only at the angels
manner of salutation, it appears she was as well acquainted with such a
presence as others, to whom (as infallible true hystories affirm) it was
nothing so dainty as now to us to see an angel) otherwise, no doubt, he had
manifested himself unto her, as before he had done elsewhere, when he told
Zacharias that he was Gabriel, and one of those, which stood continually
before God.

Now began the Priests to think upon the bestowing her, but they could not
think on any who^ they judged worthy to match with her: she made them
acquainted with her vow, to remain perpetually a virgin, and they were afraid
to put her in danger of breaking it.

The Scribes, who were interpreters of the law, and other of the same sect,
but of more subtle learning, and therefore also differing from them in name,
and were called Pharisees, vowed many times virginity, or chastity for
certain years, which they observed most strictly: and for that purpose (as at
all other times, so especially at these) they neither took much ease, nor eat
much meat, but day and night applied themselves wholly to prayer. Also some of
the Esseni (which were divided into four sects) lived all their life time
virgins, but never until this time did any of the other sex profess such a
kind of life, which troubled the Priests the more, yet in the end being
resolved by divine inspiration to bestow her, they found out one of the same
tribe of which she was, who although his auncesters also had been Princes of
the Jews, yet was he but a poor Carpenter, and to him they gave what was
most excellent in the whole world, choosing for her safety, rather a well
disposed, then a wealthy husband, Joseph (for so was the Carpenter called)
receiving her at the Priests hands, was according to the custom of the
country espoused unto her, at a solemn meeting of their friends, which was
done by the taking of their names, by such as were in authority for the
purpose, but afterward her parents kept her at home until the day came of her
marryage: during which season, they were accounted as husband and wife, and as
fast linked, as if they had been married. And her son before he became her
son, wrought marvelously to her contentment in Joseph, least at any time
her virginity should have been in ieopardie, for who would have judged her
to have meant to remain a Maid, which see her take a mate, her self being
of tender years, and her husband no old man: but Joseph (having the same
mind that she had before he married her, or persuaded by her after he was
married, as she was informed (no doubt) by him who wrought it) that she
should prevail with him in that matter, did never so much as purpose to
prejudice her vow, which she had made of perpetual virginity, but being
most truly and properly her husband, he resolved to behave himself only as a
most constant, faithful, and chastely loving friend.

By this mean was the Enchaunter deceived, taking her for no pure maiden being
married, and the world satisfied afterward, when she was with child, which
else would have judged her to have done amiss. Thus did the Prince conceal
from his adversary what was done, and left him to judge as he lysted of
that, which was never done, and as of himself the adversary was not of power
to enter into the Virgins thoughts; so was he also restrained, that his
knowledge might deceive him in her deeds. And although that he could never
perceive that ever she gave consent to any such act, yet was she of such a
nature, as he knew she might, and being married, he thought it so likely a
matter as he hoped he should not by her in any sort be restrained in his
malice, yet because he knew the time approached near, of which had been many
prophesies of the end of that wickedness he had wrought, he could do no less
then fear, and withal, be very watchful: but the young Prince being more
wise then the other was wily, and more cunning to conceile, then the other was
to conceive, gave him leave by some accidents, to conjecture his nearest
miseries, but yet kept him altogether uncertain of the cheifest mysteries.

The Virgin being in her fathers house, retired in her chamber, as she used to
be, a Prince of the Emperor his court came unto her, either one of those
which was wont to visit her, or some of higher quality, whom she was most
joyful to see: but when she heard him salute her after an accustomed manner,
she began to be afraid, and to tremble for fear. Hayle full of grace
(says the Ambassador) our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women.
And how could she, that was mother of all humility, not blush to be told
that she was full of grace? how could she choose but be astonished to hear
him, who, or his like was wont always before to speak nothing but truth, now
say that, which she thought was very far from the truth: she doubted not,
but that her Lord of his kindness was continually with her; but she could not
resolve her self that she was so gracious a creature in his sight, as to be
saluted by this name Full of Grace: she was wont to be called Marie, to
which name she never feared to answer, but now that she hears one called
full of Grace, humility would have assured her, that the Ambassador meant
some other than her, but that she neither had any thought of any others being
in place, nor the Prince any power to fix his eye, but upon her. Here
therefore made she a stop, and stayed upon this salutation: for easily would
she have consented, that the woman was most blessed above all other women, who
was full of grace, but her humble thoughts would not grant that she was this
woman. Whereupon falling into a very deep meditation, whereunto this
unwonted salutation should tend, she changed her color so often, as her
imagination varyed, making with her, or against her, which the Ambassador
perceiving, he awaked her as it were out of some troublesome dream, and
soluing all her doubts, said thus unto her.

Fear not Mary, for thou have found grace with God, behold thou shall conceive
in thy womb, and shall bear a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, he
shall be great, and shall be called the son of the most high, and our Lord
God shall give him the seat of David his father, and he shall reign in the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end.

When she perceived, being now named, that she was the party to whom the
embassage was to be delivered, and was also persuaded that her Lord had that
care of her, that he would not suffer her easily to be deceived, either with
any feigned show, of that which was not, or false promise of that which could
not be: with a modest boldness she demanded of him, how so great a mystery
should be wrought in her, being a thing well known unto his Lord, and her,
that she did not know any man: which she spoke with that constancy in her
gesture, and shamefulnesse in her countenance, as the Ambassador might very
well conjecture, that as she did not mistrust his message, so she meant not to
prejudice her vow she had made, of perpetual keeping her self a maiden, and
therefore he returned her this answer. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the most high shall ouer-shadow thee, and therefore that holy
one which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of God, and
behold, Elizabeth thy cousin, she also has conceived a son in her old age,
and this mon^th is the sixth of her, who is called barren, because no work
shall be impossible to God.

This Virgin, who had profited so much in virtue, as now she was become
peerless, seeing right well, that without any blemish to her honor, she
might entertain such love, as was offered her by him, who was of so high
renown, as she might presume he would not, and so absolute, as she might be
thoroughly persuaded he could not do any thing, whereby either repentance
should fall to him, or any shame redound to her, to satisfy the expectation of
the Emperor, his son, and all the Princes attendant on them, which seemed at
this time to mind nothing else then her answer: she yielded her self to her
Lords will, and with more humility then Abigail to king David's messenger (when
he sent to demand her consent unto him in marriage) she said unto this
Prince Ambassador, Behold the handmaid of my Lord, be it done to me according
to thy word.

Her consent obtained, the Ambassador gave her a farewell mixed with such joy
and reverence, as if he had been loath to detract time to be gone with so
great good news, and yet could not but stay a while to do his duty, but
being of that agility, that he could pass so much space in a moment, as is
betwixt heaven and earth, and dispatched himself wirh that speed, that in a
trice he both increased a joy in the place where he was, and began another in
the place from whence he came. Whereupon Love, who is impatient of delay,
caused him from whom, as well as from his father, proceed infinite love, with
all his might to pursue this matter, and the wole Trinity working miraculously
in the womb of the Virgin, and gathering of her most pure blood together,
framed thereof in one instant, a perfect body, and no sooner could that body
enjoy the soul which was created for it, then the emperor his son united the
whole unto him, a work as worthy praise as wonder, and so wonderful, as reason
having tye^d it self in discourse of this work, leaves off, and begins to
do nothing but wonder for which cause one among the rest, being wearied with
over much musing, began to refresh himself a little with his Muses In this
manner.

Whom earth, the sea, the heavens,
do worship, praise, adore,
King of this threefolde frame,
the womb of Marie bore.
To whom Moon, sun, and all
do service in their turns:
Chaste bowels be are with fall
of grace, which from heaven comes.
Blessed such a mother,
within whose womb is closde,
Her heavenly maker,
holding from being losde
With ease the world, and blessed,
for that she had receiude,
By angels mouth addressed.
a message she belieude,
That she conceiving by
the help of holy Ghost.
He should within her lie,
Whom Gentiles wished most.
But although others lost themselves in the consideration of this divine
mystery, the Virgin no doubt was so perfectly instructed in it, that she
sound as much knowledge, as she had felt comfort, and her comfort was the more,
because her knowledge was so great, and remembering that the higher she was in
calling, the more lowly best beseemed her to be in her carriage, she did
always with most humble thoughts attend upon high conceits, neither thinking
at any time too well of herself, for that she should mother so worthy a
prince, nor yet so unwary as to give any cause, why from thence forth he
should disdain her to be his mother.

Among other her comforts, she remembered what the Ambassador had said unto her
of her cosen Elizabeth, whom before she loved, but now she longed to see, and
if the ways presented themselves in her imagination very long, her desire
looked to be preferred, which was in heart also very great, and and the time
of the year being both fit and pleasant to travel in, enuited her ernestly to
the journey, to a city called Hebron* in the mountains of Judah, liing
southward from Jerusalem 22. miles, one of the most famous cities in Palestina
for antiquity, and of greatest renown, because it was sometime the kings seat.
The inhabitants of this place were sometime such men (or rather monsters) as
neither eye could without horror behold, nor ear without fear hear
speak: here was David who slew Goliath the Giant in a single combat with his
sling, anointed king, and ruled all Israel by the space of seven years, a
place also for this cause had in reverence by all the world, for that Adam the
first parent of all mankind, here is said to have forsook the world, here also
was Jacob the great Patriarch buried, and his father Isaac, who was
miraculously in this place conceived by Sara, when she was by natures course
past childbearing, from hence Abraham issued with 318. of his men, and joined
with him the 3. brethren ma^bre (who gave name to the valley joining unto it)
Aner and Escoll, and pursuing 4. kings conquerors overthrew them near unto
mount Libanus, and brought back all the spoil which they had taken out of the
richest part of the country, and was here also afterward buried. A place
notoriously (...) from the beginning of the world with an oak which continued
there 400. years after the incarnation of the young prince we spoke of, and it
was one of the 46. cities which were allotted unto the priests to dwell in.

Hither hastened the virgin, if not so well accompayned as noble and welthie
parents could send their only daughter, as well for her guard, as theit own
credit, yet neither was it likely she would caresly of her self have strayed
so far alone, nor her parents suffer her to go without some company, being so
far from the basest blood in Palestina, as they were of the best, and none of
the poorest, who could spare unto the temple one third part of what they had,
and an other to relieve the poor, but her chiefest guard was invisible, and
therefore it was invincible, for if ever any princes with child traveling was
choisely attended on least any hurt should befall unto her, or unto that she
went with, much more was she and every thing so well ordered, as she neither
felt any inconvenience in long uneasy ways (being a young maiden) nor found
any (...) in her journey by her burden (being lately become a mother) for it is
not to be thought that he which came to bring ease for his enemies, would breed
any pain in his best friends.

But no sooner had she set foo^e into her cosens house and saluted her, but
the child within her cosens womb be wrayed who she was, and Elizabeth by
divine instinct, cried out with a loud voice beginning where the Prince
Ambassador had ended his salutation, and said unto her: Blessed art thou among
women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, whence is this to me, that the
mother of my Lord does come unto me? for behold as the voice of thy
salutation sounded in mine ears, the infant in my womb did leap for joy, and
blessed art thou which did believe, because those things shall be
accomplished which were spoken unto thee by our Lord.

The sun although it appear unto us to be in a cloud, because there is a
cloud betwixt it and us, is not altogether deprived of his power, but gives
some light, and by his light life, where it lights, and the son of justice
having builte his glorious throne in the womb of a virgin, where he did as it
were ascend upon a thin cloud, shall he lease his virtue, and not rather
work, not of any necessity, as a natural cause of such like qualited effects,
but voluntarily, as a liberal and free agent of supernatural graces? How may
we think would he draw unto him, if he were once exalted, who drew so
mightily being imprisoned? for although his imprisonmente was rather for his
own pleasure, then upon any others compulsion, and his keeper such, as ioied
she had him, rather for that perfect love she did bear unto him, the^ for any
private gain she meant to make of him more, then that she might by this mean
get him to seal her a patent, by which she might be assured she should love
him, and be beloved again with an enles love: yet was he a prisoner, and a
close prisoner, and to that end at this time a close prisoner, that after once
he had gotten liherty, he would bring it to pass, that no man but by his own
falt should die a perpetual prisoner.

He drew not as the Adamant stone draws iron, and there holds it, never
again to banish it, neither ever to beter it, but he drew as a most precious
stone hewed ont of a rock of infinite virtue without the hands of men,
bettering every thing which comes near unto it, if it be capable of goodness,
although it batter that all to pieces where it lights, if it fall upon any
thing which is brittle. It turns iron into gold, and gold into inestimable
jewels, being able to add perfection to whatsoever is made perfect, and by the
infusion of a gracious quality, to alter the most ramish and hardliest reclamed
nature.

The maiden mother blushed at her cosens words, and began to muse how she should
come to the knowledge of this secret work, but presently she perceived that he
had told the tales; who best might without rebuke, judging it therefore no boot
for her to conceal it, when the riddle was so rightly read, with a modest
downcast of her eyes, she acknowledged it, and therwithal in thanksgiving unto
him (...) who^ she had received such an especial grace, according unto the
custom of the country when any extraordinary cause of joy was ministered unto
them, she brake out into this song.

My soul does magnify my Lord,
My spirit does also accord
To joy in God my Savior.
For that he has regardfully
Beheld his maids humility,
Her meek and low behavior.
Therefore all generations
From this time forth of nations
Shall evermore me blessed call,
For he has done great things to me,
Who able is in each degree,
And holy his name oboue all.
Whose mercy also does extend,
From one to other without end.
The which of him do stand in fear.
With power and might of his strong arm,
He has dispersed them to their harm,
Who proud and lofty minds did bear.
He has deposed from their seat
Who in their own conceit were great,
Exalting humble minds for aye.
The hungry he has filled with good,
Unto the rich he gave no food,
But sent them all empty away.
He has received Israel
His child (who ever pleased him well,)
His mercies forgotten never.
As he before had promised,
Unto our fathers (which are dead)
Abraham and his seed for ever.
There was so sweet a consorte in her countenance, and so exquisite a
concord in her carriage, that there was no need of other music to grace her
song: the ear had so full an object of her voice, and the eye had wherewith to
delight it self so sufficiently with her looks, that those which heard her,
and see her as they had done impiously to have taken her for a Goddess, so had
they done injuriously, if they had taken her for less then the mother of God.

But while she and her cosen entertained inexplicable joys by these their
mutual and most kind greetinges, Zacharias came with as hearty although a
speechless congratulation unto the blessed virgin, and gave her as friendly a
welcome as his dumbness would permit him. A sharp penance did Zacharias
endure, but it was deserved, because he knew not how to do any wrong who
enjoined it.

This Zachartas was a priest and husband to Elizabeth, honored among the
Jews for his worthiness, and highly esteemed by God for his virtues, punished
with a momentarie loss, because he was thought worthy of an eternal gain:
for while he ministered in the Temple, and made his prayers for a child unto
him, who could open the womb of a barren and aged woman, an Angel appeared
unto him at the right hand of the Altar of incense, first frighting him with
his presence, then encouraging him with a friendly message, and told him, that
his wife Elizabeth should bear him a son, whom he should call John, in
whose nativity he and many other should rejoice, with so many circumstances
of so great importance, that Zacharias thought it a thing impossible.

Whereupon the Angel meaning to assure him of his message, showed unto him
that he was Gabriel, and sent unto him from God, to tell him these good
tidinges, but because of his incredulity, he should remain dumb until the
day came wherein all these things should be done, and therewithal departed
from him. But Zacharias presently found by experience the sign was too true,
which was given him of the childbirth, for coming abroad among the people,
who had expected him above the usual time allotted for that kind of worship,
he saluted them with signs, and not being able to speak unto them, they all
understood that he had seen some vision.

This notwithstanding he continued still in the Temple, until the days of
his office were expired, for all the Priests did minister in their turns,
which being performed, they rested three and twenty weeks before they
returned to do their function. This order did king David institute to avoid a
confusion, likely to grow among them, by reason of the multitude of them, for
sending for all the priests which were in his time, and finding four and
twenty principal families, he appointed that every family should serve in
the temple in their several week, the order to be ever after kept, according
to the lots then presently to be cast, which course also the Levites observed*
which served the priests: and because Zacharias was the chief priest of his
family, many call him absolutely the high priest, whereas among them were 23.
more of equal dignity, and no one of them greater then an other, as appears
by that no one of them was preferred before the other, but every family
served in the temple, according as their lot fell unto them, and Zacharias was
of the family of Abias, to whom fell the eight lot: but above all these was
one chief priest, to whom only belonged the chiefest office in the temple,
which was to enter into the holiest part thereof, and this was but once in the
year, that is to say, the tenth day of their seventh month, they accounted
the first (for the most part) part of our March, and part of April: and the
length of their month to the first appearing of the new moon. The high Priest
when he entered that place, put on a pair of breeches made with twisted silk
(for when the law ws first given, men did wear no breeches) and they were so
made for strength, but they were of most pure white silk, and exceeding fine.

They were tied fast under his navel, and reached to his knees: then he put on
a garment of the same stuff, which was open in the breast, and back, but to be
made fast with hooks of gold, the sleeves were strait unto his arms, it
reached to his feet without pleite or fold, it was girt unto him next unto his
body, a little beneath his armepittes, with a girdle four fingers broad, but
hollow like unto the skins which Snakes do cast, in it were many flowers
and percious stones, wrought in red, purple, skie-coloured, and white, so
lively as if they had been set, not wrought: the ground was white, and it hung
down to his feet from the knot where it was tied. Upon his head, he wore a
Mytre wrought with white silk, which was tied behind with a silk ribband,
that it should not fall off from his head, when he stirred about the
sacrifice. It was made like unto a half Moon, and not so high, but that some
part of his head was seen toward the crown, and round about it were little
ribbandes sowed one part of the one over some part of the other, but so
cunningly as no man could perceive where the needle was used.

Thus attired did he go into that part of the temple, which was called the
holy of holies, with the blood of a calfe, which he sprinkled upon the cover
of the arch, and also the blood of a Goat. Then coming forth he laid his
hands upon the head of another Goat, confessing before God all the sins of the
people, and praying that the punishment due unto them might light upon that
Goat, he caused it to be carried away into some desert, and there to be left.
After this ceremony, he put of those vestments, and washed himself. Then was
he attyred again, adding to his former ornaments an other coat of sky color,
which was made open in the breast, and in the back, and where the priest was
to put forth his arms, without any sleeves, and a welt of the same stuff was
sowed round unto the edges where it was open: it reached down unto his ancles,
and was wrought near unto the lower part, with pomegranates, in white, red
sky-colour, and purple silk, in such order, as betwixt every pomegranate did
hang a little bell of gold, to the number as some say of 72. Over this coat he
wore a garment, which came no farther then unto his middle, it hung half
before, and half behind, it was open in the shoulders, but the sleeves were
close to his arm, and where it was open under the arm, it was to be fastened,
by being sowed together, or with buttons. This kind of garment did not only
Priests, and Levites wear, but whosoever applied themselves in any peculiar
worship of God, but with this difference, that their garment was only wrought
with silk, without any other ornament. And that which the high Priest did
wear, was wrought also with gold, and had upon each shoulder, where it was
open a precious stone called an Onix, which is transparent, and of a mixed
color between white and read. In these stones were engraven the names of the
twelve sons of Jacob, saving that in place of Leui, and Joseph, were two of
Joseph's sons, Ephraim, and Manasses: for Leui having the Priesthood, and
offering sacrifice, was a sufficient representation of that family before God,
for which cause principally were the others engraven in the stones, and to be
worn at that time. These stones were set in gold, and in place of buttons to
close this habit on the shoulders: but the stone which was on the right
shoulder, as often as the high Priest offered sacrifice, did above his wont,
and above his nature shine so bright, that it might be seen a great way off,
of which perchance the reason may be, because on that shoulder were the names
of the six eldest, among the which was Judas, from whom he should spring, who
should be a light to the whole world. This habit was girt unto him with a
girdle of white silk wrought with diverse colors, and intermingled with
gold, the edges whereof were conveyed into pipes of gold, and this also hung
down before. This habit they called an Ephod, and it had a far more costly
ornament fastened unto it. It had a place in the middle of the breast without
any work, about a spanne square, to supply which, was a piece of the same
stuff double wrought, because it should be of good strength, for in it were
set twelve precious stones, in every one of which were the twelve names above
mentioned, engraven, they were set three in a rank, so that they made four
ranks in the piece. In the first order was set^e a Sardius, a Topaze, and an
Emerauld: in the second, a Carbuncle, a Sapphire, and a Jasper: in the third,
an Anthracite, an Achate, and an Amathist: in the fourth, a Chrysolite, an
Onix, and a Berill.

This piece thus beset with precious stones double wrought (as is said for
strength, because no doubt these stones were very great containing in every
one of them twelve names) was fastened in the breast of the Ephod, with four
ringes of gold, which were in the four corners on that side, which was next
unto the Ephod, in which were also four other rings of gold, to which it was
tied with a skycolour silk lace, but in the outside of the piece (in the upper
part thereof) were two greater ringes of gold, one in one corner, and another
in the other corner, through each of which rings went a chain of gold to the
shoulder, through hollow pipes of gold, and was fastened by both the ends
thereof to the upper part of the Ephod in the back, which for the purpose had
two hooks of gold set in it: and this little square rich piece they called
Rational, wherein they said was also put knowledge and truth, which was no
more, then that the Priest putting it on him, when he put on the Ephod, and
demanding of God the event of things to come, or the truth of things which
were doubtful, he was so assisted by Gods goodness, as he obtained that for
which he prayed, and could give a right judgment thereof: by this also when
they went to wars, they always knew what success they should have, for if
they should have the victory, the precious stones would give an extraordinary
glimse and brightness, to the great encouragement of the people, and although
others putting on their Ephod, did often demand of God the event of things to
come, and had answer, yet none was so particularly ordained for this purpose
by God, as this, neither was there so manifest a certaiuty, as was by this, for
by the glistering of this, all the people might also divine, without any doubt
of their good or evil success, for which cause the Grecians used to call it
an Oracle.

Upon his head he wore a mitar like unto the other, but it was covered al over
with a skie-colour needle-worke, and in the forepart thereof, hung plate of
gold somewhat over his fordhead, tied with a skie-coloure silk ribband behind
his head, in which plate of gold were engraven words of this signification, The
holy of the Lord, but the word which signified the Lord, was expressed with
these four caracters, by which no man ever knew how to spell it rightly, or
at the least were afraid to speak it, yet some presumed to call it Jehovah:
from this plate backward went round about on both sides of his head a triple
crown of gold, wrought and embossed much like unto the Henbane leaf.

In these ornaments the high Priests offered sacrifice that same day at the
altar which stood in the Court, which was called the Priests court, and at all
other times when they offered sacrifice, and the reason why he did not in this
glorious attire enter into the most holy place, was because he entered at that
time to sacrifice for the sins of the people, for which he went in, in a
more humble sort, and all the people that day did fast; but afterward in
token of joy, that all were cleansed from their sins, he attired himself as
is declared, and proceeded to a second sacrifice in the place, where the
inferior Priests did offer every day, according to the order taken for the
purpose, but their ornaments were no other then such, as the high Priest did
wear, when he entered into the holiest place of all holyes. This daily
sacrifice which they offered in the Court, was a lamb a year old or under,
which was without spot (that is, without any deformity or disease either in
skin or limb) with somewhat more then a pecke of flower, a pottle of wine, and
as much of the best oil, and this was offered morning and evening, beside all
other sacrifices whatsoever, or whenever they were offered, and this was the
second office of the Priests in the Temple, the third was to change the bread
of proposition, which stood in the Temple next unto the Court Westward, which
was but once in a week, the fourth was to trim the lamps in the golden
candlestick in the same place, and this was also done morning and evening.
The fifth was to offer up incense at the Altar, called the Altar of Incense, or
the golden Altar, which stood in the same Temple right before the door, by
which the high Priest entered into the inmost Temple, which office was performed
every day morning and evening, when Zacharias, because he would not believe
what was said unto him by the Angel, was bereaved of the use of his own
tongue, so that the B. virgin might guess at her welcome only by the
entertainment only which he gave her, and was not to look for any
lip-ceremonies of him, who could not in that manner bid himself welcome, but
had it not been that truth could not have been contrary to it self, he who
had set a lock upon his lips, until his child should be named, would have
given Zacharias his tongue as free passage to have ioyed in his liberty, as
his heart had often felt pain for his incredulity, and not have let the
father make so many dumb shows of his inward grief, who caused both the
mother and the son in her womb, to make so many open signs of their
unspeakable mirth, but his word being past, stands still for a law: yet so
far forth, as his lips could do hearty loves message, he omitted not what
kindred invited him unto, and the custom of the country allowed him to do,
acknowledging that in his mind, which he could not utter as he would with his
mouth, and because she was one, whose company could not be too much desired,
it was no small corasiue unto him, that he could not give her that
entertainment which she deserved, but both he and his wife did their
endeavor to let their guest understand, that although neither the place, nor
the company were able to give her condign entertainment, yet that both the
place, and the company were at her commandment, and she as one who had her
mind well fraught with h^militie, thinking too much homage could not be
exhibited unto her child, nor too little honor unto her self, required their
forwardness with as friendly, but humble thanks, minding in no one point to
be wanting unto her coosens, if at any time they should stand in need of her
service.

The days of her abode with them, seemed to them both too short, their
discourses every day waxing sweeter then other, and the nights were judged too
long, although they promised still they would be shorter, which both cut off
their talk too soon, and kept them too long asunder, having very ample and
pleasing themes to delate upon in the day time, and nothing but dreams of
their day talk in the night time.

Elizabeth would discourse unto her coosen, how the Angel appeared to
Zacharias in the Temple, what he promised, and how far forth his promise was
performed, with hope that he which punished an others false heart in his
tongue, would not have his own tongue blemished with any falshoode, for no
doubt Zacharias did seek by all means possible to animate his amated wife,
when he saw her in her dumpes for his dumbness, and for such cause would
not stick to write* that at the least in Tables, which he could not utter
with his tongue, which she labored as a most grateful lesson, until she
had perfectly learned his fortunate misfortunes, and perceiving how greatly
his incredulity had displeased the Angel, she often intimated to her Coosen,
as at her first meeting, how blessed she was, who had believed the Oracle.
And the virgin, when her warrant was sufficiently signed with her coosens
silence, required her with as strange a story in respect of the manner, but of
a far more noble, pleasant, and profitable a matter. For although her Coosen
had supernaturally some notice thereof, yet was she very far from the
knowledge of many circumstances belonging thereunto. Entering therefore into the
discourse of her annunciation, she used few words, as became a Maiden, but
such as might fitly proceed from the gr^^^est Mation, leaving off when she
saw her time, with a full period of her (...) speech, and giving a greater
appetite of knowing how in the end she sped, beside infinite other matters,
which continually came into her mind, both of her sons greatness in
himself, and his goodness toward others: for being his mother, and therefore
not without just cause judging herself to have the second right in him, she
thought it fit she should give place to no more then one, in the commendations
of him, one thing only seemed to afflict those poor women in the highest of
their happiness, that they might talk of perchance, and feel, but could
neither see, nor here those sacred babes, which made them both so blessed
mothers, yet did they often embrace, and kiss them in their minds, whom they
were sure they had enclosed within their sanctified wombs.

But Elizabeth whose time was at hand, was somewhat comforted, and the blessed
virgin when she espied her sons harbinger, was the more contented, the one
seeing her joy present, the other knowing hers not to be far distant. For
although some do doubt whether she staid her coosens delivery, because it was
the custom that Maidens should not be present at women's labors, yet the
house containing more rooms then one, would affoorde her another, until her
Coosen were delivered: and it is not likely she would take so long a journey,
stay there so long, and then leave her kinswoman whom she so entirely
effected, when she should have most need of her comfort, as being in labor in
her old age, with her first child, whose worthiness was such, as his father
not believing it, was bereaved of the use of his tongue, he by her presence
sanctified in his mothers womb, and in whose nativity it was foretold by the
Oracle, that not only his parents, but many other also should rejoice. And
although a divine History does mention the Virgins departure, before it
mentions Elizabeth's travail, yet does it not say it was before her
travail. And a festival day being celebrated in remembrance of this
visitation, the morrow after the Circumcision of the child, we may probalye
think she stayed there until that time, comforting the old couple with her
company, and delighting her self with her young Coosen, who had as great
affiaunce with her by spiritual gifts, as he had by carnal generation. And
if we should allow her but a few days to think upon that which the Angel
said unto her, which was a matter not lightly to be considered on, as also to
obtain leave of her parents to go unto her Coosen, and to prepare her self
for her journey, she co^ld not stay there three months, and go away before her
coosen was delivered.

No Ladies title was here given unto her, much less the honor due to any
princess. She gloryed more in being an humble Coosen among her kinsfolk,
then in her chiefest calling among the Angels, and being mother to the greatest
prince in the world, she famed her self at this down lying of her coosen (as
a most venerable writer affirms) to be serviceable unto his servants.

The day came, in which the child should be circumcised, a ceremony prescribed
unto the Jews to distinguish the^ from all the world, except the Israelites*
otherwise callen Saracens (a people which ranged in the Desert of Pharan) for
these did circumcise themselves, and the Arabians which descended of them, but
not until they were thirteen years of age, because that Ismael was so old
when he was circumcised. And in this they differ from the Jews, who descending
from Isaac, did circumcise their children the eight day after their nativity,
as Isaac was, and as their law commanded, under pain of death, which
penalty was perchance only to terrify the parents (as it seems) for
during the time they were in the Desert, none were circumcised, which no doubt
was through exceeding great negligence, for infants of 8. days old did ask
little attendaunce, more when they were circumcysed, then otherwise, also when
Moses was going from God unto Pharao, to bring the Israelites out of Egypt, an
Angel appeared unto him and his wife in their Inn, making proffer to kill
him, because one of his sons much elder, which he had there with him, was
not circumcised, at what time suddenly Sephor^ his wife, daughter to Iethro
the Medianite took up a sharp stone, which lay by her, as the next instrument
for such a purpose, and cut off the superfluous skin of her sons privy
members, after which done, the Angel departed, and this manner of circumcising
with a stone endured ever after among the Jews, great pain no doubt to little
infants, and no great pleasure to such as at riper years were circumcised, for
it was lawful for any to be circumcised who would, and afterward to be
accounted in some sort as a Jew, but distinguished by the name of a Proselite,
that is, one who passed from one Religion to another: and because there should
be no confusion of families by this cohabitation of Jews and Proselites, a
very exact order was observed in keeping every man's pedigree, both in public
offices, and private men's houses, until the first Herod, which was king of the
Jews, to this end, that there should be no knowledge of the nobility from
others, because himself came of a base house, and was no Jew borne, called for
all those pedigrees, and burned the^, so that never after was any kept
publicly as before, but only with private families, such as had them always
in their own keeping before Herod was King.

Abraham the great Patriarch, the Jews glory, Gods especial friend and
worshipper, living under the law of nature, when he was an hundred years of
age, by order given him from heaven, circumcised himself first, and all his
family, and from him, as the first father of circumcision, descended this
ceremony unto all his posterity, and because at that time that he was
commanded to circumcised himself, God changed his name from Abram to Abraham:
the Jews also used at that time to take their names, by which ever after they
should be called, observing this custom in every family and kindred, that
their children should either bear the fathers name, or of some other their
kinsmen, which at this present bredde a mutiny among a menye, which came to
Zacharias his house, either for kindred, neighborhood, or wonders sake, but
the greater part would have had the child named Zacharias, as his Father was,
against which Elizabeth (being before instructed either by her husband, or
some heavenly spirit) exclaymed, saying: His name should be John, to which
the company replied, that none of her kindred were so called, and therewith
they made signs to Zacharias to end this controversy, who making signs to
them again for writing tables, and receiving them, writ in this manner, John
is his name, and immediately feeling his tongue at his often wished for
liberty, as if he had been nine months busied (...) setting a (...) unto a
di^tie, which contained many worthy mysteries, as comfortable words, he began
to praise God, and prophecy of his young son with this canticle.

Blessed be our Lord God of Israel,
Who visiting his folk, redeemed them,
And has erect for us an horn of health,
Of holy David his child's royal stem:
As long before himself by others told;
Who sacred Prophets ever counted were,
Health from our foes (to whom our sins us fold)
And from their hands who did us hatred bear.
To show his mercy unto our fathers,
And call unto his mind his holy will,
An oath sworn to Abraham we without fears,
Freed from our enemies, should serve him still,
In holiness and justice all our days
Before his face, and thou child a Prophet*
Shall called be of the most high, whose ways
Shall be to make his paths before him straight,
To give his folk knowledge of their safety,
By pardon of their deeds done sinfully,
Through the bowels of our Lords mercy,
In which he came to us rising from high,
To comfort those with light, the which do sit
In darkness, and in the shadow of death,
And that the ways of peace each one may hit,
Our feet from straying he also guides.
His song being ended, and his enduring without end, next unto her son,
whom in this song* he acknowledged the author of his joy, he thought the B.
virgin was to have her due, wherefore coming unto her, he gave her that honor
which at that time he thought meet, although he dared not to give her in
open show, so much as he meant her in his mind. And by this time the company
finding their senses, which they seemed to have lost upon this sudden
accident, began to whisper among themselves, what such strange wonders
should po^tend. An old and barren couple to have a child, was a thing full of
joy to their friends, and marvel to strangers, but Zacharias his speech
restored unto him after nine months dimnesse was to them both, both joy and
wonder.

They remembered when he was first dumb, (which by their account was
immediately before the conception of the child) they did assure themselves that
he had seen some vision in the Temple, but when they heard him at the
circumcision of his son, not only speak, but fore-show also matters of such
importance to be now at hand, they could do no less then conjecture that this
child should bear some part in them, and therefore demanded they each of other*
^ow think you* will this child prove? which doubt one which was present would
soon have solued, if he would have bin seen, but it was somewhat too soon* and
therefore he deferred it until a fitter opportunity should be offered for that
purpose, where we shall in part also understand what thi^ child proved, and for
this time accompany the blessed virgin, who very well understanding the
matter, when she saw her time, left her coosens with a friendly farewell,
although they were greatly sorry for her departure, to comfort themselves in
their little one, and the rest to diuulge those strange wonders in the
mountains.

Her guard was quickly in a readiness to safeconduct her to Nazareth, where
her parents rejoiced not a little to see their daughter, and Joseph was
exceeding glad to enjoy his spouse, who thought the time very long of her stay,
and therefore requyted her long absence with his often presence after her
return, through which he perceived the sooner that she was with child, which
did not only check in some part his love, but also choked all his joy.

He loved her so entirely well, that he knew not how to hate her, and yet in
his conceyte she had deserved such hatred, that he knew not how hereafter
he could love her. He meant truly and faithfully to have kept his promise
made unto her, when they were betrothed, and he could not but think it great
disloyalty in her toward him by this supposed spousebreach, For the love he
bare unto her he would not openly defame her, for then according to the law
she should have been stoned to death, yet could he not frame himself to
detain her, because he conceived an offense impardonable: and if at any time
her virtues ran in his thoughts to be such, that it could not be possible
she should in so foul a matter f^ll from her faith given to God and him, yet
again he thought it impossible but that she should be faulty, having such
manifest proof of a matter, of which he could conceive no reason, but
guiltines against reason. Not brooking therefore what he mistrusted, nor yet
willing that she should be a byword for the world, he bethought himself that
it would be best for them both, if he should dismiss her without defaming
her, for although he saw evident peril of his own life, as well by forsaking
her whom he loved as his life, as by living with her, who had already grieved
him almost unto the death, yet he thought it would be an easier death, if he
were altotogether from her, then to die in the daily sight of her, whom he
took to be his murderer.

But while he was thus troubled in choosing by which torture he could best like
to end his life, and in a manner resolved to dismiss her, crying out against
heaven and earth, the one because he thought it had wrought him this wrong, the
other to revenge it, his eyes grew as heavy as his heart, and by a mourneful
fall bereaved him of all his senses. And being now at some little rest, not
because he had no grief, but because he felt it not, he thought he saw a man
whose attire, comeliness, and majesty, bewraied him to be no less then a
prince, although some kind of his behavior showed him to be no more then a
messenger, as bold to speak, as he seemed able to persuade him* he thought he
heard use these words unto him. Joseph son of David fear not to take Marie
thy wife, for that which is bred in her is of the holy ghost, she shall be
delivered of a son whom thou shall call Jesus, for he shall save his people
from their sins. Which message being done, he departed. Joyful tydinges to
poor Joseph, but straight he feared that they were too good to be true. He knew
her virtue was such as she might very well be thought the least unfit to mother
such a child, but again he thought himself not worthy to husband such a wife:
with which conceit being somewhat troubled, he awaked, and calling to mind the
vision which he had seen sleeping, he remembered also what he had often heard
waking, that a serpent was threatened by a divine oracle, and a perpetual
enmity pronounced betwixt him on the one part, and a woman, and her seed on the
other part, which he heard expounded of a maiden, who should bring forth a son
without the company of man, expressed sufficiently in that it was called her
seed, and confirmed at another time by the same oracle to Achas K. of the
Jews, when it was told him that a virgin should conceive in her womb, and bring
forth a son: and afterward an other answer was given, that a sprig should spring
from the root of Iesse (who was K. David's father) and a flower from thence
should bud, to show that as a flower grew only from one, so likewise should he of
who^ was so great expectation. And what strange or new thing this should be
which the oracle did insinuate God would make that a virgin should conceive a
man, he could not imagine unless it should be understood to be done without the
company of a man, and that the infant should have what perfection could be in
man, which agreed very well with his vision. These and such like as he recounted
in his mind, he recanted that which before he meant, and now having as great
difficulty to bear the joys he felt, as he had before to brook the fault
which he found, he held it, and not without cause the gretest happiness he could
have in this world to enjoy the love of her, whose virtue surmounted all who
were virtuous, and were not virtue it self. She was a young maiden, but of
grave dedemeanor, able to have provoked the best mortified to love, but she
reproved even in her face all manner of lust, for whom her modesty drew to
admire her, her majesty drove from thought of sinning by her: and although her
poverty sought to conceal it, her properties showed her princely desent.
Wherefore he thanked the heavens for his good hap, and began to think how he
should make her amends, of whom he had conceived so hardly.

But when he came again unto her, he stood stone still, as though either his
soul had forsaken him, or his senses forgotten her: if only sorrow for his
suspicion past, and joy of his present resolution had fought the combat, the
quarrel might have been quickly ended, and poor Joseph would with tears
either have confessed unto her his fault, or have congratulated his own good
fortune, b^t a reverence entering into the lists, prevailed against both, which
made him as backward in his paces, as love could make him forward in his
looks, wherefore she perceiving his eyes fixed so upon her, as if he meant
they should not straye, and his heels so fastened to the ground, as if he had
been minded they should never stir, she began to be abashed at this so
sudden an alteration, and blushed to think whether she had given him any just
cause of so strange a salutation: but her conscience assuring her, that she
had been always as forward in showing him all manner of courtesy, as she was
free from suffering any manner of corruption, she encountered him with such sweet
piercing looks, as she encouraged him to prosecute his former professed loves,
but in such sort, as joy, grief, and reverence were moderators in his words,
countenance, and behavior. He confessed his jealousy, and suspicion he had of
her, and humbly craved pardon therefore, vowing himself for his penance,
until his dying day in sight of the world, a true and faithful spouse, and in
all his actions a most diligent and obedient servant, he uttered his intention
to dismiss her: and being so fully satisfied in the mystery wrought in her,
he was now become a suter unto her, that she would vouchsafe to accept of him.

And she perceiving that this work could not possibly proceed without his
knowledge, recounted unto him what had chanced unto her, but with such
humility and lowlines of mind, as was sufficient to have persuaded a truth,
and dissuaded him from his determined purpose, if he had before discovered his
jealousy unto her. Wherefore after humble thanks to her Lord, who in such sort
had supplied her bashful backwardnes she embraced her spouse, who trembled for
reverence to touch her, and she did not only pardon his offense past, but
dispensed also with that penance which he had enjoined himself, so far
forth as it concerned her own person, but craved most careful attendance on
him, whom she had conceived. Many words passed not betwixt them at this
meeting, because they both were willing that this his fault, as it was quietly
forgiven, so it should also be quickly forgotten, but they could not part
without many joys, because they both had their wish, that this sacred
conception, as it cleared her from all suspected faults, so it should cleanse
him from all superfluons fancies, and they lived ever after with such
contentment and happiness, that they neither envied at the stately port of
earthly princes, nor desired the highest estate of the heavenly spirits, yet
could they not but wish every day her time were expired, that not only they,
but the whole world also might enjoy whom they expected, for although a
special choice was made of the Jews, yet were not the gentiles abandoned,
being each as nobly born, as other, and both as one.

They both had their Prophets, which did forshew his birth, that both might
take like profit by his death. Among the Gentiles were Trimegistus, Hidaspes
and the Sibilles, and the Jews were not without those which foretold both the
time and the circumstances most justly.

The Gentiles understood that about that time a king should be born, by whom
only (as the most eloquent Orator that ever spoke in Rome said) all people
should be saved, but they understanding no more then he did, what this saying
meant, some of them which thought well of themselves, began to cast how they
might be kings, hoping that the Prophets spoke of them, for this cause did
Lentulus join himself in Catalines conspiracy, and Anthony boldly set a
crown upon Julius Caesar his head, when they sported themselves at their
Lupercals, at which Caesar seemed to grieve, and the Senate to grudge, and
Caesar refusing the crown, Anthony to the dislike of all the Romans set it
upon Caesar his Image: others thoug^t that Augustus Caesar was the man, and
the rather because he was borne about such a time as upon a strange accident
conjecture was made, a mighty prince should arise, for the Image of Jupiter
which stood in the Capitol, and the image of the Wolf which nursed Romulus
and Rhemus, as also many other Idols were either broken or melted, yet was
A^gustus a favorer of Idols, and by sacrificing unto them, acknowledged
himself rather a bearer of them out, then a breaker of them down, but
whosoever was born that year by the Senates decree was murdered, because the
very name of a king was hated amongst them. All thought the appeari^g of the
sun in a rainebow, (when the sky was round about then clear) at Caesar
his return to Rome from Apollonia, was a confirmation of this Empire: so
likewise did they enterprite the flowing of oil by the space of one whole day
out of a well on the foreside of Tiber, (a famous river that runs thorough
Rome) in a place hitherto permitted to the Jews to inhabit, and to live
according unto their laws, but the well stood in a Tavern, sometime used by
aged soldiers to soiourne in, when they had served in the wars in defense of
the common wealth, for after that a soldier came to his threescore year, he
had his certain allowance until his death, which commonly was spent in that
place? And when they saw the sun in the middle of three circles upon one of
which was a crown burning made as it were of ears of corn, they applied it to
their Trium^^^^ that is, to signify that three men should sit upon
capital matters, on which only two satte before, and were called ^^^umuiri.

But Augustus Caesar who had searched their old southsayers, saw he was to
wait for a greater then either they or himself was, or the Gods whom he
worshipped, and Apollo (whose son he was accounted) confirmed the same,
insomuch as he refused the title of a Lord, and having great treasure brought
unto him for to make Statues, he would have none dedicated either to him
self, or unto any other then unto him, who should save all mankind, and
unto Peace, for he had read the Sibilles, which promised such a prince, and
prophesied of the whole course of his life, among the which being ten of great
fame all virgins, and of diverse places, one which was called ^umana, of her
city where she was borne in the lesser Asia named Cum^, disciphering his
birth, constitution, and his name, gave forth this oracle.

Then unto mortal men the son
Of an Omnipotent Father shall come:
He shall be like unto a mortal man
Clothed with flesh, with natures two but one,
In 6. letters is containde his name,
Four vowels, two none, remember this same,
Eight and 8 tens, and one hundred (...) times 8.
Declare his name unto the faithles straight.
I 10 8 S 200 O 70 Y 400 S 200 888
These Oracles as they were with much marvel received, so were they given
with much majesty: the manner thereof is thus set down by one, who writ of
Sibella surnamed Cumea, because she forsook Babylon in Chaldea, and lived in a
town called Cumea in Campania a Province of Italy.

In Cumea was a Church of great praise, because it was of a strange bigness, and
of as great price because it was of one stone, in the middle whereof were 3.
large vessels of the same stone, wherein this Sibill used to bath her self,
and afterward being attyred with some precious robe, she went into a more
secret place in the same temple, in the middle of which was a seat like unto a
princes throne, she spoke of future things, as if they had been present.

But Apollo who was accounted most cunning in reading riddles, after that he
had been a long time ashamed to show himself, and to the daunting of the
whole world, had many years been dumb, being fayrely entreated by Augustus
Caesar, and in the end importunated with a sacrifice of an hundred Oxen, to
tell the cause of such an extraordinary silence, he made him this answer.

A Jew, a child in show, a God in power,
Who rules all other Gods, commands me
Hence to depart, and dwell in hellish bower,
Hereafter silence must thine answer be.
Hereupon Augustus returning to Rome, erected presently in the capitol, an
Altar with this ^^scription: The Altar of the first begotten of God, for he was
convinced with these Oracles, and conceived no reason, why this child could not
as well cause these accidents which befell them in Rome, both in the heavens
and in the capitol, as have power so long before to p^tte the Oracle to
silence. Great shame it might have been for the Jews, that Gentiles should
give such credit to evil spirits, if they had been careless of divine
inspirations.

(...) a prisoner in Babylon, and a Prophet among his people, after that he
had foretold them in how short a time they were to return to Jerusalem, he
added also that 69. weeks after, he should come whom they expected,
understanding a year for every day in the week, which mount to 483. years,
at the which time the Prince was borne.

Israel by being whose children they were distinguished from other nations,
lying upon his deathbed, after that he was 147. years of age, called all his
sons unto him, and blessed them, foreshewed what should befall unto all their
families, and among the rest of Judas, who was his fourth son, he prophesied
in this sort.

Judas, thy brethren shall praise thee, thy hands shall be upon the necks of
thine enemies, and thy fathers children shall adore thee. The scepter shall not
be taken from Judas, neither shall there be a ruler, who shall not be of his
stock, until he come, which is to be sent, and he shall be the expectation of
the Gentiles.

These notwithstanding, and diverse other tending thereunto, some were as
forward as the Gentiles, and began to have a great opinion of themselves.

Theodas a Jew, hearing that as mighty a Prophet as Moses should about that
time be raised, he persuaded himself that he could as well divide the river
of Iordane with his word, as Moses did the red sea with his wa^d, with which
brags he seduced many, but going to show the people this idle slight, he, and
many of his followers were slain.

Judas of Galile, knowing also that about that time a Prince should be borne,
who should redeem the Jews, and that none but themselves should eat the labor
of their hands, devised how he might comp^^ this conceit, and imperiously gave
a commandment unto the people, not to pay tribute unto Ca^sar, which many
obeyed, even to the suffering of exquisite torments, and cruel death, in so
much as children, not without wonder, would abide great torture, rather then
yield to accept Caesar for their Lord, but in the end he with his followers
failed of their purpose. Others seeing Herod confirmed in the kingdom, assured
themselves that he was the prince which was so long before promised unto them,
because now first did the scepter fail in the family of Judas, for when
Nabuchodonosor carried Ioachim king of the Jews, captive into Babylon, he left
no prince over them, but one of the same family, called Sededechias, uncle
unto Ioachim, and Sedechias afterward rebelling against him, and being carried
away also into Babylon, none was accepted for king or ruler over the Jews,
until their return out of captivity, at which time Zarobabel who was of the
kings family, took upon him the government of them, but would not be called
king, either because he was tributarie unto the Mede^ and Persian^, who since
the Jews their captivity, had conquered Chaldea, and all the countries
thereabout, or else because perchance he did not directly descend from the later
kings of the Jews, for diverse had (...) tributaries both to the Egiptians and
Chaldes, who notwithstanding both were, and were called kings. Also when
Antiochus Epiphanes, King of the Sirians, made war upon the Jews, and
prevailed sometime by falsehood, sometime by force against them, he used the
victory with such cruelty, that he caused them to eat meat forbidden by
their laws, yea, and offer sacrifice unto Idols, which he set in their temple,
as also in other places, where were new altars erected for that purpose* But
having brought their Princes to so low an estate, as they were accounted of no
more then private men, yet before he could set up a Prince over them,
Mathathias, who by some small right was high Priest, and also of the tribe of
Judas (for those two tribes, and only those might marry together) gathering
such unto him, as would rather leave their lives, then live against their
laws, resisted Antiochus his power, and his children following their fathers
example, remained high Priests and Princes over the people, so that the scepter
still remained in the family of Judas, till Herod usurped the crown, into
which by these means he in^roched.

Aristobulus grandchild unto Simon, the last suruiuing brother of the
Machabees, sons of Mathathias, took upon him the name of a king, never
before used, since their captivity in Babylon, and dying without issue a year
after he began his reign, leaft his wife (according to their laws) as well
as his kingdom unto his brother Alexander, who had by her two sons, the
elder was named Hircanus, who after his fathers decease, during his mothers
widowhood, was high priest, and after her death was also king of the Jews: the
younger who was called Aristobulus, aspiring to the kingdom by force of arms,
made his elder brother to yield it unto him, and to content himself with the
high priesthood, which also not long after he demanded in like sort, as he
had demanded the kingdom. Wherefore, Hirca^^ being too weak to resist his
forces, fled for aid unto Pompey, a noble Roman well experienced in wars,
and had already been a (...) of many Kings, who ^ay with a great army at
that time in (...), a principal city of Siria, bordering upon the north side
of Palestina. This did Hirca^^s, partly because not long before had been a
great league of friendship concluded and kept betwixt the Jews and the
Romans, and partly by the persuasion of one in some credit with him, whose
name was An^ipater, he was no Jew, but of Idumea, or as some say, of Ascalon,
(one of the five Dutchies of the Philistines, near unto the middle earth sea)
and some to one of those Idolatrous priests which belonged to Apollo, or some
other which kept his temple, and was stolen away by the thieves of Idumea,
whence because his friends were either not able, or not willing to redeem him,
he remained until in the end he was one of their chief leaders, and in a
(...) betwixt them and the Jews taken prisoner, but being found by Alexander
^ing of the Jews, to be both valiant and wi^e, he was made governor of Id^mea,
in which office he behaved himself so well, as the Arabians ^ought his
friendship, and to confirm it, gave him to wife a noble woman of their country
named Cypr^s, and for his sake were ever after ready to aid the Jews, until
some private quarrelles chanced to be between them, and when he returned
again to Palestina, he always favored Hircanus, eldest son to Alexander,
and encouraged him to maintain his right against Aristobulus his younger
brother Nicholas of Damascus, who (when need was) pleaded before Caesar for
Herod, and Arthel^^^* labored to show that this Antipater was descended of the
kings of Palestin^, and fetched his pedigree from the chiefest of those Jews,
which returned after their capti^^itie from Babylon: but if Antipater or his
children were the first which would seek to gentilzie a base blood, Nicholas
will not be the last which will find it.

Pompey having given Aristobulus the overthrow, and carried him away captive to
Rome, although he restored Hircanus to his kingdom, yet he made the Jews
tributarie to the Romans, and left Antipater as a president over the country,
who because he was in years, committed Galile, which contained all the north
end of Palestina, unto his son Herod* and Judea, which contained all the
South part, unto his son Phaselus, himself ruling only in Samaria, which
was the heart of the country, which when Antigonus, Aristo^^l^s his son
perceived, and conceived small hope of any help from the Jews to recover the
dignity which his father lost* he requested aid of the Parthians, who coming
with a great power, set up Antigonus in Hircanus his rome, and led away
Hircanus prisoner, and also Phaselus, but Antigonus, to the end that Hircanus
should never after be capable of the high preisthood, disfigured him by cutting
or biting off his ears, and Phaselus hearing that his brother had escaped, and
hoping that he would revenge his death, beat out his own brains against a
stone, Antipater not long before was poisoned by Malchus a Jew, and Herod
escaping although very hardly, travailed with great pain to Rome,
notwithstanding the time of the year was unseasonable for so long a journey,
where declaring unto Augustus Caesar, and unto the Senate, what had chanced in
Palestina, he was created in the capitol, king of the Jews, and returning
with a great power of men, after much bloodshed against Antigonus, whom Antony
Emperor of the East, by an agreement made betwixt him and Augustus Emperor of
the west, against which Antony, Tully thundered out in vain, and to his cost, so
many phillipics, after he had whipped and crucified him, caused to be heheaded,
and established Herod in the kingdom of the Jews.

But although many were so besorted with Herod as to take him to be the Prince,
of which they had so many prophesies, yet many others which see the seep^er
^ayle in Judas his family, and knew that he who was promised unto them,
should not only come when the (...) failed, but be also of that family, and
of Dauid^ stock, expected daily when he would show himself, and set them at
liberty, who lived under Herod in too much sauery, but Marie and Joseph kept
al things most secret, awaking themselves often with the consideration of this
heavenly mystery, and waiting the wished time of her happy delivery.

And when the virgin had made provision, not such as princes commonly affect,
but such as their poverty could conucnie^thy afford, she gave her self wholly to
the meditation of that, which had (...) often broken her sleep, without any
trouble, and bereaved her of her sense^ without any pain, and poor Joseph was
as forward in will, although he were not s^ highly favored as his wife, when
suddenly did a speech* arise, which wrought in him an unspeakable (...), and
would also have amassed her had she not been well armed against all weather.

Augustus Caesar, sole Emperor, both in the East, and West, (having overcome
Anthony at Ac^^um in Greece) as at other times before, so now sends order to
the Presidents of every p^ouince, to gether the tribute due unto him: the
manner whereof was in Palestina, as it seems at that time, to take the names of
the people, not where they dwelled, but where was the portion of land allotted
to the tribe of which they were, and as near as they could in the city, which
principally belonged to that family, which exquisite course of e^acting the
tribute, has given a probable cause of suspicion, that this was the first
description, which was made of Palestina, by cause afterward we read, that one
of the tribe of Judah and of the family of Da^id, borne in (...) belonging
unto the same tribe and family, and brought up in a city of Zabulon, paid
tribute in (...), a City of Nepthalim. But whether this were the first
description of Palestina, or no, it is not material Joseph being of the tribe
of Judah, and of the family of David, was forced to depart from Nazareth,
toward his country, there to give up his name, and to pay the tribute
demanded, which was ordinarily every five years, for every man two grotes
sterling or four groates as some say, beside what (...) ordinary taxes were
sometime exacted by the Emperor, as his treasure wasted. And most gladly would
Joseph at this time have doubled the tax, that he might have stayed at
Nazareth: for Winter being but half gone, and therefore at the sharpest, and
the virgin almost all gone out her time, and therefore at the biggest, it did
not only move him to extreme melancholy, but menaced also an irreparable
misery: for Joseph pitying as he loved, and loving without limit, pity
caused that in him, which because he enjoyed his love, love could not, so that
now he began to languish, with thinking that she whom he so entirely loved,
should be subject to so perilous an accident, as not having many days to
reckon to her delivery, she should be compelled to travail no few days
journey. But she who was always as well fraught with joy, as she was full of
grace, and assured that neither foul weather could wrong her, nor long ways
weary her, to do her any harm, having him in her womb, who was to command
both the earth and the heavens, comforted her husband in such sort, as she
both acquieted his mind, and quickened again his spirits, that now he began
to have an assured hope he should bring her happily to the end of a hard
journey: in which after that he had once set forward, he waited more upon her
looks, then he looked unto his own ways, more then necessary care commanded
him for her easier travail, thinking not any thing did more then duty, which
either exhibited that which might ease her, or prohibited that which might
displease her.

Three days journey was Nazareth from Hier^salem, but all circumstances
considered, very likely they made it above four, from whence they went to
Bethleem: for although that Jerusalem were the chief City, and all the kings
were of the tribe of Judah (after king Saul) yet was Jerusalem in that portion
of land, which fell by lot to Ben^amin. Bethleem* was a City six miles south
from Jerusalem, possessed by Caleb: at the Jews first entrance into
Palestina, he was a prince of the tribe of Judah, and one of the twelve Princes
sent by Moses from the desert, to take view of Palestina, and also one of the
two, which brought all glad tidings to enconrag^^ the people, wherefore he
only, and Ios^^e, who was the other, of all the Jews who were above twenty
years of age, (when these two returned back to Moses) entered into this land,
the rest being all dead in the wilderness, for murmuring against God, who had
promised to bring them thither. It was also the more famous for one called
Abessan, who lived in the time that the people were governed by Judges, and
himself was judge 7. years, he married from thence out of his house 30.
daughters, and took home unto him 30. wives, for his 30. sons. This City was
sometime called Ephrada, and the whole country about it, as some do say,
because that Ephrad^ (Caleb his wife) was there buried (but others do show
that it was so called in Jacob the patriarch his time) and it kept that name,
until a great plenty of corn came, after that dearth which caused Noenn and
her husband and household to go and dwell in the country of the Moabites, and
after this plentiful time it began to be called Bethleem, which is as much
to say, as the house of bread: but when as that king David was their anointed
king of the Jews (for there was he first anointed by Samuel) and because he
was there borne and brought up, as also his father, grandfather, and other his
ancestors, it was called after his name, as the worthiest of them all, the
City of David.

The soyleround about it, was comparable unto the most fruitful part of
Palestina, the City stood upon the top of a reasonable high hill, which what
it lacked in breadth, it had in length, the going up unto it, was only on the
west side, and that not werie easy, because it was somewhat steep.

Hither came Joseph and Mary not so welcome as weary, yet not so hardly used*
as they were well contented, they enquired from one end of the City to the
other, and neither for love nor money could they be entertained, every house
perchance in the City having some guest, might also have some color for their
discurtesie, but any little corner in a house at such a pinch, could not but
have been accounted great hospitalltie, they looked not for the best, they
sought a mean host; but the very worst cottage would not be opened unto
them, this favor only did they find, that being come in at the one gate,
they might without any trouble go out at the other, where by good fortune
nature wrought that in beasts, which nurture could not work in men. A young
woman tired with travel, and for in man's conceit it had been more fit to have
been with her midwife in some house, then to be wandering in the streets with
her husband, moved people to so little pi^tie, as the beasts were thereof
ashamed, and freely gave them such house-roome as themselves enioied: for not
far from the East gate of the City was an hollow place in a rock, either by
nature, or art, made fit for the receite of cattle* wherein was a maunger,
where stood an Ox, and an Ass, and into this rock entered the wearied
couple in the coldest time of Winter, where they neither had other company,
nor comfort, then is already showed, no bed was made to ease them, no board
was spread to refresh them. Some little what did poor Joseph provide in the
town to vittail the^, and somewhat perchance had he from the beasts to lay
under them: he got some light that they might see, as well as feel, what they
wanted. And when they perceived the inco^ueniencie of the place to be such as
they knew not where to make any little fire, they resolved themselves that
patience and contentment must be their best fare: with which after they had
spent half the night, and the virgin perceived her hour was come to be
delivered, she applied her self unto her wonted devotions, and Joseph being
warned thereof, hastened to make ready such cloutes as he brought with him,
when in a moment did he appear in the world, who was before all worlds, and
his mother taking him in hi^ arms, swadled him in as good order, as either her
skill, or her clothes would suffer her, and laid him in the maunger betwixt
the Ox and the Ass, who with their breath qualified the coldness of the air
round about him, her self also being ready to comfort him, what she could*
least that he should suffer any inconvenience by taking cold.

Wonder (O ye heavens) be astonished, O earth, he who was prince both of heaven
and earth, seems to have forsaken heaven to live in earth. Was it ever heard
since the beginning of the world, that one of such a nature, as neither any
sense could discern any portraiture, nor any science discover his least
perfection, should not only become an object to every man's sense, but accounted
also as an abject in every man's sentence? Lament, O heavens, your loss, and
earth joy in your gain: if it be to be judged your gain, that he who was
begotten a prince in heaven, and in all points comparable to the mightiest
Emperor, should be borne in so poor an estate in earth, at he seemed a
companion only for the meanest beggar.

Princes having choice of Palaces, remove sometime from one unto an other,
where they neither brook the diminishing of their port, nor abate the least
portion of their pleasure: but this Prince has removed himself from a large,
stately, and a glorious palace, where he had much company most noble, pure,
beautiful, and sure unto him, unto a narrow, homely, and base place, where he^
finds small company, of such condition: but for the most part poor, impure,
deformed, and false unto him. He removed from a palace, at the building
whereof was neither any noise heard of any tool, nor any noisomeness
complained of for any toil, it was with one only word made, and made so
firm, that unless that word be again vnsayde, it is an eternal frame. From
hence he removed not to any other Palace, any house, no, not to a poor
man's cottage, but to a cave, not in Babylon, not in Rome, not in Jerusalem,
cities famous, either for soueraintie, or sanctity, no nor in Bethlehem,
which was the least of a thousand in Judah, but in a rock without the town
walls, neither as if he had meant to have made an escape from the world, or
else, if the world had made a scorn of him,

The Caruer was judged passionate, who wished his work transformed into his
own nature, keeping the shape which he had given it. Run Jews and
Gentiles, behold your creature, who had power not only to wish, but also for
the love of you to work himself into your natures, which argued a passion of
more intention, and also of more perfection, in that the Caruer wished it more
for his own pleasure, then for his works preferment, and what your Creator
has wrought, was to his own pain, and only for his works profit, for the
compassing of which, he thought that this present condition, place, and
company so fit, as he would not have accepted any other, had it been
offered, for a more wealthy condition, would perchance have obtained a more
convenient place, and having a more convenient place, the virgin must have had
more company, or if she had refused them, she would have incurred a suspicion,
either to have offended by some shameful fact, or else in tended some cruelty
against her self, and her infant. And company being admitted unto her labor,
the midwife at the least (if not all the rest) would have been privy unto
this mystery, which was as yet to be kept most secret. For the virgins labor
was not such as other women's labour^ are, nor the child in that manner borne
that other childen are: for neither did she feel any pain in her delivery,
nor he leave less integrity in her body then he found, that kind of pain
being the reward only of sin, of which he acquitte her, and corruption
of body not without concupiscence, which never was acquainted with her: so
that in all points she was as pure and perfect a virgin after this nativity,
as she was the first day after her own. Such a mother only became Gods
son to have, and such a son was none, but a uirgin worthy to conceive.

So was the Oracle fulfilled, which spoke of a gate in the East, which should
ever be shut, through which no man should pass, because the Lord God of
Israel had entered by it, and it should remain, shut for the Prince, who was
therein to make his seat, and to pass in and our through it,

So was the figure verified, which being a bush flaming with fire, and not
consuming, foreshewed, a virgin should conceive a child in her womb without
any corruption.

So was the expectation both of heaven and earth in part satisfied, because he
now began to run his race like a giant (although he seemed but a weak
infant, who took upon him to right the earths wrongs, and to repair the
heavens ruins.

But the higher powers, the heavenly spirits not able to contain themselves
from communicating the cause unto the earth of her joy, which was not more
sudden then secret for no doubt all the world at this time rejoiced, although
they knew not whereat) left their Princely palace for a time, and descended
into a plain (near unto a tower, whereabout Jacob once ^ed his sheep, a mile
distant from Bethleem) where they found three poor shepherds, very
prouidently watching over their flock, in a field where neither the cattle
could lack meat to fill them, nor their keepers food to refresh them, being
as fertile of Olives to the ease of the one, as it was of grass to the use of
the other, where one of the Princes saluted these shepherds, but with a kind
of reverence unto that shape, for their master his sake who lately had
vouchsafed it, and was as perfect in a peasant as in a Prince, beside, that by
their office and ability, they made the representation of him the more lively,
whom they entirely loved, but the shepherds perceiving a light beyond all
their night observations to shine so bright, and in the midst thereof a
stately prince, such as neither day nor night they had ever se^ne the like,
were so much affrighted therewith that the prince thought it high time to
harten them again, and spoke unto in this manner: Fear ye not, for behold I
bring you news of great joy which shall be unto all people, for this day is
borne unto you in the city of David a savior, who is Christ our Lord, this
is your sign, ye shall find the infant wrapped in clothes, and laid in a
maunger, which said, he joined himself unto the rest of his company, and for
exceeding great joy began to sing with them this or the like Canticle.

Chorus 1. All glory and praise be to God on high,

2. And peace on earth to men of a good will.

1. Such glory as endures eternally,

2 Such peace as none but ill wild men can spill.

1. Glory to God the which shall never cease
And unto good wild men eternal peace.

2. The heavens are full of glory which is Gods,
The earth brings peace twixt those which were at ods,

1. Glory and peace the ornaments of heaven,
The Lord of both to men in earth has given.

2. God will this glory shall continue still,
And peace twixt heaven and earth, if so me^ will

Chor. 1-2. Glory be to him therefore, who made this peace.
And blessed earth which gave so good increase.

The shepheardes when they had consulted upon what they had heard and leene,
they concluded to go unto Bethleem, to try the truth of those their glad
tidinges, whether when they were come, they found Mary and Joseph in a rock
without the town walls, and fast by them an infant lying in a maunger betwixt
an ox and an ass, and after that they had in their rustical manner maruailed
enough thereat, in some rude sort they did their small devotion unto their
Lord, and then declared unto the maiden mother, how they were sent unto that
sacred place, by whom and for what cause, likewise what music they heard
after the message was done unto them, but care of their flock excusing their
short tariance, they took their leave in the best manner they could, feeding
the virgins thoughts with these words, and filled the world with wonder.

O happy shepherds, honored above the highest sovereigns, in being chosen
to be beholders of this heavenly babe, blessed be the eyes which see what ye
did see, for many kings and princes would have seen what ye did see, and
have heard what ye did hear, and could not, but tell us good shepheardes, tell
us what ye did see.

The king of glory, the glory of heaven, the heaven of Angels, the Angels ^oy,
the heavens ornament glories truest image, who was when no other thing was,
although that others were, begotten before all worlds, although borne after
that himself had builte the world, as old as the most ancient, although an
infant of an hour, a prince of peace, but a conqueror of mighty powers, a
mirror of love, but a revenger of wrongs, the God of might, but become a man.

O heavenly sight, but where good shepheardes did you see, what you say, and in
what sort.

In Bethleem of Judah, or to say more true, without Bethleem, because in
Bethleem was no room for him, he lay a young, tender, and a most delicate
infant, in a rude rock, without the town walls in the very sharpest time of
winter, without any succor, but what he received by the breath of an ox, and
an ass, which stood tied to the maunger wherein he was laid, for although his
mother could not be far from him, yet had she not wherewithal to comfort him,
but rather wanted cherishing herself, not being without some grief to see her
own bowels lie shiuering for cold, who could with a word have made the
heavens to shake, and whom Angels could not without terror behold in heaven, to
lie trembling in a maunger.

O heavy sight, that the corner stone upon which the safety of the whole world
was to be founded, hewed out of a rock without man's hands, should now be so
laid in a rock as it seems to be left almost by all but by a rock. O
hearts more hard the^ the most stony rock. O heads more dull then the most
senceles beast. O Bethleem had thou been so poor as thou could not, thou
mightiest have been excused, but thou were so peevish as thou would not,
and therefore art thou justly refused: had humility answered for thine
unworthiness to receive so noble guestes, happy had thou been, and thou
had been made worthy, but a contrary humor made thee swell so big, as
thou would not have any spare room for thy Lord and maker, at what time
both the ox knew his owner, and the ass the maunger of his master, and
sticked not by the instinct of nature to give him entertainment, and the
institutor of nature vouchsafed it.

Succor heavenly Peers your prince, since that he whom ye took delight to
behold in heaven, is destitute of help in earth, and disdained of such as yet
knew not their own dignity, forget that he choose rather^ be a man then an
angel, ^or now does he feel that he has taken upon him a nature which cannot
help it self, and left an other which could have helped others. Be present
worthy princes at this spectacle, and give diligent attendance upon him and
his mother, who pitied him as much as ye did, although she could not
profit him, well might his wailing make her weep, being her own most noble,
tender and sweet infant, but all the help she could give him, was scantly
worth the having at that instant.

O hardy shepherds to hazard sheep and selves rather then fore ^ow the sight
of this little infant: right worthy were ye to be lighted in the midst of
the darkness with a more piercing light then either the sun is by day, or
your star by night: the field wherein you watched your flock was lighted,
the senses wherewith ye watched your selves were lighted, but your souls
seemed to have received the chiefest light which could so perfectly know,
whom your senses see, and for whose sake ye forsook for the time your
flock, (except what ye saved to present unto this infant) but go shepherds
go, and show unto the world whom ye have seen in want.

O Joseph thrice happy, because it was thy hap to light whereas thou
could not choose but like. Now do thou see the Saint whom thou have
served to be such, as neither heaven nor earth can show thee the like. What
sweet flowers have budded in thy land, what sovereign fruit have blossomed,
the time being now come, that the husbandman would pruine every tree, and
trim it for the last trial, whether it would rather carry fruit worthy
his pheere, or become fuel for a never wasting fire. The mournful voice of
a sorrowful Turtle is heard in thy land, (because in his own it could not)
having lost his entirely beloved mate, for the recovery of whom he would
refuse no martyrdom. Stand not therefore any longer wondering to hear him so
grievously lament, but rather try if by wayling with him thou may lessen
his woes, approach near unto this princely infant, whom although thou were
not worthy to father, yet must it be thy work to foster, hardly did thou
conceive of thy spouse when she conceived this infant, but happily did thou
receive her, when thou were better informed, and now may thou see it waking
of which thou were warned sleeping, that she conceived without sin, who was
delivered without p^ine.

O sweet office granted thee with as sure a pattent, to be a guard to grace,
a comfort to compassion, a nurse to nature, a supposed father to him, to whom
princes sue for favor. O trusty guardian of grace his truest gemme, to have
the sole custody of thy Prince his chiefest spouse, to have the sole
conducting of thy prince his mother, and to have the sole comforting of her
when she was delivered of thy prince, both worthy of thy love: the one thy
mate, the other thy maker, both worthy of thy service, the one thy God, the
other his mother, both wanting at this time thy help, the one a tender infant,
the other a young maiden. How undoubtedly shall thy service be recompensed, thy
love requited doubly, and for thy present good will, shall thou hereafter be
presented with a crown of glory? Continue then thine accustomed care toward
thy spouse, and her infant, that thou may be a sufficient witness to the
worlds wonder, as well of her motherly charity, as thou art of her maidenly
chastity, and that at one, and the self same time she was both a pure
virgin, and a perfect mother.

And thou divine Lady, most happy of all to be his mother, who was thy maker.
O how well did those words of the Angel fit thee, when he said thou were full
of grace, being presently to be fraught with God. Behold now thy sweet infant
borne into the world, who was nine months borne in thy womb. Look where he
lies for whose sight thou have so much longed, embrace him at liberty in
thine arms, whom thou had imprisoned in thy bowels. O how well did he
provide for thy comfort, who picked out so solitary a place, where thou were
not likely to have much company, that thou might have thy fill in looking
on him, embracing him and kissing him, whom although thou see lie crying in
the manger, thou knew he was thy Lord and maker, and no less admirable in
the sight of Angels, then amiable in thine. Thou neither need to rise by
night, nor yet to range by day, to seek whom thy soul does love, nor to ask
of any watchman whether they did see him, for they which came through the city
unto thee at night, would without any demanding demonstrate unto thee where thy
love did lie. He sought thee, he found thee, he took such hold of thee, as he
means still to have thee: thy lap must be his board, thy bosom his bed,
and betwixt thy breasts does he resolve to build his nest.

Poverty much hated by others, ought to be honored by thee, for that this
mean estate has brought thee more profit, then could a princely port. O
happy want which compels thee unto thy hearts wish, for now that he has not
where else to lie, thy lest arm must be a boster under his head, and thy right
arm a border round about his body. Now that he has not where else to live,
thy cottage must be his court, thy company his comfort. He is the center of
thy thoughts, about which they roll. He is the loadstone of thine eyes, from
which they cannot roue. He is the rock, against which thy speeches break,
driven by a violent passion, he is the rest which thy thoughts best brook,
divided by a new affection, the which are as often supplied by tears, as thy
words by them, being neither able to speak that which thou could, nor to
think that which thou would, for thou were both overtaken in thy words
with thine own gladness, and ouercharged in thy thoughts with thy sons
greatness: yet speak what thou may, and think that which thou may not
speak, and in the end let thy loue-teares witness, that thou art as far
unable to utter thy thoughts, as thou art from thinking the uttermost. Proceed
then blessed virgin to embrace thy princely babe, press him in thy bosom, who
has pierst thy breast, let him never pass from thy hand, who has possessed
thy heart, but seeing he being thy Lord has taken on him the person of a
child, and vouchsafed to be thy son, thou being his maiden fear not to use
both the privileges of a nurse, and the pre-eminence of a mother.

But O most sacred babe, heavens bliss, helles bane, worthy of all praise,
because the worker of our peace: shall we congratulate thy coming into the
world, or grieve that thou art become so short a word, the largest heavens
were lately to little for thee, and now a little hole can do more then lodge
thee. A short word, but a sweet worth, more of thine own desire, then of our
desert, for if thine own love drive thee, it was thy goodness, if ours drew
thee, it was thy gift. But tell us sweet babe, in whom affection has fully
supplied the defect of thy tongue, as yet an instrument only of a lamentable
sound, as thine eyes were fountains of sorrowful tears, tell us, why have
thou loosed from the right hand of Majesty, to arrive in a restless haven of
misery? Was it to recover again the right which once was passed by thee, and
enrolled in a most faithful record. The heaven of heavens to the Lord, but
the earth he has given to the sons of men, and therefore would thou of
an omnipotent God, become an impotent man, yea, and contented to be accounted,
and that in scome, king of the Jews, who were the true king both of the Jews,
and of the Gentiles? or rather was it to right the wrong done unto the Lady,
who^ thy father adopted to his daughter, thou tookest for thy sister, and to
redeem her from her unmerciful conqueror, (who had bereft her of her
matchless beauty, and whatsoever else nature and grace could bestow upon her)
importunated other by her suit, or rather inchaunted by thy self, thy love
toward her being without limit, and her loss of thee being infinite? Tell us
sweet babe, who art an eternal word, although now too young to speak,
tell us what caused thee to descend from thine unspeakable dignity, in which
thou were the only food of Angels, unto an irreparable infamy, because thou
art now become the meat of beasts, for as an infallible truth has revealed
unto us. All flesh is grass, and grass is beasts feeding.

In my bed by night I sought whom I loved, I sought her, but I could not find
her.

Enough sweet babe since that love has no higher cause, all this thou did,
because thou did love: (...) thou did love because thou did. Well
do I conceive thee to have been in thy bed, that is, at thy quietest repose:
but what nights were those, where we supposed to have bin one continual day,
or what darkness could grieve thee, who art the brightness of thy fathers
glory? Care which contrary to the nature thereof, made thee look many
thousand years younger then thou art, did perchance contrary also to the
nature of the place seem to bring a night, where the Sun never used to go
down, or cause thee to be hidden in a cloud, who art the light of heaven,
that not without some cause thou may say in the night in thy bed, tho^
soughtest whom thou louedst: but what, when thou could not find her in thy
bed?

I will rise and go round about the City through the streets, and open places
will I seek whom I love, I sought her, but I could not find her.

But what among all those glorious company could thou not find thy love?
If heaven be not worthy to hold thy love, how shall the earth yield her
unto thee? But it seems by thine intended course, that hell it self shall
not escape thy search: But when thou could not find her in the City.

The watch found me which kept the City: saw ye whom my soul does love? And
when I had a little passed them, I found whom I loved, I held her, and will
not let her go, until I have brought her into my mothers house, and into her
chamber who bred me.

O worthy Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, for whom did ye watch? Or
whom did you find in your watch? Did ye find him because ye did watch, or
did ye watch him, because ye found him? O how much to you eternal gain
did ye find him, when ye kept your first watch over your selves, at what
time many of your fellow Citizens drunk with self delight, were to their
intolerable pain banished their bright and glorious City, and could never
again attain unto their former felicity; and because that ye so happ^ly
watched (...) do those duties, which others sleeping ouershipped, ye were
admitted to watch (...) in his praise, (...) Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of
(...), the earth is full of thy glory, although (...) he so gracious in your
sight, that ye would not stay him? or was he of so great might that ye could
not? He was the purest fountain of grade, and the surest fortress against all
griefs.

But if ye had so just a cause, both of love, and fear, why gave ye him no
answer unto his demand. (...)

Love thought the time too long, which was spent in asking the question, and
desire to find whom he loved, would not let him stay to take an answer.

But as soon as he had passed from the watch, he found whom he loved: for a
little inferior to the angels had he created mankind, which through her own
fault was lost, and therefore rightly he is said to find her: for unto Gods
Image and likeness was man made, and placed in earth for a time in a Paradise,
he was plentifully enriched with all heavenly gifts, and created a Prince
over all earthly creatures, yea, the Angels themselves were so made to the
service of him, that from the hour of his birth, has every one an Angel
attending on him. But man not understanding the greatness of his own ho^our,
followed too much his adversaries him our, who beguiling him with fair words,
made him so fond and prodigal, that in one instant he wasted all his
patrimony. Man made in the likeness of God, did the devil ransacke by a
cowardly wiliness, and therefore God made in the likeness of man will restore
him again by a wotthie victory.

And now that thou have found her whom thou louedst, thou have taken such sure
hold of her, as she cannot go but wither thou guidest her, she cannot rest,
but where thou remaynest, thou have not only brought her into thy mothers
house, (for father and mother was all one with thee in the beginning) and to
express that infinite tenderness and love which thy father had over thee, thou
termest him thy mother) but into the chamber also, where thou were begotten,
keeping nothing secret from her, which thou may show, and she conceive, and
adiuring all the daughters of Jerusalem by the goats and hearts of the field,
that they do not raise thy love, or cause her to awake before her self will.
A strong love, a strange care, does the diseasing of thy love deserve so sharp
a punishment, as he who does it should be accounted either as a goat, whose
filthiness signifies all want of grace, or as a heart, whose fearfulness
supposes him void of charity, for grace will not dwell with filth, and
charity does expel all fear, but what? do thou think that ever she will
have that will to arise, or to awake out of thine embracings, being, so fast
joined to thee in matrimony, that although ye be God and man, yet ye are not
two, but one Christ. Great dishonor would it be unto thee, that after so much
seeking after her, thou should ever suffer her to be divorced from thee, for all which know of how great power thou art, will imagine a want of love in thee,
to let her go from thee. True it is, that by thy proclamation, thy warrant of
peace in earth avails only such as are of good will, but rather supply
their perverseness with thine effectual mercy, then suffer them to part from
thee to their eternal misery.

How narrowly did thou search, who would not leave the most secret corner
in the world unsought? how fervently did thou love, who to gain a little
something, made thy self almost nothing? how securely did thou joy, when
thou foundest her, to whom thy soul was so surely joined? thy tears do
witness it, with the which thou do bewail her more then thy self, and
bewray thy glad sudden finding her for her own safety: But still thy
weeping, until thou art past thy mothers weaning, and begin now at the last to
comfort her with a cheerful countenance, whom thou have chosen to give thee
this charitable attendance. Apply thy self to a virgins teate, whose breasts
contained milk as strangely, as her womb conceived a child, change thy
cribbe, although sacred with thy first cries, for thy mothers arms, in whom
are settled thy firmest joys, shoot up apace heavenly Impe, to man's stature,
who were shaped in thy mothers womb with a man's staydnes, and art of more
wisdom in thy shortest cloutes, then are the grauest sages in their sidest
cloakes. Run out thine intended race, provoke al adverse powers, rowse thy
self as like Lion against thy foes, as thou restest like a Lamb among thy
friends, and show as much proof of thy might against the one, as thou have
of thy mildness among the other. So shall the world in part be satisfied,
that whatsoever thou presently suffer, is rather because thou would
conceal some secret mystery, then that thou could be compelled by any to
fall into this seeret misery, and that thou, who could command the
stately heavens by thy power, would not but for some great cause commend so
small a hole with thy presence.

A little hole it was, but a most holy place, sacred with a more princely
presence, then are the statelyest palaces, and of no less and happy
pleasure, then is the heaue^liest paradise, a place worthy (...) praise, where
princes dwell without shame, where virgins are enamored without sin, where a
virgin gave suck to the son of GOD, for so soon as the virgin was delivered
of this prince, her breasts began to fill, and he, who of her purest blood,
had framed the body of her princely babe, transformed also part of the
reside we into milk for his food, that whence he had received nature, he
should also have his ^^burishment.

Now may the mount Sinai leave bragging in the desert of Pharan of the deity,
which there gave a law to men, by which they might know the heavens pleasure.
Now may the Tarpeia^: rock leave boasting in Room of her dignity, which
receiving an extraordynarye light from the heavens, discovered their
displeasant. Now may the mountain Morea abate her majesty in Jerusalem,
whereupon stood the Temple, where in an obscure cloud appeared the holiest
of all holyes, because now in a rock under the walls of Bethleem, is no Law
given, but life, a light for to direct. not to correct, and the holiest of all
holyes enclosed in such a cloud, as he may both be seen and handled by his
creatures, and afterward this rock was consecrated with the effusion of far
more holy blood, then either was sprinkled in Moses tabernacle, or shed in
Salomons temple, for the eight day after the nativity, according to the law of
the Jews, he who was above all laws was circumcised in this rock, and
thereby made subject unto the law, (the parents not being commanded by the
law, nor accustomed to carry their infants to the temple, for the receiving
of that sacrament) at which time also he had this name Jesus given unto him,
as the Angel called him before and after that he was conceived in his mothers
womb, notwithstanding that long before many other names were assigned him by
the divine Oracle, as Admirable, the Counselor, God, the Mighty, the Father
of the world to come, the Prince of Peace, with many other correspondent
either to his person, or some property which is in him, yet none was
significant as this, and whatsoever is obscurely contained in them, is
manifestly declared in this.

For the sin which slew mankind being infinite, in respect that the party
offended was infinitely more excellent then the offender, it required a
satisfaction infinitely good, which man was not able to make, whose nature is
within certain limits of perfection, wherefore it was necessary either that
God, who is only infinite, should of his mercy satisfy himself, or else in
justice the sinner was to have an infinite punishment, which because the
offender could not in any limited time sustain, it was to be changed for a
limited punishment, which should endure without limit, and because God his own
nature was so superexcellent, that it was capable of nothing but happiness,
he was to take such a nature, as wherein he might best accomplish his gracious
designement, and because man knew of himself how to sin, he thought it
best in the same nature, to teach him also how to satisfy. He chose therefore
to become a man, but in such sort, as he would be but one, yet God and man:
for if there had been two, God, and a man, which also had not been God,
condign satisfaction could not have been made unto God for the sin, for
neither was a pure man able to satisfy, nor God in his own nature subject to
suffer. Having therefore decreed to make himself admirable in this union of
two so different natures, without the confusion of them, he thought it an
unworthy thing for him to begin to be a man, by a carnal generation, as other
men do, and therefore chose a virgin, in whom he was not without miracle
conceived, nor of whom, without as strange a miracle he was borne, after that
her time came to be delivered, for she remained as well for his honor, as
her own, as perfect a virgin after his birth, as she was before:

He was a true and faithful counselor unto us, enforming us nothing, but what
himself before performed even to the effusion of his own most precious blood,
in following our cause for us, and instructing us by exhortation, and his own
example, that the mean for us to win heaven, was wholly to weane our selves
from the world.

He was true God, being the only son of God, equal unto his father in power,
goodness, and authority from whence proceeded his mightines, both in word and
work, to the redeeming of mankind, ransacking of hell, and in the end the
overthrowing of death, which done, he would make al things new, and therefore
rightly might he be called the father of the world to come, restoring by
himself only, that which the whole Trinity had before created, and thereby
creating a new by grace, what was thorough sin come to naught. He was also a
Prince of peace, for the obtaining of which he came into the world, to
perform a single and bloody combat, that not without cause he was proclaimed
by that name, so soon as he was borne, and the eight day after to conclude
all in one, he was called Jesus, that is, a Savior,

A name never heard before, although like sound has been heard, as Iosue the
son of Naue, was called Jesus, who brought the Israelites into the land of
promise, after forty years wandering in the Desert, and the high Priest, who
returned with them from Babylon, after seventy years captivity, was also
called Jesus: but neither these nor any other, whose name sounded after the
same manner (although either as chief priests, or Princes they brought their
people into the holy land) were other the^ figures of this prince, and
therefore neither were their names the right name which this prince had, it
being given him by one, who knew verte well the property of every thing, and
either gave, or ratified their names given unto them accordingly. But the name
it self discloseth some secret mystery. For who is not deaf, and has not his
ears filled with a most sweet sound, when he hears this holy name Jesus?
Who is not dumb, and has not his mouth flowing with a most sacred sweetness,
when he sounds this holy name Jesus? who is not dead, and has not all his
senses furnished with a strange delight, when he apprehends the name of
Jesus? who is not damned, and has not his soul deified^, by an infinite
goodness when he engraueth this holy name Jesus?

A holy name was before, but it was holy, and terrible, because he whose name
it was, was a consuming fire. A holy name is now, but it is holy, and
merciful, because he whose name it is, is a most gracious redeemer: insomuch
as there is no other name given to men, by which they may be saved, then the
holy name of Jesus: so glorious in heaven, so gracious in earth, so regarded
in hell, that at the sound thereof every knee boweth in heaven, earth, and
hell. Glorious in heaven, because heavens storer, gracious in earth, because
earthes restorer, regarded in hell because hels restrainer: glorious in heaven
because a maintainer of majesty: gracious in earth, because a mone^ of misery:
regarded in hell because a maisterer of tyranny. Heavens honor, earthes
myrror, helles terror. A most sweet and sovereign oil flowing from the
heavens above unto the lower parts of the earth, and refreshing all who were
either oppressed with darkness, or oppugned with overmuch danger, most
nourishing a wasted light, and most necessary for a wounded limme.

And very fitly did this sacred oil flow upon such a day, as wherein no one
glimse appeared of the light of nature, nor any sprake was seen of the least
good nurture.

Many feasts did the Gentiles keep to one or other false gods honor, and
many sportes did they make according to each one his frailest humor. For
although that some seemed to tend to the exercise only of their strength, and
wits, yet were such most attended, as made them both weak and wantons.

The games of Olympus were most famous in Greece, so called because they were
at the foot of the mountain Olympus, which was so hie that it gave name unto
the heavens: for it reached so far above the middle region of the air, that
never came any wind or rain at the top thereof, as appeared by that
certain Philosophers left there some caracters in dust, which they found in
the same manner after a year, but neither could any bird mount up unto the
top thereof, because the air was too pure for any inferior creature: for
which cause the Philosophers which went up, carried with them spunges full of
water, through which they might take air more agreeable to their nature. In
these games was nothing worthy praise unpracticed, and both warriors were
rewarded for their worthy courses, and wise men regarded for their witty
discourses. These were first devised by Hercules, in honor of his father
Jupiter, and every fifth yeeere so precisely observed, that after they were
once begun, no other account was made of the year, then from such an Olimpye
game, or such a year after it, and these were always used in summer, when the
days were at the longest. Other games were followed by the Grecians in the
worship of other Gods, as their Pythi^^ in honor of Apollo at Delphos, and
their Isthmia, in honor of Neptune, or Palaemon, or both, near unto Corinth.

The Romans also, beside running with horses, and with chariots, and fighting
naked with swords, to this end, that being in wars it should be no wonder
unto them to see wounds, had other games, as their Saturnall^ in honor of
Saturn, which they kept five days in December in feasting, sporting, and
mutual presenting with gifts, and in remembrance of the golden world, when
Saturn was king, they reckoned all things so in common for those five days,
as there was neither owner of any substance, nor master of any servant. These
were first devised by Ianus a king of Italy, and dedicated yearly unto Saturn.

They had other games, which they called L^percals, in which the young
nobility ran naked up and down with such beasts skins, as were then
sacrificed, striking every one whom they met, and women offered themselves in
their way, hoping by their strokes to have the easier travail, if they were
with child, or to wax big, if they were before barren. These were used in
the honor of Pan, and were named Lupercalles, either because they offered
sacrifice to Pan, for the preserving of their flocks from the wolf, or because
they sacrificed dogs to gratify the wolf, which nursed Romulus and Rhemus,
or thirdly, because the sacrifice was offered at the foot of mount Palatine
in Rome, where there was a cave consecrated to Pan, which in remembrance that
Romulus and Rhemus were there nursed by a wolf, was named Lupercall. Some say
these games were so called, because the sacrifices then offered, were to purge
the hellish spirits with the blood of goats, and that for this cause the
month was called February, in which these games were used. Others say they
had their name of a mountain in Arcadia, called Lycea, where they were first
invented, and were afterward brought into Italy by Euander the Arcadian king,
at what time he was banished out of his own country, and hereupon they say
the games were performed by naked men, because they were devised in Arcadia,
when the people were both bare of clothing, and of barbarous condition, and so
continued also afterward, when they were of a more civil conversation.

Others say, that Pan mistaking Hercules for Iole, (who upon some occasion at
that time, slept in he Lions skin) was once so discovered, before he got his
wished pray, that he departed with naught but shame of his wanton purpose, and
could never after that his conceited evil sp^ed, abide any aparrel in his
sports.

Other some say, this naked running up and down was in remembrance of a worthy
victory, which Romulus had over certain thieves, who, (while the people were
busy in these sports) drove away a great company of their cattle, and
Romulus understanding thereof (naked as he was upon some other occasion,
pursued them, and brought back the stolen pray, for which cause those which ran
thus naked, had their faces stained with blood, and other followed after with
wool dipped in milk to wash them, but whatsoever was the cause of their
sports, thus was the course of their life spent.

After these were other devised in honor of Ianus, who was sometime a king of
Italy, to who^ they built a famous temple, and set therein his picture, which
they made with two faces, to signify the concord which was made betwixt
Romulus king of the Romans, and Titus Tatius, king of the Sabins, at what time
a bloody war being begun to one or others overthrow, the maidens which were
stolen by the Romans, and for revenge of which rape, the Sabians vowed the
utter ruin of the Romans, came into the field, and offered themselves to
death, rather then they would live to see for their cause, either their parents
slain on the one side, or their husbands whom they now fancyed on the other
side. This Temple of Ianus the Romans did leave open so long, as they had any
wars abroad with foreign nations, either because that going forth to
war, they should also have a care of their country they left behind them, as
the Idol looked both forward and backward, or else in hope of some
extraordinary help, by Ianus his protection, when they should be driven to
any extremity, because that the Sabi^ns having compelled Romulus to take this
Temple for his best defense, were forced to retire by a whole water, which
sprunge in great abundance from before the Temple against them. Many other
things are recorded of Ianus, which many think are to be applied to diverse of
the same name, but he in whose honor the first of the two months which Numa
Pompilius, (Romulus his successor) added unto Romulus his year, was Ianus king
of Italy, who built a City not far from the place where afterward Rome was
built, and called it Ianiculum, and him they thought they did so greatly honor,
when they were either over lavish in expenses, or too lascivious in their
sports, that when his calends came, that is the first day of that month, he
seemed the deuoutest in this rite, who showed by his riot, that he neither
deemed it a shame at any time afterward to be in want, nor a sin to be at
all times wanton.

These as the first in the year, and other abuses as they fell, came the
Prince this day to abolish, as he showed both by the shedding of his precious
blood, and the sound of his princely name.

Yet notwithstanding that he was a prince, and therefore freeborne, and a
priest, and therefore to be forborne, so soon as his name was given him, he
was sessed by the officers, and paid a tribute unto his own subject (for as
yet the infants of Palestina were not exempted from this tax) and the mother
was the more willing to conceal her sons deity, because she thought it
would nothing derogate from his dignity, being at that time taken for a
private person, not for a prince.

But not long after it was blown abroad, that such a prince was borne, and
princes hastened to do their homage.

An old prophecy was in Arabia, that a star should rise in Jacob, and a rod
spring in Israel, which should both strike the princes of Moab, and destroy the
sons of Seth, with many other so great prerogatives, that the prophet sighed
to think he should not live to see it, and the king of Moab was frighted,
fearing that he had lived to feel it: for the Israelites coming out of the
desert of Pharan toward Palestina, encamped themselves near unto the river
Jordan so strongly in middle of the Moabites, that Balaac the king of Moab had
better courage to fight against them with shrewde words, then with sharp
weapons, and therefore understanding that in Mesopotamia was one who did so
forspeake people, as they never after prospered, sent speedily unto him to come
and curse the Israelites, but Balaam (so was the south^ayer called) being
taught before by divine inspirations, when he came to the top of the mountain,
from whence Balaac showed him the Israelites, performed what God and the angel
had informed him, and to the great preiudise of Balaac king of the Moabites,
he pronounced many blessings over the Israelites, and prophesied of this young
prince, as is before showed.

Hereupon Makida the Queen of S^ba, Ethiopia and Eg^pt, understanding of
Solomon his wisdom, wealth, worthiness, and large dominions, came with
exceeding great pomp unto Jerusalem to see him, and presented him with 120.
talents of gold, many jewels, and infinite store of frankencense, being
persuaded that he was the man who was meant by the prophecy in Arabia: for
Saba was a province in the south side of Arabia, and took the name of Saba
grandchild unto Abraham by Iecsan, whom Abraham had by Caethura, as also
Madian father unto Epha and others whom he sent away out of Chanaan (afterward
called Palestina) into the East countries, as also he sent Ismael (whom he had
by Agar) southward, not suffering any of them to have part with Isaac in the
land promised unto him: yet did he not send them away empty handed, but
bestowed upon them great riches, apparel, and jewels, which he had taken from
the four kings, whom he conquered in the rescue of his nephew Lot: among
which gifts some write that Abraham gave unto them mirrhe, and frankencense,
not without some mystery then known unto him, and now openly showed by three
princes, which came out of the East parts at this time unto Bethleem of Judah,
which journey they did the more willingly take, because probably their
ancestors were also Jews: for the Queen of Saba among other great favors
which she received of king Solomon, was accepted for his wife, and returned
into her country with child, and carried with her twelve thousand Jews, of
every tribe one thousand, and did them that honor, that after a while the
chiefest in the country vaunted that their fathers were Jews, and ^he son
which she had by Solomon she crowned king, surrendering all her dominions unto
him: and of that stock unto this day (as some say) remains the great monarch
of those coasts, commonly called Priest John. But the principal motive of
these three kings their voyage was the sight of a star, which did penetrate
so far into their understanding, that by that extraordinary light, and what
they had by the prophecy, they resolved that the prince was now at the last
borne, of which had been so great expectation, for although they were men of
great learning, yet could not their skill attain to the perfect meaning of the
star, which appeared unto them, without farther help then they could have by
Astronomy* wonder they might to see so near unto them so bright a shining
star, because it was much lower then where exhalations fiered do appear
blasing like stars, and comparable with the Sun for brightness, as it
received no light from the Sun, as other stars do* so neither did the
brightness of the sun drown the clearness thereof, as it does of other
stars, where it self does shine, and the greater might their wonder be,
because that all such tokens as were commonly in all other extraordinary
stars, or commets to signify either diseases, or death were so far from
this star, that it betokened nothing but health and life: and that the
author of life had taken upon him a new kind of life, although perchance in
some secondarie sort it might also pretend the death of the prince, whose life
it showed, as may appear by some of the presents which the kings brought,
who were both warned by this star to seek him, and warranted to find him
out: yet was it no Angel, as many have thought, but a star, as much superior
to other stars in brightness, as inferior in bigness, made of some former
matter, or created of nothing by him to whom all things are possible, and
afterward either resolved into that of which it was made, or if created for
this purpose, the cause thereof ceasing, the effect came again to nothing, but
it kept such a course, as the kings following it were no more subject to be
deceived of their purpose, then were the Israelites when traveling from Egypt
unto the land of promise, they were guided by a cloud, which always went
before them in the day time, and a fiery pillar in the night: for the star
never ceased to shine, but to their greater light, nor to conduct them but to
their greater comfort: wherefore not without the providence of the stars guide,
they entered Jerusalem where they were both confirmed in the truth of their
former prophecy, and comforted with the shortness of their following journey:
but not without the amasing both of Herod and all the city, because the last
thing which the Jews had done, was an oath sworn to accept Herod for their
king, which althougb he had labored both with courtesy and with cruelty for
the space of thirty years little more or less, he never obtained it of the
whole country until this time.

The three princes as soon as they came into the city, demanded boldly what
they doubted not every man knew, (a kings seat fitting best a princes birth,
and such a birth being commonly celebrated with a public triumph) they
demanded for him by his title, not knowing as yet his name, where is he who
is borne king of the Jews? we see his star in the East, and are come with
presents to adore him, was it then any wonder that Herod was troubled, who
wrongfully entered into the sovereignty, and the Jews touched deeply, who
had rashly sworn themselves his subjects, the one having just cause to fear
that he should be put down as a tyrant, and the others no hope but to be
punished as traitors? and although Herod could have been very well contented
never to have heard any thing more concerning this matter, yet fear in the
end first increased a desire to know the rest, and then to devise some
mischief fot a remedy, wherefore calling the chief of the Priests and the
Scribes of the people, he asked them where Christ should be borne (for so was
the prince called, to show that he was anointed). In Bethleem they answered
of Judah,) for in Galilie was an other city called Bethleem, and was in the
tribe of Zabulon) according unto the prophecy: And thon Bethleem of Judah art
not the least among the chiefest (cities) of Judah, because out of thee shall
come a gu^de, who shall govern my people Israel. Herod being thus enstructed
by the priests of the prince, he began to devise the prince his destruction,
and having resolved how he would prevent his misconstered fall, he ran into
a greater folly: he called the three kings secretly unto him, and learned of
them what he could as well concerning the star, as also their prophesies, and
whatsoever they could inform him either by their own skill, or the
traditions of their country, which they could not want, but rather have in
great plenty, where so many Jews had lived, and left a posterity, and
afterward sent them to enquire diligently where the prince was, and requested
them to bring him word thereof, that he might also go to adore him.

The princes set forward to finish a long iorneye, for Jerusalem was at the
least 1200. miles from Saba, which was the seat of Jasper, one of these three
kings and no doubt Melchior and Balthazar (for so were the other two named) had
their seats not far from thence, for in those times within the compass of 20.
miles dwelled commonly three or four kings, as in Palestina which for length
or breadth seemed to little for one, were 37. kings, so that they might without
any great business begin this journey together, or without any great
difficulty meet by chance in the way, none knowing before of others intention,
and perchance this might be the cause, that all three brought of the same kind
of presents, which might have been thought superfluous if they had in one
company begun their journey, and the star keeping his course toward the
west might be a guide unto them all coming from places in the east, which
were not much distant one from the other, but from that part of Arabia (as some
say) which was called Magodia, whereupon these kings were called Magi, that is
to say, men of that country, yet many think they were called Magi because they
studied art Magic, and say that by their skill in this art they had
understanding of this prince his birth, and who he was, but it is not likely
that the prince of that art had himself any such knowledge, for there was as
great reason to conceal the mystery of this prince his birth, as the mystery
of his conception, others were also called Magi, who lived in great abstinence
and spent their lives in honest studies, and of this sort perchance were these
three kings, who knowing no natural cause of the appearing of this star,
remembered that extraordinarily a star should appear to show the birth of a
mighty prince in Judah, and when this star appeared in so strange a sort,
they persuaded themselves this was it, which was foretold by Balaam in their
country, and mounting upon Dromedaries (which are incomparaby swif^er then any
horses) in 13. days they came this long journey guided by the same star,
which now lastly showing it self again unto their no little joy, when they
passed out of Jerusalem toward Bethleem, it went before them until it came to
the place where the prince was, and his mother, and there it staide so low in
the air, that the kings never asked for the house in which they were, and
having ended his course which was no longer then the kings ioruey, (for it
went not round about the world as other stars, planets, or cometes use to
do, but kept his course in such order, as when the kings removed the star
did also remove, and when they rested, the star did not stir any further)
it was no longer seen either by them, or by any other.

When these three kings entered into the cave they found the child and Mary
his mother, and falling down they adored him, and understanding perchance of
the custom among the Jews, that no man should come empty handed in the
presence of God, each of them offered of their treasure th^^e but the same
presents, gold, mirrhe and frankensence acknowledging thereby that he was a
prince, a mortal man, and yet a God, or as some will a priest, whose office it
was to offer frankensence unto God, but being both God and man, and not only a
prince by defcent, but also a Priest, the frankensence could not without great
mystery be offered unto him, whether it was in the one respect or the other,
yet it is more probable that it sign^fied at that time that he was God,
because his priesthood by which he offered sacrifice was not according unto the
order of Aaron, who among other sacrifices offered also incense, but according
to the order of Melchisedech, and was a far more spiritual kind of
priesthood. Beside that these three kings brought it to offer it themselves
unto him, not that he should offer it unto an other.

That this infant was of the blood of the princes of Judah, is manifestly
deducted by his pedigree from David by the kings of Judah, unto Joseph the
virgins husband: for although the law permitted marriage betwixt the tribe of
Judah, and Leui, yet was it unlawful for such as to whom their fathers
inheritance did descend, to marry with any other then the next of kin in the
same family, least that any confusion should grow in the possessions, which
were first given by portions unto every one of the 12. tribes, and Ioachim the
virgins father being known to be of such substance, as he lived only upon
the third part of his yearly revenue, and when he died, to leave his daughter
Marie at the least a coheire with her sisters (if she had any) or sole heir
(if she had none) for Ioachim never had any male issue: it is a good proof
according unto the law mentioned that if Mary's husband were of the family of
David, she was also of the same family. Wherefore although that the young prince
took no flesh of Joseph, but only o^ the virgin, his petigree is sufficiently
showed by Joseph's: for never was any petigree kept of women, but of me^ only
Maidens proving their petigrees by their fathers, and wives by their husbands.

But an other history seeming to fetch Joseph his petigree from king David by
other parents, would make the former suspected, were it not a law among the
Jews, that the widow of the one brother should marry with the other, or the
next of kin, if she had no children by the first, and that the child of the
second husband should be accounted by the law the first husbands child,
although in nature it is the seconds: for by this means a man might be said to
be the son of two men, of one by nature, and of another by the law. Hereof
Joseph is said in one petigree to be the son of Jacob, and in another petigree
the son of Hely, as being the natural son of Jacob, and called the son of
Hely, because Jacob had him by Helies wife, whom Hely left a widow, and without
any children, for Hely and Jacob were brethren of one womb, although of
diverse fathers: that is to say, of Matha^, who was father unto Jacob, and
Mathat, who was father unto Hely.

But although it be most true that the young prince did descend of the princes
of the Jews, and that he was of the family of David, yet these petigrees of
Joseph prove nothing, but that the prince his mother was of the tribe of Judah,
because Joseph who in these petigrees is proved to be of that name, did espouse
her (it being a thing unlawful among the Jews, that any should match but in
their own tribe) but neither does this prove that this prince was of the tribe
of Judah, because notwithstanding diverse tribes should not join together in
marriage, the tribe of Judah and Leui might, and therefore the the proof that
Joseph was of the tribe of Judah, and of the family of David shows not^^ng for
the young prince, but that he did by his mother descend either of the tribe of
Judah, or of the tribe of Leuy.

For this cause many take the second petigree for the petigree, not of Joseph,
but of the young prince by his mothers auncesters. Thus begins that petigree,
Jesus was entering into his 30. year, who was thought to be the son of I^seph,
who was the son of Hely, that is to say, Jesus was accounted the son of
Joseph, but he was the son of Hely by Mary daughter to Hely, otherwise called
Heliachim, or Ioac^im (for all is one name among the Jews, and although by
this account the Prince should have but one King among his auncesters, yet he
had many absolute Princes, and governors of the people descending from
Zorobabel, unto Iamnes, (otherwise called Ioannes Hircanus) who not brooking
the misery in which he and his people lived, through the oppression of the
Syrians, at the beginning of Antiochus Epiphanes his reign, (who forced them
to do many things against their laws) slew himself, for which fact all
his wealth was confi^cate, which was a cause that the family of David lived
afterward somewhat obscurely.

But in these petigrees appears a very intricate difficulty. For if
Salathiell, and Zorobabel, mentioned in the second petigree, are the same
which are mentioned in the first, why does not the second petigree name the
princes ancestors from king David by king Solomon, as the first does, but by
Nathan, an other of David's sons, by Bersabe king Solomon his mother. Again,
if Salathiel, and Zorobabel mentioned in the second petigree, are not the same
which are mentioned in the first petigree, how came they which are reckoned in
the second petigree to be princes of the people, and their posterity, until
Iamnes slew himself. A sacred history affirms, that Zorobabel, who is said
to descend from Iechonias (the last king of the Jews) by Salathiel, did carry
the people home out of Babylon, where they had been captives. And other
hystories of authority continue this government by Mosullam, or Misciola
Zorobabels son, and such as are reckoned in the second petigree, to be the
prince his ancesters.

The difficulty will be easily solued, if we may say that Salathiel and
Zorobabel, mentioned in the one petigree were the same, which are mentioned in
the other, and that Salathiel was not son unto Iechonias, but unto Neri. And
this is agreeable unto the Oracle which said, that Iechonias should be barren,
and one, who should neither prosper, nor have any offspring, which should sit
in the throne of David, or have any authority ever after in Judah, Which
should not have been true, if he should have children to succeed him, and
to say that a man is barren, or that the son does not succeed his father,
when the son has not that pomp, and majesty, which his father had, is to
say that most men are barren, and few sons succeed their fathers, so we may say
that neither Salomons son did succeed him from whom ten tribes fell, and
followed Jeroboam, nor Ioachas succeed his father Josias, because that Pharaoh
king of Egypt, within three months after took him, and sent him into Egypt,
where he died prisoner: nor Ioachim brother to Ioachas, who after that he had
for a space paid to Pharaoh a yearly t^ibute of a 100. talents of silver, and
one of gold, paid tribute for the space of three years to Nabuchodonos^r king
of Chaldea, and rebelling against him, was taken and slain, and thrown out of
Jerusalem, and lay unburied according to the Oracle, which said that he
should have no other then the burial of an Ass. Nor his son Iechonias, who
was within three months after carried prisoner into Chaldea, least perchance he
should by some means have revenged his fathers death: yet notwithstanding is
this Iechonias said to have sitten in the throne of David, and Zorobabel, and
his children, having authority in Judah as Kings, although for some cause
they would not be called Kings, it is evident (the Oracle being of infallible
truth) that Salathiel father to Zorobabel, was not natural son to Ieconias,
but to Neri, and accounted the son of Ieconias, as descending of Ieconias his
wife, who was left to Neri, the next of kin to Ieconias, and to raise seed to
Ieconias, who according to the Oracle was barren.

Some would seem to solue this difficulty by saying that Salathiel was the
natural son of Ieconias, and adopted by Neri after Ieconias his death, but
why then were the princes his ancestors reckoned from King David by Nathan,
the other being both a more true, and more honorable petigree.

By this pedigree also is showed, how the prince was high priest, for Onias the
high priest having one only daughter, and one son, he gave his daughter in
marriage unto Tobias, otherwise called Mathathias, Siloa, who was grandfather
unto Iamnes the last prince which the Jews had immediately before the
Machabees, and one of the young prince his anncestors, but his son Onias (some
call him Ananias, and say that he was not his son, but his brother) fled
from Jerusalem into Egypt, where by Philomater the King of Egypt his lycense,
he built in Hieropolis a Temple like unto the temple in Jerusalem, and there
ended his life in scisme. Onias the Father had also two brethren, who after
they had brought him out of the high priesthood, were themselves as they
bribed Antiochus Epiphanes, (the King of Siria,) now one of them high priest,
now another, and in the end both shut out, and slain. Some do say, that
those three brethren, were sons to Simon, who was high Priest, and son unto
that Onias, which fled into Egypt, but whosoever they were, all perished, and
oue succeeded them in that dignity, whose name was Alcintus, but had no title
or right unto it, and after him did Mathathias hold it, who was of the familye
of Ioiarib, to whom fell the first lot to serve in the temple, according unto
that order which King David appointed to be kept among the Priests, and
therefore was but an ordynarie Priest dwelling in the City of Modin,
(Jerusalem being always the seat of the high Priest) and the Machabees, his
Sons were extraordinarily accepted of by the people, in respect that no man
who was nearer, would challenge the highpriesthood, and they were admitted for
chief Princes, not because the right line of David was clean extinguished,
but because it was brought to so low an estate, that it could not, and no
other would right the peoples wrongs, which no doubt was Gods special
providence, that for some five or six descents, both the high priesthood and
the scepter should go from the true heir, although not from the right
family, that when this young Prince came, he might in the more secret manner
bring his purpose to good pass.

That this infant was a natural man, notwithstanding any dignity whatsoever
was in him, it was evident, for that already thereof, had been sufficient
proof made by the grief he felt, as well in his circumcision, as in cold, and
whatsoever occasion else might chance to try it. And although the virgin very
well understood no less before, yet this offering of mirre (a thing which was
used about the body, in the last obsequie done unto it after death) did so
refresh it in her mind, that in all this joy which was made for three Kings
presence, she could not choose but grieve, yet in the end using some kind of
patience in a matter, she could not help, she conformed her self into the
rest of the princely company, who nothing abashed either at the childs
present low estate, nor daunted with the consideration of his death, which was
afterward to follow at the time appointed, performed that for which they
came* with all duty, reverence, and worship, as if they had not been absolute
Kings, but subjects unto this young Prince, and held it no abasing of
themselves to do it.

Well worthy were ye noble princes of the highest welcome, having made such
haste to visit whom the world disdayneth, and to follow one who is so
little favored. But how can ye frame your selves to him, who has set
defiaunce what ye esteem most fortunate, and has expressed by his work,
because as yet he would not by his word, that riches estimation, and what
earthly pomp soever the world breeds, brings not so much ornament unto
the body, as anguish unto the mind, and therefore lies, and lamenteth the
misery in which man lives, as though he were already weary of such estate,
and more willing to leave it, then to linger any longer in it.

Had ye wist ye should have found so bare parents, so base a place, so small a
company, you would perchance either not have come, or not with so great
speed, so great pomp, so great presents but the words of your prophecy
could not stand as ye thought with so great a poverty, the brightness of the
star be a sign of any obscurity, the expectation of the whole world be
satisfied without some great majesty. This and not unlikely this might be the
cause why so confidently ye alighted at Jerusalem, because ye measured with
man's wit, the ways of an eternal wisdom, but thryse happy were ye when
hearing he was not to be found among such as lived delitiously, ye hastened
to honor him where he lay thrown out disdainefullie, and where ye saw that
not without just cause wisdom is said to cry out in the streets, since that
as well great palaces, as little cottages, were answered to be to narrow
straytes, but take him as ye find him, and as ye now can taste him, hereafter
fancy him.

The Queen of Saba saw in Solomon more wisdom then she thought, she found
more favor then she sought, she returned with greater riches then she
brought, and behold a greater then Solomon here. Solomon his wisdom was such
as all might be seen, his favors such as all might be won, his riches
such as all might be wanting, think then your pains in this journey well
bestowed since that ye have found a greater then Solomon here. This his
infancy, this poverty, this rude place are but emboldnings to princes to
command and warrants to prevail, he is able to give more then ye are able to
ask, for although he seems to be in the extremest misery, yet never was
Solomon to be compared with him, when he was in his chiefest majesty, make
proof of that which appears not in him, and make your profit of that for
which others despise him. King Solomon was no more then a shadow of this young
prince, and the Queen of Saba no other then a figure of your selves. King
Solomon was no more then his shadow, whether ye respect his power or his
wisdom his princely seat, or his peaceable government, his stately Temple, or
whatsoever was called his, which might either win him grace or work his
glory, for this prince his power is such, as by his word only, he can make or
mar, his wisdom such as he can both propose and dispose not only of all
this world but thousands of worlds, his princely seat so strong as no man can
daunt him, his peaceable government so secure as no man can endanger him, his
temples as low founded, as high framed, and as pure gold within, as they show
goodly without: his glory may be worthily wond^ed at, because it cannot be
worthily written of.

The Queen of Saba (so called because her chiefeest seat gave that name unto
her country round about her) came to seek whom ye have found, fame
supplying to her the place of the star which appeared unto you, she
presented the king with gifts, and with problemes made trial of his wisdom,
she was answered to every thing she could demand, and she was astonished to
see what he could command, and in the end being accepted for his wife,
departed leaving with him seven hundred other Queens, and carried with her so
much treasure as that which she brought seemed to be but borrowed of her for a
short time, and paid again with unreasonable usury.

Noble princes ye have brought worthy presents and have proposed no easy
problemes, but if he can without long discourse show the meaning of three
kings adoring one silly poor infant, justly ye may admire his wisdom, and
wonder at his might, and because the Queen of Saba shall not triumph over you,
in being made Queen of Jerusalem, by her matching with Solomon, the prince
has espoused you al, and in you three as a most sacred number all foreign
nations, and made you coheires with him of a celestial Jerusalem, but the
treasure with which ye shall return into your countries, shall be such as
never could be valued with any prince, nor before this time comprehended in any
place, the depth said it is not in me, and the sea disclaimed it, and other
places of treasure were altogether unknown, whence then comes it, or what
where has it had? it has been hidden from men's eyes, and the Angels could
never attain unto it. Death and destruction said they had heard of it, and now
that same wisdom, which has been concealed from so many is revealed unto you,
ye heard of it in Ephrata, and embraced it in Bethleem, although in so poor an
estate, as of all his state lines he seems to have nothing remaining but what
might move both him and his to mourning.

How happy did these princes judge all those, which might daily attend upon
this young prince, whose wisdom might very well be wondered at, although he
had no words, as also his conquests which afterward he obtained without any
weapons: all his looks and gestures did these princes ma^ke, every thing they
saw, and heard imp^^ting some marvelous great mystery, and now nothing seemed
grievous unto them after this long journey, but that they must part from this so
much desired company, not because they would, but because it was necessary
they should, least their too long abode in such a place might cause to so^e to
open a speech abroad of the prince, but determining to take their leaves,
having now done their fealty unto a new king, of whom they acknowledged they
held their kingdoms, they were warned in a vision not to go back again to
Herod, but to return by some other way into their country, not because that
Herod should not know of their going, but because that Herod knowing the manner
of their going (which was through such obscure places, as many times they were
constrained to lie in the hollowes of mountains) should think that these
princes had committed some great folly, in coming so far with such iolitie
and triumph, to seek a prince which was not to be found, and were therefore so
ashamed of themselves that they would not be seen again of him, nor of any
other which see them when they came, for it is not credible that three kings
known to be in Palestina, and whether they went, could pass through it with
their train, although it were not very great, and with their dromedaries, and
Herod not hear of it.

Herod therefore being thus persuaded of these kings their voyage, rested
resolved upon this matter, that since they had lost their labor in seeking out
the prince to honor him, he would not also be laughed at in the like
enterprise to murder him. Wherefore this journey of the three kings was
quickly past, and Herod well pacified, but the kings, their guide their
offerings, the place where, and to whom the offeringes were made, are briefly
recorded for all posterity to know them, by a devout of the young prince in
this Himne.

O only City of great worth,
Bethleem greater then the rest,
Whose chance it was for to bring forth
A heavenly guide of health inflesht.
Whom shining star (more the^ the sun
And of more comely portraicture)
Does show that to the earth is come
God in an earthly creature.
Whom when as that the Magi see,
Their Eastern presents they unfold,
And prostrate offer him on knee,
Frankencense, mirrh, and princely gold.
By gold the acknowledgde him a king,
A God by their sweet frankencense,
By mirrh they showed a mortal thing:
United was to Gods essence.
The maiden mother who slept not when she heard the poor shepherds
discourse, no doubt was wrathful at those princes deeds, and both marked well
the manner of her son his disclosing himself unto the world, and mused that
he would so soon diuulge so secret a word, but understanding that the nearest
of these princes, which came unto him was a far dweller, she hoped her son
might be talked of in their countries without any danger, and therefore she
staid the more sec^rely in her cave, until her time came to go unto the
temple, when both she was expected to be purified, and her young infant to be
presented: for the Jews accounted all women unclean, which according to
natures course were delivered of children, either male or female, with this
difference, that of a manchild she remain unclean forty days, and of a
womanchild double so much. And God challenged the first begotten among the
Jews to be his, whether it were man or beast: which duty unto God in diverse
times was diversely performed: for at the first every manchild did offer
sacrifice, as appears by the history of Cain and Abell. Afterward the first
begotten only, as the chiefest, was priest, and offered for the whole family,
but in the family of Jacob (who by a supernatural dispensation got the
eldership, and the priesthood from his brother Esau) the tribe of Leui, as the
most faithful to God (sufficiently proved in revenging the wrong done unto him
by those, who adored the golden calfe in the desert) being accepted and
assumpted unto this dignity, and to serve at the altar without any redemption,
the rest of the people might according as they were appointed by their law,
after a presentation made of their first begotten son, 10. days after his
birth, redeem him of God for five sicles. The first breed of beasts, such as
were not admitted for the sacrifice, were to be redeemed by being changed for
other beasts, which were lawfully sacrificed as the first breed of an Ass was
redeemed for a sheep, and other beasts for a sicle and a half, and if they
were not redeemed, they were to be killed, which was freely granted by the
consent of all the Jews in remembrance that God slew the first begotten of the
Egiptians, both man and beast, when after many other plagues, they would not
suffer the Jews to depart. According unto this law, as also to fulfill the law
of purifying women after their delivery, the maiden mother, although she knew
both her self to be a virgin, and therefore without need of any such ceremony,
and her son to be the son of God, and therefore in that respect, as well as for
that he opened not his mothers womb, not to be subject unto that law, yet she
thought it most fit to present her self and her son at the temple, carrying
with her 5. sicles to redeem her son, and a pair of young pigeons or turtles
for her own offering, for such was the law, that who were able should offer a
lamb and a turtle, or another pigeon, and who were not able to buy a lamb
should bring a pair of turtles or young pigeons for old pigeons would not be
accepted of, nor young turtles, because they are not so good as the other, and
the best were thought bad enough to offer unto God* And in this sort was this
offering made: The whole lamb (if a lamb were offered) or one of the turtles
or doves (if the party were not able to buy a lamb) was consumed with fire in
the sacrifice, and a turtle dove was offered as a sacrifice for sin: for the
Jews had diverse kind of sacrifices, one which was offered unto God for the
special reverence and love which men did bear unto him, and this sacrifice
was all consumed upon the altar. An other kind of sacrifice was called a
sacrifice for sin, and the one part of the oblation was consumed on the
altar, and the other was to the priests use, and to be eaten presently by them
in the same place, unless the offering were made for the sin of all the
people, or for the high priest, for then it was all consumed with fire, and no
foul were offered in this kind of sacrifice; because they could not be
divided, except at the purification of women, for then was a dove always
offered for sin, whatsoever was ^o offered to be wholly burnt, but the dove
offered at that time (after it was killed according to the law) was wholly unto
the priests use. A third sacrifice was offered up either in thanksgiving unto
God, for such his benefits as already they had received, or to obtain at
Gods hand something which they wanted, and this host was divided into three
parts, whereof one was consumed with fire upon the altar, another was to the
priests use, and all their family, and the third part was to their use, whose
offering it was, and none of all these sacrifices might be offered without salt.

The beasts which were offered in these sacrifices, were such as might easily
be had in Palestina, and such as might be driven without any great
difficulty, as sheep, oxen, goats, and of their kind: the foul were such as
were in great plenty, as turtles, and other common doves, fishes were
altogether excluded from their offerings, both in respect they could not be had
at all times, when men would, nor conveniently be brought alive unto the
Temple, and it was not lawful to offer any dead thing unto God, but neither
any quick thing which had any defect, for to this end were the Priests
exceeding cunning to feel every joint, from the head unto the feet, and to
judge whether any thing were otherwise then well in the beast or foul which
was offered, and thereupon to accept of it, or reject it, after which ceremony
the people washed their hands, and laid them upon the beasts head which was
offered, and left the rest unto the priests, without meddling any further in the
sacrifice, except that in the third kind of sacrifice, the priest delivered
all the suet, and the breast of the beast unto them whose offering it was, who
taking it of the Priest* lifted it up before God, and delivering it back
again unto the priest, the breast was to the Priests use, and also the right
shoulder, all the rest was to them which made the offeringe, but the suet was
all consumed with fire, for it was as unlawful for them to eat any suet of
their offerings, as of the blood, and therefore they were as curious in offering
all the suet, as they were in shedding all the blood, a ceremony used even
where they might not use any ordinary instrument of death, for although it was
not lawful for the^ to use any instrument made for the purpose in killing their
turtles or doves, yet might they not kill them, but by shedding their blood,
wherefore they wreathed the neck, and bowed the head backward unto the wings,
and with the nails of their fingers cut the throat of the foul, letting it
in that sort bleed to death.

But what mysteire so ever was in killing the turtle doves or pigions in this
or in any other sacrifice, it cannot be without some great mystery, that the
maiden mother made so poor an offering, for a pair of turtles or pigeons were
not to be offered in this ceremony, but by such as were not able to provide a
Lamb for their sacrifice, and a turtle beside, or a pigeon for their sin,
and how could she be in such want, whose parents were of so great wealth,
that the third part only of that which they had, was sufficient for them, and
she was either her fathers sole heir, or at the least had a third part (if it
be true that she had other two sisters) but put the case that she reaped
as yet no profit by her fathers substance, as who might yet be living (yet
some say he was dead) or her mother, or that her father (if he were deceased)
gave by will two thirds of that he had, one to the poor, another to the
Temple, as he did in his life time, and that the maiden mother was then to
have the profits, but of the third part of that other third, and that not as
yet, because her mother was living, yet how can she be accounted as poor,
who so lately received so great presents: for who can imagine that three Kings
would come so far, to present another king with a trifle, whose birth was
talked of so magnificently, that no one was either before, or after judged
peerless for might and wisdom, but was thought among the Jews and Gentiles
to be this Prince, beside the president which the Queen of Saba gave unto
them, when she came unto King Solomon, and presented him with exceeding great
gifts, meant unto this Prince, and for this Prince his sake given unto Solomon,
because she thought ^ee had been the Prince of whom was the prophecy in her
country: and although these three princes their Kingdoms all put together,
were not to be accounted of in comparison of the Queen of Saba her dominions,
yet no doubt they were very rich, as absolute Lords may be of most fertile
and rich countries, and all of the^ bringing gold according to their calling,
as me^ who knew by the star, that they were to appear before him, before whom
their predecessor could not, no doubt they brought it in great abundance,
which neither the virgin could refuse being an offering of Kings, nor spend
within the space of a month in so poor a cottage, but neither could she
dispose of it to the poor without great speech of the country, and to have
sent it unto the Temple, had been to certify them that the three kings had
not only been with her (of which perchance they might have some knowledge
otherwise) but also had acknowledged her son to be the king of the Jews,
which, whatsoever else was to be disclosed unto them, was as yet to be kept
most secret from them, and perchance this was the cause why in her offering
she pretended that poverty, which the better she thought she might do,
because she was not bound to offer any thing, but was most pure before, and in
place where she did not only touch that which was holy (forbidden by the law
to women before they were purified) but handled in most sweet manner that holy
one, by whom all are made holy. So that the question might have more
difficulty why she offered any thing, then why she did not offer alms, yet
before that she parted from the Temple, she understood very well, that she
had offered alms, at whose death a sword of grief should pierce her own
soul.

For among others which expected the redemption of Israel, one whose name was
Simeon dwelling in Jerusalem, father unto Gamaliel as some write, and son
unto Hillel, who was one of the two chief masters of the Scribes and
Pharyses, men of great learning, and right understanding, until opposing
themselves against the Sadduces, who were accounted heretics among the Jews,
they fell by two much preciseness, into most absurd superstitions. This Hillel
lived 120. years, and flourished not long after the Machabees, he was of the
tribe of Judah, and no doubt instructed his son Simeon how near he was, who
was to come to redeem Israel: for which cause Simeon made always his prayer
unto God, that he might see his Savior before he dyed, which was promised
unto him, and this day of the virgins purification performed, for coming
according unto his custom into the Temple, and seeing the maiden mother and
her son, he took the child with exceeding great joy in his arms, and as
one, who after a long time had obtained his hearts desire, he began with a
voice, which was no less then an 100 year old, to sing this little H^mme.

Now let thou thy servant Lord depart,
According to thy word in peace,
Because mine eyes have seen (which joys my heart)
Thy sacred health (my souls release)
Which thou prepared have before all peoples face,
A light to light the rest, renown to Jacobs race.
Had this been else where, the maiden mother used unto such matters, would
either have been very little or nothing moved, but her son being at that
time, and in that place descryed, it made her greatly amazed, much more did it
astonish others, who could not but know that the three Kings came to
Jerusalem to seek such a child, and poor Joseph among the rest maruailed
not a little, who was accounted by the people father of the child, and for
that cause is so called in the same sacred history, which before had showed
how that the Maiden mother conceived this child by the holy Ghost without the
company of man. But old Simeon drove her out of that maze, by drawing her into
a far deeper muse, for afterward taking advantage of his own gray hairs,
and her green years, he blessed her, and gave her as much cause of grief in
prose, as he had given of joy before in verse, and told her that her son
should be the ruin (although also the raising) of many in Israel, and that
he should be a sign, which should be contradicted, alluding perchance unto
that which the Oracle said unto Achas king of Judah, The Lord shall give you
a sign, behold a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son. But in that
Simeon said, that this sign should be contradicted, he would insinuate
either a troublesome life, or else a scandalous death, as that either his
doctrine would be little esteemed of, where he preached, or that his manner
of death should be such, as being suffered by him, should in malicious
minded men, derogate from the worthiness, which others attribute unto him. For
aptly does the conclusion of Simeons speech unto the virgin fol^ow. And a
sword of grief shall pierce thy soul, and many secret thoughts be revealed.

And no sooner had Simeon done his devotion, but a religious widow of 84.
years, and above a hundred years old, daughter unto Phanuel, of the tribe of
Aser, came, not unto the Temple, for she was never from thence, spending there
all her life in fasting, and prayer, but unto the maiden mother, and having
done her duty unto the young prince, she spoke of him (for she had before the
spirit of prophecy) unto all such as looked for the redemption of Israel. And
after these things were finished, they returned into Galile, unto their city
Nazareth, from whence they parted, when they came to Bethleem. These ceremonys
being finished, which satisfied the Jews law, a new solemnity was also begun,
which should abolish the Gentiles looseness, for as by the princes his birth,
the sports made in December in honor of Saturn, were afterward turned to
celebrate his nativity, who was to bring again unto the world, such times, or
rather better, then in which Saturn reigned, and as by the effusion of his
most precious blood, the first day of the year had a new consecration, which
was before performed with vain pastimes in honor of Ianus, so now in
February, wherein they used their lupercals either to purge the unclean
spirits, or to please themselves with unseemly sports, both the virgin was
purified, because she would not have it known how little she needed it, and
the young prince was offered, who doubted not afterward to make himself a most
grateful sacrifice, thereby to change these senseless superstitions, into a
most sacred solemnity, likely to teach them also some new kind of triumph
in March, in which Month their priests which song and dance, marched up and
down in the streets in armor.

But before the virgin and her spouse had disgested these sudden joys, which
happened unto them in the Temple, new dangers were set before them, insomuch as
that their own experience might sufficiently have taught them, if they could
not have told before, that mourning is always at one end of mirth, Joseph his
jealousy swallowed up his first joy he had in his spouse, their grievous
winter journey, made him bewail her wombes groth, their gladness at this
childs birth, was checked with an inconvenient abode, the shepherds
congratulation was soon choked with the child's circumcision, the kings
oblation of gold and frankensence, was not perfected without mirrhe, and now
that they have been at the Temple, and heard what joy these made which did but
see him, who was theirs, a message comes, which to show the more have,
comes by night, and urges Joseph to arise and take the child, and the
child's mother, and fly into Egypt, for that Herod would make search after the
child to kill him.

The message being delivered unto Joseph, he lost little time, but rose, and
took the child and his mother by night, and went into Egypt, where they
remained not only until the massacre was ended, but also until that Herod
was dead.

Then were many Oracles understood, and one principal prophecy was fulfilled,
that the Lord should ascend upon a light cloud, and should enter into Egypt,
and the Idols of Egypt should be overthrown, and the heart of Egypt should
languish in the middle thereof, for when the son of God became a man, he was
in some sort hidden, that his glory was not seen, and the flesh which he
took was likened unto a light cloud, either because flesh is of it self no
more lasting then is a thin cloud, which with every little wind is dissolved,
or else because he was of no less power when he was in that cloud, then he
was before.

At his coming into Egypt, some affirm that all the Idols in Egypt fell
down, others say, that only one in every Temple, as at the departure of the
Israelites from Egypt, one dyed in every house: some write, that only those
fell down, which were at Heliopolis in Thebais, whether the virgin went with
her son to dwell: certain it is, that a huge great tree was not far from
the City, whose fruit, leaves, or bark did heal many diseases, and no other
cause was ever given thereof, then that it received this virtue myraculously,
when the young prince passed by it at his first coming, at what time it bowed
down unto the ground, and was dispossessed of an evil spirit, which was
wont there to be honored by the Egyptians, and all this is no wonder to
those, who read that Dagon (the Idol which the Philistines adored) was found
first lying upon the ground before the Ark of God (which they took in a
battle from the Jews, and had placed it in Dagons temple at Aso^^s) and the
second time the body of the Idol was in his place as they had set it up
again, but the head and hands were off* and lay before the arch. If the arch
were of such virtue (being a thing made of wood made by Moses at Gods
commandment to keep the law, which he gave unto the Israelites) that an Idol
could not stand in the presence thereof, how could any Idols stand in the
presence of an arch made without man's hand* and where God himself was
personally present? For into Egypt came now neither Abraham, Jacob, Moses, nor
Jeremy, but one who was greater then ever was any of the patriarks, or
prophets, and therefore no wonder, if Egypt felt such an alteration as never
before. That this young prince dwelt in Heliopolis a worthy fountain not far
from thence witnessed, wherein it is said the virgin washed the young prince,
and such things as she used about him, it was in a garden where grew nothing
but that which was most precious. For in the garden was nothing but Balsam, and
it had no other water but of that fountain to water it, and the garden being
afterward made greater, the inhabitants thereabout dug a greater place for
the watering thereof, near unto the other little fountain, persuading
themselves that there was some special virtue therein for this purpose, and
that their Well which they dug, being near unto it, might be the better for
it, but they all were deceived of their expectation, until they made certain
Pipes by which they conveyed water out of the little fountane into their Well,
and mingled it with other water, which sprung fast by it, in remembrance of
which, both that place, and the place where the virgin dwelled, were had in
great reverence by the heathen people, for they saw a manifest sign that his
body gave virtue unto that fountain, when as the water which was dug close
by it had no such virtue in it.

This sequel perchance made the Egyptians to reflect the more upon their Idols
fall, both in their Temples, and elsewhere, and called to mind what they had
been before also informed by one, who although he were a Jew, and stoned to
death by his own countrymen in Egypt (because he foretold them they should
all die by sword and famine, which descended into Egypt after the destruction
of their Temple by the Chaldees) yet he was highly esteemed of by all the
Egyptians, for that by his prayers he delivered all that coast where he came,
from Cocatrices (pernicious water serpents) and from Aspides, which were so
wily, that if at any time the enchanter were about to charm them (thereby to
take away their force in hurting them) they would lay one of their ears so
close to the ground, and stop the other so fast with their tail, that the
enchanter could not in any sort prevail against them.

The Oracle which this prophet gave them, was that when a virgin should bring
forth a son their Idols should be destroyed, which being believed by the
priests, they erected in the most secret place of their temple the Image of a
virgin with a child in her arms and adored it, which Ptolomeus their K. (for
Alexander the great made Ptolo. K. of Egypt, and after him the K. of Egypt were
called Ptolome, as before they all called Pharao) when he demanded what it
meant, they said as before is showed, and that their predecessors had left
such a tradition among them, and that they believed it, and no doubt that
Image did stand still in their temple, for the honor they bore unto the
Prophet, whom after the Jews had stoned, the Egyptians buried close by their
Kings, but afterward Alexander the Great translated his body with exceeding
great pomp unto Alexandria, that by the presence thereof, those Serpents
should avoid, which by no other policy he could overcome, notwithstanding
that he had brought other kind of sepents out of Greece to destroy them.

But after that this blessed virgin and her child were come into Egypt, Herod
returning from Rome as most men affirm, either from making complaint of his
sons Alexander and Aristobulus, or from aunswering to their complaints made
upon him to the Emperor, and not knowing this young prince where to find, but
mistrusting only, that he was some where about Bethlcem, sent to murder all
the infants which were in Bethleem and near about, so that Benjamin, as some
do think, bordering upon that part of Judah, lost also some of their infants,
according to the old prophecy. A voice of weeping and howling was heard in
Rama, Rachel bewayling her children, and would not be comforted because they
were not, that is to say, because she was spoiled of them, for Benjamin was
the youngest son of Rachel, and the youngest of the twelve patriarchs, some
do think that Rama was a town betwixt Bethleem and Hebron, and that
Zacharias upon riot of this murder, conuayed away his son, for which he was
afterward slain himself. Some say, that this Rama was a town in Arabia,
whose name was used to show how far in a short time this crueltye was spread
abroad. Some do think that Rama signified nothing but the vehemency of the
cry, which might very well be, for 14000. infants were slain in this
massacre, and as some do think, only the infants of Judah, and that Rachel is
by the Prophet said to lament her children, not because that any of the tribe
of Benjamin were slain, but because that she lay buried near unto the place,
where this murder was principally done, (which was done upon all of two
years old, to five years old, as some have thought) because the childrens
bones which were after seen, seemed to be of a greater growth then two
years: others, who think that children were bigger at that time, then they
were in a short time after, say all were slain which were of two years and
under, which also some do limit, saying that none were slain, who were under
40. days old, because Herod understood that the Prince was borne when the
three Kings were with him, which was about forty days before this murder, and
these do suppose, that the murder was done presently after the presentation in
the Temple, but this limitation has more pity then pith in it, for if the
Soldiers were debarred from killing those who were but forty days old or
under, could they distinguish better betwixt one childs age (...) another of
forty days, and another of forty five days, or fifty dayesx, then betwixt
one of forty days, and one of two years old? if they were so cunning to
distinguish one age from another, which differed but three or four days, why
were children of two years old murdered, for one little above forty days
old? if they were not so cunning to distinguish, what security was it for
Herod to kill some, and leave other alive, who might very well be taken for
four or five days younger then they were? Wherefore it is more probable, that
all were slain which were two years old or under, for Herod assured
himself, as he might very well, both by the Prince his presentation in the
Temple, and also by the appearing of the star, that the child he sought for
was under those years, and not knowing how to set a limit under that time,
which could be observed for his purpose, he might think it little more
cruelty, then he did principally intend to kill them all, beside that he
might think, that some for some bribes might be favored, the soldiers
having so just an excuse, as a precise commandment to kill such, and no
other, and the young Prince as well as any other, might by these means
escape, being above a year old, and thought to be very forward in growth,
having in Herod's conceit, more help by the influence of the stars, then
other children, and the more, because he understood that a star did in a
sort attend upon him at his birth, and this cause do somegiue, why he took
so large a scope in the age of those, whom he caused to be murdered, for he
thought the stars would make him look younger or older then he was, for his
advantage, although others impute it altogether to Herod's cruelty, which
deprived him so much of reason, as in this commission he would not except his
own son, but suffered him also to be murdered among the infants, perchance
hating him for this cause, that being an infant, he was like unto the Prince
whom he feared. The shepherds their tale was heard, where they had reported
abroad this child's birth, and held for no more then a tale, because it chanced
at such a time, as when Gentiles and Jews by their imitation, used to watch all the night. For an ancient custom was among them to keep watches twice in the
year, at what time the nights were at the longest, and at the shortest, and
spent them perchance in some kind of pastime, and this watch did the Gentiles
keep (as some do write) in honor of the sun.

The three Kings, their so strange a demand in Jerusalem for him, who was
borne King of the Jews, drove Herod into a little fear, but their silent
departure made him think that they missed what they sought for, and therefore
the more secure, but when the Prince was openly proclaimed in no obscure place,
but in the temple, and not in a corner, but in an open assembly, Herod began
to be exceedingly troubled, and having a present wit, especially in any
wicked practice, determined rather then to miss him, that all the children in
Bethleem or near about, should be murdered, but deferred it until his
return from Rome (as many do say) perchance because in his absence he
doubted, either that it would not be done unto his mind, or else that it
might cause some tumult among the people, or thirdlye, because he would not
have this objected against him when he should come before Caesar.

But here may seem some doubt why the Virgin should fly into Egypt for
succor, being at Nazareth, for the sacred History says, she went thither
so soon as all things were ended in the Temple, which was four days journey
from Bethleem, where (as it appears) she was in sufficient security with
her child, to which may he answered, that although Herod were informed that
the Prince he feared, was to be borne in Bethleem, and that from Bethleem the
child came, of whom, at his presentation in the Temple, so many things both
admirable, and worthy eternal memory were spoken, yet could he not be
ignorant (whom fear made ouercurious, and to search out whatsoever might make
for his purpose) of an old prophecy that was amongst the Jews, that is to
say,

A sprig shall spring from the root of Iesse, and out of this sprig shall come
a flower, or as some did read it a Nazarene, so that it was convenient that
the virgin should remove the Prince from Nazareth, which Herod after his
return by diligent search having found: but not whither they were removed,
and imagining that they were returned to Bethleem, or thereabout, because they
were of the tribe of Judah, he resolved to send his soldiers thither to kill all
the infants of two years old, and under. But after this murder Herod grew
odious in Palestina, and infamous in all the world, in so much as the Emperor,
who had before a great conceit of the man, said by way of mocking, that he had
rather be Herod's hog, then his son: for the Jews did not kill any swines
flesh, either for the temple or for their own private uses, because they
accounted those beasts as unclean, and therefore not to be eaten, for every
beast (says their law) which does not chew the cud, and has not the foot
cloue^, is unclean, by which the Hare although it chew the cudde, yet because
it has an whole foot is counted unclean, and the hog which has a cloven
foot, because it does not chaw the cud is also unclean.

But neither were hogs kept in Palestina, until such had power over it, as were
not under the Jews laws, and then were the Jews contented (being for this
cause privileged in other things above others) to keep hogs for others uses.
And these observations were not only for beasts, but for fishes, which were al
accounted unclean, which had not both fins and scales, and also for fowls:
among which some were forbidden. which among other people are used ordinarily,
some seldom, either in respect of daintines of the meat, or curiousnes of the
eaters, as Swan, Puet, a sea foul like to a sea gull, Crows, Hawks, Owls,
and many other, which perchance in far countries elsewhere were accounted good
meat: as Griffins, Kites, Ostriches, Eagles, and other strange birds which
breed in Egypt or thereabout. Generally all flying things which had four legs,
were judged unclean, unless they had their hinder legs longer the^ their
forelegs.

But Herod his good fortune was such, as all things still chanced as he
wished: and whereas Caesar was thought by some to give him a mock, Caesar (he
thought) did highly commend him, for by Caesar's words Herod was noted to be so
strickt an obseruer of the law he professed, as he would prefer it before his
sons life, yet was it manifest unto the Jews, that Herod would not spare to
kill, yea and to eat swines flesh, if by eating thereof he could have found any
sweetness, for all his religion was mere policy, and he carried only a show of
religion to win men's minds unto him. He built a goodly temple in the place of
that which the Jews built after they returned from their captivity in Babylon,
but he showed with what devotion when he erected a golden Eagle upon the
great gate of the temple: for pulling down of which (as a thing not tolerable
by the Jews laws that any image should be dedicated in their temple) many were
put to death, and peradventure more should, if he had lived longer, for
howsoever he got the favors of foreign people, he lost ordinarily the hearts
of all the Jews, for beside the great taxes and advantages which he got of
the people to enrich himself, by which riches he purchased strangers good
will, he was always exceeding cruel unto his servants. But due punishment for
his cruelty, especially that murder of the infants, was not altogether
deferred until after this life, for long before he died he had a most odious
disease, and such as was so grievous unto him, that if others had not staid
him, he had in one of his pangs slain himself. His disease took him with an
extreme heat in all his body, so that his bowels were consumed, he fed
greedily without any intermission, his entrails were exceeding fore, and he
was troubled with an extreme collicke: his feet and his grines swelled, his
members rotted, being full of worms, with the which they had both a filthy
stifnes, and gave out an intolerable stink: his sinews were shrunk, and his
breath he drew very short. After that the physicians told him that he was past
their cure, he was carried beyond the river Jordan, to a city called
Callirhoe, near unto which is a great rock, having as they were two teats of
equal height from the ground, and not far one from the other, out of which ran
two sorts of waters, one extreme hot and sweet, the other as cold and bitter,
which meeting together made a pleasant medlie to drink, and were also very
medicinable for many diseases, especially for shrunk sinews. Here did Herod
bath himself, but to so small purpose, that being set afterward in a bathing
tub full of oil to refresh him, he fainted, and recovered not himself, but by
the outcrie of those which were about him then began he to think he should
die, and returning from thence to Hiericho he made his will, wherein he
declared his son Achelaus king, and made his other sons princes of diverse
places in Palestina: he bequeathed a great quantity of money to the Emperor and
to the Empress, beside great store of plate, both of silver and gold, and very
rich ornaments: he distributed largely among his soldiers and friends,
providing for all unto their contentment, and after he had settled himself to
die, he remembered that he was so much hated of all the Jews, that whereas at
the death of princes much mourning is in all their dominions, contrariwise at
his death would be as much joy: therefore that he might be honored with
tears after his departure, he commanded that all the nobility of Palestina
should upon pain of death come unto him: with whom after he had a while
quarelled, he sent them to be kept in an Amphytheater, with this charge unto
his trustiest and dearest friends (his sister Salome as some think and her
husband, but others think he had caused the^ also to be murdered before) that
as soon as he were dead, and before his death were known abroad, all those
Jews should in that place be slain: but the joy he conceived of this
(although it did him very great ease) was not able to make him forget his own
grief, but in a raging impatiencie would have slain himself with a knife, for
which he called to pare an apple, as he used to do in the time of his sickness
had not Achiabus his nephew stayed his hand, and not long after he finished a
most hateful life, yet according as he had lived in exceeding great pomp, his
body was buried with great honor.

The litter on which his body was laid, was of gold, adorned with very rich
and precious stones, it was covered with purple, as also his body was, he had a
diadem on his head, and a crown of gold over that, he had also a scepter in
his hand, his children and kinsmen were round about his body, next to them went
his guarde and champions, first, the Thracians, then the Germans, after these
went the Frenchmen, then came the whole army lead by their Captains and
Centurions all in warlike manner, after those went five hundred of his
servants, carrying sweet perfumes, which order they kept until they came to
Herodium (a castle built by himself before, not far distant from Ierico)
where he was interred, but the Jews whom he had caused to be shut up in
the Theater to be slain, were all let go after his death, and a grateful
message came to Joseph in Egypt by night in his sleep, that he should rise and
take the child and his mother, and return into Palestina, because they were
all dead which sought the child to murder him, which Joseph flacked not, but
as soon as he heard that Archelaus did rule in Judah, he was afraid to go
thither, and being in the same manner urged again, he went to Galilie, and
dwelled in Nazareth, whence he before had brought his spouse, and at this time
was under A^tipas, as also the country of Perea, upon the far side of the
river Jordan, and therefore called sometime Transamnana, for that part did
Herod allot unto him in his last will and testament, who gave also unto Philip
an other of his sons the Tetrarchie of Traconites, Bathanea, Auranitis, and
Paneas, all which provinces except Paneas are also without the river Jordan,
upon the north part of Palestina, Iamnias, Ahotus and Phaselida, he gave to
Salone who was his sister, Judea. Idumea, and Samaria remained to his son
Archelaus, whom he appointed to be king after him, if so Caesar would,
neither dared Archelaus (although all did congratulate him by that name) to
take upon him to be king, until he had been at Rome with Caesar, whether
when he came he wanted no adversaries to stand against him, especially the
Jews which labored much to be delivered from the tyranny under which they had
lived being under his Father, and feared the like under him, who already at
Easter (when from all parts of the world came Jews to Jerusalem to solemnize
that feast) had slain about three thousand and commanded al to leave of their
accustomed devotions, and return unto their own countries: but his chiefest
adversary was his brother Antipas, who claimed the kingdom by his fathers
will, which was made when he was in health, and would have disprooued his
Fathers last will, because it was made when he was in great extremity of
sickness, and knew not what he did: but Nicholas of Damascus Archelaus his
orator (knowing before whom he pleaded) answered that it was a sufficient
argument that Herod knew what he did, because he left his will in all things to
Caesar's wisdom, and after he had laid the blame of all the murders and
misdemeaners of Archelaus upon them which answered him as being rebellious
and sactious people against their prince, Archelaus came to Caesar and upon his
knees offered himself unto him whom Caesar took up, and promised that he
would do nothing against Herod's last will, only he would have him refrain
the name of a king for a while, which he doubted not, but that he would
quickly deserve.

The cause of this strife betwixt these two brethren for the kingdom, was
Herod's their fathers rashness, who in his life time appointed now one, then an
other, almost all his sons for kings, first he meant that the kingdom
should descend from him unto his sons Alexander, and Aristobulus, whom he
had by Mariamnes grandchild to Hircanus' the last king of the Jews, but his
eldest son Antipater (whom he had by Doris a base woman) being provoked
oftentimes by the contemptuous speeches of the princes, for whose mothers love
his mother was rejected devised how he might both take revenge upon the^ and
advance himself, whereof first he wrought means by the discredit of the
princes to come a little into his Fathers favor, which when he had gotten so
far as his Father put him before the two princes in the right of the
kingdom, he used matters in that sort, that Herod having by his slight and
his friends, put Mariamnes to death, now also by his false suggestions murdered
his two sons which he had by her, then was Antipater honored as a king by
all, for Herod gave over unto him the government of the country in such
manner as he kept unto himself little more then the bare title of a king which
Antipater also thought was too much, yet first he stirred up his father what he
could against Archelaus and Philip two other of his brethren, the^ sought
means to poison his Father, which being perceived by Herod, he presently
changed his former will (by which he had given the kingdom to Antipater) and
being offended with Archelaus and Philip by Antipaters means, he made Antipas
his successor in this kingdom, but before he dyed (having manifest proof of
Antipaters treasons against him) he repented too late his cruelty which now he
mistrusted was without cause against Mariamnes and her children, and,
accounting all which proceeded from Antipater to have been false accusations
to further himself in the kingdom, he changed his will, and divided the
country into four parts, and made four Tetrarches over it, but the chiefest
part he left to Archclaus, whom he set down in his last will for his
successor, (if Caesar should think him meet) and not above five days before his
death caused Antipater to be executed and buried obscurely, for as he had many
causes for which he thought he might worthily have put him to death before,
so would he not upon any of them execute him without Caesar's consent, to whom
he had signified by letters what Antipater had attempted and wrought against
him, and how that in his treasons he had used the help of Acme, who attended
upon Iulia the Empress, to which letters Caesar answered that Acme being
found guilty at Rome, was executed as she had deserved, and that Antipater was
now at his Fathers discretion to order him as he would which was no small
comfort unto him in the extremity of his sickness, wherefore he determined
that Antipater should die, which intention upon this occasion was put in
execution. When Herod (being in an extreme fit of his sickness) would have
slain himself, and was hindered by Achiabus, who was his nephew. Achiabus
(notwithstanding he had prevented the stroke) gave so great a skritch, that
all in the palace thought Herod had been dead. And Antipater, who was not
far off (although a prisoner) hearing those news, dealt with his keeper to
let him go at liberty, as not doubting to get the kingbome within a
short time, and to the end he might persuade the more easily, he promised
great gifts both then, and for afterward. But this keeper, either for fear of
Herod, or for little love to Antipater, went presently to Herod, and declared
his sons attempt, for which Herod in his rage commanded him presently to be
slain, so that now remained the other two wills which Herod made to be
tried which of them were of force, but Caesar decided the controversy, and the
two brerhren upon this conclusion returned from Rome to Palestina, where
Archelaus, as well before as after his voyage, did so little degenerate from
his father, that glad were they who were out of his dominion, which was the
cause why Joseph avoided his own country, and went directly to Nazareth with
his charge, from whence every year for devotion sake, they went to Jerusalem
to the Temple, especially at the feast of Easter, for many feasts did the Jews
observe, and no one passed them without great solemnity. Some of them might
not be celebrated but in Jerusalem, some again might be observed else where
wheresoever the Jews dwelt.

Their Sabbath they did celebrate every seventh day, a day solemn from the
beginning of the world, sanctified by God himself, and called the sabbath,
because then he ceased from creating the world, and the complements thereof,
wherefore the Jews always (except when they were in Egypt) and all their
ancestors, kept the seventh day holy, in remembrance that after six days, in
which all things were created, God rested the seventh day, which although
perchance when they were in Egypt they minded not, and in time forgot it, being
so long in bondage, where they could not use that honor unto God upon that
day, as their fathers had taught them, yet were they assured, that was the day
when they were in the wilderness, by the miracle which chanced so often unto
them, that in the end they did by their murmur seem to contemn it, for when
they wanted victual in the desert, God sent down unto them like rain a food,
which because they knew not else what to call it, they called it Manna, which
word was in every man's mouth, when they first saw it, and signifies what is
this, it fell six days, and the seventh nothing fell, but upon the sixth day
it fell in greater abundance, then any other day, that the people might gather
sufficientlye to serve them the same day and the next. Upon this which they
called sabbath, it was not lawful for them to do any work, no, not to
provide or dress any meat for their sustenaunce, for confirmation of which,
they did see weekly that what Manna they gathered upon the sixth day, was as
good upon the seventh day as when they gathered it, whereas the Manna which was
gathered upon any other day, was eaten with worms by the next morning, and
this their sabbath day is our Saturday.

By this name of sabbath also they call the week, and accounted the morrow
after the sabbath, the first of the sabbath, and so forward unto the sixth of
the sabbath, which because then they prepared their victual ready to be eaten
the next day, they called the Parasceue of the sabbath, and generally they
called all their feats sabaoths. But there was one sabbath among them, which
many doubt what kind of holyday it was, they called it a second first
sabbath. Some say it was a sabbath which fell next after another holiday. Some
do say it was a sabbath which fell the next day before another holiday. Some
say that that word first does not signify any order, in number, but in
dignity, and that meaning of the second first Sabbath, may be of a Sabbath,
which was a chief Sabbath, but not so great as another might be, such were the
Sabaoths which lighted within the Octaues of some great feast, and were called
great Sabaoths, but when the first day of the feast, being (no doubt) greater
then the other, lighted upon a Sabbath, that Sabbath was greater, then if the
second day of the feast should light upon the Sabbath, and if there were any
difference betwixt the solemnity of the first day of the feast, and the last
day, then may such a Sabbath, being the Octaue of a feast, be accounted the
second chiefest Sabbath, because none could be greater then that but one,
upon which should fall the first day of the feast. So that the second
first-sabaoth, may be said to be the second chief Sabbath, that is, either
a Sabbath within the Octaues of a feast, or else the Octaue it self, if it
fell on a Sabbath day.

The Sabaoths, as also all other their feasts, began the evening before the
day, and continued until the evening of the same day: the evening was then
thought to begin, when the shepherds star appeared, and to every day
belonged but one evening, so that when it is said from evening to evening they
celebrated their feasts, it is to be understood from the beginning of the first,
to the beginning of the next evening, for then was it lawful for them to work.

A greater difficulty it is, how far the Jews might walk upon this
Sabbath, for as they were restrained from dressing any meat (which upon all
other holidays they might, except their day of expiation. So likewise it was
lawful for them to walk, but with in certain limits, which some have thought
did extend unto two mile, and prove it by tradition from the Jews: some say
it did extend but unto two thousand cubits, and prove it by the order which
the Jews observed in the wilderness, because they fixed their tents so far
from the tabernacle, whether no doubt they repaired upon the Sabboath, others
because that an infallible truth has revealed that the mount Oliuet was a
sabbath days journey from Jerusalem, which mount was scantly two hundred foot
from the City, do think that this was their stint, and they do confirm it
by the tradition of the Jews, who affirm that their Rabbis so taught them,
but how much, or how little so ever it was, no doubt the Jews were as precise
in observing it, as in other things belonging unto the Sabbath, which rather
then they would not most strictly observe, they would offer themselves to be
slain, as once it chanced at Sea, where a Jew holding the stern, as soon
as he perceived the sun set upon Friday at night, left it, and lay prostrate
upon the ground, not without amaz^ng all other in the ship, who thought that
they had been in some desperate dannger of their lives, but when they
understood that he did it for Religion sake, as who would do no work upon the
sabbath day then new begun, one ran to him with a sword, and threatened to kill
him, if he took not again the stern in hand, but his threats were in vain,
for the Jew would not work until he was sure the Sabbath was past. And in
the history of the Machabees it is showed, that a thousand suffered themselves
to be slain by Antiochus his soldiers, who knew the Jews would not strike
that day in their own defense, which when Mathathias perceived, and conceived,
that if they did keep their Sabbath so strictly in this point, that all the
Jews might be slain without any battle, he exhorted the rest not to
stand upon any nice points, which grew rather upon too much scrupulousness,
then upon the true meaning of the law. So that when the next sabbath came, and
the soldiers assaulted them as they did before, thinking to have murdered them
without ^^istaunce, the Jews did not only defend themselves, but also
offended their enemies, and gave them a bloody overthrow and thought it no
breach of their sabbath, when they saw by the contrary observation that both
the people, and their law would quickly have an end.

And other solemnity was among the Jews, which they called the feast of
Neomenia, that is, the feast of the new Moon, or the first day of the Moon,
for the Jews reckoned their Months from the first appearing of the moon,
until it did appear again after once it left to appear, for the discrying of
which, they had every where in their sinagogues (that is to say) their places
where they met together at their devotions) a high tower into which one did
ascend, with a trumpet in his hand at the sun set, next day after they knew
the conjunction of the sun and the Moon: and as soon as he saw the Moon,
he sounded his trumpet, by which he gave all the Jews in that place, to
understand the beginning of the new month, this account did they always
observe concerning the moon, without any respect either to her natural course,
which is from west toward the east, and in 27. days and 8. hours, returns
to the same point from whence it went, or to the time in which it does appear
in her violent course, from the east to the west, for that time is no more than
28. days, but always to her conjunction with the sun, which is once in 29.
days, and 12, hours, and because those od 12, hours should breed no
confusion, they added to every second month 1. day, so that the first month was
always of 29. days, and the second of 30. and in this sort they did account
12. months in the yeeare. But because in a short time, according unto this
account a confusion might be of times, this year of 12. months thus reckoned
wanting 11. days every year of the course of the sun, to accord their
years with the year of the sun in 19. years they added 7. months, 6,
months of 30. days, and one of 29. days, which amount just unto the number of
the 11. days which in every one of the 19: years do want in that other
reckning: for in 19. years of 12. months in the year, according to the Jews
account, the sun had gotten 19. times 11. days, which amount to two hundred
and nine days, and these months added, one sometime to some third, and
sometime an other to some second year of the nintenth, amount to as many
days, so that in the 19. year the year of the sun and the year of the
moon, by the Jews account did perfectly agree.

The day of their Neomenia (that is, ahe first day of the moon was kept
holyday, but so as any man might work therein, and those which would not,
might be present at the sacrifice then offered extraordinarily with sound of
trumpets, and other music, to the end that having cons^crated to Gods honor
the first of their time as first fruits, God would prosper the^ in all the
month following*

These were the ordinary feasts, which continued* from the beginning of the
year to the end, the Sabbath every seventh day, and the calends or Neomeni^
every first day of the moon.

The solemnity of their Ph^se or passover (by which they would both show
themselves grateful for a good turn, and instruct all their posterity how
graciously God dealt with them in Egypt, the night before they took their
journey from thence, when he slew the first begotten both of men and beast,
from the highest to the lowest of every kind: or as some think, not only the
first begotten, for a second son, although he were not absolutely the
auncientest of his house, yet he might be the auncientest in the house,
whereat that time he was, for in every house one lay dead, and passed over
only the housen in which were the Hebrews, at the sight of a sign made like
unto a T. upon the posts of their doors, with the blood of a lamb, or a kid
the same night killed, and eaten in the house, was observed the fourteenth day
of the first moon in the year, and that Moon they did always account the
first in the year, whose first day was nearest unto the Equinoctial in the
Summer spring time: for before this solemnity was instituted, they accounted
their beginning of their year at the other Equinocticall according to the
custom of the Egyptians, which account they did not altogether afterward
neglect, but used it in their secular affairs, as they used this other in
their divine ceremonies, and called the one a holy year, and the other a
secular year.

This holy year was instituted by God himself, and promulgated by Moses, and
was observed in remembrance that in this month they were brought from Egypt,
and this feast was celebrated in this manner.

Upon the 14. day of that moon at the sun set, or before, they had ready a
lamb, or a kid of a year old, or under, clear from all disease, both in the
skin and body, and after that it was offered unto God, (which the Priests did
by lifting it up before God) it should be killed, roasted and eaten in the same
house, and if they were not sufficient in the house to eat a lamb, or a
kidde, they should call in their neighbors (always provided that they were
Jews) or at the least Proselites (that is, circumcised if they were Gentiles
before) which was a great help unto the poor, who were not able to buy a
lamb, or, a kidde: they might not cast away any part of the lamb or kidde,
but after they had washed the entrails, they put them in again, and roasted it
whole from the head unto the feet, neither might they break any bone
thereof, or sees any part: they were to eat it with unleavened bread, and
wild lettuse, they had staves in their hands, and shoes on their feet (a
thing not used in their feasts, for at feasts they sat barefoote) whereby they
would signify, that they did eat in haste, and were ready to be gone, and
therefore they did not sit but stood at this feast: wherefore when we read of
some who did rise to wash others feet after this feast, it is not to be
understood, that they did rise immediately after this feast, for they were up,
and stood at it (although the phrase might bear it, when any new thing is
attempted) but they did rise from the supper which was usually made after this
feast: this being instituted to fulfill a ceremony rather then to fill the
belly: and the same custom continued a long time after, that the thing it
self was used, of which this was partly a figure, if any of the lamb, or
kidde remained not eaten, it was to be burned the next morning: if the
householde were very great, that a lamb could not satisfy their hunger, it
was not lawful for them to kill any more then one in this ceremony: but they
might afterward eat what they would to satisfy them. Yet some have thought
that no more, nor fewer then ten persons might be at the eating of a lamb.

This holy day began when the lambs or kiddes began to be offered, andx
ended when the evening was come, yet they might eat of the lamb until
midnight, notwithstanding that the same evening an other feast was begun, which
continued 8. days, and was called the feast of unleavened bread, because it
was not lawful for the^ to have any other in the house all that time. It was
also called Phase, as the former feast was, and by the same name were the
sacrifices called, which were offered in those days of the feast, and the like
conditions were required of purity, in those which eat of them, for as they
were commanded under pain of death to eat their pascall lamb, so might they
not eat it, if they had contracted any uncleanness by touching any dead body,
wherefore in such case it was lawful for them to keep the next month, and
keep this feast then according unto their rites prescribed.

In this feast of their Phase, they kept the first day and the last so holy,
that in them they might do no other work, then dress meat, upon the second
day (unless it were the sabbath) they gathered of the ripest of the barley,
and after they had scorched the sheafe in the fire, they grinded the corn, and
brought the quantity of 4. pound weight, which they mingled with oil, and
offered it with frankensence, as the first fruits of the earth, partly in
remembrance that at such a time they came from Egypt, partly in thanksgiving
unto God for their increase, which the priests took and throwing some of the
flower and oil into the fire, also all the frankensence, they kept the rest of
the flower and the oil to their own use.

The cause why their phase had so short a solemnity, and their feast of sweet
bread so long, is for that their first phase was no longer, and they eat of
vnleaue^ed bread a long time, and this order did they always keept, that what
feast they did celebrate in remembrance of that which chanced but once, or for
one day, they did keep but one day solemn for it; and for that which chanced
many days, they kept their Octaues, and therefore they celebrated also their
feast of Penticost in one day, because the fifteth day after they were come
into the wilderness, God did appear unto them upon the mount Sinai, and gave
them the law, so that this fifteth day was not accounted after the eating of
the Lamb, but after the offering of the first fruits in the Temple, which was
the third day after the eating of the Lamb, in which day they entered into the
wilderness.

In the feast of Penticost they offered wheat corn, every one two loaves,
but with leaven, of four pound weight a loaf, at what time also they offered
other sacrifices unto God for his benefits, but some of the cattle when the
priests had lifted them up, were to the priests use, and all the bread,
because it was not lawful to sacrifice any leven unto God. In their seventh
month of their year, which they called their holy year, they had 4
solemnities. First they celebrated the first day of the month as in all other
months, with the sound of Trumpets, and other music, with this only
difference, that in remembrance of the sacrifice of the ram, which hung by
the horns in the brambies, on the top of the mountain Morea, and was offered
in place of Isaac, whom by Gods commandment Abraham had sacrificed, had he not
been at that time countermanded: the Jews did in this solemnity sound their
rams horns, thanking God for Isaac his delivery, and hoping of like favor,
whenever they should be in like affliction. The second feast in this month
was the day of Expiation, which was as strictly observed as the sabbath. It was
celebrated in remembrance of Gods mercy toward them, after they had fallen
into Idolatry at mount Sinai, where they adored the golden calfe, of which
mercy they had a manifest sign, when Moses as that day brought unto them the
tables wherein the law was written the second time, for when it was written,
Moses offended with their Idolatry, brake the tables which he had received of
God.

Upon this day only did the high Priest, and no man but he, enter into the
holiest place of the Temple with the blood of a calfe, and a goat prayed for
the people, that their sins might be forgiven the^, x which he confessed before
God, laying his hand upon the head of a quick goat, and afterward he caused it
to be carried away into the wilderness, whereby he would signify that al their
sins were forgiven them. Then attiring himself in his rich ornaments (for when
he went into the holiest place, he wore no other then the ordinary Priests
did wear when they offered sacrifice) he offered at the common Altar a great
sacrifice, and this feast was always upon the 10. of the 7. month, but it
began upon the 9. day at night, when also all the people began their fasting,
which they did continue all the next day, this fast began so soon in respect
of the solemnity thereof, as far exceeding all other fasts, of which they had
in every of the twelve months some, beside their ordinary feasts every week,
which were upon the second and fifth of their sabbath, that is to say, upon
monday and Thursday.

Upon the fifteenth of the same month they did celebrate the feast of the
Tabernacles, in remembrance that they dwelled in Tabernacles, at their return
from Egypt, this feast continued 7. days, of which the first only was holy
from work, and not the last, because the next day after the last of the feast,
they did celebrate another holyday, which they caled the Meeting for a special
worship of god, and thanksgiving unto him for his benefits, on which it was not
lawful for them to do any work (except such as was necessary for their
food) and two such days they would not have together, because it seemed
inconvenient for the poor, who got their living by their handie labor, by
which custom it appears, that the opinion of those was not improbable, who
thought that the first day of the feast of unleavened bread was never kept upon
Friday, but when it so fell, it was put off unto the sabbath, lest two days
should come together, in which the people might not work, and that
accordingly, the eating of the Lamb was transferred a day longer for that
year, which whether it were lawful or no, it is a very great difficulty to
define, but not material in this place, whether it were so or no, because in
some things they would do often as themselves listed, but the like feast as
that was of their meeting, was also celebrated upon the last day of their feast
of unleavened bread, which now in this feast of the Tabernacles they could not
so well do, because that the solemnity of this feast of Tabernacles,
consisted in dwelling abroad in tabernacles, where they could not conveniently
meet, for every household set up a tabernacle, not so large as they would, but
to serve their own company, they set them up in such order as tabernacles are
now used, the covering was of linen, and perchance some skins over the
linen, to keep out the weather, and the poorer sort, who were not able to
make such provision, made their Tabernacles with bows. Great sacrifice was
offered in this feast of the Tabernacles, and all the time of the feast the
people carried in their hands bows of myrtle, willowes, citron, and palm tree,
with their fruit hanging on them, whereby they would show, how that they were
brought out of a barren desert into a very fruitful country, where was great
plenty of all things, this feast they called the feast of Scenopegia, to
signify that they dwelled for this time in Tabernacles, not that they might
not go forth at their pleasure, but because there was their principal abode
for that time.

At this feast was their seventh year always ended, which they accounted from
seventh to seventh, from their time of their entrance into Palestina. In every
7. year, they did neither sow, nor set, nor gather any thing as their own in
particular, but all the fruits which the earth of it self did yield, were common
for as well Gentiles as Jews, and for this cause God gave them treble increase
of all things in the sixth year, also all those Jews which were sold to any
Jew, were in this year set at liberty, and no debt dew to a Jew, by a Jew
could be demanded, and yet they were forbidden to withdraw their loan from
their poor neighbors. when this year approached. In this year the Book of
the law was read unto the people, and this was the solemnity of the seventh
year.

After the same manner they did account every fifty year, which they did
proclaim in the seventh month of the 49 year, with sound of Trumpet to be a
year of Iubile, that is, a year of remission, for in that year all slaves
were set at liberty, and such Jews as would not part from their master in
the seventh year, either because they loved him or else (if perchance the
slaves had married in his service a woman, who was no Jew, and therefore not
to be set at liberty before) because they would not forsake their wives and
children, which during that time they had by them, and in this case a slave was
brought unto the priests, and being set against the post of the door his care
was bored through with an All, and then he could not go from his master
until the year of Iubile, but in the year of Jubilee, he and his wife and
children were al free. Also in this year of Iubile, all the possessions which
were sold, returned to their first owner, lest in time should grow a confusion
among the tribes, which were distinguished by the partition of the land, but
with this caution, that if the buyer had laid out more then was the commodity
he had by it, he that sold it should give him satisfaction for it, but if
any house (except the Leuits house) in a City were sold* it could never be
redeemed again, if it were not redeemed within a year after it was sold,
which was to make the people have care of the City wherein they dwelled,
seeing their houses were after a year to pass clean from them. All loanes or
lettinges of moveable goods were ordered every seventh year. The trumpets
which they used in this year of Jubilee, were not of silver as those were with
which they called the people to the temple, nor such as they used in the feast
of their trumpetes the first day of their seventh month, for these were of
Rams horns, but were of hotns of greater bests, as Buffelars and were made of
that fashion that the brazen trumpets were made.

The fourth solemnity of the seventh month was in remembrance of the finding
holy fire, which was hid by Jeremy the Prophet, when the Jews were carried
prisoners into Babylon, and their temple destroyed, and it was found at their
return again which when it was brought forth, it appeared to be nothing but a
congealed water, but when it was laid upon the sacrifice, and the sun did
shine upon it, it flamed up and consumed the sacrifice, and continued so long
as any sacrifice continued in the temple, for from the first time that the
Jews had this fire (which came miraculously from heaven, when Aaron offered as
high priest first sacrifice, it was never extinguished, but night and day it
was maintained by the priests.

In the 9. month they kept their Encoenia which was in remembrance of the
renouation of their temple by Judas the Machabee, after the Gentiles had
profaned it, this feast continued eight days, and in their 12. month they
had a holyday in remembrance of an overthrow which Judas gave unto Nicanor,
whom Demetrius king of S^ria sent to destroy the Jews, and in the same month
they solemnized those days which being granted by Asseuerus (who ruled 55.
years from India to Ethiopia 127. provinces) to Aman for the massacre of all
the Jews within those dominions, were afterward by Hester her means (who was
a Jew, and wife to Asseuerus) days for the Jews to revenge themselves upon
all their enemies, and Aman before the rest was hanged upon a gibbet, which
he had provided for Mardocheus who was uncle unto Queen Hester.

Among these feasts were three, in which ^ll the male kind were to show
themselves at the temple by their law, to wit at the feasts of their Phase,
their Pentecost, and their Scenopegia, but male and female who could come were
to appear at their Phase, because they were all bound to offer or eat of a
lamb or a kid offered at that time, and it was not lawful for them to offer
it but in Jerusalem, and for this cause did the maide^ mother and Joseph
repair unto the temple every year at this feast, and carried the young prince
with the^, who passed to and fro the more securely, because no show mas made of
any such personage, yet did he once above al other times draw all to mark him,
and give them some cause to admire him. The virgin carried him (as she was
wont) unto the temple, where were so many glad of his company that presuming
once that some of her kinsfolk had gotten him amongst them, she and her spouse
departed from Jerusalem without him, but when at night they found him not
amongst their kinsfolk, the virgins grief was so great as it cannot be
showed, although returning unto Jerusalem, and not finding him so soon as she
would, it was increased, but before she left seeking him, she found him in the
temple sitting among the Doctors, hearing their discourses, and demanding of
the^ some questions, for such was the custom among the Jews that it was not
only lawful, but well accepted by all, that any of what years or condition
soever might reason with the learnedest Doctors, who for that cause sat in
their chayres at the entrance of the Jews court, and other places were prepared
for others, every one according to their reputation, and mats on the ground for
the younger sort to sit, and hear what was taught by the Doctors, and it was as
lawful for them as any in these conferences to demand of others, and usual
to declare their own minds, but so soon as she saw him, she went unto him,
and full of joy, and reverence she said, Son why have thou thus done unto us,
thy Father (for so was Joseph reputed in the world,) and I have sought thee
with no little grief, but he replied again unto her, demanding why they
sought for him, taking no exceptions against that word Father, because it was
in a public assembly, yet because he would give them somewhat to mu^e upon,
headded unto his former speech, knew ye not that I was to be about my Fathers
business, by which the sta^ders by might easily perceive that Joseph was not
his Father, both for that Joseph was present, and that kind of business about
which he was employed, could not belong to Joseph: after which answer made
unto them, they were somewhat amassed, but the virgin let neither word nor deed
slip her without a deep meditation, conferring every thing together which
she heard him speak or see him do, notwithstanding he returned to Nazareth
with them, and lived under them in most dutiful manner, as who had before all
worlds known what belonged to a son, profiting every day in wisdom and
grace, both in the sight of God and men, which profit was not absolutely in
either, for he had all wisdom essential unto him being the eternal
wisdom of his Father, but he profited in that he practiced what before he
knew, and joined to his speculatiue wisdom, a wisdom gotten by experience,
and so likewise is he said to profit in grace, not that he was not from the
very instant of his conception replenished with all grace, by reason of that
heavenly union which then was made, but that as a man he increased it by other
kind of actions, then he practiced before he was a man, which what they were
more then his subjection to his mother, and to the poor Carpenter his supposed
father are not in any credible history recorded, except what he did after he
was thirty years of age, and so forward until his return from whence he
first came.

But concerning the spending of his youth, some affirm that he used the
Carpenters art, which he seemed to have learned of Joseph, because an
infallible truth has revealed, that men of that place where he dwelled, and
such as in such a matter could not be deceived, after they heard him what he
said, and saw what he did (when he showed himself unto the world) marvelled
whence he should have so great power, and so much knowledge, one of them
putting another in mind that he was the Carpenter, who was Mary's son, and
whose kinsfolk dwelled among them.

But how can it be that the virgin should be an inheretrix, and to no small
revenues, and yet be forced to live upon her sons labor? (for Joseph lived
not many years after his return from Egypt) it seems a very inconvenient
thing, that without any necessity either she should give from her self all
that she had, or he be subject both to evil words and w^rse usage. To this
some do easily make this answer, that the virgin enjoyed what her parents had
before, although after her son showed himself unto the world, both he and
she forced themselves to live upon the charity of others, lest in counselling
others to sell all which they had, and give it to the poor if they would
follow him, he might justly have been challenged for preaching one thing, and
practicing another: wherefore the young prince used an art, only because he
would not seem to the world to live idely, for that was so scandalous a thing
in that country, that the chiefest men did train up their children in one kind
of trade or other, but the young prince although he could have used what art
he would, being skillful in all by his extraordinary knowledge, as well of
the least matters as the greatest, yet he chose to be a Carpenter rather then
any other artificer: first, because he was not yet to show himself unto the
world, and therefore would do nothing but what people might think he was
taught by Joseph, whom they took to be his father. Secondly, for the
affection he did bear unto that art above all other, having used it from the
first framing of the world, a work so much more excellent then ever any other
Carpenter could make, by how much the instrument by which it was made is
incomparably better then any Carpenters tools. Thirdly, because it was the
custom among the prophets, which were sent unto the Jews, to show before
they did prophecy by some action what was the effect of their message: and he
would do the like.

The Prophet Ose being to foretell the overthrow of the house of Iehn, who was
king of Israel, and also how Israel (that is the ten Tribes which divided
themselves from Judah and Benjamin) was forsaken of God for their sin, and
evil customs, he took a wife which was before an harlot, by which he would
signify unto the people, that they lived in fornication and all manner of
filth, although because he married her he committed no sin, and when he had
gotten by her a son he called his name Iesrael, whereby he would signify
that the blood which was shed in Iesrael should be revenged upon Iehu, for
although Iehu pleased God well in overthrowing the house of Achab and Iezabell,
and therefore was rewarded with the kingdom of Israel, and his posterity unto
the fourth generation: yet because he was not free from those vices of Jeroboam
the first king of the Israelites: which divided themselves from the rest.
Zachar^as who was the fourth from him was slain, and the kingdom possessed by
Sellum, who was of another stock. And after the prophet had this son by his
wife, he had also a daughter, which he called without mercy, because God
would have no mercy upon Israel: then he had also by her another son, whom
he named, Not my people, whereby he would show unto them how that God had
altogether forsaken them. So that three years or thereabout at the least were
past before he ended his prophecy, which without this action he might have
ended in few more then three words.

In the same manner Ezechiel the prophet (when he was in Babylon) carried out
of his house all his substance by day, in the sight of the Jews, who were
captives there at the same time, and by night he dug a hole in the wall of
his house, through which he crept, and when he was out he was taken up, and
carried away, by which he would show unto the Jews which see this strange
devise, how Jerusalem should be spoiled, and Zedechias the king carried away
captive, as afterward it proved, although by night he had thought to save
himself by flight through a private gate.

Jeremy also the Prophet after he had tried in vain to stay the relics of
the people in Palestina, who hastened into Egypt for fear that Nabuchodonosor
would revenge upon them the death of Godolias, (who was left by him as
president of the country and slain by the Jews) when he came into Egypt (for
thither the Jews carried him against his will) he laid a great heap of stones
in a cave which was under a brick wall at Pharao his court gate, and then he
said unto them, that Nabuchodonosor who was king of Babylon should place his
throne upon these stones, and when he should strike Egypt they also should
perish with the Egiptians.

Many other things are recorded, which both this and other prophets did before
they uttered their message, but these suffice to show their names of
prophesying, and the young prince perchance because he would observe the (...)
course being the chiefest of all prophets, busied himself in such things
before he preached, as might very fitly be applied to his purpose: for as some
men do say, he wrought nothing but yoakes and ploughes. He made yoakes to show
that the perfection of his law consisted in mutual love: and because in a
yoke are as it were two parts in one, we should study for nothing else but
the true love of God, and our neighbor, and this not so much for any our own
interest or our neighbors, as purely and only for God, in which yoke
whosoever draws, tastes first, and then tries how sweet it is, for he
which made this yoke, said also, my yoke is sweet, and my burden light. He
made ploughes, to show that men must persevere in that good work they
began, or else all the former gain is to little purpose, because he which
holds the plough, and looks backward, is not judged fit for the kingdom
of God, as also he afterward preached, which sentences may have a more fit
place hereafter to be discussed, let it now suffice, that they show how
that the young prince did not in vain spend his time in making yoakes and
ploughes, whose principal arrant was for nothing else, but that his spouse
taking on her his yoke, and going still forward from virtue to virtue, might
recover with a sweet pain, what she carelessly lost by a proud sin.

But Palestina labored all this while under a most grievous yoke, and so much
the more grievous, because they had no hope of any help. The 72. seniors who
were always of the family of David, and the chief princes of the people, and
therefore could bear great sway among the^, were al murdered by Herod, for he
could never brook any of the ancient nobility; and Proselithes, as himself
was, were in their place. The two brethren whose falling out for the Kingdom,
was Herod's falling into it, were both put to death, first Aristobulus, who gave
the first occasion of the ruin of the country, was poisoned by Pompey,
afterward Hircanus, in whom was all the right which was known, both to the
priesthood and to the kingdom, was put to death by Herod, Alexander, eldest
son to Aristobulus, and husband to Alexandra, daughter to Hircanus, was
beheaded at Antioch in Siria, Antigonus his other son fled with his sisters
to mount Libanus, where he bestowed one of them upon a great Lord without
the mountain, but himself was afterward taken, and after some grievous
torture, beheaded by Antony. Alexandra daughter to Hireanus, Herod did put to
death, and her daughter Mariamnes, who was his own wife, also his own sons
Alexander and Aristobulus, whom he had by her, but before those he caused
Aristobulus, who was brother to Mariamnes, to be drowned, for he was the only
man whom at that time he feared, as well for his towardliness, as his title
he had to the kingdom. Yet to color his malice, he gave him all the
honor which he could, he displaced Ananelus, whom before he had exalted
unto the priesthood, and restored Aristobulus to the highpriesthood, by which
fact, all that stock thought themselves bound to him: he might at his pleasure
make him away when he would, for before, Alexandra had procured Cleopatra the
Queen of Egypt, to make Antony the Emperor send for him, fearing lest that at
one time or other, he should be murdered by Herod: but when that Herod
perceived that some did work to get him out of his hands, after the first
excuse made to Antony, that the people would not like well to have their only
hope from them in a strange country: by this exalting him he contented them
all, and Alexandra ioyed so much to see her son made high priest, as she
forgot that ever she had any just cause to think him in any peril. Herod
seeing all things to go forward as he would wish, and that now he was
trusted with the youth, for he was not past sixteen or seventeen years of
age, which was used for a color, that he was not before placed in that
dignity, he practiced the more securely what he intended against Aristobulus,
but as it is thought, he made the more haste, because he saw an extraordinary
joy in all the people, who were maruailously affected unto the youth, for that
in all his actions, especially at the Altar in his rich ornaments, he did most
lively represent unto them his grandfather Aristobulus, performed all things
with exceeding great majesty and reverence. Herod resolved to rid him and his
own fear, played with him as he was wont to do (for he cared not sometime if
he were seen to use some youthful games in his company, to make him and
others think how much he loved him) and when they were both somewhat hot,
under pretense of some refreshing, he carried Aristobulus to a very pleasant
place, where were large pondes, and men swimming in them, (amongst whom (at
Herod's very importunate entreaty) Aristobulus went also to swim, and the
swimmers having gotten him into the water, pretended to make him some sport,
but Herod, (who was a looker on) had all the pleasure, for they diued so long,
and so often, and ducked him with them so much, that in the end striving to
small purpose, he was drowned by them. Then was nothing heard in the country,
but weeping and lamenting, and Herod himself, although he wept at the
beginning, was thought afterward to grieve somewhat, when he reflected upon
those commendable parts, which were in the youth, and he repeated this fact,
when Antony by Cleopatra her procurement, at Alexandra her suite, sent for him
to answer for it, but before he went to make his answer, he sent such
effectually pleading presents, as when he came, all which he swore and
forswore was believed, and contrary to the expectation of the whole world and
his own, was not only acquitted of this cruel murder, but also used in most
friendly and familiar manner. The children which Alexander and Aristobulus,
Herod's sons by Mariamnes left behind them, were too young at this time to lay
claim to the kingdom, although afterward Agrippa, who was son to
Aristobulus, enjoyed it.

But Archelaus showing himself to be Herod's son in all things which might vex
the Jews, brought them all into such humors, as they cared not what King they
had, so that they might be freed from Herod's kindred, and some of them without
any head, opposed themselves at Jerusalem against the Romans, as the
cheifest authors of their miseries, others seeing no possibility of
withstanding the Romans, who were now become conquerours of all the world,
made suite at Rome to the Emperor Augustus, that they might be altogether
under the Romans government. Some followed one named Judas, whose father
Ezechias had in Herod's time troubled the whole country, and they were the more
encouraged to accept him for their King, because at Sephoris, the cheifest
City of Galile, he took the Storehouse, wherein was exceeding much armor,
with the which he armed those who followed him. Others about Hierico, were
contented to honor one named Simon with the title of a King, he had served
Herod in his life time, and now persuaded himself that he had as much right
unto the kingdom, as Herod his master had before him: whereupon to show some
forwardenesse, he burned and spoiled many Palaces therabout, and gave what
was to be gotten, among his soldiers. But these factions continued not so
long, as that which a shephearde began of a huge stature and strength, his
name was Athronges, he had four brethren, not much inferior to himself,
whom he made governors of those multitudes which flocked unto him, but in
the end some of the brethren being taken, the other upon condition yielded unto
Archelaus.

Others hearing a rumor, that Alexander one of Herod's sons, whom he had by
Mariamnes, was yet living, believed it, because they much wished it, and no
honor due unto a King, was thought too much for him, he was brought to Rome
in most princely manner, with hope to have this kingdom of Palestina, and to
requite all those, who had in this sort maintained him.

But Caesar, who knew that Herod was too careful to let any of them escape
death, who he resolved should die, especially such as whose kind he feared,
would not believe that any such report could be true, yet hearing that many
thousands of people would not only say it, but swear it, he began somewhat
to doubt, and sent Celadus, who had been a companion with Alexander and
Aristobulus while they lived at Rome, to see what this should mean, and
whether it were Alexander or some counterfeit, but both his countenance and his
skill in all matters concerning Palestina was such as Celadus returned answer,
that it could be no other then the same Alexander. Then did Caesar (...) for
him, congratulating his happy escape, and demanding for his brother
Aristobulus, was answered that he stayed in Cyprus until he heard of
Alexanders safe arrival in Italy, least that the Jews should by the casualtie
of the seas, hazard all their hope in one voyage, but before he had long
talked with this Alexander, he perceived somewhat differ in his countenance
from Al^^anders favor, and in the end by that, and some defect in his
behavior, (which was not possible to be in Alexander, who in all points, as
well in behavior as countenance, showed himself a maruailous brave and
towardly prince, Caesar persuaded himself that this was some counterfeit, and
not Alexander Herod's son: beside that, he felt his hand very hard and
rough, more like unto some peasants hand of the country, then the hand of a
prince. Wherefore in some earnest manner, but with fair speeches, he commanded
him to show truly who he was, and who had put this attempt into his head, and
promised him his pardon. Alexander not having now his tutor at his elbow,
discovered himself, and of whom he had all his instruc^ion^s, at which after
Caesar had a while laughed, Alexander was sent to the gallyes, and his tutor
put to death, by which means all went still current with Archelaus, who
presuming much upon the Emperor his favor, hid nothing of his own
disposition, but ruled where he had authority with so much tyranny, as both
the Jews and Samaritanes joined together (who were ever deadly enemies, after
their persecution under Antiochus Epiphanes, at what time the Samaritanes
renounced both Gods law, and alliance with the other part of Palestina, and
sacrificed both to whom, and where Antiochus would have them, and sent an
Embassage to Rome unto the Emperor, where they touched Archelaus with so many
crimes, that about nine years after he began^^ his reign, the Emperor
banished him into France to Vienna, and seized upon all that was his, adding
that part of the country (over which before Archelaus was tetrarch) unto
Siria, and sent one from Rome to govern it.

Thus came Jerusalem the cheifest City of Palestina, under the government of
the Romans, who although they often attempted as Herod had before them, to
profane the temple, yet at their times every thing was performed in the
temple, which was accustomed to be done before. The Romans saw that
Archelaus and Herod made it no matter of religion to change the high priest so
often as they listed, and that liberty also they used, contrary to the custom
which was always observed among the Jews, for while one high priest once
chosen was living, no one did the office of the high priesthood but he, except
upon some accident he were not fit for it, as once it chanced, that the
high priest dreaming that he lay with his wife the night before he was to
offer a solemn sacrifice, was accounted unclean for that which passed from
him in his sleep, at which time another for that day supplied his place, for
they required great purity in the priests which did their f^nctions in the
Temple. Antiochus Epiphanes was the first that did substitute one in the high
priests room while the other lived. Aristobulus forced his brother Hircanus
to leave both the kingdom and priesthood to him, and the third time that the
highpriest was changed, was when Herod placed or displaced Ananelus, for
Aristob, his wives brother, but afterward it became a very ordinary matter,
which both Herod, Archelaus, and the Romans did the more boldly, because in
the time of their government, they had the keeping of the high priests rich
ornaments, until Vitellius sending away Pilate (called Pontius, because he came
from governing Pontus* to bear some sway at Jerusalem, although at that timex
he was not made president of the country) and willing to gratify the Jews,
beside many other privileges, gave the^ also the keeping of those ornaments,
which first fell into Herod's hands, when they seized on that Palace, which
afterward he made a very strong Castle, and called it after the name of his
friend Antony, who was his chiefest stay during his life. This palace did
belong to the Machabees, and Hircanus high priest and prince of the country,
hau^ng his palace so near unto the Temple, would use no other place to put
on, or off his attire but this, and in a^^hest for the purpose, he always
locked up his ornaments, which order was observed by those who succeeded him
and Herod getting the kingdom, and finding this chest with the ornaments,
thought it good policy to have them still in his own keeping, and thereby in
some sort to be able to bridle the Jews. Archelaus succeeded his father, and
kept them in the same manner, and when he was banished, the Romans entered
upon the Castle, and all things which they found there: yet to content the
Jews, the president kept a lamp continually burning before them, which was
accounted a reverent keeping of these holy ornaments, and delivered them seven
days before they were to be used, that they might be purified before the
feast, for they were accounted as profaned by lying in a profane house, or by
passing through profane hands, but the next day after they were used, they
were brought back to the president, and locked up until they were to be used
again, which was but thrice ordinarily in the year.

The young prince, who a long time appeared no other then a carpenter, in the
thirtieth year of his age begins to finish that, which at the first he
intended to frame, which whosoever shall prosecute, and show in what sort he
vncharmed the Lady, which was enchaunted by eating of the fruit of a tree, by
choking the inchaunter with no other thing, then what also a tree did bear,
shall both find a most pleasant entrance, and when he has entered, an
endless entising paradise.

FINIS.
Page. Line. Faults escaped. 3. 25 seed, read feed. 14 22 take, read take.
19 11 appointed to, read appointed by God to. 21 12 a Eedar, read of Ce^ar.
23 17 anointed, read accounted. 27 12 stayres, read stories. 28 18 seemed,
read served. 30 7 miage, read image. 32 16 Sedechias and his, read Sedechias
his, 34 10 some four, read some forty five. 35 30 sides, read side. 38 12
in a dangerous, read in dangerous. 24 manor, re. de manor house. 40 23
vnth, read unto. 44 3 or that, read of that. 21 of her, read to her. 45 22
proceed read proceeds. 48 8 worked, read marked. 11 spoke, read speak,
29 inconvenience, r, incombrance. 50 15 battering, read bettering. 60 28
whom, read where. 63 11 secure, read former. 65 10 feigned, read framed. 67
31 many, read as many. 68 30 and his, read and his joy. 69 25 How think you
will, read who think you will. 73 15 descent, read descent. 79 16 Capitol,
read Capitol fell down. 77 1 hitherto, read heretofore. 12 Tiumiari, read
Triumuiri. 15 Tr^umu^ri, read ^uum viri. 78 10 hundred ten times, read a
hundred times 25 throne, she, read throne, and she. 79 12 description, read
inscription. 22 David, read Daniel. 82 7 restised, readeresisted. 85 7
against, read prevailed against. 86 5 will, read woe. 5 amazed, read amated.
8 Achum, read Actium. 88 14 Iasme, read Iosue, 25 Ephrada, read Ephrata. 90
10 enreated, read entered. 29 his arms, read her arms. 93 10 labor, read
labors. 98 10 rathero, read rather to. 22 foreshew, read foreslow. 101 24
boster, read bolster. 103 19 other, read either. 105 21 sought, read song.
108 29 secret, read so great. 109 12 and she, read and he. 110 21
significant, read so significant. 117 22 it, read is. 117 3 spread, read
speed. 119 23 in middle, read in the middle. 121 28 and, read, and as it was
so 126 21 there, read three. 132 21 brought, read bought. 30 Alemius, read
Alcimus. 133 22 natural, read mortal. 137 18 Prince, read price. 138 2
easily, read daily. 7 imparting, read imported. 141 7 ten days, read forty
days. 146 19 alms, read a lamb. 21 alms, read a lamb. 27 Hilleb, read
Hillel. 147 2 Hilleb, read Hillel. 149 21 performed, read profaned. 151 31
Aylous, read Azotus. 152 3 things made of, read thing of* 155 3 riot, read
report. 156 3 age then another of, read age of. 164 8 Ahotus read Azotus. 165
5 answered, read accused. 172 16 assistance, readeresistance. 174 15 Phese,
read Phase. 177 16 moat upon, read meat, upon. 179 13 it was, read it was
first. 18 prayed, read and prayed. 184 1 first, read the first. 31 passed
and, read passed to and 187 24 wast, read worse. 190 25 names, read manners.
25 soon, read same. 192 24 priesthood, read highpriesthood. 193 21
performed, read and performed, 194 13 repeated read repented. 196 25 seek,
read send. 197 18 instruments, read instructions.


