MR. PILKINTON HIS PARALLELA DISPARALLED.

AND The Catholic Roman faith maintained against Protestantisme.

By ANT. CHAMPNEY Sorbonist, and author of the Manual of Controversies,
impugned by the said Mr. Pilkinton.

WE WISH THAT THOSE WOULD depart from their own frowardnes, who against
Christ, carry the ensign of Christ, and against the Gospel, brag of the
Gospel which they understand not. Aug. ep. 61. ad Dulcit.

Cited by Mr. Pilkinton against himself.

AT S. OMERS, For JOHN HEIGHAM.

With permission, Anno 1620.

Mr. PILKINTON HIS PARALLELA DISPARALLED. AND THE CATHOLIC ROMAN faith
maintained against Protestantisme.

By ANT. CHAMPNEY Sorbonist and author of the Manual of Controversies impugned
by the said Mr. Pilkinton.

We wish that those would depart from their own frowardnes, who against
Christ, carry the ensign of Christ, and against the Gospel, brag of the
Gospel which they understand not. Aug. ep. 61. ad Dulcit. Cited by Mr.
Pilkinton against himself.
To Mr. George Abbat, called by some, Archbishop of Canturbury.
IT is now three whole years I appealed to your judgment in a matter of
difference and controversy betwixt a minister of your own making, or
allowance at least, Mr. Francis Mason, and my self; concerning the vocation
and consecration as well of your own person, as of all the rest of the
protestant Bishops and ministers in England. And though hitherto I have
received no notice of any Sentences given by you in this Controversy (because
for seeinge as I suppose, that you cannot pass your Sentence thereupon,
without prejudice either of your own interest, or reputation, you willingly
dissemble the matter) yett am I moved to demand your judgment in another
difference, betwixt another minister of yours, Mr. Richard Pilkinton, and my
self. For where as I set forth five years a go a brief Manual of
Controversies, contayninge only seven sheets of Paper, proouinge all the
cheifest heads of controversy by Scriptures only; he, this last year, to
cross the same, has printed a foul great book of fifty sheets, calling
it, Parallela. Which book he dedicateth to you. In whose Epistle Dedicatorie,
though there be as many falsities and impertinencies, as there are in so
manies lines of the rest of his book; yet shall they pass without other touch
in particular, then this general reprehension (as either refutinge themselves,
or not worthy refutinge of purpose) only I cannot omit these brauinge words
of his which follow. This popish agent (he means the author of the Manual) I
have undertaken, and stripped him of his armor, which he has usurped,
shewinge his proofs to be as weak, as his positions are wicked, that his
blind religion may appear unto all to be nothing but an heap of untruths
without patronage of holy Scriptures. Which encounter I now offer unto the
view of the world, under the shield of your graces protection, who first
encouraged me to this battle, and can best of all men judge (as the most
experienced general in this sacred warfare) on which side the truth
propendeth. In which words he does not only vainlie brag of the victory
already achieued, but also acknowledges to have received this task from you,
and perferringe your judgment of his trauells before all other men's, offers
his book unto you, nothing doubtinge either of your approbation or
protection. Therefore have I made free choice of you for vmpiere betwixt him
and me, to judge whether he has indeed stryped me of mine Armor, as he
braggeth, and whether his proofs or mine be stronger, and more pertinent to
the purpose for which they are produced. I say of the proofs only, for of the
positions themselves, I houlde you not a fit or competent judge. And were it
not, that I am very confident in the clearenes of my cause, and am also
persuaded that you will not prejudice your reputation with the world so far,
as to give your judgment against a manifest truth, I would not be so unadvised
as to put my cause into so unequal and partial a judge his hands, as all men
know you to be, between me and mine adversary. Nevertheless the premises
being considered I will not refuse your judgment in this cause: Only I will
request of you to peruse that which has been said on either part, before you
give your judgment of the cause it self; And this I think I may justly
demand of you, without incurringe any special obligation of particular
grace or favor: which being performed, I freely permit you to pass your
opinion of the difference, as you shall think most conformable to equity, and
important for your own reputation. Whereof, I marvel not a little, you had so
small reguarde, as to let go forth into the view of the world, with so much
testimony of your allowance and approbation, such a piece of stuff as Mr.
Pilkinton has set to sale in this book. Which (to speak without prejudice
of others that may seem to conte^d with him for the price of ignorance,
impertinencie and peruersitie) I think is one of the seeliest and shallowest
things that has seen sun in this age* And therefore a judicious friend
(having looked a little into it) told me I was not to expect any honor by
vndertakinge such an adversary. Wherefore I advise you for your own credit
sake, to be more wary hereafter, then to let such birds fly abroad with
your name in their forehead. ^^r the blemishe and stain which they bring with
them, will stick as fast in your face, as ^ ^^th in that of the author, yea
by so much the faster, by how much more eminent your name and authority is,
or ought to be above his. And so wishinge you from my very heart more love
and affection to the Catholic truth and verity, then hitherto you have
showed, without which your part will infalliblie be with the Father of all
falshoode: For, qui non credit iam iudicatus est, he Joan. 3. 18
that believes not is already judged; I leave you to his disposition whose
providence is never deceived; though his will whereby he wishes us well, be
not always fulfilled, we our selves only being in fault thereof.

Doway this last of June 1619. Your true friend, though enemy to your
errors, A. CHAMPNEY.

TO THE JUDICIOUS READER.
IN the year 1614. (good reader) I put forth in print at the request of a
friend, a brief Enchiridion or Manual of controversies, proouinge the
Catholic faith in 38. several heads of controversy by the text of holy
Scripture it self; which contayninge but only seven sheets of paper, Mr.
Richard Pilkinton, who styles himself doctor of Divinity, after four whole
years, pretends to answre, and for that purpose has set forth a book of
fifty sheets thinkinge to cover by multitude of words, that which with force
of argument he could not impeache nor make obscure. His book came but to my
hands the last of February this present year, when I was both indisposed in
my health, and had newly received a command from those who could command me,
to transporte myself from Paris, where then I lived, to Douay. So that until
the fourteenth of May, I could not begin to think seriously of any reply to
him, though I had in the mean while run over some part of his book, and
also noted something therein to that purpose. Where Mr. Pilkinton may
peradventure say as he says of the Manual, that it well appears to have
^ee^ do^^e in haste, and yett not in such short time but another might well
have made diverse such replies in the same space; as Apelles answered to one,
who sheweinge him a picture, and saying he had made it in one day: But be ytt
that Mr. Pilkintons wit and dexterity, could have performed much more in the
same time, yett I confess that mine could do noe better; the other
employments wherein the greatest part of my time is taken up, lyinge upon
me. Neither does Mr. Pilkinton need much to brag of his dexterity and
expedition in this kind; seeinge he has bestowed four whole years or very
near in answereinge only seven sheets of paper, and that also so shallowly
and seelily, that there is much less difficulty to refute his answer, then
to Coppie out or transcribe his words. I have replied to all he says as it
lies in his book so far as I go with him, relatinge his own words, least
he should complain of ill dealinge, as if something of moment were left
untouched; And both he and the reader may likewise understand, that I might
with as much facility have refuted the rest of his book, had it been either
necessary or proffitable to have bestowed the labor in transcribinge it, and
cost in printinge it. I would wish thee good reader to take special notice of
the preface, which may serve thee as a key not only to this small treatise, but
also to other works of greater moment, and generally to all controversies. In
the answereinge whereof as Mr. Pilkinton has been more laborious, so has he
also showed himself more impertinent and perverse. Read the whole with
attention if thy leisure will permit thee, and compare diligently his
proofs and mine together, and after do not spare to give thy Censure thereon
as thou shall think good in gods name. And if thou receiuest any proffit by
my small labor, I shall think it well bestowed, and as fully recompensed as
I expect or desire in this world. God ever keep thee and me also. This first
of July. 1619.

APPROBATIO.
Ego infrascriptus S. Th. Doctor and Collegij Anglorum Duaceni Praeses, legi
libellum inscriptum Mr. Pilkinton his Pararelle Disparelled, Autore Magistro
Antonio Champneyo S. Th. Doctore Sorbonico: nihilque in eo reperi aduersum
fidem Catholicam vel bonos mores, sed eandem fidem Catholicam in nonnullis
propugnatam, and aduersarij ineptias and frauds detectas. Quocirca iudico
eundem vtiliter praelo committi posse.

Datum Duaci die decima Decembris, Anno salutis 1619. Matthaeus Kellisonus.

Mr. PILKINTONS PARALLEL DISPARALLELD.
Mr. Pilkinto^ after his own Epistle Dedicatorie to his Gracious Patron of
Canterbury, and his shapeles answer to my short Epistle to the reader (for
so exact he would seem to be that he lets nothing pass without an
answer) he begins his encounter as follows.

PILKINTON.
A brief Synopsis of popish positions avouched by the Manualist, directly
contradicted by the Fathers.

CHAMPNEY.
I may err and fail, as all other men may; but obstinate in error by gods
grace I shall never be. Neither will I ever be but a scholar and child of the
orthodox Fathers. If therefore by oversight, ignorance or error which are
defects incident to all men, I have uttered any thing contrary to their
doctrine, I do here willingly and wittinglie recall and retract it. But let
us hear the direct contradictions you speak of.

PILK.
All articles of faith are not contained so Thesis papist. 1.
much as indirectlie and implicitlie in the holy Scriptures.

CHAMP.
You were very ill advised to use such evident corrupt dealinge in the very
first line of your book. This position, set down by you, is no more mine,
then your Parallel, is my Manual. But you prove your self a fit scholar of
your old Masters. My position is this. All such articles as are of faith, are
not contained so much as indirectlie or implici^lie in holy scriptures, but
only so far as the scriptures contain and testify the authority of the
Church and Tradition. To this position let us now see your Antithesis of the
Fathers.

PILK.
In those things that are plainly set down in the holy scripture, all
poinctes are found that concern either belief or life.

CHAMP.
If your wits had been at home when you wrote Antithesis Aug. lib. 2 de
doctr. christ. c. 6.
this, you would easily have seen this doctrine of S. August: to have hadd no
opposition with my position. For my proposition, were it set down in these
words. All articles of faith are contained in scriptures so far as they
testify the Authority of the Church, and Traditions. Which you will not, as
I suppose, deny to be the very same in sense with the position set down in
the Ma^uall; I would learn of you wherein you putt the antithesis betwixt this
position, and that of S. August. But let S. August. Cont. Crescon. lib. 1.
cap. 33.
himself be judge of this matter. Although (says he) no example of this
thing (speaking of the validity of Baptism, ministered by heretics) be
brought out of holy scriptures, yett do we follow the truth of the same
scriptures in this point, whilst we do that which pleases the whole Church,
which the authority of the scripture does commend. Whereby you see S. August.
to teach some articles of faith not otherwise to be contained in holy
scriptures, but so far only as they commend unto us the authority of the
Church, which is that my position says; and therefore your antithesis is in
your own brain that seems to be at odds with all true doctrine. And
marueyle truly it is to me, with what countenance you produce S. Aug. doctrine,
as though you attributed to him some authority, saying in the Lib 2. d^ doct.
chri. cap. 5.
very chapter immediately goinge before the place alleged by you, amongst
the other canonical books of holy scriptures, he numbreth the books, of
Ecclesiasticus, Sapientia, Tobie, ^udith, and the Machabees all rejected by
you: and beginning the chapter where you would take your antithesis, says
thus. In his omnibus libris timentes Deum, and pietate mansueti quaerunt
voluntatem Dei. In all these books, those that fear God, and are endued with
true piety seek the will of God. If now you make any esteem of S. August.
judgment, what case are you in, that reject these books of holy scripture as
apocriphall, whence he says all pious and those that fear God, do seek his
will: but this only by the way.

PILK.
The holy Apostles delivered by word of Thesis papist. 2.
mouth more things to be believed and observed by this church, then either they
found written or wrote themselves.

We know not the disposition of our Antithesis Ireneus lib. 3. c. 1*
salvation from any other then from them by whom the Gospel came to us,
which first they preached, and after by the will of God delivered unto us in
the holy scriptures to be the foundation and pillar of our faith.

CHAMP.
If you had taken but ordinary heed what you wrote, you would not have said
that my position has any opposition with S. Ireneus; who says not that the
Apostles wrote all they preached, as he should have don to make your antithesis
good, but only that they wrote the same gospel which they preached, and not a
different or contrary doctrine to their preachinge, as some profane
heretics of whom he makes there mention impudentlie taught, which sense of
this Father your self acknowledge page 5. But if you will needs make this
consequence they wrote that which they preached, ergo, they wrote all that they
preached, (as you must argue if you will make any antithesis betwixt my
position and S. Ireneus his doctrine) I will say that either you have forgotten
your logic, or that you never had any. For to make or infer an universal
proposition, of an indefinite in n^n necessarijs, is most absurd, as you shall
see by these examples. Homo est albus vel caluus, ergo omnis homo est a ^us vel
caluus* or, the king writes that he speaks and thinks, therefore he
writes all he speaks or thinks. Moreover, of S. Ireneus his judgment
concerning traditions, you might have informed your self by the chapter
immediately followinge that which you cite, where he has these words. When
we appeall to that tradition (which descendinge from the Apostles, is by the
succession of priests in the Church preserved) they, to wit heretics, reject
Traditions.

PILK.
The scriptures are dark and difficult to be Thesis papist. 3.
understood, and all articles of faith are not clearelie laid down in them.

All things are clear in the holy scriptures Antithesis Epiphan. haeresi 76.
to them that come to them with a godly mind.

CHAMP.
The position of the Manual which you aim at as this. All places of holy
scripture containinge articles of faith (the obstinate misbeleefe whereof is
damnable) are not easy to be understood, but require some rule to be
interpreted by. Now if you will maintain this position to be opposite to S.
Epiphanius, you must grant that your doctrine is opposite to him, which I
evidently show in this manner. In the roll of positions which you say are
forged by me against you, and are set down by you in the next page of your
book; This in the second. All places of holy scripture conteininge articles
of faith, are easy to be understood, which proposition if you will reject as
none of yours, as you do in the place mentioned; then must necessarily the
contradictorie proposition which is the same with mine here carped at by you,
and which you say is opposite to S. Epiphanius be, yours, and then do you
contradict S. Epiphanius, if you will say that I do. Or if you will confess
the truth, and acknowledge this latter proposition. to be yours, as doubtless it
is, why do you then charge me with forgeinge it against you? Accord your own
sayings, and then shall I know what to answer unto. In the mean while, you
are unfortunate to stumble so grossly (if contradictinge your self in so
short a space may be termed only stumblinge) in the very entrance of your
dispute. My position shall be showed agreeable both with holy Scriptures and
ancient Fathers in due place. And as for your authority alleged out of S.
Epiphanius, if it be in him (as I know no^ whether it be or not, for it is
cited by you so at large that I cannot find it) it may have this true sense
and meaning; That all things are clear in scriptures to such, as come to
them with this mind to understand them as the catholic Church and the true
pastors thereof interpret them. Which saying has noe contrariety at all with
my position. For I do not say that the scriptures are hard to be understood
by the church, or that they need another rule to be interpreted by then the
Churches understanding and interpretation.

PILK.
The sense of the holy scriptures given by the Thesis papist. 4.
church is vnfalliblie true; as are also the definitions and declarations of
faith delivered by the same, and every one is bound upon his damnation not
to reject the judgment thereof.

Who knows not that the holy scriptures Antithesis Aug. lib 2 de Bapt. c^nt*
D^n^tist. c. 3.
as well of the old as new testament is contained in certain bounds and so
is to be preferred before all the latter writings of Bishops, that noe man
ought to doubt at all or call in question, whether it be true or right,
whatsoever is written therein; when as the writings of Bishopes that have been
or are written after the canon confirmed, may lawfully be reprehended, both by
the wiser speech of any that is more skillful in that matter, and by grauer
authority of other Bishopps and wisdom of the learned, and also by counsels
if they have in any point wandered from the truth: and even national and
prouincial counsels do give place to those that are collected out of the
whole universal Christian world: and general counsels themselves are often
amended, the former by the latter, as often as by trial and experience the
thing was opened, that before was shutt; or known that was hidd; without any
swellinge of sacrilegious pride, or stiff neck of arrogancy, or contention
of deadly envy, with holy humility, with Catholic peace, with Christian
charity.

CHAMP.
You do greatly abuse your readers patience farceinge your book with such
impertinencies. And you do no less wrong the holy Father S. August bringinge
his words as co^tradictinge the churches infallibility in matters of faith,
and interpretation of the scriptures, which he so often and so evidently
restifieth. But to convince you of wilfulnes in abusinge S. Aug. it shall
suffice to set here before you that only Testimony of the same holy Father
which is expressed in the Manual in proof of this position which you would
have him to contradict. His words there set down are these. Although noe
example Aug. Lib. 1. cont. Crescen. cap. 33.
is brought out of holy scripture of this thing (that the Baptism of
heretics is sufficient) yett do we follow the truth of the same scripture
in this point, whilst we do that which pleases the whole Church, which the
authority of scriptures does commend. And because the holy scripture cannot
deceive, whosoever fears to be deceived by the obscurity of these questions,
let^ him consulte thereupon with the church, which without all doubt the
scriptures do show. Judge now with your self whether you or I speak more
conformablie to S. Aug. That which you allege out of him of the doctrine of
particular Bishopps or counsels, compared with the doctrine of holy scripture,
is altogether impertinent to your purpose. That which he says of universal
counsels that the former may be amended by the latter, is understood of
matters pertayninge to manners or practice, which often are changed according
as circumstances of time and place change and alter, as experience teaches,
and not of matters of faith and belief, which are ever the same without any
change or alteration. So that my position has no other contrariety with S.
Aug. doctrine, then heat has with white, or hearing with seeinge.

PILK. Thesis papist. 5.

Universality is a note to find out the church by.

Attend not those companies that go Antithesis Aug. in Psalm. 39.
the broad way, they are many and who cann number them? and few go in the
narrow way: bring forth thy weights, and weighe them; see what a deal of
chafe for a littell corn.

CHAMP.
The farther you go, the more your ignorance or obstinacy does appear. Are
you not ashamed to make S. Aug. at odds with the Apostles and Nycen Creed,
both which make universality a note and propriety of the true church? Besides
are you so shallow brayned that you see not, that S. Aug. speaks here of
baddly living Christians, which make not diverse churches, but are as Chafe
in the same ba^ne or flore with the good Corn, and not of misbeleeuing
heretics and Sectaries which make their conuenticles a part out of the
church, and are never comparable to the true church, for universality either
of time or place? Again why do you charge me in the page followinge with
forgeinge this proposition and fatheringe it upon you: ^he true church of
christ is not necessarily Catholic or universal* either in respect of
place or time: if you will deny vniuersallity to be a note of the true church?
You are so busied to make contrarieties betwixt my positions and the fathers
doctrine, that you run into evident contradictions with your self, and that
within the space of a little leaf of paper. Either confess the cause which you
would defend to be so badd that it inforceth you to these absurdities, or
leave the defense of it to some others of better skill and judgment.

PILK. Thesis papist. 6.*

The true church of God is visible and apparent, both to the saithfull
believers that are in it, and also to heretics and others that are out of it.

What church now freely serves Antithesis Athana. in epist ad so^^^. vita^
agentes.
Christ? For if it be godly it is exposed to dangers; and if there be in any
place faithful servants of Christ, as in all places there are many, they like
unto the great prophett Elias are secret, and hide themselves in dens and
caves of the earth, or wandringe up and down, remain in the wilderness.

CHAMP.
If you would have proved the truth of my position and the conformity thereof
with the doctrine of S. Athanasius, you could not easily have done it more
effectually, then by the testimony you bring out of him to prove the
contrary; so deuoyde of judgment are you in all your sayings. For the church
that is exposed to dangers, that is in all places, and is persecuted, is
doubtless visible both to the faithful, and to the heretics. Yea those
servants of Christ that like unto Elias hide themselue^ in dens, and remain
in the wilderness, are not invisible more then the catholics now are in
England, whereof some part is in prison, others are in woods and
wildernesses, as these were of whom S. Athanasius speaks. And if you could
show such a visible church of protestants before Martin Luther, you would not
use the shameless shift of an invisible church whereunto you are driven by
mere necessity.

PILK.
S. Peter was by our Savior Christ constituted Thesis papist. 7.
supreme head or sovereign Bishop, or pastor over his whole church
militant.

Christ gave to all his Apostles equal Antithesis Cyprian. de vnitat.
power after his resurrection, and said as my Father sent me, so send I you,
receive the holy ghost: whose sins you remitt, they are remitted: and a
little after; the rest of the Apostles were the same that Peeter was; endued
with like fellowshippe both of honor and power.

CHAMP.
The equality of power to remitt sins, or as the divines term it power of
order (of which equality S. Cyprian speaks) in all the Apostles, does stand
well with the supremacy of the power, of jurisdiction and government, which S.
Cyprian gives to S. Peeter. Again all the Apostles were of equal power in
respect of the rest of the church, but not in respect of themselves. For one
head was chosen says S. Hierome that the occasion of schism Contra Iouinianum.
might be taken away. Where you are also to note, that if you will still
persist to urge the equality of power in all the Apostles, out of this
testimony of S. Cyprian; you must also in like manner conclude the equality
of honor in them all, which notwithstanding none of you dare to do, in
regard of so many prerogatives clearly given to S. Peter* both in holy
scriptures and by all antiquity: For which reason Spalatensis who has
strugled more peruersly against S. Peter his supremacy, then any other
heretic hitherto, does grant unto him a supremacy in diverse respects,
thinkinge thereby (as (...) he is malicious and perverse) by grauntinge him
some part of his due, more easily to deprive him of the rest. Either cease
therefore to impugn S. Peter his supreamacie out of this testimony of S.
Cyprian, or if you will continue still to do it, take his whole words and
sense, and so shall you make him opposite to your selves.

PILK.
The Bishop of Rome is the lawful and lineall Thesis papist. 8.
successor of S. Peter, in that charge and office which our Savior gave unto
S. Peter over his church militant.

Let none of us make him self bishop Antithesis Cypr cited by S. Aug. lib 2.
de bap. contr. Dona^. c. 2
of bishops, or by tyrannical fear force his fellows to necessity of
obedience, seeinge every bishop has free liberty and license of his own
power and may not judge another, no more then another may judge him, but let
us expect the judgment of our Lord Jesus. Christ, who only and alone has
power to prefer us in the government of the church, and to judge of our acts.

CHAMP.
I know not whether I should ascribe it to ignorance or peruersitie, that you
produce this Testimony as opposite to my position. For no man of common sense
that reads in S. Aug. whence you cite it, but will judge it most
impertinentlie alleged for your purpose. S. Cyprian there speakinge to his
fellow Bishopps of Affricke, willinge them to give their opinions of the
matter proposed (which was touching the Baptism of heretics) professinge to
keep union and communion with them that should judge other ways then he did.
And this without mention or intention to include in his speech the Bishope of
Rome, but directs his words to the Bishops present for that particular
matter which there he proposed unto them.

PILK.
To holy Saints and Angels in heaven, is due Thesis papist. 9.
more then civil honor and reverence.

We honor the Angels with love not service, we build them no temples etc*
our Antithesis Aug. de vera relig. cap. 55.
religion teaches us not to worship dead men.

CAMP.
Your ignorance or peruersitie if not both, lies so open to all men, that
nothing else appears hitherto in you. If you had read S. Aug: and but half
understood him, you would never have dreamed of any Antithesis betwixt my
position and his doctrine. He speakinge manifestly of that service which is
due only unto God, called of divines Latria whereof my position is not meant.
And if to make your Antithesis good, you will contend that there is no other
religious woshippe or service but only that which is called Latria and is only
due unto God, learn of S. Aug* to correct your senseless error. Who
disputing against Faustus and haueinge confessed the religious worship of
Martyrs, to prevent your error, adds these words. But with that worship
C^t. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 21.
which in Greek is called Latria, and in Latin cannot be expressed in one
word, being a service due only to the divinity, we neither worship nor
teach to be worshipped but God only. Read the whole chapter and see his
doctrine more at large and you shall find that in S. Aug. opinion, Christian
religion does not forbid the religious worship of ma^tirs who are no more
to be called dead men, then Abraham Isaac and Jacob of whom our Savior
himself testifies that they are living. Matt: 22: 32:

PILK.
To pray to the angels and Saints in heaven Thesis papist. 10.
is lawful and derogateth no whit at all from the mediation of Christ.

The martirs are nominated in their place Antithesis Aug. lib. 22 de ci^. Dei
c. 10.
and order, but yett are not prayed unto by the priest that offers Sacrifice.
That prayer which is not made by Christ, not only does not abolish sin, but
it self is Aug. Psalm. 108*
turned into sin.

CHAMP.
Though I be already weary of your impertinencies, yett will I not stick to
refute this last, which is as apparent as the rest. First therefore, though
you take the words of S. Aug. as nakedlie as you set them down, yett do
they sound noe Antithesis with my position, he only denyinge, that Sacrifice
is to be offered to martyrs which the manual affirms not. Secondly S. Aug.
speaks only of such invocation* as the heathens used to their false Gods,
as you your self cannot deny if you would but read that same chapter, which
is by you alleged, and therefore his doctrine cannot co^tradict my position
which makes not Saints to be Gods, nor yett to be worshipped as such.
Furthermore in this your allegation, I note the shameful beggarie and misery
of your cause, which is such that you cannott beg or borrowe of the holy
Fathers the least seeminge cover for one soar without gaulinge or discoueringe
another. For whilst you would cover your heresy of not prayinge to Saints
with a patch borrowed of S. Aug: you shamelessly discover and lay open that
other he^esie of yours wherein you deny the sacrifice of the church. I will
set down S. Aug: words that all such as are not as wilfully blind as your
self may see both your vanity in this Antithesis, and the confutation of your
heresy against the sacrifice of the new Testament.

The Gentiles (says he) built temples, erected alters, Aug. de ciuit. lib. 22.
c. 10.
ordered priests, and did sacrifice to such Gods; (to wit Hercules, Romulus
and the like) But we build not churches to our Martyrs as to Gods, but
memories as to men departed* whose souls live with God; neither do we erect
altars there to Sacrifice thereon to the Martyrs, but we Sacrifice to one God,
who is our God, and the God also of the Martyrs: in which sacrifice they are
named in their place and rank, as men of God who vanquished the world in
confessinge him bu they are not inuocated (to wit as Gods) by the priest that
sacrifices, for he sacrifices to God and not to them* though he sacrifice in
their memory, because he it the priest of God and not of them. And the
sacrifice is the Boddie of Christ, etc. Your other testimony out of S. Aug.
upon the psalm 108. is yett more foolishlie alleged. As though for soothe
those prayers which are made to God by his Saints, were not made unto him by
his son our Savior? Your peruersitie has made you intollerablie ignorant if
you think so. Again S. Aug. there speaks nothing of prayers made to
Saints, but of prayers made by Judas, who sellinge and betrayinge Christ, did
not only not pray by him, but against him, which being so, hence I gather that
if you saw and read S. Aug. your self, you have a most wicked mind,
wittinglie labouringe to induce you^lesse careful and wary reader into
error. A degree of malice almost proper to the devil himself.

PILK.
The like may be verified of the rest.

CHAMP.
If you call this verifyinge, I desire you should always plead against me, and
never for me. For hitherto have you not verified any apparent contrariety
betwixt my position and the fathers doctrine, though you bragginglie pretend
to bring direct contradiction between them. And in this dare I stand to the
judgment of your own patron of Canterbury, upon condition that he will read
the places in the fathers cited by you. I will except that of S. Cyprian
brought for the 7. Antithesis, which though no more true indeed then the rest,
yett has it a more apparancie in words then the rest, and so is willingly
understood by your self, and all the adversaries of S. Peter's primacie.

After your Antithesis you putt down a roll of forged positions as though I
had imposed them upon you and your fellow protestants. To which I answer
first in general, that if it had not pleased you to wink at, and ouerlooke
that which I say neither confusedly nor obscurelie in my preface, you would
not (if you would have said the truth) charge me with forgeing any positions
against you. I will here set down mine own words which shall clear me of
that imputation, I think even with mine adversaries, if they be not wilfully
malignant. Thus therefore I say there. First I jett down the Catholic page 12.
Roman belief in direct and plain positions etc. And last of all I putt down
the position contradictorie to the Catholic doctrine* to the end that the
indfferent reader may more easily judge, whether doctrine has better ground
in holy Scripture. And further that he that will impugn this treatise, may
see, what he has to prove if he will prove any thing to purpose. That is if
he will prove any thing against the Catholic Faith, which only I undertake
in the Manual to prove, and not to impugn or disprooue the protestants,
further then the proof of one contradictorie, is the disproofe of the other.
Without reason therefore do you charge me with forgeinge positions, though
amongst these which I set down under this note in the margent, Protestants
positio^s, some were found, which they do not mantayne (which whether it be
so or no we shall presently examine) for I putt the position contradictorie to
the Catholic, under the title of protestant position for this cause (as I have
said before) that if any protestant will deny or impugn the catholic
position proved by me, he may see the direct position which he is to prove.

If therefore there be any of the catholic positions set down by me,
admitted and acknowledged as true and orthodoxe, then is not the contradictorie
position enforced or imposed upon them to prove. But if they reject all the
Catholic positions as false and erroneous (as they will be found to do) then
must they whether they will or not, acknowledge the contradictorie position to
be theirs, unless they will grant that both contradictorie positions may be
true or both false, which noe man ever yett admitted. And thus much sir for
your charge of forged positions in general, now we will examine the particular.

PILK. POSITIO I.
Forged positions.

All Articles of faith are contained expressly in holy Scripture.

CHAMP.
Of this position thus set down it is true, you say, that it is forged, but
it is by your self, not by me: for it is no where set down by me. The
position of mine which you aim at being this page 20. under this note:
Protestant position 1. All articles of faith are so expresselie contained in
scripture as out of them only full proof may be made thereof. Which position
if you will deny to be yours; take here your own words in witness against
you. If you Pilk. page 35.
mean the sense and substance, and that which may be deduced by necessary
consequence, then it is false that full proof cannot be made of all articles
of faith out of scripture. I am content to bring your own Testimony only in
a thing so manifest, without further proof out of other of your own sect.
Only I cannot sufficiently marueyle, what complexion you are of, that have so
littell care and feelinge of your own credit, and of the cause you would
defend, that you committ so many foul fayles in so few lines. Certainly if
you hold on in this manner, you shall have the prise of all either fall or
foolish fellows that ever blotted paper, but let us proceed further.

PILK. POSITIO II.
All places of holy scriptures contayninge articles of faith are easy to be
understood.

CHAMP.
You fail in puttinge down this position also, (so hard it is for you to
deal honestly) which in the Manual is set down thus. All places of holy
scripture contayninge articles of faith, the obstinate misbeleefe where of is
damnable, are easy to be understood, and therefore require noe rule to be
interpreted by. Which proposition you cannot deny to be yours without denyinge
your self. For do you not remember that in your third Antithesis, you say I
contradict S. Epiphaniu* for saying that the scriptures are dark and
difficult to be understood? why do you therefore deny this position, All
places of scripture contain(...) matters of faith, are easy to be understood,
here set down by you to be yours, unless you will also co^tradict that holy
Father, which you falselie object unto me? but it is is a bootles thing to
tell you of contradictions, they are so frequent with you. Therefore to let
that pass that you may know if you were so ignorant in your own doctrine as
you knew it not before, that it is good protestant doctrine, hear your Father
and founder Luther what he says of his matter. We must give Luth in prafat.
assertionis art. a Leone damnator. De seruo arbitrio.
this sentence the scripture being judge that it is of it self most certain,
most easy, most open or apparent, interpreter of it self, proouinge all
things, iudgeing all things, and illustratinge all things. And in another
place. I say of the whole scripture. I will have noe part thereof to be
obscure. And this shall suffice for the present to purge me of forgerie in this
matter, having more to say thereof hereafter when we shall come to speak of
the article it self if we go together so far.

PILK. POSITIO III.
The true church of Christ is not necessarily Catholic or universal neither
in respect of time nor place.

CHAMP.
This position you set down truly, which I marvel that you deny to be
yours. Because the contradictorie position being admitted for true, as it must
necessarily be, if this be false, your protestant church, which noe wit nor
coninge can ever show to have hadd either kind of universality, must of
necessity be a forged or counterfeit church. And for what other cause think
you did Luther in the Creed, turned by him into Dutch, in steed of the
Catholic church, thrust in the Christian church, but to avoid the force of
the word Catholic? which he did so dislike, that his disciples in the
conferrence at Altemberge rejected a certain proposition Colloquiu^ Altemb.
fol. 154.
ascribed to him wherein was this word Catholic, ^lleadginge for a
sufficient reason of their so doing, because that word Catholic did not
savor Luthers phrase. And for full proof that this position is truly
protestanticall, read the laborious book De authore and essentia
protestanticae Ecclesiae authore Richardo Smitheo, printed this year
containinge ten inevitable demonstrations taken out of the protestants own
doctrine, that Luther was the author of the said protestants church, whence
it necessarily is concluded, that in their doctrine the true church is not
necessarily Catholic, neither in respect of time or place.

PILK. POSITIO IV.
The true church of Christ may be without a lawful personnall succession.

CHAMP.
If you deny this position to be true in your doctrine, then must you
necessarily grant the contradictorie to be true; which if you do your newly
reformed church, will evidently appear no lawful church. And for further
proof of the want of succession of pastors in your English Church, I referr
you to my book in answer to Mr. Mason, which till it be answered (I say
answered indeed, and not only replied unto in a heap of words as you have
done to my Manual) I shall ever hold as a sufficient proof, and as for your
Sister churches of France, they make profession in their very confession of
their^ faith, that the state of the church Art. 31,
haueinge been interrupted, it was necessary that God should raise up men
by extraordinary means to repair his church a new which was ruined Judge
you therefore whether they deny the position which you say is forged by me
against you.

PILK. POSITIO V.
The lawful succession of pastors, may be without Consecration or
authentical mission by any ordinary power residinge in the Church.

CHAMP.
If you houlde your Sister churches of France to be lawful churches you cannot
deny this position to be true in your doctrine, as appears by their
confession even now alleged whereunto I referr you. And as for the
consecration of your pastors of your new church of England, it is so far
from being ordinary, that it was never heard of before King Cap. 12.
Edward the sixth his reign, when first it was devised as I have evidently
proved in my book against Mr. Mason. And therefore though you would seem to
deny this position in word, yett must you necessarily admit it in deed,
unless you will grant freely (that which is true) that you have no true
pastors at all.

PILK. POSITIO VI.
It is not necessary for every man's salvation that he be baptized.

CHAMP.
It seems you have not yett learned the rudiments of your religion, saying
you number this position amongst those that you esteem forged against you. See
therefore for your better instruction in this point of Catechism, your grande
master in reformation John Calvin in Antidoto Concilij ad Sess. cap. 5. and
lib. 4. instit. cap. 16.. 24. 25. Peter Martyr another of your masters upon
these words of the Apostle. Alinqui filij vesiri in mundi essent. 1. Cor.
Fulke Marci 1. Sect. 5. with the whole crew of Puritans or Caluinistes. Or if
you will not look so far, see the first days conferrence of Hampton Court,
and see what you find there of this point. And either blushe at your ignorance
in the principales of your religion, or if you like not the doctrine, leave the
company where it is taught, and unite your self to the Catholic Church
where it is abhorred.

PILK. POSITIO VII.
Matrimony contracted between Christians is but a civil contract.

CHAMP.
You are soon weary of honest dealinge, and quickly return to your
accustomed falsifications. I do blushe in your behalf that I am forced to
tell you so often of it in so few lines. The position in the Manual adds to
the words set down by you; And not Sacrament properly. Which if you had
added, you would have been ashamed to have said the position to be forged. If
you will cavil and say that though it be no Sacrament, yett is it not a bare
civil contract: I, will not stand here to debate that question with you
being not material to my purpose, which was to prove Matrimony to be a
Sacrament, according to the catholic doctrine, above and besides the civil
contract therein contained, and if you should be urged to show in the precise
nature of matrimony, any thing more then a civil contract, seeinge you
deny it to be a Sacrament, you would I know be troubled, and would not
easily quitte your self of that bussines. And Calvin whose authority is of
some weight with you, compares it to the art of husbandry, barbinge and
weauinge lib. 4. Instit. cap. 18.. 34.

PILK. POSITIO VIII.
Baptism and the lords supper are not instruments of Grace, but only signs
of gods good will toward us, or means to stir up faith in us.

CHAMP.
Here again I am constrained to tell you of your false dealinge. The position
set down by me is this. Neither Baptism nor the other Sacraments of the new
law give grace as cause thereof, but are only signs of gods good will
toward us, or means to stir up Faith in us. What material diversity
you will find betwixt this position and the 25. article of your church, I
know not. It says thus. Sacraments be not only badges or tokens of christian
men's profession, but rather they be certain sure witnesses and effectual
signs of grace, and gods goodwill toward us, by which he does work
invisibly in us, and not only quicken, but also confirm and stregthen our
faith in him. And your master in reformation Calvin speaks yett more
conformablie to the position set down by me; hear his own words. This
only office is enjoined to the Sacraments to Instit. li. 4. c 14. 6. and 17.
witness to us and confirm in us gods good will. And again. The Sacraments are
to us from God, as are messengers of gladd bidinge from men; or as an ernest
penny in stricking covenants; as not geueinge any grace of themselves, but
declare and show, and as they are earnest money or tokens) do ratify in us
those things which by gods liberality are given unto us. And for more clear
explication of his meaning he uses in the 18. Section follwinge the examples
of the raynbowe, and of Gedions fleece. And this shall suffice for this present
to clear me of forgerie, and to prove you ignorant in the principales of your
own erroneous doctrine, unless peradventure you be ashamed of it and therefore
deny it to be yours.

PILK. POSITIO IX.
Justification is only remission of sins.

CHAMP.
You are as obstinate in false dealinge as if you had sworn never to deal
truly. The position in the manual is set down in these words.
Justification is only the remission of sins without renmation of spirit or
interior Sanctification. which position if you dare to deny to be truly
protestanticall, all those of your sect that have written of Justification will
condemn you of ignorance in their doctrine.

PILK. POSITIO X.
By Justification sin is only covered and not quite taken away.

CHAMP.
Why did you omit to say as I said, seeing the position set down by me is
so breife in these words. By Justification sin is only covered or not
imputed; and not washed or quite taken away? Surely for noe other cause I
think, but to keep your self in custom with clippinge and gueldinge, as he
did that did steal strawes to keep his fingers in we with filchinge; but
peradventure you feared the word not imputed, so often abused by your
masters; and the word washed, used in the holy Scriptures. Howsoever your
error in imputinge to me sorgerie in this position is not pardonable. Cannot
you utter one position but with manifest falsification or palpable ignorance or
both? Read only the second article of Luther (for I will trouble you with no
more Luther in aser. 2. ar.
referrences at this time and see his doctrine in this point. His words are
these. It is another thing that al sins are remitted, and another that all
sins are taken away. Baptism does remitte all, but it takes none quite
away, but begins only to take them away Again your known doctrine of
imputative and not inherent justice, does it not necessarily enforce you to
say, that our sins are only covered or not imputed, but not washed and quite
taken away?

PILK. POSITIO XI.
Man though helped by Gods grace, has not free will, either to fly ame evil,
or to do good auaylinge to his Salvation, but in both is forced to do that
which God has ordained he should do.

CHAMP.
This position have you truly set down. But why do you say that it is
forged? The sole title of your first master Luther his book de seruo arburio.
might have taught you that it is his professed doctrine. Read further his 36.
article where besides many other things to this purpose he has these
express Luth assert. ar. 36*
words. I said ill that freewill before grace is a mere rule: But I should
have said that frewill is a fiction or a title without the thing. Because it
is in no man's power to think either good or badd, but all things (as Wicleffe
his article condemned at Constance ri helie teaches) do happen by absolute
necessity

And thus you see Sir your Catalogue of antithesis and roll of forged posi^ions
which you muster in the beginning of your book, to deceive your l^sse wary
reader, and disgrace your adversary, is blown away more easily, then a
Cop-webb is broken with the wind, to your own irrecouerable disgrace and
dishonor, unless you prove more solid and sincere in the rest of your book.
Which if you do not, I shall much marueyle if ever you be more employed by
your Metropolitan, either to defend your own, or impugn the Catholic
doctrine.

And before I go any further with you, I would have you to understand, that
when I putt down the position contradictorie to the Catholic, I do not
distinguishe betwixt this or that sect of protestants, but include them all
that hold or teach against the Catholic doctrine, whether they be Lutherans,
Zuinglians, Anabaptists or Parlamentaria^s, all which with the rest of all the
re maligna^t brood, I understand by the name of protestants. Now I will go
forward with you in this order; I will first set down the words of the
Manual in sections as you have divided it, then I will putt down your answer
in your own words, and lastly I will add mine own reply.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
MANVALL. SECTION I.
THis brief treatise (courteous reader) being at the request of a friend
speedily compiled, may serve to convince them of manifest calumny, who no
less untruly, then boldly do affirm the doctrine of the Catholic Roman
Church, to be either against holy scriptures, or at least to have no ground
from them. And it may also give satisfaction unto such, as more upon the
confident boldenes of them that affirm the Roman Religion to be destitute of
scriptures, then upon any other reason, are drawn either to think this to
be true, or at least to doubt of the truth of the contrary.

PILK.
He that advisedly shall read your Manual of Controversies, will easily
believe you were in haste when you contrived it, forgettinge that wise speech
of Cato, reported by Hierome (Sat Epistola 26 ad Pammachium.
cito, si sat been) For whether it were your great celeritie, which is the
mother of many slippes, or whether it be the badnes of your cause, that
admits noe just, scarce probable proof, so perfunctorilie and lightly
(tanquam canis a nido) you have touched these matters, as if of purpose you
would have settled in the minds of men, that which you labor to overthrow. So
that if popery have noe surer footinge in the sacred word of God, then this
which you have found for it, then it will appear noe calumnnie, but a manifest
verity, that the Roman religion is without ground of scripture.

CHAMP.
Mr. Pilkinton though your words be many, and as empty of substance as they
are full of falsities, and therefore will neither quitte labor nor cost to
relate them, yett will I sustain so much pains, as to set them down as they
lie, so far as I shall go with you, I say so far as I shall go with you,
because I intend not to loose so much time as to look through your whole
book. As for the slippes therefore you speak of, if you shall make good but
one quarter so many in my whole book (notwithstanding the the celeritie I
used in compilinge it) as I have allreadie marked gross and flatt falls in
three pages only of yours (after four whole years study in the work) I
promise you faithfully I will commend it to the fire, to be forged a new. And
though Catholic religion (which you disdainsullie call popery) had no other
footinge in holy Scripture, then that which I have set down in proof of it,
yett will it be better grounded, then your protestantisme, even by the judgment
of your own freindes and mine adversaries, if they will but with one spark of
judgment and indifferrencie parallel your proofs and mine together.

PILK.
First you confess that the Scripture is not the total but the partial rule
of your faith, therefore that part of your faith, which is with out the
compass of this rule, has no proof or ground from it, for the rule is that
whereby every thing is proved. Now the things without the Hosiut confess
92. page 38^. post principium.
compass of this rule, your self acknowledge to be many, yea the greatest
part of the Gospel, for the least part is come unto us by writing as others
teach and your self accord: therefore a small part of your faith can claim
this birthright from the Scriptures, but is avouched by your teachers, believed
by your hearers only on the creditt of tradition, which every one might know
if any of your deuines would consigne unto us a catologue of your traditions;
A matter that in conscience they ought to do, fith Come. Trid. sess. 4.
your counsel charge to give equal reverence to traditions, as is afforded
to holy scriptures. And yett none of you have performed this task, least your
adversaries should see the poverty of your religion, how naked it is of the
protection of scriptures; And your selves have a startinge hole to fly unto
unwritten verities and traditions, when you cannot derive your doctrine from
the written word of God.

CHAMP.
I confess the Scriptures to be a partial rule of our faith, if we speak of
those thing which are expresslie contained in Scripture, and therefore I say
there must necessarily be a more universal rule of says the^ the express
Scriptures, by which rule we receive and believe the Scriptures themselves to
be such. And this is true by the judgment of many most judicious protestants.
Notwithsta^ndinge the Manual expresslie teaches that all articles of says
are contained in scriptures, so fair as they testify the authority of the
church and verity of traditions. In which sense the scriptures may truly be
said to be a total rule of our faith.

Where you say that others teach and I accord, that the least part of the
Gospel is come to us by writing: For my self I answer with as much modesty
as I may, that you sowlie belie me. For I never so much as dreamed any such
thing. If you groonde this ficton upon that which I say, I here must Hooker
li. 3 pa. 146. and lib. 1. p. 86. with many more cited in the protestant Apol.
p. 620.
needs be a more universal rule of faith then the scriptures, understanding
me that more things in number are taught us by tradition alone, then by the
written word, (which interpretation you seem to make of my words) I cannot
truly blame my manner of speech, but either your dull or captious
understanding; my words are plain, that because we believe some things
without express scripture, as that there is a holy scripture, and that it is
contained in these and these books, which is no where expressed in holy
scripture, there must necessarily be some other rule more universal, that is,
which teaches some things besides that which is directly expressed in the
holy scripture.

You cite in the margent Hosius whom it seems you understand in the same
manner (I say it seems, for whether it be for negligence or fraud, you make
no reference for what purpose you cite him, neither do you putt down his
words, for so might you have been taken trippinge) but I find nothing in him
soundinge to this purpose. He has this indeed, that the scripture
commaundinge us to hear our pastonrs with whom Christ promised to be always
until the end of the world; it is found true that S. Hierome says, that the
scriptures contain all things.

Our divines you say are bound in conscience to deliver unto you a catologue of
our traditions, saying the Council of Trent charge to give equal credit to
traditions and to holy Scripture. But you are fowly deceived; For our divines
are bound to receive those traditions which the church delivers unto them,
and to desend them against your Cauills, and not prescribe unto the church
what traditions she should receive. This pride and arrogance pertains
properly to you Sectmaisters, who prefer your own private opinions before
the judgment of the whole church, which pride is the very root and cause of
all heresy and error that has been in the world.

PILK.
Nevertheless the most of these positions here Linda panopl li. 4. cap. 6.
Bellar. li. 4. de verbo non scripto. c. 7 and 9. Peresius de tradit.
by you fathered on it (and I doubt not but you have chosen the clearest) are
confessed by your own side not to be of its kindred, but bred and believed
only upon tradition S. Peter's being at Rome, the Popes Supremacy and
succession, prayer to Saints, relics, images, purgatory, seven Sacraments,
Exorcismes, exufflations, and unction in Baptism, real presence,
transsubstantiation, communion under one kind, sacrifice Soto con^. Brentium.
lib. 2. cap. 68.
of Mass, confirmation, penance, orders, extreme unction, matrimony, meritt
of works, monkery, with very many more not expressed by you: so that when you
and your sellowes bringes the scriptures to patronise these points, you fairlie
imitate the ancient heretics, who Athan^. orat. 1. cont.
knowinge their opinions to have no communion with the scriptures, yett
allege them to seduce the simple sort.

CHAMP.
You are resolved I perceive to be shamelessly impudent; not blushinge to write
that the most of the points proved by me out of Scripture to be confessed by
catholics to be believed only upon tradition, and namely all these set
down in your words now related. Why do you deal so vnderboarde as not to
set down the Authors words whose names you putt in the margent? you fear
the trial and therefore you walk in obscurity. So many falsities as you
have been taken with already, will make your reader wary enoughe to believe
you noe further, the^ he sees proof of your sayings. And whether you and
yours, or limitate more fairlie the ancient heretics in alleaginge Scriptures
for their errors to deceive the simple, it will appear by the progress of
our dispute.

PILK.
And how can you persuade the world that Cusan epi. 2. and 7. Bellar. de verbo
lib. 4. c. 7. Baron anno. 53. number. 11.
you purpose in deed to make the scriptures the ground of your faith, which
are branded by your men to be inconstant, and mutable, fitted to the time, and
variablie understood, to be insufficient and imperfect, and explicated by a
council, they firmly prove that which before they did not, that herein
they are ouertopped by Stapl. l. 9. de princip doct c. 1. Hosius de auth scrip.
l 3 p. 530 Greg. valent.
traditions, for that without traditions they firmly subsist not, but without
them traditions have their strenghte, that the authority they have toward
men is derived from the church, and without it they have little force, which
church with you is the Pope. Therefore for all your plea of the scriptures,
the Pope is the Atlas of your faith.

CHAMP.
That the scriptures are branded by any of our me^ to be inconstant, mutable
or fitted to the time, is your own slanderous fiction; or if it be not, bring
forth your author and justify your self of so shameless a slander. That the
scriptures may be diuersslie understood if you deny, who is he of all your
fellows that will believe you? Surely noe man that is awake, but will think
rather that you dreamed when you wrote this, then he will think that the
scriptures cannot be understood diversely, which being so evident by daily
experience, that noe man in his senses can deny it, who sees not the
necessity of some judgment to determine which is the true sense and meaning
thereof. But that is the thing you fear, which rather then you will grant,
you say that which a drunken man would be ashamed to have said.

The insufficiency of the scriptures to instruct the church in all matters of
faith, stands right well with their sufficiency to prove those things
which are contained expreslie in them; And therefore your argument whereby you
would conclude against me, the insufficiency of scriptures to prove any
article of faith, because I say it is not sufficient to prove all the Articles
of faith is more then childish, and like unto this. The first chapter of
Genesis is no^ sufficient to prove all the articles of christian faith,
therefore it is not sufficient to prove that God created the world. Would
you (I pray you) admit this argument as good? I think not, though I know
you impertinent enoughe; why therefore do you go about to conclude your
purpose against your adversary by the like argument? leave for shame to make
your self so ridiculous, saying you write your self so doctor of Divinity.
As for the word imperfect, I do not know any catholic that does use it;
yett if it have no other meaning then insufficient to prove all the articles
of faith, it is not reprehensible and helps your cause nothing at all. The
authority of the church, council, and tradition in explication of
scriptures, is as friuolusly alleged by you, to impugn the authority of the
same scriptures, as if you should say the authority of the judges or customs
in England or any other kingdom, to interpret or expound the Law does
violate and impeach the authority of the Law. Your impertinencies are without
measure or number.

The Pope is not the Church as you more then childishlie term him, but he is
the head and chief pastor of Gods Church militant here upon earth, malgree
all your spite and malice, and therefore are you bound to hear and obey him,
if you would hear our Savior Christ, who has expreslie said of all the
pastors of his church, he that hears Luc. 10.
you, hears me: but because you depise to hear our Savior Christ, who
adds in the same place, he that despises you, despises me, therefore you
scorn to hear your pastor.

MANVALL. SECT. II.
But before thou proceed to view the thing it self, I desire thee to
consider well these few points followinge. First that no proof of any point
of christian belief can be so direct and full out of holy scripture, that may
not be deluded by false interpretation. For the damned Arrians, and most other
heretics could interpret all places of holy scripture, brought by the
catholics against their heresy, in such sense, as being so understood,
they make nothing against it: yea that noe less seely then perverse heretic
Legate (burned in Smithfielde not long since for Arrianisme) could not be
convinced of heresy by only scripture. Such proofs therefore of catholic
doctrine as cannot be deluded by any interpretation, are not to be expected
out of holy scripture.

PILK.
An unskillful pilot that makes shipwreck ere he getts out of the haven. You
will prove your faith out of holy scriptures, and presently you will tell us
that your prooses are not so direct and full, but your adversaries may delude
them, and that none such must be expected from you: much like the soolishe or
at our who usually propoundinge three or four points to speak of, ever
forgott one of them, and then charged his adversaries that they had bewitched
him. So the weakness of your arguments, is imputed to the delusion of your
opposites.

CHAMP.
A blind adversary that does not see what he has to impugn. I proposed in
my Manual to show the catholic doctrine to have true ground in the holy
scriptures, and this Parallelist would have such conuinceinge testimonies, as
may not be deluded by any false interpretation: we shall belike see that he
will play the man egregiously when it shall come to his turn, to prove his
own doctrine, and will bring such testimonies for himself as he requires of
me, In the mean time let us hear the rest of his learned discourse.

PILK.
But to your bold and rusticke assertion, that noe articles of faith are so
fully proved out of the scripture; but may be deluded by false
interpretation, the Fathers shall answer, nothing can delude them that search
the scripture.

CHAMP.
Which of the fathers say this? why do you not name them? you putt in the
margent Theophilact and Chrysostom, but not as authors of this your senceles
assertion, that none can be deluded that search the scriptures. but you give
a reason thereof out of the fathers, let us hear it.

PILK.
For they (the scriptures) are the candle whereby Theophil. in l.
the these is espied. Chrysostom says that Manichees and all heretics
deceive the simple; if we have the senses of our minds exercised to Chrisost.
hom. 8. ad Hebr.
discern good and evil, we may be able to escape them, But how may our
senses become practiced? by the use of the scriptures and often readinge.

CHAMP.
What is all this to prove that any testimony of scripture may not be
deluded by a false interpretation? that is, that a peeuishe or a perverse
adversary, cannot understand or interpret it otherwise then it is meant.
These fathers sayings (be they truly related by you or not, which I list not
now examine) have this manifest sense, that a catholic man, conversant in
scriptures, who understands them in the sense of the church, cannot be
deceived by heretics, but espieth quickly their theeuish driftes, which is
true, but far* from that which you should prove: to wit that noe heretic
can so interpret the testimony of holy scripture, but that he must
necessarily remain convinced of his heresy by them.

PILK.
S. August avouches that all articles of faith Aug. de doctr. christ. li. 2
cap. 9.
are plainly set down in holy scriptures, and that so evidently that diverse
of them need noe interpretation at all: as that Christ must suffer and rise
again the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins must be
preached in his name in all nations begininge at Jerusalem as it needs noe
interpreter; this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world
and then shall be the end as it needs noe interpreter; ye shall be my
witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and the whole earth as it
needs noe interpretour; suffer both to grow until the harvest: and when it
needs an interpretour the Lord himself did interpret it, whom no man dare
contradict. Your own Lib. 6. in princip. praefat.
Stapleton affirms the Popes Supremacy, which is noe mean article of your
faith to be fully and abundantly proved out of the scripture.

CHAMP.
Conclude out of all these words (be they truly related or otherwise for it
imports not to examine them) that the testimonies of scripture for any one
point of faith, may be so conueincinge that they cannott by any false
interpretation be deluded, and you shall say something to the purpose,
otherwise all your words are but idle and impertinent bablinge not worth the
readinge.

PILK.
But let it be granted that the scriptures may be thus deluded as you would
have them, it neither helps you nor hurts me. Since whatsoever you add to
bring fulness unto them, whether traditions or counsels, is equally subject,
if not more to delusion then the written word of God.

CHAMP.
I would you wist that I disdain to take any thing of guyfte or grant of
you; that pertayneth to the defense of the catholic truth; deny therefore
hardly that which you can without blushinge, and grant me no more then that
I extort from you by force of argument, and after good deliberation shape me
answer to these demandes followinge. First is it not a chief article of
Christian belief that the son of God is of equal or one substance and
glory with his father? and secondly is not this article as clearlie and as
often set down in the scripture, as any other articles of our belief? And
thirdly did not the Arrians delude by false interpretation all the proofs of
the said article, so that they remained not convinced by any of them, nor all
of them together? which of all these three propositions will you deny? you
will not as I suppose find any probable ground to deny any of them. And
yett if you grant them all (as they are all most manifestly true) that is
clearlie concluded which I affirm, and you deny; to wit that noe testimony
of holy scripture can be so direct, and conuincinge, but that it may be eluded
by false interpretation. You say be it so, what does this either help me or
hurt you. But you are very short sighted or rather stark blind, if you see
not this, For it helps me in that it delivers me of the charge or
obligation to bring such testimony of holy scripture in proof of the article
of our catholic belief, as cannot by any tergiuersation or false
interpretation be misco^strued or misunderstoode by you, which you would seem
to tie me unto, it hurts you, because it evidently shows that the sole
scriptures are not sufficient to convince any wilful or obstinate heretic
in any article of faith, as you affirm it to be.

The reason that you allege why it should not help me, nor hurt you, that
all criptures may be mis-interpreted, is altogether misapplyed, prooueinge not
that for which it is alleged, but rather disprooeuinge the proposition it
self. But this is a small oversight in your discourse, you say therefore; that
whatsoever is added to the scriptures to interpret them, whether traditions or
counsels, is equally, if not more subject to delusion: whereunto I answer.
First that neither counsels nor traditions, are so subject to
misinterpretatio^ as the scriptures are; And the reason is, because they
express more particularly their own sense and meaning then the scriptures
ordinarily do, and consequently leave not so much liberty of
misinterpretatio^ as they do. Seco^dlie I answer that whensoever the
testimony of counsels or traditions are drawn into doubt, and difficulty
as often they are; (heretics seruinge themselves of them, as they do of the
scriptures) they are to be understood according to the judgment of the
present church, which as a lively and living judge and interpreter, has
power to interpret as well the cou^sells and traditions when there is doubt of
them, as it has to interpret the scripture; which beeinge added they are not
subject to any farther doubt or delusion.

PILK. Eusebius l. 5. Hist. Eccl. c. 19. 20.

Concerning Tradition, Eusebius will inform you, that in the City of Rome,
the rule of Ecclesiastical Tradition, was vexed with diverse novelties: and as
for counsels how shamefullie your Popes would have corrupted that of Nice,
the fathers of the first council of Carthage, have formerlie manifested unto
the world, and how vainlie at this day, your divines delude the sixth Canon of
the same council, purposely made to give equal honor, unto the Patriarche,
to patronize your Popes Monarchy, every bleare eye does easily perceive.

CHAMP.
Your intention by inculcatinge these old and ouerworne objections, I mean
these of counsels, have been answered an hundred times, being only to deturne
your reader from the subject in hand, and to draw your adversary into like
confusion of matters with you, I will pass over those words of yours,
expectinge your confutation of the answers already to these same objections,
before I will trouble my self to answer them again, before the first
answers be confuted by you. That which Eusebius says of vexing traditions is
true; marry it was by such as your self and your fellow hetetikes, whose
endeavors were frustrated by the catholic pastors: see him reader and marueil
at Mr. Pilkintons wit in citing him.

PILK.
Now when you cannot fully prove your faith out of scriptures, you fall
presently to wound them with your slanderous accusation, that they are not
able to convince heretics, noe not such seely ones as Legate, not perceuinge
how euenlie you iumpe with old heretics, who when they are convinced by the
scriptures, fall to rail on them as though they were not right, nor
sufficiently authorized, but various and not full to find the truth by them
without tradition.

CHAMP.
Why do you not I pray your answer the instance made in Legate? ^ know well
the reason; you can as well answer it, as you can beat down Paul's steeple
with your fiste. You call it in this same section, a sheepishe objection, but
that is only a caluishe solution. And that heretics cannott be convinced out
of scripture only, hearken I pray you to ancient Tertullian who was better
conversant in these conflictes then either of us, yea then both of us putt
together, thus he writes. The conflict with the scriptures profits nothing
but to turn either the stomach or the brain. For which he gives this reason.

This herefie receives not certain scriptures (as the Tert. de praescript.
cap. 17. 18. 19.
protestants for examples) and if it receive any, it araweth them to her
purpose by additions and detractions. And if it receive the whole scriptures,
it depraueth them by diverse expositions. Whereas the adulterous sense, does no
less destroy the truth then does the corrupted letter. What will thou gain
then that art cunninge in scriptures, when that which thou defendest is
denied, and that which thou denyest is defended? Thou shall indeed loose
nothing but thy voice with conte^dinge, nor shall thou gain any thing but
choler, hearing blasphemies. The heretics will say that we adulterate the
scripture and bring lyinge expositions, and that they defend the truth;
Therefore must not appeal be made to the scriptures, nor must the conflict be
in them, by which the victory is either uncertain, or little certain, or
none at all. But let us now go forward.

PILK.
But let this be the first issue betwixt you and me, whether scriptures only
will fully convince heretics, wherein the negative, is yours, the affirmative
mine, and thus I double it out of the word of God. That which does perfect the
man of God to every good work, enableth him fully to convince heretics: for
this is one main duty of his calling, to convince contradictours. But the
scriptures do perfect the man of God to every good work, and particularly
S. Paul expresses conviction, therefore they teach him fully to convince
heretics.

CHAMP.
I very willingly accept of your challenge and am content to join issue with
you in this point, desiringe no other judge or vmpire of the victory then your
own patron of Canterbury. To your double therefore out of the word of God, I
answer, that the minor or second proposition of your argument is not out of
scripture, nor in it self true. For the place of scripture which you aim at
is this. All scripture 2. Tim. 3.
inspired by God i^ profitable to teach, to argue, to correct, to instruct, in
justice, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work.
Out of which place if you would conclude any thing by lawful argument, you
should argue thus. That which is profitable to teach, to argue, to correct and
instruct in justice, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed in every
good work, is sufficient so fully to convince heretics of their error,
that they cannot delude it by false interpretation. But all scripture inspired
by God is such; therefore all scripture inspired by God is sufficient so fully
to convince heretics, that they cannot delude it by false interpretation. The
conclusion of which argument is the issue betwixt you and me. The medium you
use to prove it are the words of the Apostle, which if you had putt down
simply and wholly and not dubled (as you say) by curtayllinge them, you would
easily have seen (if you see any thing) that they are as far from
co^cludinge your affirmative, as the argument followinge is from concludinge
that which is put in the conclusion thereof. Mark it I pray you, and learn to
argue better; especially when you dispute for the victory in a matter of such
moment as this is. That which is proffitable to nourishe, to exhilarate, and
conforte or strengthen man, that he may be able to exercise all man-like
functions and actions, is sufficient to defend him from his enemies, and to
vanquishe them. Butt al wines are such. Therefore al wines are sufficient to
defend a man from his enemies; and to vanquishe the^. By which argument, which
is the very same in form that yours should be, if you would have formed it
out of the Apostles words, you see (if you only are not blind) how
ridiculouslie you double your affirmative out of gods word. Besides your
argument is for diverse other respects either foolish, or fraudubent. For S.
Paul says that all scripture, that is every part and parcel of scripture
is profitable to teach etc: yet you will not I hope say that every parcel of
scripture is sufficient to convince heretics. Again the Apostle speaks
manifestly of such scriptures as Timothy had learned from his childehoode,
which without controversy were only the scriptures of the old testament, of
which you will not affirm that they are sufficient to convince all heretics.
And so you see the living wherewith you would double your affirmative to be
so poor stuff, that were your cloak doubled with no better lyninge, you
would feel the winter could, noe less then if your cloak were simple: but
let us see, peradventure you have better stuff behind.

PILK.
That way which Christ and his Apostles took to convince heretics is a full
and direct way: but they convinced them by scripture only. The Saduces that
were heretics amongst the Jews, denyinge the resurrection, werethus by Christ
putt to silence, so were the false Apostles that urged Circumsion, by the
council at Jerusalem, and thus Apollo confuted the Jews, sheweinge by the
scriptures that Jesus was Christ.

CHAMP.
These examples of Christ and the Apostles do clearlie convince your
affirmative, wherein is our issue, to be false. For otherwise all these that
heard the^ should have been converted from their errors, which they were
not. And assuredly if you take those places of scripture used by our Savior
Christ and the Apostles to be of themselves conuincinge, abstractinge from the
authority of those that used the^, you will convince your self to be a mad
man and not a doctor of divinity. The way therefore that our Savior Christ
and the Apostles then used, and which all the Doctors of gods church have ever
since exercised to convince heretics by scripture, is doubtless most
convenient, and good, which is not in controversy between you and me: but
only whether it be such as by noe false interpretation it may be avoided,
deluded or frustrated of the effect, which these very examples brought by you,
and the experience of all times do demo^strate to be true against you. And
this might fully suffice for that which you add, but least you may complain
of your words concealed I will set them down.

PILK.
Lastly the fathers thus taught that heretics might be convinced solelie by
the scriptures, Matt. 22. 32. Act. 15. 16. Act. 18. 28.
Take from the heretics their heathenishe learning that by scriptures only
they must prove their opinions, and they cannot stand says Tertullian. See
how nere unto danger they be that refuse to exercise themselves in scripture,
for of them only the judgment of this trial must be known.

CHAMP.
How impertinent always you are? you should prove that heretics may be
convinced by scriptures only; and you bring Tertullian to prove that
heretics cannot prove their errouis out of scriptures; speakinge of one
particular heresy against the resurrectio, which article of the resurrection
being not to be proved by natural discourse, but out of scripture only,
therefore those heretics that neglect to read them were in danger to
continue in their error. But if you make any esteem of Tertullian his
judgment in this matter, see his words cited a little before, and judge your
self whether he favor your affirmative or my negative more.

PILK.
Athanasins writing to Serapion against th^se Epist ad Scrap.
heretics that taught the holy ghost to be a creature, charge him to learn
only these things that are in the scriptures. For the documents contained
therein about this point, are of themselves sufficient and do satisfy. S.
Aug: Charge Tom. 2. de vnitate cap. 16.
the Donatists to prove their church only by the canonical scriptures, and
remouinge all other things, to demonstrate their church, if they were able,
not in the words and rumors of Affricanes, not in the councelles of the
Bishops, not in the letters of any disputers, not in signs and lyinge
miracles, because we are forewarned and fore-armed against these things by the
word of God: but in the prescripte of the law, the predictions of the
prophetts, in the songs of the psalms, in the voice of the Shephearde
himself, in the Sermons and labors of the Evangelists, that is in all the
canonical authorities of the holy book. Innocent. i. bishop of Rome says,
Aug. epist. 193.
that by the sole testimony of holy scriptures the heresy of Pelagius might
be refuted. The testimony Theod lib. 1. cap. 7.
of the fathers are infinite in this kind, which to avoid prolixitie I pass
over, and conclude with that charge of Constantine to the fathers of the Nicene
council, where Arrianisine received its deaths wound (to satisfy the
sheepishe objection of seely Legate) the books of the Evangelists and the
Apostles, together with oracles of the ancient prophets do plainly teach us,
what we are to think of divine things; or as Bellarmine reads it of the
nature of God. Therefore layinge a side all contention, let us out of the
divine inspired scriptures, take the resolution of these things that are in
question.

CHAMP.
Many words and nothing to the purpose Which of all these testimonies (be
they truly related by you, which I list not examine, because they are nothing
to the purpose) or of those infinite others (which you more prudentlie omit,
then you have related these) say that the heretics may be so convinced by
only scripture, that they cannot delude them by any false interpretation,
which is our issue as you know? The charge of Constantine (as you
ridiculouslie term it) does sufficiently euict my cause against you, so
wisely you plead for your self, and so solidelie you satisfy the objection
of seely Legate (which you esteeminge sheepishe, show your self to be more
then a sheep in not soluinge it for which of all the testimonies out of the
books of the Evangelists, and Apostles, or the oracles of the ancient
prophets, did so convince the Arriaus, that they had not some answer for it?
not one surely. Therefore all these words of yours contain nothing but an
argument of your wilful obstinacy against an evident truth. And therefore to
conclude my defense in this issue, I will ask you whether you are convinced of
the real persence by these words; hoc est corpus meum: or of Matt. 26. 10. 20.
23.
the power to remitt sins; by these: quorum remiseritis ^e^cata remittuntur
e^s, or of the infallibility of the church by these; quae est co^umna and
firmamentum 1. Ti. 3. 15
veritatis; to omit the rest: if you say you are not convinced, as by your
profession I conjecture you will say; then I will further ask you, what more
clear testimonies of scripture you can bring for any one article of our
faith? and because I know you cannot bring any more direct or pregnant, I
therefore challenge and conjure you, even by the judgment of your patron of
Canterbury (whose arbitrament I do not refuse in this cause) either to
confess your self convinced in these points of Catholic doctrine, or to
confess that heretics cannot be convinced by only scriptures, and so shall
I gain mine issue against you. Which being euicted, the note of the Manual
remains entire and untouched, notwithstanding all your tedious and prolixe
wranglinge against it.

MANVALL SECTIO 3.
Secondly that though the protestants may allege texts of holy scripture for
the proof of some poinctes of their doctrine, yett that alone is not
sufficient to make it true; both because the same poinctes are proved false by
other places of scripture, and also for that all heretics have ever brought
scripture for their heresy; and none more apparent or frequent then the
damned and blasphemous Arians. To say nothing of the devil his citinge of
scripture even against our blessed Savior; by all which it is more then
evident, that the sense of holy scripture, besides the words is necessarily
required to make sufficient proof of true doctrine: For which reason I often
bring the incorrupte testimony of some holy father for the sense of the place
alleged by me, who haueinge lived at least a thousand years before these
controversies began, cannott be esteemed partial one our side.

PILK.
We adore the fulness of scripture and prove from thence not some, but every
point of our doctrine (which you Jesuits neither can do, nor profess to
do, but the contrary, charginge them with insufficiency and imperfection)
which how manfully you can desprooue by other texts will appear in the
discourse ensuinge.

CHAMP.
As you are more redoun^ in words in this section then in the precedent. so
are you more impertinent. Your flant out of Tertullian shall be answered in the
page 45.
controversy of scripture where you repeat it again. And for your vain and
windy brag to prove every point of your doctrine out of holy scripture, I
know already how it will be performed; to wit by fillinge your margents
with quotations of scripture, to delude the ignorant; which being examined and
compared with the article to be proved, have as much resembla^ce with it as an
aple with an oyster. The ministers of France being of late detected of this
fraud before the king himself and provoked by his preacher to justify
their citations of scripture quoted in the margent of the confession of their
faith, though they seemed to take haynouslie the accusation, yett till this
day have they not justified their quotations, nor ever will. How you will
quitt your self in this point, we shall see when we come unto itt.

PILK.
In the mean while it is untrue that all heretics alleged scriptures, which
they love as well as dogs do whippes: but just as you papists Canus loc. com
lib. 3. cap. 3. Text. de I. cap. 47. Idem de praescript.
say there is more force in tradition then in the written word, for they are
owls that cannot abide the light of the scripture, they massacre them as
Martian did, that they may build up their own matters, they allege
Apostolical traditions as Artemon did, who said that all the ancients, yea
the Apostells taught and said like himself, and laid hands on the
scriptures irreligiouslie, saying that he had reformed them.

CHAMP.
You affirm boldly but prove nothing, a foul fault in a doctor. That
all heretics universally allege scriptures, which you say is most untrue,
hear the testimony of one that is not partial to either of us, and of more
judgment in this matter then us both. I mean Vincentius Lirinensis of equal
standinge with S. Aug. who writes thus. Some will Lirinensis contra propha.
haeresum nouationes.
peradventure demand here whether heretics do use the testimonies of
scripture? They do^ truly and that vehemently For you shall see them run
thorough all the books of holy scripture: through the books of Moses of the
kings, of the psalms, of the Apostles, Evangelists, and prophets. For whether
they speak with their own fellows or with other, whether privately or
publikelie, whether in Sermons or in books, whether in banquetts or in the
streets, they never utter any thing of their own, but they will seem to
shaddowe it with the words of scripture. Read the works of Paulus
Samosateuus, of Priscilian, of Eunomius. (of Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius) and of
the rest of the plagues, thou shall find almost an infinite heap of examples,
noe page that is not painted with the passages' of the new testament. Now
judge your self, whether your saying or mine is the more untrue.

Yea which is more, do not (I pray you) the pha^tasticall Swinkefildians a
younger brood of your grande father Luther, allege scripture for their
reiectinge of all scripture, and adheringe to their dreams and revelations?
yea and such scriptures as if you had the like for any point of your
misbeleefe, you would think it fully proved by them. You say that heretics
hate scriptures as dogs do whippes; which is true when they are understood
in the sense of the church, and not according to their own interpretation,
and after the same manner do you love them, and not otherwise. They affirm,
say you, as papists do^, more force to be in traditions then in scriptures.
What papist can you name that ever affirmed this? name one at least or say you
belie the^? and do not inuert the question, but compare the received
scripture, with an approved tradition, for so are they to be compared to find
out whether of them has the greater force: where I would have you further to
note, that the heretics their alleaginge of traditions, does prove the
authority of traditions even with catholics. For no man of common se^ce will
allege an authority which he knows to be not received of his adversary, or
could prove that it ought to be received. You say. Mar^ion did massacre the
scriptures. But did he massacre the them more then your Masters Luther and
Calvin do, who cut out of them many whole books; besides many notable
parcels of those books which they seem to receive? Artemon, you say, affirmed
that all the ancients yea, the Apostles taught as he did and yett laid
irreligious hands upon the scriptures saying he had reformed them. And do
not (I pray you) your masters, say, and do the very same? where, for the love
of God were your wits when you wrote these things, that you saw not all
these sayings of yours to be bloody stripes to your self? let us see the
rest.

PILK.
Yea Arrius himself began thus his book Eusebius li. 5. c. 28. Athanas. ^rat.
cont. Arrianos.
Thalia. After this manner have I learned of the elect of God according to
faith, the knowers of him and the right walkers after him. And of his followers
whom you esteem to have stood so much upon the scriptures, Athanasius
reports, that when they could not prevail by them, they fledd to the
Fathers, as thieves usually pretend honest and modest men to be their
companions, like the wicked Jews which claimed Abraham for their Father, when
they were convicted by the scriptures. Against all which as against your
traditions, we oppose that worthy saying of Hierome. All things that they
pretend Hiere. in c. 1. Aug.
without authority and testimony of scriptures, the word of God thrust
through.

CHAMP.
You go still forewarde in your impertinences, having either forgotten what
you should prove, or wittinglie wandringe up and down to dazell the eyes of
your less skillful reader, and to weary your adversary with followinge your
idle stepps. What I pray you does all this you have said, make to prove that
heretics allege not scriptures, for their errors which is that you
undertook to prove? nothing at all. If you would prove that Arrius and
his sectaries alleged not scriptures for their heresy because in the first
line of his book Thalia (which seems to have much semblance with the style
of your elected brotherhoode) he alleges none, you are too seely a disputer
to bear the name of a doctor. But S. Athanasius says, they fledd to the
fathers saying they could not prevail by the scriptures Be it that S. Athan:
says so, it is evident thereby that they alleged scriptures contrary to
your assertion. S. Hiero^ whom you draw in by the ears says as little to
your purpose, putt case you cite him truly which I will not stand to
examine. For he says no such thing as that heretics allege not scriptures;
which you should prove; but because you imagine his saying to make against
traditions, which if you had but one spark of judgment you would see how
vnseasonablie you impugn here) I will answer it by puttinge you in mind that
catholics pretend not traditions without the testimony of scriptures, butt
according to the express testimony thereof, which you know and therefore is
your impertinencie in alleaginge S. Hierome his words less excusable.

PILK.
What then? though Satan the Father, and heretics his sons abuse the letter
of the scripture, as you papists now do, yett with noe other weapon did
Christ conquer him and them, to teach us that they only are the sword of the
spirit, wherewith the devil and all his adherents must be putt to flight; but
this you say is the sense and not the words only.

CHAMP.
Whether you or we abuse the scriptures as Satan did, is in controversy
between us, and must necessarily light upon one side. In the mean time
whilst it appear whether you or we be the scholars of Satan, hence it is
clearlie manifest that it is not enoughe for the proof of any doctrine to
cite scripture for it, which is my position, against which you have hitherto
wilfully wrangled. And if you will stand to that ignorant paradox of yours,
that with no other weapon then the scriptures our Savior conquered the devil
and his children, and that to teach us, that they only are the sword of the
spirit, where with they are to be putt to flight; blott out of your Bibles the
whole new testament as you have done many books of the old; for no word
of the new testament was written diverse years after our Saviors Ascension
into heaven, and triumph over the devil and hell. Would you have me conclud
this in form of argument against you? Here take it. That scripture only is
the sword of the spirit which our Savior used. But he used noe other
scripture then the oulde testament, ergo the old testament oulie is the sword
of the spirit. The mayor is your own, the minor is evident, the conclusion
follows directly upon the premises. Whence clearlie follows this
consequence. Therefore the new testament is not necessary. So that you see
how well you argue for the authority and dignity of holy scripture. But qui
ambulat in tenebris nescit quo vaait.

PILK.
Madd Orestes would swear he were out of Hierom in cap. 1. ad Galas. Tert de
praescript.
his wits, that could imagine otherwise: For the the Gospel lies not in the
words of the scripture, but in the sense, not in the rind, but in the pith,
not in the leaves of speeches, but in the ground of reason says the same
Father. Wherein it follows that gods word foolishlie understood, is not his
word, which consists not in reading but in understanding, and that
adulteratinge the sense, hurts the truth as much as marringe the sentences of
scriptures. The sense then is the Garla^d we strive for; which whether it be
with you or us, you refer your self unto the incorrupte testimony of some
holy Father, that lived a thousand years a go, as if you meant to stand to the
Fathers verdict* whom your good masters as scornefullie contemn, as if they
were school boys, when once they contradict the sense of the Roman church.

CHAMP.
I willingly join with you in this issue also; that the sense of the
scripture is the garlande you ought to strive for. And if you dare, the Fathers
shall be the judge of our plea; but you dare as well eat hot coals, as stand
to their verdict.

PILK.
When we prove out of Tertullian that lived 200. years after Christ, that
Pope Zepherinus favored the heresy of Montanus, contrary to your new Roman
Sense, that Popes cannot err, we must not at all believe Tertullian in this
point says Bellarmine. For he was a Montanist, yea an evil spirit so carried
him, that of evil being made worse, and worse, and most filthy, he spued out
most horrible blasphemies says Barronius.

CHAMP.
What is this to the purpose of tryinge the true sense of the scriptures! have
you so quickly forgotten the thing in question? But to follow you in your
extrauagances, least you should think your objection not to be answered. Tell
me I pray you in the small honesty of a minister, whether you give more
creditt to Tertullian now a confessed heretic, in a matter aduantageous to
his error, then to all antiquity, testifyinge Zepherin Pope to have been an
holy Saint and Martyr? Are you so maliuouslie bent against the Pope and sea of
Rome, that to fix some fault upon them you will put Saints out of heaven,
make martyrs heretics, and that for the bare testimony of a professed
heretic? let the judicious reader judge what spirit you are guided by.

PILK.
When we urge S. Aug. to prove that in the Lib. de i^stificat. cap. vlt.
state of corruption there is no free will in man to that which is good,
contrary to your sense, Stapleton says he went beyond all good measure in his
dispute against Pelagius, with like usage do they entertain the rest when
they cross their gross errors.

CHAMP.
This objection is as impertinent as the precedent. For be it that the Fathers
have some hard speeches which heretics abuse to their own hurt, what
marvel? since the holy ghost testifies the like of the 2. Petr. 5. 16.
holy scriptures themselves. Stapleton speaks never a word directly of free
will in that chapter, nor yett of S. Aug. opinion thereof. But having showed
S. August: to have taught that gentills and others not justified do not sin
in all their works, obiecteth to himself certain places out of S, Aug.
where disputinge against Julian the Pelagian, he seems to incline to the
contrary opinion. Which having answered and explicated by other of his
sayings in the same places, he concludes* Sed vt^unque in hac disputatione
moaum for^asse excesserit Augustinus, vt propter aduersarij putuiantissiman
impudentiam, etiam peccata esse diceret quae vere and perfect bona non essent,
tamen nusquan alibi id dixisse aut scripsisse legitur, vbi sine aduersario non
agonostice, sed dogmatice scripsit. Which are the words of Stapleto^ you carpe
at, but why, if you consider them a little better you will not easily show.

PILK.
For howesoeuer your council of Trent make a semblance to decree that the
scriptures must be interpreted according to the sense which the church
holds, or the unanimous consent of the fathers approoueth, yett it is plain,
that as when Caesar and Bibulus were consulls together, whatsoever was decreed
and done, was ascribed to Caesar, Bibulus was a Cipher. So whatsoever
interpretation the Roman church, that is the Pope gives, that must be
intertayued, the fathers set behind the door. This your Cardinal that was
present at the counsel under Pius the fowerth tells us. Whatsoever the
Hosius de express Dei verbo. pa. 642.
church teaches us is the express word of God, whatsoever is taught
contrary to the sense and sentence of the church, is the express word of
the devil.

CHAMP.
I marvel whither you will wander at lenght* what is all this to the tryinge
whether you or we have the true sense of the scriptures? The council of Trent
decrees expreslie that which you seem to approve, and yett you are not
content with it, your example of Caesar and Bibulus in a grammar scholar had
been tolerable, but in a D. of divinity it is too ridiculous. And if you
dislike the doctrine which you ascribe to Cardinal Hosius, why do you only
mumble and grumble at it, with in your teeth, without disproouinge it either
by scriptures or fathers? But your malice will not permit you to embrace the
truth, nor your courage or strenght, serve you to impugn it.

PILK.
And another more ancient then he. It is no Cusanus ad Boh^mos epi. 7.
maruelle if the practice of the church at one time interprett the scriptures
after this manner, and another after that: for the understanding runs with
the practice; for that sense which is concurrent with the practice is the
quickinge spirit, therefore the scriptures follow church, not conuertiblie.
If then the sentence of the Fathers ru^ne not with the modern Roman church,
they are not the messengers of God, but in this manes opinion instruments of
the devil.

CHAMP.
You still wander out of the way, and stray from your purpose. But I will yett
follow you though not without some patience. Cusanus speaks expresslie of
the use or sece of scriptures so far as they pertain to the rite, order or
manner of administering the Sacraments, and namely of Communion under one or
both kinds; which rites or Ceremonies because they may be diverse and
changeable without any prejudice either to the nature of the Sacraments or to
the verity of holy scripture (as indeed they are at this day different in the
Greek and Latin church, the one consecratinge the holy Eucharist in leauened
bredd, the other in unleavened, and yett neither of them contrary to the
scriptures) they may be altered and changed according as the wisdom of gods
church sees just occasion, and yett according to the sense and meaning of
the holy scriptures, which to the church is never unknown, and this is
Cusanus his plain doctrine, which you could not have been ignorant of, if you
had read him yourselfe. But it is your good nature, to make always the worst
sense of your authors to deceive your reader thereby. For he speaks not of
scriptures so far as they contain articles of faith, which ever are the same,
but as they appertain to matters of practice, which may be different
according to the diversity of circumstances occurringe. In settinge down his
words, you use your accustomed art and fraud. For his words where upon you
would make your chief advantage are these. Therefore the scriptures follow
the church which was before them and for which the scriptures are, not
contrary: That is, the church is not for the scriptures. Whereas you leaving
out some part of his speech, make his words to sound that the sense and
meaning of the scriptures, follow the understanding of the church, and not
the understanding of the church the sense of scriptures, but might be
contrary unto it: which neither he nor any other catholic man ever dreamed
of.

PILK.
And in very deed though the Pope has devised a solemn oath whereunto your
prosessours are sworn, that they shall admit of the holy scriptures,
according to that sense which the holy mother the church holds, and they
shall not at any time take or interprett them, but according to the unanimous
consent of the fathers, yett it is manifest that they do not only leave the
sense, which the fathers follow, but follow that which noe father within.
500. years after Christ did ever dream of.

CHAMP.
Saying the council of Trent has decreed as you say, and the Pope has
appointed an oath to bind men to follow the sense of the scriptures,
delivered by the church and consent of the fathers, you have small reason to
say it is manifest that catholics do leave that sense, without some manifest
proof of your assertion, which I will expect and exact of you under pain to
esteem you a rash and slanderous impostour. In the mean time whilst you
perform this task, you may for your erudition understand; that it is one
thing to give an interpretation of a place of scripture, which the fathers
have not given before, and another to interpret it contrary to the uniform
Consent of fathers. The church of god being no less assisted now by the
holy ghost which teaches her all truth according to the infalible promise of
our auiour Christ, then was the church within the first 500. years, she is
no less able to interpret the scripture according to the true meaning
thereof, then she was then: yet she never ga^e-saith the interpretation of
the ancient church, or of the uniform consent of the holy fathers* but let
us hear how you prove your saying.

PILK.
Your late divines interpretinge that place: there shall be one flock and one
Shephearde, forsake the fathers which understand it of Christ, and cleave to
the sense of their mother, who will have it to be the Pope.

CHAMP.
Are you a master in Cambridge and know not that these two senses may be both
true without any contrariety? neither modern nor ancient divines ever
understood this place otherwise then of our Savior Christ principally and for
himself, or per excell^ntiam. But that it is not truly understood of him to
whom he commended his flock which he redeemed as S. Chri^ostome says) who
therefore is his vicar and vicegerent here in earth, and also of his lauful
successor in the same charge, secondarilie and by participation, none but
contentious heretics, who will see nothing in the scriptures contratie to
their error, do, will, or can deny.

PILK.
Do this in remembrance of me, that is sacrifice; this is now the sense of
the Roman church, show one father that took it so, and you shall wear the
garland.

CHAMP.
Stand to your word, and the garlande will be mine by any indifferent man's
judgment. Hear S. Ireneus who lived above. 1400. years ago; ^u^, qui Ireneus
lib. 4. c. 3^
ex creatura panis est, accepit, and gratias egit dicens: Hoc est corpus meu^,
and calice^ similiter; qui est ex creatura, quae est secundum nos, suum
sanguinem confessus ect, and noui testamenti nouam docuit oblationcm, quam
Ecclesia ab Apostoli^ accipie^s in vniuerso mundo offer^ Deo. When he took
that which is of the creature bread, and gave thanks saying. This is m^
boddy: and likewise the chalice, which is of the creature which is with us, he
confessed it to be his blood, and taught a new oblation' of the new law,
which the Church receauinge from the Apostles does offer it to God, thorough
the whole world: These are his words: you will peradventure say that here is
no mention of these words (do this) the exposition whereof is now in
question,. It is true that here is no express mention of them. But S. Ireneus
epreslie saying that our Savior Christ when he said hoc est corpus meum,
taught a new oblation of the new Testament, declares plainly in what words
he taught this oblatio^. For it being clear in S. Ireneus his doctrine, that
our Savior Chr. sacrificed his body and blood at that time, it cannot be
called into doubt, but he gave to his Apostles by these words do this, power
and authority to do the same.

PILK.
What father ever conceived, drink ye all of this, to be understood only of
priests, and not of the people also, which now is the sense of your holy
mother*

CHAMP.
No man says these words; drink ^ee all of this, so to have been spoken to
the Apostells and consequently to priests, that the laytie is by divine
precept excluded; but that they may if the church (which all that will not be
as publicans and heathens are bound to hear) think good, also drink thereof,
as they have done in some times and some places. But that these words are so
spoken to the laytie, that they are commanded to drink of the Chalice, you
cannot I think show any one father that affirms it, much less the
uniform consent of the fathers. And therefore your objection is altogether
impertinent to prove, that we leave the interpretation of the fathers.

PILK.
Again psalm the. S. God putt all things Anton. in sum. part. 3. cap. 5. in
initio.
under his seete, that is of the Pope, beasts of the field, that is men
living upon the earth: fishes of the sea, that is souls in purgatory:
fowls of heaven, that is souls of the blessed, which by Canonization the Pope
may propose to be adored: name any father if you can, that so dalyed and
played with gods sacred word.

CHAMP.
Name you any one chatholike Doctor that gives this interpretation of this
place for the literal sense thereof, or if you cannot, blush at your
impertinencies; bringinge the moral or mystical interpretation of one author,
to prove that catholics leave the uniform literal interpretation of the
scriptures given by the fathers* yea though this were given for the literal
sense of this place, yet would it not prove that we leave the fathers
interpretation of the same place: one passage of scripture, being capable of
diverse literal interpretations: so that your impertinencie appears yett more
gross.

PILK.
As then the Jews tied themselves to their Rabbines, that they must receive
whatsoever they teach, though they say the right hand is the left: so have
you captiuated your self in such manner to the* sense of the Roman church,
that one of yours is not afraid to teach, Hosius d^ expresso Dei verbo.
is any man have her interpretation of any place of scripture, though he
neither know or understand whether or how it agree with the scriptures, yett
he has the word of god.

CHAM.
We do not imitate the Jews in adheringe to the churches sense of the
scripture, as you idly imagine, Matt. 1^.
but we follow therein the express doctrine of our Savior Christ, who
tell'eth us that he that will not hear the church is to be esteemed as a
publican or heathen. whose doctrine if you did esteem more then your own
fancy* you would not carpe at that saying of Hosius, which is true if the
gospel itself which teaches the like doctrine, be not false.

PILK.
As for the fathers we read their works, and give God thanks for their
labors, who have cleared many obscurities in the scriptures, desended the
ancient doctrine of the church against the novelties of heretics, yett with
their good leaves we pass by their interpretations, when they are dissonant
from the scriptures, and willingly embrace them when they are consona^t,
tryinge their expositions by them, not them by their expositions; and in a
word ever deducing the sense of the scriptures from themselves.

CHAMP.
It is well you here acknowledge some obscurities Obscurity of scriptures
acknoledged.
in the scriptures. Hereafter if I be not deceived you will come to deny all
such thing as shall be noted when we come to the place if we go so far
together. The honor you give here to the fathers works, is no other then you
give to the damnedst heretics that ever wrote, so kind you are unto them. For
that which any heretic says conformablie to holy scripture, you willingly
embrace. And in one word you deduce the sense of scriptures from your own
selfe-willed fancy, making it say what you list to believe; and not
belieuinge that which the scriptures say indeed.

PILK.
Not without cause is there an healthful ecclesiastical Aug. cont. Cresc. li.
2. cap. 31. Tom. 7.
Canon vigilantlie constituted, whereunto certain books of the prophets and
Apostels do appertain, which we do not judge at all, and according to
which we judge freely of other letters of the faithful or of infidels, says
S. August. So that being urged with Cyprians authority, that these which were
baptized in heresy or schism were to be rebaptized, he answers we offer noe
wrong to Cyprian when we putt a difference between his letters and the
Canonical authority of holy scriptures: for (as he goes on in the next
chapter) I do not account of Cyprians letters as Canonical, but I weigh them
by the books that are Canonical; and what is agreeable in them to the
authority of divine scriptures, I with praise intertayne, and what is
disagreeinge, with his leave I refuse.

CHAMP.
We neither compare nor oppose the fathers works to the scriptures, and
therefore these words of S, Aug. are as impertinentlie alleged by you as all
the rest you have hitherto said. If any one father teach any thing
contrary to the scriptures interpreted by the rest of the fathers and the
catholic church, as S. Cyprian of humane error, and not of wilful
obstinacy did, we receive not his doctrine in that point. As S. August: in
the 32. cap. here quoted by you expresslie says in these words. That which
b^esse^ cyprian thought of the baptizinge of heretics and schismatikes I
receive not, because the church does not receive it, for the which S. Cyprian
shedd his blood. Follow you S. Aug: example in refusinge the fathers
interpretation in this manner and no man will find fault with you.

PILK.
This freedom which S. Aug. shows, we Nehem. 8. 8.
protestants freely mantaine against the slavery of your popish spiritts,
knowinge what is due to men, and acknowledginge what is proper to gods holy
word, which we ever interpret out of it self, wherein we follow the
direction of the au^tient priests and leuits that read the law unto the people
expoundinge the meaning and gave the understanding according to scriptures.

CHAMP.
I wish with all my heart (though you give little occasion to hope it) that
you would immitate S. Aug: as well in this particular as in all other things:
then would you with all humility and reverence receive and acknowledge the
authority of the church in the interpretation of the scriptures, and not
diabolicallie brag of the brauenes of your spirits, that dare contemn the
same. Hearken I pray you unto S. Aug: words to Cresconius in the same chapter
cited by you; which seeinge you take noe notice of, it is an evident argument
you have noe great desire to learn any thing of him; but to see if you
can pick any thing out of him for your purpose, which is to impugn him
and the rest of the fathers. His words are these which may as properly be
used to you, as he used them to Cresconius. Put your self (says he) in the
church which it Conc. Cres. cap. 31.
is manifest S. Cyprian defended, and then may you allege S. Cyprians
authority for your doctrine. The same I say to you concerning S. Aug:
example, though you came nearer the imitatinge thereof the^ you do.

You say you follow the direction of the priests and leuits in expoundinge
scriptures. I find nothing at all in the place quoted by you warrantinge your
usage of scriptures. But were it as you think, you must first prove your
selves to be priests or leuits, before you can take upon you the charge of
priests and leuits in expoundinge the scriptures. How would you answer that
old question put unto such as you are well nighe. 1400. years a go? Vnde
vemtts? quid in meo ^acitis non mei? or if you will take upon you as priests
and leuits to expound the scriptures being noe such men, those that desire
not to be deceived, will reject your expositions as false and pernicious.

PILK.
And thus the fathers teach us, as whatsoever Origenes Hom. 25. in Matt. circa
medium.
gold is without the temple is not sanctified, so whatsoever sense is without
the scriptures, although to some it seem wounderfull, yet is not holy because
it is not contained in the scriptures. The scripture expounds her Hom. 13. in
Genesis Lib. de Trin. p. 9.
self, and suffers not the hearers to err, says Chrysostom. He is the
best reader, says Hyllarie, that expects rather the understanding of the
words from the words themselves, then imposes it upon them.

CHAMP.
The sense of the church is never without the scriptures, as the sense of all
heretics is which impugn the church, and if the scriptures permit not the
hearer to err (as you say) in vain are your expositions: every hearer being
as well able to understand them as you ministers. You said not long since that
there are many obscurities in the scriptures. and are they now so clear that
they permit not the hearer to err? Do you not see what absurdities you run
into, whilst you wrangle against the evident truth? And who I pray you is more
like to take the sense of the scriptures from the words themselves, and not to
impose it upon them as you say out of S. Hillarie, then the catholic church
assisted to that end by the holy ghost?

PILK.
To conclude this point, since the fathers often Lib 3. d^ verbo c. 3*
roue at the sense of the scriptures, understanding that literallie which is
meant spiritually, and contrariwise, as your own Bellarmine may inform you,
you should have done well, to Distinc 37 cap. relat.
have followed the direction of your own Canon law: you must not from without
scriptures seek a forrayne and strange sense, that so you may confirm it
with authority of the text as you can, but of the scriptures themselves you
must receive the meaning of the truth.

CHAMP.
If the fathers roue at the sense of the scriptures (which saucie and unseemly
term you falsely father upon Bellarmine) what shall I think you will do?
Hitt the mark directly? what sencelesnes would that be, to think that men
impugninge violently the church, which the scriptures testify to be pillar of
truth, should be true interpreters of scriptures? Know you therefore, that
whilst follow the fathers interpretations of the scriptures which they either
receive from the church, or is approved and not approved and not gainsayde
by the church, I seek^ not the sense of the scriptures from without them, but
in them, by them, and most conformablie to them, and so I follow punctuallie
the direction of the Canon Law, as you advise me, maruellinge not a little
that you should give so good counsel to another, and follow it so little your
self.

And now (Judicious reader) would I entreat thee to turn over a few leaves
backwarde, and take reuiewe of the short section of the manual, set down as
it is in Mr. Pilkinton, and then pass hardly thy censure of us both as thou
shall find cause and ground. And particular note I would have thee to take
how pertinentlie, and directly he impugneth that which h^ affirms (...) and
effectually proves that which I would have thee observe thoroughe ou^ whole
dispute.

MANVALL SECTIO 4.
Thirdly that I expect and exact of him or them that shall go about to
answer this teatise, the same round, sincere and direct dealinge, which I have
here used; Remembringe before all things, that he set down his faith in
direct positions, and proceed in like method as I have done for the rest. To
whom I willingly grant this large liberty above that which I have used, that
he tie not himself unto the first. 500. years after Christ for the fathers
interpretations, but that he take boldly. 1500. years, so that he bring not
condemned heretics for his authors, and with all observe the point followinge.

PILK.
You may boldly sound the Triumph before the victory, if you may prescribe
your adversaries how and what they shall answer you, which if any of us
should offer to your side, we should presently be vpbrayded with (fortissimi
milites) that on noe other condition dare encounter with our enemies, except we
forbid them what weapons they would use, and take to our selves what we list.
Nevertheless rather then you should complain that you are wronged, if your
desire be not accomplished, who carry in your head Ticonius conceit, quod
volumus sanctum est, therefore I am content to follow your disorderly order,
and for the rest of this paragraph do as Antonie the orator did, who when he
came to a troublesome point, lapped it up in silence: so on the contrary, for
the easines of this to pass by itt, and proceed to that which is of greater
moment.

CHAMP.
It is not only lawful but very laudable and welbeseeminge for any man to
demand equal conditions of his adversary, which notwithstanding I have
spared to do; yeldinge unto you the liberty of 1500. for only 500. years,
which is in any indifferent men's judgment, over great advantage. For the rest
of this section I will imitate your example lettinge it pass in silence. For I
will not be ashamed to follow you where you go right.

MANVALL SECTION 5.
Fowerthlie that it shall not be to any* purpose in way of answer, that any
adversary bring another interpretation of some father upon the places of
scripture alleged by me beside that which I have brought. For it is not denied
that one and the same place of scripture, may be and is often diversely
understood, not only of diverse fathers, but of one and the same father. But
if he will say any thing to the purpose in this kind, he must bring an
interpretation contradictinge that, which I have brought: and withal labor
rather to prove his own doctrine, then to impugn that of the catholics.
For seeinge it is (as all men know) a far more easy thing to impugn any
doctrine, though never so true, then to prove the same, (no truth especially
of faith, being so evidently clear, but that something with show of
probability may be objected against it) it is not now expected that any
adversary should stand to answer those authorities of scripture and fathers
which I have alleged for proof of the catholic doctrine, or to impugn the
same, but rather to bring others in proof of his own. That the judicious
reader may compare our grounds in scripture both together, and by the view of
his own eye, try whether of them be more conformeable to gods sacred word.
And when any one shall have produced his proofs for protestantisme, in like
manner as I have in the behalf of the catholic religion (if he can so do)
yett shall he gain no more thereby, but an evident demonstration against the
cheifest grounds of the protestants doctrine, that eitherto the true and full
decision of controversies in matter of faith, is necessarily required some
other judgment or trial, then the only words of holy scripture, or else,
that there is no means at all to end matters of controversies of faith, which
latter nevertheless to affirm, is no less injurious to gods wisdom, goodness
and power then to say that he has provided no sufficient means for men to
know the way to save their souls. For both parties bringinge scriptures for
themselves, who shall finally determine whether of them does apply the said
scriptures more sincerely, and according to their true meaning?

PILK.
Your demaundes do so cross one another, as if your thoughts had been at
wars together. First you prescribe your adversary how he shall answer you,
not by bringing another sense of any father upon the place of scripture
alleged by you, but a co^tradictorie. And the^ you forbid him to answer
either scripture or father urged by you, but to fortify and prove his own
doctrine. But you must be co^te^t whether you will or not to suffer your
adversary to unmask your fraud, and to open the veil of your cunninge
dealing, both in your doubtful positions and impertinent allegations, by
sheweinge the native sense of the scriptures even from the fathers, to have no
concurrence with your imaginations, but to contradict them: and then he will be
content to acquainte you with the grounds of his doctrine (which either
ignorantly you mistake, or purposelie pervert) which being paralleld with
yours, the reader may judge on which side the truth stands.

CHAMP.
Your head is so full of crochets that you imagine my words to cross one
another; or else you say so only to make your less heedfull reader to think
so upon your creditt. I neither prescribe to mine adversary how he should
answer me, neither do I forbidd him to answer either scripture or Fathers
alleged by me as you are pleased to faigne out of your own brain* which
notwithstanding if I hadd done, yett hadd there been no crossinge betwixt
those things as every man may easily see) but I tell him what manner of
answer will be to the purpose, and what will not* and further I require he
should first set down his own belief with the proof thereof out of the
scriptures; which two things do not cross one another in any man's judgment
but yours, and besides, the reason which I give both for the one and the other
is clearlie good and true. For your vnmaskinge of my fraud* spare it not in
gods name; and I promise you that if you discover but one quarter of those
blotttes and blemishes in my face, that I have already done in yours, I will
hide it for ever that it never appear in public more. But now I will hearken
how you will perform the great things you here promise.

PILK.
But this is no part of your meaning at all, that your reader should try by
the scriptures as the Bereans did, and so rest himself satisfied.

CHAMP.
My meaning (good Sr.) is that the reader should search the scriptures
alleged by me in proof of the catholic says, and tr^e whether he find
them not so as I have cited them; which the Bereans did. Whereby he shall find
the chatholicke doctrine to be truly grounded upon the holy scriptures and
consormeable unto them, as the Bereans did find S Paul's doctrine to be:
though they were bound^ to believe his preachinge without that research.

PILK.
But your drifte is, after you have set the scriptures together by the ears,
to thrust upon him the authority of the Pope, who must finally determine on
which side the sense of the scripture bends, and then I doubt not but you
shall win the day.

CHAMP.
My drifte is to make the reader see that the catholic faith has true ground
in the holy scriptures* and if you or any other will show the same for your
new doctrine, the reader must necessarily see that he must find somes means
to know to whether side the true sense of the scriptures does truly agree:
And if he find that the Pope who is chief and head of all those to whom our
Savior said, he that hears you, hears me* gives sentence for the
allegations on the catholic side (as you confess, there is no doubt but he
will) If he have any true care of his soul, he will believe and follow that
part.

PILK.
For thus you carry the matter, when both parties have brought scriptures for
themselves (...)out the letter of the scriptures, not opposinge the letter to
the sense as you falselie say I mean; but seekinge and taking the sense from
the letter only? Is not this your doctrine, in this very section? you cannot
deny it unless you have a face to say and unsay at every turn. Cast up
therefore once more your own cards, and see what other Judge you make of
controversies besides the only words of scripture. Therefore either blushe
your self, or if your face be so brazen that you cannot, bidd some other blush
for you, that you either understand not your own doctrine, or are ashamed to
acknoweledge and maintain it. I know to what end is all this florishe of
words; to raise up a little smoke before your readers eyes, that you may
steal away and leave the difficulty (which you know presses you hard)
vutouched; you shall not escape so I wisse.

PILK.
If then there appear a ^arre in the scriptures that some of them are opposed
to others, as it fell out between the ancient Bishops and the Arrians,
between the Catholics and Donatists, between Pelagians and godly teachers,
and now between you and us, that on both sides they are produced, a judge
must be sought for to reconcile them. Who is that? not a Christian, for he is
party on the one side or the other, not a pagan, he knows not the mysteries
of Christianity, not a Jew for he is an enemy to Christian Baptism: on
Earth there can be found Optatus l. 5 c^ntr. Parm.
noe judgment, says Optatus. But why do we knock at heaven when we have in
the Gospel his testament? for here earthly things may be compared to
heavenly. See how we may come to the true sense, not by seekinge unto the
Pope, not by restinge upon determinations of councels, not by settinge on
Traditions, but by flyinge unto the Testament. For as the same Optatus goes
on, Christ has dealt with us as an earthly Father, who having many children
rules them all so long as he lives, noe testament so long is necessary:
even so Christ so long as he was present upon earth (although now he be not
wantinge) gave in charge unto the Apostles, whatsoever for the time was
necessary. But as an earthly father feelinge himself in the consines of
death, fearinge after his decease; his children will contend^ and break peace,
calls witnesses and from his dyinge breast draws his will into lasting
tables; and if there fall out any contention among the brethren, they go not
to his tomb, but seek his testament, and so he that quietly rests in his
tomb, speaks still from the tables as if he were alive. He whose testament
we have is in heaven, therefore let his will be sought for in his gospel as
in a testament, for these things which presently ye^ do, he foresawe that
ye would do.

CHAMP.
Because these sayings of Optatus, have the same meaning with that of S. Aug
which imediatlie follows, it shall there appear how little they serve your
turn. Here are only to be noted these words of his. On earth there is found
noe judge: By which words he excludes not all judgment upon earth, for so
should he exclude the testament also it self, but he excludes all earthly or
humane judgment as unfit and unable to decide differencies of faith, of which
sort the judgment of the church is not. For she is the pillar and ground of
truth perpetually I^. 16. 13.
assisted by the holy Ghost, which teaches and suggesteth to her all truth.

PILK.
S. August: runs the very same course and In Psalm. 21. expo. 2 prope fine^.
almost uses the same words as if he had taken them out of Optatus? we are
brethren (says he) why do we strive, our father died not intestate, he has
made a testament, and so died; men do strive about the goods of the dead,
till the testament be brought forth, when that is brought, they yield to have
it opened, and read; the judge does hearken, the counselors be silent, the
crier bids peace, all the people are attentive that the words of the dead
man may be read and heard, he lies void of life and feelinge in his grave,
and his words prevail. Christ does sit in heaven, and is his testament
gainsayde? open it, let us read it, we are brethren, why do we strive? let
our minds be pacified, our father has not left us without a testament, he
that made the testament is living for ever, he does hear our words, he does
know his own word, why do we strive?

CHAMP.
S. Aug: by these plain words of the spalme* Reminis^entur and conuertentur
ad Dominum omnes fines terrae. Et adorabunt in conspect^ eius vniuersae
familiae genti(...): as by the confessed testament of the father, proves that
the Donatists have noe right to the inheritance of the church (which they
contrary to the testament of God expressed in the psalm) say was only in a
corner of the world amongst them. Who notwithstanding were not come to that
degree of se^clesnes, as to say the church was invisible as the protestants
do. Justly therefore did S. Aug: provoke the Donatists in this point to the
trial of the testament; as also the catholics do the protestants in the
point of the real presence, and diverse others. Which trial notwithstanding
is not sufficient where either scripture is opposed to scripture, or it is not
agreed upon which is the scripture it self, as it happens between the
catholics and protestants, as shall ^ore amply appear by and by.

PILK.
And S. Ambrose more ancient then both, to Ambr. de fide ad Gratia. l. 1. cap.
4.
Gratian the Emperor; Believe not Emperor our Argument, and our disputation,
let us ask the Scriptures, let us ask the Apostles, let us ask the Prophets,
let us ask Christ, what should I add more, let us ask the Father, of whose
honor they say they are Jealous.

CHAMP.
Sr. you always speak besides the purpose. The question between you and me,
is not whether the scriptures understood in the sense of the church are not
sufficient to decide any controversy in faith; and namely that whereof S.
Amb. disputes, which is not denied unto you: but whether the scriptures left
unto the interpretation of either party contendinge, are a sufficient judge to
end all controversies in faith. In which question I defend the negative, and
you the affirmative if you will yett contend any more. These testimonies
therefore of the fathers as well of S. Ambrose as those that went before and
also that follow, are alleged beside the question, and altogether
impertinentlie as all the rest of your sayings for the most part are.

PILK.
A Gentile comes and says I would be a Christian, but I know not which side
to cleave Chris. 33. in acta prope fine^.
unto, many dissentions are among you, and I cannot tell which opinion to
hold, every one says, I speak the truth, and the scriptures on both sides
are pretended, so that I know not whom to believe. To this Chrysostom
replyeth; truly this makes much for us, for well might you be troubled if we
should say we rely upon reason, but seeinge we take the scriptures which are
so true and plain, it will be an easy matter for you to judge; if any
consent unto them, he is a Christian, if any go against them, he is far from
this rule.

CHAMP.
This allegation of S. Chrisost. is not only impertinent as all the rest are,
but fraudulent and proceedinge of a mind not willinge to find out the truth,
but to deceive the reader For the words imediatlie followinge and left out by
you (Mr. Pilkinton) propose directly the question which now is in hand, and
the answer thereof follows also consequently. Quid igitur (says S.
Chrisost.) What therefore if he say, that the scripture has in this sort: and
thou say another thing, explicatinge the scriptures otherwise, and drawinge
their sense to favor thee? Lo here the question in controversy between Mr.
Pilkinton and me. How does S. Chrysostom answer it? does he send us to the
scriptures for decidinge thereof? no such thing, but he gives diverse rules
or marks whereby he that is in doubt whether part to follow, may judge who
has the true sense and meaning of the scriptures. And after one or two rules
he adds this: Vt autem manifestius dicam: But that I may speak more
plainly; they (to wit heretics) have certain men of whom they are named*
for the sect is named of the author, but we (to wit the catholics) have not
our name of any man And a little after answeringe to the same question more
fully he adds. What? are we cut off from the church? have we
Archeheretickes? are we surnamed of any man? have we a captain (any
particular man) as these have Marcion, these Manicheus, a third Arrius, and
other heresies have their sect masters. (As Lutherans have Luther, Caluinists
have Calvin and the like). And though we have the name of any one, ^et is is
not of the father of any heresy, but of those who are our pastors and do
gouuerne the church. We have not Masters upon Earth (as all heretics have)
God forbid, we have one in heaven. Thou will say that they pretend the
same. But they have a name that accuses them, and gives them their names.
Thus far S. Chrysostom, whereby it appears not only how impertinent or
fraudulent Mr. Pilkinton is in his allegations; but also of what moment the
ancient fathers esteemed the argument taken from the surnames of sects, for
the discovery of their heresies and false doctrines.

PILK.
Lo in these cases wherein scriptures were produced on both sides the fathers
fledd for resolution unto other scriptures, where it appears your inferrence
to be without coherence, that if there be not a judge without the scriptures,
God has not provided sufficient means to save men's souls, seeinge that
composinge of controversies, reconcilinge of differencies, clearinge of
doubts, manifestation of truth, is not from without to be fetched, but in the
testament it self to be learned, that we may know scriptures, and them only
to be the supreme judge from whence decision of doubts in matters of faith is
to be derived.

CHAMP.
Mark judicious reader whether this be any other thing, then that which I
said in this section. One chie^e ground of the prosestants doctrine to be,
that the words of the scripture are the judge of all controversies. For the
which Mr. Pilk: hotly reprehendeth me of fraud and falsehodde. See his words
a little before at this mark in the margent, and marvel at his wit, judgment
and memory: Now to the purpose. Noe one of all the testimonies alleged by
you does say, that where scriptures are produced by both parts, they are
sufficient to decide the controversy. Though I do not deny, but for the
most part the inequallity is so great in the catholic party (as it also
falls out in the cause between the protestants and catholics at this day)
that any man of indifferent wit, judgment and desire to find out the truth,
may see on whether side the scripture stands. But that they are not
absolutely sufficient where there is obstinacy on any side, I shall make
your self to confess (though perverse enoughe) or else I shall much
marueill; and that by the very example used by S. Optatus and S. Aug: and
approved here by your self. Put therefore the case, that the children of a
deceased father contend about the inheritance, every one of them challenginge
it as appertayninge to himself, and in proof or confirmation of his claim
alleges the testament and will of his father, which he protests to be
clear for him, and against his competitours, being rightly understood,
persisting most stiffly in his opinion and in deffence of his right claim, as
he is persuaded. The case being putt thus (which is the very same with ours
in the controversy of religion) will you say in the sincerity of your heart,
that the sole will or testament of the father is a sufficient judge to decide
this difference and to bring the parties to an accord? And that there needs
not any other judge or arbiter to determine upon the true sense and meaning
of the fathers will, whereby they all pretend to make their claim, and to
ground their title? you will not I think say, yea, to this question. And
well I wot that were the case your own betwixt your self and your brethren
concerning a temporal inheritance, experience (which though she be the
mistres of fools, is not for all that a foolish mistres) would teach you that
it is a mere Paradoxe to maintain that the sole testament of your deceased
father, could in this case decide the controversy amongst you his disagreeinge
children. So that the example brought by your self out of the fathers, is
proved to make manifestly against you.

Which will yet be much more clear, if the case be putt as it is indeed with
us, that these brethren do not only contend about the true sense and meaning
of their fathers testament, but also about the testament it self; the one
contestinge the whole writing contained in the book under the title of his
will to be his true testament, another not receiuinge the whole, contendeth
diverse parts and parcells not to belong thereunto. And another yett reiectinge
more; as it falls out between us and the protestants, Calvin castinge out of
the testament of God, five whole books besides some large parts of other
books, which the catholics believe to appertayn to his true testament. Luther
reiectinge besides these, diverse other whole books. The case therefore being
thus, how is it possible that the sole written testament of God should decide
the controversy between these competitors, and bring them to an accord? who
do not agree so much as in what books or writings the testament is
contained, so far are they from being at accord of the true sense and
meaning thereof.

It is therefore no other thing to say in this case, that the scriptures must
judge all controversies, then to say that the controversy it self, must be
judge of the controversy, which is more then madness to think. For the
controversy being not only what the scripture says, or means, but also
what is scripture, it is all one to say, that scriptures must judge and decide
all controversies, and to say the controversies themselves must decide all
controversies. Again seeinge you Mr. Pilkinton, seem to give so much to holy
scripture as to be able and sufficient to decide all doubts and determine all
differences in matter of faith, Why do you not hearken unto them when they
send you to the church and to the pastors, and doctors thereof, as to
lively judges, having the keys of knowledge to understand the scriptures?
But you desiringe nothing less then to come to a just and competent trial of
your cause, hold your selves close to that principle, by which the most
detestable, vile, and contemptible heretic that ever was may maintain his
heresy, without being convinced thereof; as I toulde you before of Legate,
which instance you can never answer not satisfy, and which only is sufficient
if you were not obstinatly perverse) to make you ashamed to maintain so
senceles a Paradox, and so evidently contradicted by perpetual experience in
all ages.

Your last shifte or euasio^ of interpretinge scripture by scripture, unless
there be some agreement, or certainty of the scripture interpretinge, more
then of the scripture interpreted, which abstractinge from the judgment of the
church cannot be had, is a mere mockery, and like as if a man would measure
one piece of veluett the measure whereof is as uncertain as that of the former.

And to conclude this section, it being in question between the catholics
and protestants who is to be judge of controversies in faith (yea the root and
key of all controversies, which being ended or decided all the rest would have
easy decision) you affirminge the scriptures to be this judge and pretend to
prove this by scripture, as al other things to be believed, you are bound by
your own doctrine, to show it out of scripture, which when you shall do, we
will yield unto you in all the rest of the tontrouersies between us. But
seeinge you can never do this, why do you not yield to us, shewinge you out
of manifest scripture the authority of the church to decide controversies?
You say the church is a party and therefore no competent judge. But this
having been the cavil of all condemned heretics, and as truly alleged by
them as by you, this plea is no more receiueable in you then in them. And tell
me I pray you, the king is he not party in all pleas of felony or treason
that are brought into his courts? yes verily. And yett none ever yet thought
of any such plea, as to appeal from the judgment given in his name, and by
his sovereign authority in such cases: Albeit the judgments given in his
courts are far from being so assuredly just and equitable as are the
judgments of the church, which has the infallible promise of the holy ghostes
assistance in her decisions and determinations. You are therefore fast taken
which way soever you turn your self; and this inference of mine: That if
there be no other judge of controversies besides the scriptures, God has not
provided sufficient means to sa^e men's souls, which you say is without
coherence, does nessarilie follow upon that supposition, that heretics and
namely protestants, do produce scriptures, in proof of their false
doctrine, as catholics do for their orthodoxe belief, if there be no other
judge to decide the controversy but only the scripture, which inference you
have labored (but all in vain) to overthrow as the indifferent reader will
easily judge.

MANVLL SECTION 6.
Fiftlie that whereas before I can prove any point of Christian belief by
scriptures, I should first by good order prove that there is an holy
scripture, and secondly in what books of the Bible it is contained: yet
because neither of these two can be proved by scriptures, unless we believe
some scripture without proof, therefore that I may prove these points of
faith wherein the Roman Catholic church does differ from the protestants,
by holy scriptures (which our adversaries urge me unto) I must necessarily to
satisfy their disorderly desire, proceed disorderly, and suppose that for
truth without proof, which requires most to be proved. I say without proof,
if no proof be good but that which is made out of scripture.

PILK.
All questions are not to be disputed of, says Aristotle, but only those
whereof man desires a reason, that is not worthy of punishment or lacks
sense. For if any demand whether God is to be worshipped, or our parents to
be loved, he deserves stripes, or whether snow be white, he lacks sense.
This question of yours, whether the scripture be gods word, tends to
Atheism and deserves punishment, rather then answer.

CHAMP.
In the precedent question, to avoid the authority of the churches judgment
expreslie testified in the scriptures, you labored to maintain this paradox,
that notwithstanding scriptures were produced for either party of any
controversy, yett the controversy might be fully ended and decided by the
scriptures alone, without any other judge decidinge or determininge whether
party used the true sense and meaning of the same scriptures. Now in this
section to avoid the Authority of Traditions expreslie also taught in the
scriptures, you go about to maintain another paradox no less improbable, to
wit, that it is so clearlie manifest not only that there is a written word of
God, or holy scripture, but also in what book it is contained, that to move
question in either tends to Atheism, and deserves punishment rather then
answer, let us see how you make good this your paradox.

PILK.
But least you should triumph before the victory, I answer, that as in all
humane arts there be certain principles, which are known of themselves,
without any farther demo^stration: So the verties that are contained in the
Cannon of the Bible, are the principles and foundations of divinity, and
receive not authority by other things In 1. S^ns. q. 1. art. 3.
whereby they may be demonstrated, says Cameracensis.

CHAMP.
Ignorance in the rudime^ts of Philosophy makes you abuse your terms
egregiously. For what principles of arts or sciences (I pray you) are those
that are believed for themselves? none certainly. For the principles of all
natural knowledge, are either evidently known by the light of nature, and
not believed, or they are believed for the authority of a higher knowledge,
and not believed for themselves. The verities contained in the Bible are
believed, not for themselves but for the authority of God reueilinge them, who
only is truth it self, and believed for himself, of whom and from whom
they receive authority, and have it not of themselves as you falselie affirm.
But you say they cannot be demonstrated by other principles. It is true for
^^^e but the phreneticall or phanaticall Manicheis did desire or expecte
demonstration in matter of faith. Which as S. August. says, is grounded upon
De vtilitate credendi.
authority, as knowledge is upon reason, we demand therefore of you some
authority whereby we may reasonably believe the verities contained in the
Bible to have been reueiled by God, without which authority we cannot
securely believe them to be gods word.

PILK.
Then if the scriptures be principles, as it is confessed on both sides, it
follows that they are immediate and indemonstrable, as al other principles
are in their sciences, where of they are principles, but these more the^
others, because they are primae veritatis. And as the first good for it self
is to be loved, so the first truth for it self Prolog. in magist. q 3. art. 2.
Aug 6. confess. cap. 5.
is to be believed says Aquinas. And therefore it is so far from being
requisite to prove the scriptures, that S. Aug. says they are not to be
heard, who should say, how do thou know these books to be ministered
unto mankind by the spiritie of the only and most true God, for this thing
is especially to be believed? Whereupon in another place speakinge of Cont.
epist. Funda. cap. 14.
the faith wherewith we believe the scriptures, he wills us to follow those,
who inuit us first to believe that which we are not able to conceive, that
being made more strong in faith, we may attain to understand that which we
believe, God himself confirminge and inwardly inligthenninge our minds and
not men. This is sufficient to show that neither art nor order requires at
your hands to prove the scriptures, as you disorderly imagine.

CHAMP.
The scriptures or verities contained in them are confessed to be principles in
respect of all Theological conclusions deduced from them, and therefore in
respect of them they need no farther proof to any christian divine that
believes them to be the word of God. But they are not principles in respect
of the articles of our faith in general, but are themselves to be believed for
the same authority of God reueylinge, as all other articles of faith are.

And that they are not necessary principles of the articles of our ^aith, it
is manifest by that, before the scriptures were written, the church of God
believed many of the same articles which now it believes. Therefore when you
say the scriptures or verities contained in them, are primae veritatis, if
ignorance (though gross and not to be excused in a doctor of divinity) does
not excuse you, you will make the scriptures not only to be gods word, but
also to be God himself. For besides him there is no prima veritas which is to
be believed for it self, as upon better consideration (I think) you will not
dare to deny.

Seeinge therefore the scriptures are not primae veritatis or first truth, but
the testimonies words or verities reueiled by the first truth, they are not,
even by your own ground to be believed for themselves, but for the truth and
authority of the first verity God himself, of whose revelation we must have
sufficient ground before we can securely and prudentlie believe the
scriptures to be his word. That which you bring out of S. Thomas, makes
evidently against you (so judicious are you in your allegations.) For the
scriptures being not God, they are not the first truth, and therefore not to
be believed for themselves. S. Aug. in the first place makes also against you,
saying that the scriptures are to be believed to be of gods spirit and not
to be known. For to believe this he recurreth not to the scriptures
themselves, but to the authority which they had obtained through the whole
world. The second authority of S. Aug. is wholly impertinent to your purpose,
as the reader though but of mean judgment will easily discern. He saying
nothing that sounds as if the scriptures were to be believed for themselves,
or without other authority. And therefore thus far have you said nothing
that may satisfy this assertion of the Manual, that in the orderly
proceedinge in this present poincte, the scriptures should first be proved:
but you will peradventure satisfy better hereafter.

PILK.
Yett further to satisfy you I answer, that the scriptures do sufficiently
prove themselves, and these and these books to be the scripture, both by that
inward light that is contained in them, and that outward operation that they
have in us. For first they are a lantern to our feet, and a light to our
path, a candle that shines in a dark place. And as a light does Psalm. 119.
105. 2. ^ Pet. 1. 19. Tract. 35. in Joan.
discover those things that are in darkness and demonstrateth also it self
unto the eyes (says Aug.) so does the holy scriptures by that connatur all
light that is in them, manifest themselves unto those, whose understanding is
enlightened to behoulde them. Which if you cannot perceive, desire God to
remove the scales from your eyes, as he did from Paul's; for this is a case so
clear that Stapleton grants it, credenti, scriptura seipsam probat and
commendat.

CHAMP.
All this proves noe other thing, then that to christians and catholics who
believe the scriptures to be the word of God and understand it in the sense of
the church, they have all these properties of light, lamp, and lantern, and
this is it which Stapleton expreslie says, if hou had taken but very
ordinary heed to his words.

But to say that either to a Pagan who believes not the scriptures to be Gods
word; or to an heretic, who understands them not in the sense of the
church but according to his own fancy, they are such as do manifest
themselves to be the word of God, is a most senseless Paradox contradicted by
manifest experience, not only in Martin Luther and all his disciples, who as
you know reject diverse books received by Calvin, and his followers: but also
of the ancient and holy fathers, who did not universally receive as
Canonical Scripture, all such books of the new testament as now are
received by you. And yett none of all these I suppose you will say, wanted
light to see that which is manifest of it self.

PILK.
Again they are known by their operation in us, for the word of the Lord
is pure, and conuerts the soul, a two edged sword Heb. 4. 12. a very fiery
word psalm. 119. 14. which purifieth the souls, inflameth the affections,
enlighteneth the understanding, and so softeneth the heart of the hearer, that
it frames it sit to all goodness. Which noe other word or work devised by
the wit of men or Angels can do. Where upon Lacta^tius speakinge of the
difference between the doctrine of the gentills and of the church, says,
that the wisdom of the Philosophers does not root out vice, but hide it:
whereas a few precepts of God, so change the whole man, and mould him a new
by castinge away the old, that one would not think him to be the same. Give
me a man that is wrathful, evil tougued, unbridled, by a few words of God I
will make him meek as a lamb. Give me a covetous, auaritious and tenacious
man, I will restore him liberal, and distributinge his money with his own
hands. Give me a man fearful of sorrow and death, he shall contemn crosses,
fires, dangers, bulls etc. By one lauer shall all malice be expelled, such is
the force of divine wisdom that being powered into the breast of man, it
expels folly at one blow that is the mother of all vices. What man then
that has his heart thus mollified, his will rectified, his understanding
cleared, and his whole course suddenly altered, can deliberatelie doubt of
the scriptures, saying Christ himself teaches us thus to know them. Is any
will perform the Io. 7. 17.
will of his father, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be good or not.

CHAMP.
In whom I pray you does the scripture work these effects you have here so
industriously numbered up? in those that believe them not to be true, or to be
the word of God? you will not say so I suppose. Why do you therefore bring
these arguments to prove the scriptures to be easily known to be god* word,
that they are manifest of themselves, and need not to be proved? Because you
will ever be impertinent not knowinge what you say, nor what you should
prove, and yet are you so full of babble that you will still be be talkinge. If
one should ask your advise, how he might know good Physic and you should
say unto him, it is an easy thing to know that. For that phisike which
comforts nature, expels disseases, and restores health is certainly good
physic; do you think he should be much wiser for your advise? whatsoever
you think. I know he should be as wise as he was before. Such is your
directions to know the scripture, unto such as do not already know or
believe them. And seeinge our Savior himself prescribes as a necessary rule
to know the scriptures, the performance of his fathers will, before his
doctrine can be understood (as you well note but still against your self) it
is evident that they are not so clear of themselves nor yett so easy to be
known, as you pretend. For that doctrine which must first be practiced by
humble obedience, before it can be understood or known to be of God as our
Savior says of the scripture, noe man that is not deuoyde of all judgment will
say, is easy to be known even by it self.

PILK.
I might add all those arguments which both the fathers and schoolmen produce
out of the scriptures themselves to prove them the ofspringe of God, which if
they be strong against gentiles, I know not how they should be weak against
you, vid. the majesty of the doctrine, the simplicity and purity of the
style, antiquity of the books, truth of oracles and predictions that many
ages after held their complement, with sundry other to the like purpose, but I
pass by them and shutt up this point with that speech of your Stewchus.

CHAMP.
You were well advised to pass by all such arguments of the fathers and
schoolmen as would nothing serve your purpose, I would you had been so
advised from the begininge, for so should I not have hadd the labor and
pains to transcribe so many impertinencies of yours as I have been forced to
do hitherto. The arguments which you here mention taken by themselves, are
far from making any sufficient ground to build our faith upon, though
they are probable and prudent considerations and joined with the authority of
the church and tradition, whereby ^e receive the scriptures, they are not
without some force to persuade the books of the holy Bible, to be gods word,
and to be written by his inspiration. But take you experience of them in your
self, and see whether they are sufficient to persuade that the books of
Wisdom, Ecclesiastious and the rest received generally by the whole church,
and namely by the fathers and schoolmen whose authority here you seem to
urge) for canonical, are truly gods word and written by his holy spirit.
And if you find them not sufficient grounds for these, why would you intrude
them upon us as sufficient for the rest* But let us hear what you bring out
of our Stewchus.

PILK.
They which think the authority of holy Stewchus ^^^mopera in princip.
scriptures, whereunto all the world now assenteth, to depend upon the
readers faith, and not to bring with them certain divine and most potent
reasons, that draw unto them the judgments of great minds, are therefore
deceived, because they are not of their number, whose minds both by natural
goodness and continual exercitation of wisdom, do prudentlie apprehend the
highest and truest things: whereas if any have that wisdom given him to
esteem the greatness of things as they deserve, he shall feel the weight of
divine oracies to be so great, that the pronunciation of them only would
suffice to begett a most firm and sudden faith.

CHAMP.
The whole space of a thousand and five hundred years given you to take your
testimonies out of, might have sufficed without alleaginge of modern writers,
and those o^ small note and less authority. Stewchus is an author not wholly
received, and the book cited by you is put in the index of books to be
amended or corrected: and therefore the testimony thereof though it were
otherwise most formal (as it is not) is of noe authority against us. And
truly I wounder you are not ashamed to bring such stuff for the proof of
your faith and doctrine. And that in such sort as you have let pass all
other and made choice of this as of most strength and force. Let the
judicious reader now judge by that which has been said both by you and me,
whether the scriptures are so clearelie known by themselves and by their own
light, that they need no other proof to be gods word and written by his
spirit. And whether it he a needles or disorderly thing for him that
pretends to prove all the points of his faith by holy scripture, to prove
first that there is a holy scripture, and then to prove in what books it is
contained. And lastly whether because you (refusinge traditions and the
churches authority, by which only the holy scriptures are known cannot
prove the scriptures to be such, and therefore receiuinge them upon the credit
of your own fancy, which consequently must be the fundamental rule of your
whole Faith, do not recurre to that shifte, to say that the scriptures are so
evident of themselves, that they need noe other proof or testimony but
themselves.

MANVALL SECTION 7.
And here occur by the way two things worthy of note. The one that the
scripture cannot be an universal rule of our faith, seeinge somethinges are to
be believed without proof of scripture, as are (for example) that there is an
holy scripture, contayninge gods word and revelation, and that these and these
books be such, therefore of necessity must there be some other rule of our
faith more universal then the scriptures, and consequently before the
scriptures. And this cannot be but the authority of gods church, which is
clearly S. August: doctrine, who was not a frayde to say: I would not believe
the Gospel, but that the authority of the church does move me. Seeinge
therefore the authority of the church is a sufficient motive for us to
believe what is scripture, why should it not have the like authority with us
in other points of faith? which is also S. Aug: argument in the same place: but
I will notwithstanding satisfy our adversaries in their own humor.

PILK.
Your former ground being a bed of sand, that scriptures cannott be proved
by scriptures, these conclusions that you do build upon it, do of
themselves fall to the ground.

CHAMP.
When you shall, followinge your principles, prove out of the scripture, either
that there is a scripture or in what books it is contained, without supposinge
some scripture without proof, then may you term my ground, to be a bed of
sand, and I will also believe it so to be. But till then, I will esteem it a
rock that breaks all your batteries like as if they were balls of sand cast
against a brazen wall. And therefore the conclusions built upon it, will
neither of themselves, nor yett by all your forces, fall to the ground but
will stand firm and strong.

PILK.
First that the scriptures are not the universal rule of faith, a position so
derogatorie to the Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Re^e 22. 18. 19.
testament of Christ, and so contrary to the doctrine of the ancient church,
that I wounder how you durst venture upon it; For the rule whereunto nothing
must be added, nothing Aqui. in 1. Tim. 6. lect. 1.
detracted, is an universal and persecte rule, such is the scripture, which is
Aquinas collection. ^. Tim. 6. For if any addition or detraction might be made
in the scriptures, they could not be the rule at all. As in a rule says
Photicus if ye add or diminishe any thing, ye corrupt the whole. And a
rule says Theophilact neither has augmentation nor diminution, so is it in
the scriptures, which Chrysostom terms the most expert rule, Canon, and
Gnomon that can be, if it admit any supply, it could not be the rule at
all. And if we must not be wise in matters divine above that which is written,
then that which is written is the rule of our wisdom and faith: But S. Paul
forbids 1. Cor. 4. 6
that ranknes of wit to enquire further then that which is written. This S.
Aug. collecteth out of this place; The holy scripture does prefixe De bono
vi^luitatis cap. 1.
unto us the rule of our faith, least we should presume to be more wise then
behooves, but as he says let us be wise unto sobriety as God has divided
unto every one the measure of faith. Finally if our faith does lastly
resolve it self into the scriptures only, then they alone are the rule, and
nothing can be found more universal, but this is granted by your best
divines.

CHAMP.
Till it be proved by express scripture, that the scriptures are the
universal rule of our says, or that nothing is to be believed but that which
is proved by scripture. you cannot truly say that my position is derogatorie
to the Testament of Christ. And because it can never be proved by scripture,
that nothing is to be believed but that which is proved by express
scripture, your position is heretical, the contrary thereof being clearelie
testified by the scripture, as shall appear in the first and second
controversy; unto which places I will referr you for answer to your
arguments, (which you there repeat) as the more proper place. Only I will not
omit to tell you here, that you loose your creditt. with all men by vtteringe
such known untruths as, that the best of our divines do grant the ^ast
resolution of our faith to ^ee into the scriptures only You should have named
some one author at least, to have given creditt to your assertion.

PILK.
What then is the rule that is more universal? The authority of the church
say you; Traditions says Bellarmine, the faith of the Bellar. de verbo lib. 4.
cap 12.
church that is written in the hearts of the faithful says Stapleton: so
friendly do the patrons of this error accord, as if that curse Staplet. l.
7. princ. cap. 1.
wherewith God threatened the Egiptia^s had fallen upon them. I will set
Egiptians against Egiptia^s, they shall fight every one against his neighbor.
For if the authority of the church does make up the rule, traditions do
not being two things, as different as the fountain and the stream, the
fruit and the tree. For traditions flow from the authority of the church,
says Stapleton; Authority of the church is the churches testimony,
tradition is doctrine not a testimony only. This therefore is neither a more
universal rule, nor yet before it, which is your second conclusion, and which
if it were true, the church should be summa and prima veritas: for that for
which we must believe the Gospel, and it for it self, is the highest and
first truth, but you papists, say so of the church: therefore you have dei^yed
and changed it into the deity, and so made it of Beth^^^^ and house of God, to
be Bethanan, the house of iniquity.

CHAMP.
There is as much diversity or discord between all these sayings of ours,
as a good Logician would find between viuens, ^en^^^ns, (...) in^e^ ^^^ns,
which being ^ubalterna, are not in any man's brain dispara^a or opposita unless
in yours, which is often contrary to it self. Both tradtions therefore and
the authority of the church, are more universal rules the^ the scriptures; And
though the one of them is more universal and before the other, yet neither of
them is summa or prima veritas, as you most ignorantly affirm in the
precedent section, of the scriptures, for the which intolerable ignorance you
are justly reprehended there) nor either of them is believed for it self, but
for the testimony of God reuelinge their verity who only is believed for
himself, and his own essential truth and verity. And therefore your
childishe inference of changinge Bethell into Bethanan, is a ridiculous
conclusion of your own ignorant premises, or a dream of your own idle and
empty brain. But you will bring more solid stuff hereafter, let us hear
the rest.

PILK.
Besides, if it be demanded from whence the church has an^e such authority,
it is answered from the scriptures, for which are produced sundry testimonies;
He that hears you hears me, Go teach all nations. If then the life of this
authority be maintained and supported by the scriptures, they are the rule and
measure of her, and so before her, and not reciprocalli^ measured by her.

CHAMP.
When it is demanded by such as pretend to believe the scriptures (as you make
show to do and yett deny the churches Authority, as you heretically do,
what proof there is of the churches authority, the scriptures are rightly
produced, for the proof thereof, not that thee has her authority from the
scriptures (as you either ignorantly or negligentlie say) for her authority
she has from God. The author of all power and authority; but that this
authority i^ testified by the scripture. And marvel it is to me, that you
your self findinge and feelinge such testimony of holy scripture for the
churches authority as you cite in this place, do not yett cease to impugn
it. But the truth is, you believe and follow the scriptures, so far as your
self list only, and noe farther. On the other side when it is demanded by
such as believe neither scriptures nor the church, but yett seek some
grounds of christian belief, it would be a ridiculous thing to prove the
church by the scriptures saying they are written, taught, and preached, by the
ministry of me^, whereof the church consists, and did consist many hundreds
of years before there were any scriptures at all. In this case therefore it
is clear, that the church has other proof then from the scriptures, and
before the scriptures, which in that case must be proved by the church. But
what this proof is and whence it is taken, pertayneth not to this place to
say. Yet whatsoever it be it is manifest that in this case, the proof and
knowledge of the church, must go before the proof and knowledge of the
scriptures, as being before it, and leadinge unto it, and not the contrary.

PILK.
This is yett more clear by the very proposition granted by Papists, that
the scripture is the rule, whereof the sense is, that the sense and doctrine,
not the letters and characters are this rule. Now let our adversaries judge
whether is more ancient, the doctrine of the church which is the seed of the
church, or the church which is begotten of it.

CHAMP.
You either ignorantly mistake, or wilfully inuert the question, which is not
whether the holy scriptures be a rule of faith, which noe christian denies,
but whether it be the first and most universal rule thereof. And this none but
heretics that deny the authority of the church and verity of traditions
(both which notwithstanding are expresselie testified by holy scripture* did
ever affirm. And whether the church be more ancient then the scriptures, if
you doubt, as you seem to do, yea and to affirm the contrary, I shall
esteem you either very senceles, or very wilful and pe^uers; the scriptures
having been written by the church, unless peradventure by the scriptures, or
doctrine of the scriptures, you understand the word of God written in the
hearts of men, by the immediate revelation of the holy Ghost, and by them
delivered by word of mouth the one to the other, until Moises, who was the
first that ever committed any thing to writing. If you take the scriptures
in this sense, that which you mean is true; and if further you acknowledge the
authority of the church and verity of Tradition, in deliueringe this
doctrine and teachinge it one to another by word of mouth before it was
written, our controversy is at an end. The authority of the church and
traditions being evidently proved to go before the scriptures, and
consequently to be a more universal rule of faith then the scriptures.

PILK.
So that as your first conclusion is a manifest untruth, that there is a more
universal rule of faith then the scriptures; So the second is a dull and
heavy conceit, that the church should be more ancient and before them.

CHAMP.
If either my first conclusion (as you term it) be a manifest untruth, or my
second a dull co^ceipt, why do you doombelie deny it, without any proof or
reason at all? Especially saying I proved the first by clear instance, as
you may see, and the second is but a sequel or necessary deduction of the
first? If it be enough for you to say that your adversaries conclusions though
proved by manifest instance, are manifest untruths, you may well hope to
carry away the bucklers from a far greater clerk then ever I shall pretend
to be. For you know that Aristotle's ass is able to deny more, then his
master is able to prove.

PILK.
Peruse the fathers in whose works you seem to be conversant, and nominate
one that has taught, either that the authority of the church is a more
universal rule, or that she was before their doctrine; which are the two
cheifest stoopes of your religion, whereas in them I find that the scriptures
is the rule, and they nominate nothing else.

CHAMP.
If you had weighed S. Aug: testimony which the manual sets down in this
place (and which you vainlie strugle to avoid) with equal judgment, you
would not have put me to further search of the fathers for proof of that
which I say. You shall either deliver your self better from S. Aug: authority
then here you have done, or else you shall be forced to swallowe it down as a
bitter, but a wholesome pill against your heresy. Neither will I take the tax
at your hand to search further the fathers for this purpose, till I see this
one better satisfied. And you fight against your own shaddowe when you labor
to prove by the fathers, that the scriptures are a rule of our faith, your
adversaries denyinge it not, as I toulde you before. But you love to show your
strength when none resists you. And that the fathers nominate no other rule,
is as true as the rest of your sayings. For seeinge they avouch so plainly
and frequentlie traditions, and the churches authority as you know they do,
how can you say that they name noe other rule?

PILK.
The Ecclesiastical rule, is the consent and Lib. 6. Sto.
conspiration of the old and new testament says Clemens. The holy scripture
does prefixe unto us the rule of our faith says S. Aug. Aug. supr.


CHAMP.
I know not whether I should attribute the citinge of this authority out of
Clemens, to your ignorance or to your fraud and desire to deceive by it your
reader, it is so impertinent to your purpose. He saying only that it is the
Ecclesiastical rule of interpretinge scriptures to make the prophetts and law
to accord with the testament of our Savior Christ. Which what it makes to
prove the scriptures to be the sole rule of faith I cannot conceive. S. Aug.
you cite so at large that I know not where to look for the place by you
alleged, to see whether it be not as pertinentlie alleged as the other is.
And saying the scriptures do send us to our pastors to learn our faith, and
to the church commandinge us to hear it, it may well be said to prefixe unto
us the rule of our faith, and yett exclude not the churches authority, for the
which we now contend. So that this place is as fit for your purpose as the
other.

PILK.
The church goes not out of her bounds, Vincent. cap. 41.
that is the holy scriptures says Jerome. And least you might think it is the
rule, but not the only rule; Vincentius adds the sole rule of the scriptures
is sufficient to all things.

CHAMP.
The church followinge the authority of tradition, and the judgment of the
church in all matters of says and manners which the scriptures do expresslie
give testimony and warrant unto, does not go out of the bounds of the
scriptures. In citinge Vincentius you use your accustomed fraud, leauinge out
the words goinge before. Which are so expresslie against your purpose, that
had you set them down, they had been sufficient to confute your errors in
this point, they are these. We have said before, ha^ this always has been,
and is also at this day the custom of Catholics, to prove the truth of faith
by these two means. First by the authority of divine Canon; then by tradition
of the Catholic church, not because the Canon alone is not sufficient of it
self to all things; but etc. Now let the judicious reader judge whether this
holy father make the scriptures the sole rule of faith or not. When he says,
the sacred Canon is sufficient to all things, he means that it is sufficient
to al things that is necessary to every man's salvation, or to every man to
believe. For these things are not many and sufficiently expressed in the holy
scripture. Or it is sufficient being left in the hands of the church to
expound and interpret it; but it is not sufficient for every one to pick his
faith and belief out of. And consequently another rule, to wit the churches
authority in understanding and interpretinge the scriptures is necessary, as
the same father teaches in these express words. Some man may peradventure In
the book before c^^ed.
ask, for as much as the Canon of the scriptures is persect and in all points
very sufficient in it self, what need is there to join thereunto the
authority of the Ecclesiastical understanding, for this cause surely, for
that all take not the holy scriptures in the same sense, because of the deepnes
thereof: but the sayings thereof some interpret one way, and some another, so
that there may almost as many senses be picked out of it, as there be men.
For Nouatian does expound it one way, and Sabellius another way, otherwise
Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius, otherwise Photinus, Apollinaris, Priscillianus,
otherwise Iouinian, Pelagius, Celestus, lastly otherwise Victorius. Thus
far he who as you see expresselie admits as necessary the rule of
Ecclesiastical authority, besides the scriptures which is that we contend
about.

PILK.
This clearelie is S. Aug. doctrine, and the rest of the fathers and not your
crooked inference, that the authority of the church is a more universal and
more ancient rule then the scriptures, for where has he any word to this
purpose? I would not have believed the gospel, except the authority of the
church had moved me, are too weak to inserr any such like conclusion, though
we admit them in your corrupt translation. For it is plain, he speaks not
these words of the present time, when he was a Bishop as you read them, but
of the time past when he was a Manichy. Being a Catholic and a Bishop when
he writ that book, he had far other motives to believe the Gospel then the
authority of the church which here he alone names. Take one place for a
thousand, I take my conscience to witness (Honoratus) and God that dwells in
pure minds, that I think nothing more wise, chaste, religious, then all
these scriptures, which the catholic church retayneth under the name of the
old and new testament, I know thou wounderest, but I cannot d^ssemble; I was
otherwise persuaded. Howsoever then being an heretic, he thought of the
scriptures, yett now become a catholic he believed them, for that prudence
chastity piety which he found in them.

CHAMP.
Now let us see how you will quitte your self of the authority of S. Aug:
set down in the Manual; you say it is too weak to serve our turn, because
he spoke not of the present time when he was Bishop and wrote that book, but
when he was a Manichie (A poor and silie shifte God wotte) let his own
words witness what his meaning is. Ego Eua^gelio non crederem, nisi me
Ecclesi(...)s co^moueret I would not believe the Gospel, but that the
churches authority did move me; He says not no^ credidissem nisi commo^isset I
had not believed had not the authority moved me, as you corruptly translate,
or if I do produce your coppie, for mine has crederem and commoueret which if
you will translate had believed and had moved, you shall be putt to your
Accidence again.

But beit that he spoke of himself as being a Manichie, (which is as true as
that he was a Manichie when he wrote this) this is so far from fauoringe your
cause, that it makes it much worse. For if the churches authority had force
to move an heretic to believe the gospel, what man not deprived of common
sense will deny, but it has at least the like force with a catholic? But you
say that S. Aug: being a catholic, had other motives to believe the
scriptures then the authority of the church beit so, what will you infer
thereof for your purpose, or against me? nothing at all, yea the testimony
alleged by you out of him, does sufficiently witness that the authority of the
church did still move him to believe the scriptures, seeing he restrains
himself to those scriptures which the catholic church receives and
retayneth.

PILK.
Again if by the church you mean the present Bell. li. (...) de Sacra. cap.
25.
church, and by the present church her rulers and guides as your consorts
usually do, then is it most absurd to think that S. August: and the rest of
the Bishops of his time believed the gospel for the authority of the
church, for that had been for their own authority, and so they had believed
the gospel for themselves.

CHAMP.
If you hadd but one dram of good Logic, you could not but have seen your
argument to have been most idle, and not beseeminge a doctor of divinity. For
no nouice in logic but knows, that an argument taken from all the parts
together, or collectiue to every one in several or particular, concludes
nothing affirmatiuelie. Such an one is yours being this is substance. S. Aug.
and the rest of the bishops believe the Gospel for the authority of the
present church; but S. Aug. and the rest of the Bishops are the present
church, ergo they believe the Gospel for themselves. Or if you do not yett
see your own seelines in this argument, compare it with this and peradventure
you will epsy it. Richard Pilkinton and the rest of the ministers of the
church of England believe the 39. articles to be good and lawful for the
authority of the church of England. But Richard Pilkinton and the rest of
the ministers are the church of England, ergo they believe the 39. articles
for themselves.

PILK.
But if diverse papists be not deceived S. Aug. means not the present church,
but the church which was in the Apostles time, that saw Christ's miracles, and
heard his preachinge, and so this speech of S. August helps you nothing,
except you can prove that the present church, has the same authority
with the Apostles, Driedo l. 4. c. 4. de dogm. Aug. con. Faust. lib. 2. cap. 5
Hieron. in Psalm. 86.
which your own Driedo flathe denies. Ecclesia primitiua propter collegium
Apostolorum, ad tradendam nouam nostrae fidei Doctrinam, maioris erat gratiae,
maiorisque authoritatis quam Ecclesia quae nunc est. According to the Doctrine
of S. August. and Hierome.

CHAMP.
Though S. Aug. should mean the church in the Apostles time excludinge the
present church (which is false) yett would this overthrow your cause. For
whence could he receive the testimony of that church, but by authority of
the churches present and precedent? And yett this serves sufficiently my
turn to prove some other rule of belief besides and before the scriptures,
which is our controversy here. That which you allege out of our Driedo does
not prove the present church to be less infallible in her judgment in
matters of faith, then the church in the Apostles time, neither does any
catholic say so. For saying it is governed by the same spirit of truth which
was promised should remain with her for ever, she cannot be more subject to
error now, then she was at that time. Therefore that which Driedo says is,
that the primative church by reason of the college of the Apostles. had power
to deliver new doctrine of faith which the succedinge church has not; but
has infallible authority to teach that faith which she received of the
Apostles. And this you might easily have seen to have been Driedoes Doctrine,
if you had taken but any ordinary heed to his words.

PILK.
Nevertheless to pass by this and to grant that S. Augustine, a Catholic and
a Bishop, would not believe the Gospel, but that the authority of the
church moved him; is every motive to believe, a rule of faith? Nothing
less. For the rule is that whereunto faith is lastly resolved, which is not
into the authority of the church, as your best divines teach, but into the
scriptures.

CHAMP.
You might well have past by all this indeed, and also that which follows,
had you not rather chosen to fill your paper with your impertinencies, to the
publishinge of your own small judgment. If you take the rule of ^aith so
strictly as it contains only that whereunto faith is lastly resolved, you
will make only God reuelinge his verities to be the rule of faith, and then
you must exclude not only the church but the scriptures also. But if you take
it for a true ground of belief, then that testimony which so moves to faith
as it ingendreth faith in us, may truly be said to be a rule of faith, and
such a motive S. Aug: says the church is.

PILK.
And there upon Cameracensis speakinge of In 1. Sent. q. 1. art. 3.
this place of S. Aug: says, that it proves not that he believed the gospel
thoroughe the churches authority, as by a Theological principle, whereby the
gospel might be proved true, but only as by a cause mouinge him to creditt
it, as if he should say, I would not believe the gospel unless the holiness of
the church or Christ's miracles did move me. In which saying though some
cause of his beleeuinge be assigned, yet no former principle is touched whose
creditt might be the cause why the gospel should be believed.

CHAMP.
It appears well you understand not what Cameracensis says, or else that
you care not what you say, so that you say something. He says the scriptures
are not proved by the authority of the church as by a Theological principle
or argument ab intrinseco but as a motive from authority or ab extrinseco,
which is that all men say, and which I only desire to prove by S. Augustines
testimony. For if the church be a motive, to believe the scriptures, it must
necessarily be before the scriptures, and consequently be a more universal
rule, cause or motive of faith and belief then the scriptures.

PILK.
Bellarmine says, that S. Aug. speaks these words of the authority of the
church, as of a cause propoundinge what is to be believed, and not of the
foundation of faith. But the proposition of the church is not the rule and
resolution In 2. 2. q. 1. art. 1. (...)*
of faith, but only a condition requisite of beleeuinge as Valent. teaches in
22. tom. 3. de obiecto fidei.

CHAMP.
It is a most irksome and importunate thing to have to do with with an
ignorant adversary, that knows not what he should either prove or deny.
Such an one you show your self to be. For if you take from the scripture
which you truly teach to be a rule of our faith, the authority to propose,
manifest, and testify articles of belief, see how you will make it a rule of
faith. Seeinge therefore you give to the church these things without which
the scriptures are not a rule of faith, why should you deny it to be also a
rule of faith? But the church (you say) is not the foundation or resolution of
faith (I speak in your own phrase though improperlie that you may
understand) and therefore is it not any rule thereof. If this argument
conclude any thing, it will also prove the scriptures to be noe rule of
faith. For it is neither foundation, nor resolution of faith, if you
understand the first and chief foundation, or last resolution (as I told you
before) unless you will make it to be God himself. But if you take foundation
for that which does ground our faith in a certain and sure kind of
infallible testimony, in which sense al men speak, that know what they
speak, the^ are both the scriptures and the church also foundations and
grounds of our faith.

PILK.
And surely if. S. Aug, had meant that the authority of the church had been
this rule which is your inference, he had excluded all other rules. For he that
says, I would not believe except the authority of the church moved me,
establishes one cause, remoueth the rest. But this none of you dare accord
unto, and is as far from S. Aug. meaning as your next words are from truth.
If therefore the authority of the church be a sufficient motive, for a motive
it is, which none of us ever denied, but that it is a sufficient motive,
neither can you prove, nor yett S. August. any where avouches.

CHAMP.
S. Aug. words (which are to be believed before your bare negation are most
clear, that without the testimony or authority of the church he hadd not
believed the Gospel, and consequently that the church was cause, rule, and
motive of his belief, not in that degree that God is the rule or foundation of
our faith; for so we should make S Aug. as senseless as Mr. Pilkinton, but in
the like kind or degree that the scriptures are, but yett before the
scriptures, because he believed them for the churches authority. And therefore
you see S. Aug. to say that which the Manual says; that there is some other
rule of faith before and more universal then the scriptures, seeinge that for
it, and by it the scriptures are believed.

MANVALL SECTIO 8.
The second thing to be noted is, that they which believe nothing but that
which is proved by scripture, are evidently convinced to believe nothing at
all. For they that cannott believe that there is an holy scripture, or what
books be holy scripture, cannott believe any thing, because it is proved by
scripture: for it is evident that before they believe any thing, because it
is proved by scripture, they must first believe that there is a holy
scripture, and what books are scripture. But they that believe not any thing
but that which is proved by scripture, cannot believe that there is a
scripture, nor what books are holy scripture. For neither of these two can
be proved by holy scripture. Therefore they that believe not any thing but
that which is proved by scripture, cannott believe any thing at all. This
argument is a plain demonstration and compels the protestants either to
confess that they have noe faith at all, or to acknowledge this their
position to wit, that nothing ought or can rightly be believed, but that
which may be proved by scripture, to acknowledge I say this position, to be
false: which notwithstanding is one main ground of all their religion.

PILK.
When a soldier that killed Marius came to cut of his head, he drew out his
sword and told him (hie est gladius quem ipse fecisti) for Marius formerlie
had been a cutter. The grounds that you have laid, cut the throat of your
faith; but raseth not the skin of the protestants. For I have showed before
that scriptures do sufficiently prove themselves to be the word of God, and
these and these books to be such, whereon it follows your conuincinge
demonstration that protestants believe nothing at all, to be a windy
friuoulous discourse, whereas such conclusions may be drawn from your
principles, as will prove (vulnera in capite canis) you will not easily lick
them hole.

CHAMP.
Remove the sword first from your own throat whi^h^^ presses to hard, and
after may you attempt to piety your adversary with it. You have hitherto made
a (...)able show of any proof, but of your own in re^lible ignorance and
impertinencie, joined with wilful stand to de^e^^e your reader. If you defend
your pro^esta^^s no better then hitherto you ^^^ue, they will be evidently
concluded to believe nothing at all by the argument proposed, which (...)e
you cannott tell where to begin to solue o^ an^we^e, you make a Thrasonicall
and glorious sh^we of contempt of it, as many of yours (...), and (...)elie
your grand master Calluine when (...)most pressed and has least to say for
himself. Are you n^^ ashamed to let mine argument stand as a ^^^phey against
you and your heresy without saying one word in answer of it, idly
supposinge that you have said something to it before? But seeinge you dare
not set upon mine argument to satisfi it, which you should first have done,
let us see what incurable wounds you give unto me out of mine own principles.

PILK.
For they that rely their faith upon humane testimonies originallie, are
convinced to have no faith at all: for faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God: But you papists rely your faith upon humane testimonies
originallie, when you ground it on the authority of the church, which you say
is a more universal rule and more ancient then the scriptures. Now then make
the conclusion as pleases you.

CHAMP.
I grant your proposition or mayor, and deny your minor. For where learned
you to term the authority of the church, humane testimony, seeinge the holy
ghost styles the church the house of God, 1. ad Ti. ^.
the pillar and ground of truth? your conclusion therefore is blown away like
a fether. So that the wound which you thought would prove so grievous, is
not so much as the blow of a little child. Spitt therefore upon your hands,
take better hold, and strike more manfully or else give your bill to another.
But so hoodewinkt you are either with ignorance or malice, that strikinge at
your adversary, you hitt your self. For whilst you say with S. Paul, that
faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of God; you prove that the
scripture or the word written, which is not heard but read; is not the first
means of our says; but the word of God preached (as S. Paul says in the
same place) which was before the scriptures.

PILK.
From hence comes all this war that we will not ground our faith upon the
totteringe wall of humane authority as you do, but cleave fast to the sacred
scriptures beleeuinge nothing (as Paul taught) but that which was written in
Moises and the prophetts, which we rejoice to have made the mean and ground
of our religion.

CHAMP.
A stout Champion I wisse, that after the first blow. and that a very weak
one, casts down his arms, and thinkinge to overthrow his adversary with
words, falls to raylinge, as if he hoped to gain the victory, rather by
his stinkinge breath, then by strength of hand strokes. You having been at
the school of the father of all falsehoode, have learned to call the church
of God and the infallible authority thereof, the totteringe wall of humane
authority, which the holy ghost by the mouth of this Apostle, styles the
pillar and ground of truth; whereby as by many other passages you show what
honor and respect you bear unto the holy scriptures, seeinge you dare so
disdainfully debase the house of God, which they so highelie prise and extol.
You farther glory in that you believe nothing but which is written in Moises
and the prophettes, whereby you prove your self to be a Jew and no
Christian. Either retract this Iewishe proposition of yours, or blotte, out of
your Bibles the whole new testament, that you may be known to be noe
Christian, and that you may fill up the measure of your grande master Martin
Luther who has long since cast out diverse books out of the new testament,
besides those he has rejected out of the oulde. You seem to father this your
foul doctrine upon S. Paul (though you dayne him not the honor of S.
Paul) but why do you not point at the place where he teaches it! If S.
Paul had been of this mind that you would seem to make him of, in vain did
he write his Epistells, and in vain did the rest of the Apostles and
Evangelists write their works. Again suppose S. Paul had written any such
thing in his letters or Epistles, how would you make any man believe that
Epistle to be his, and therefore to be canonical scriptures, unless you will
use the authority of tradition and the churches testimony? All the wit and
cunning you have, yea though you borrowed all that of the rest of the
ministers in the world, will not shape a sufficient answer to this question.

PILK.
And which if we could not prove, yett can we not be convinced to have noe
faith, because they are principles against which none dare open his mouth, that
any way would have himself to be counted a Christian, as S. Tract. 2. in
Epist. 10.
Aug. spoke. For as other arts and sciences are sufficiently known and
credited without proof of their principles, so matters divine are perfectly
and demonstratiuelie persuaded unto us Stroma. lib. 7.
from this indemonstrable principle of the holy scriptures, says Clemens, and
are not proved by judgment but comprehended by faith.

CHAMP.
Why do you say, ( which i^ we could not prove) as though you had some
mean to prove it without traditions and the churches authority? But they are
principle, (you say and therefore not to be proved. The scriptures are
principles of faith in deed in a certain degree; but they are not prime
principles which only are to be believed for themselves without any further
proof, unless (as I toulde you before you will make them to be God, who only
is to be believed for his own proper verity and all other verities for him.
And when you say out of S. Aug. that none dare open their mouth against them
that will be counted a christian, I would a^ke you what you esteem of your
father in reformation Martin Luther, whom some of his disciples as you know
style the second Elias, the fifte Evangelist, the second or third person in
heaven after Christ, who with a great troop of his scholars, does not only
open his mouth to call into question diverse of the Apostles writings, but
absolutely casts them out of the Canon? will you censure him to be noe
christian? if you do you shall be a cursed child of a more cursed father. Yea
what will you think of your self and all the rest of your crewe, who cast out
of the Canon so many of those books which S. Aug. whose authority you cite,
always esteemed to be canonical scripture? See whether you have not
pronounced sentence with your own mouth against your self, and condemned your
self to be noe Christian? If you should eat noe bread till you quitt your
self of this indictment, I dare undertake to find you bread for six pence so
long as you live. Howsoever, hereby at least it is clear that the scriptures
are not such principles of our faith as being not proved to be written by the
holy Ghost, may be doubted of, and therefore necessarily require to be
sufficiently proved before they can be grounds of other articles of our
faith. When you or any for you shall solue this argument, I shall esteem you
not unworthy of a doctors cap.

S. Aug. has good reason to say that no Christian dare to open his mouth
against the scriptures received by the catholic church. For so should he be
worthyly esteemed as a publican and heathen by the Matt. 18.
testimony of our Savior Christ himself. And therefore is Luther and Calvin
with their viperous generation worthily censured as heretics, though they
had no other errors but that of reiectinge with obstinacy the canonical
scriptures.

That which you bring out of Clemens (were it as you set it down) is
nothing to your purpose. For we know the scriptures to be indemonstrable by
reason, but yett to be proved by authority, as all other articles of faith
are. And now look over once more your cards and weigh well with your self,
whether this proposition admitted for true, which is one of your principles;
That nothing is to be believed that is not proved by scriptures, whether (I
say) the Manual does not directly convince the protestants (who profess that
they cannot prove the scriptures to be scriptures) to believe nothing at all.

MANVALL SECTION 9.
But now having showed the absurdity of their doctrine in this point, I
will join with them in the scriptures, as they themselves do desire,
obseruinge this method. First I set down the Catholic Roman belief in
direct and plain positions: then I bring in proof of it one two or more
places of holy scriptures, citinge the ancient vulgar translation and often
times I add the testimony of some ancient father of the first five hundredth
years, understanding such scriptures as I cite in the same sense and meaning
that I cite them for. Furthermore those few places of scripture, which seem
to sound directly against the catholic faith, I show in brief how they
are to be understood. And last of all I putt down the position contradictorie
to the Catholic doctrine: to the end that the indifferent reader (be he
catholic or otherwise) may more easily judge whether doctrine has better
ground in holy scriptures. And further that he that will impugn this treatise
may see what he has to prove, if he will prove any thing to purpose.

PILK.
Zebull judged men to be shadows of mountains; and you Christian verities
novel absurdities. But as Nicomachus the painter answered a skillful fellow,
that judged the picture of Helen drawn by Zeuxes not to be beautiful; take
mine eyes says he, and thou will th^nke her to be a goddess: So if you look
with spiritual eyes, you would easily conceive them to be divine verities,
which you imagine to be palbable absurdities. For lack whereof you proceed to
beat your adversaries with their own weapons of holy scriptures, and you
tell them how you will marshall your forces.

CHAMP.
Zebull (if you say true) imagined men to be shadows, and you contrariwise
imagine shadows to be men: I doubt not but if I should take your eyes to
look upon your work, I should think as you do, a ^rogge to be as fair as
Diana. You say I proceed to beat my adversaries with their own weapons. But
the scriptures are not mine adversaries weapons, but as they steal them to
impugn the truth with: as thieves do true men's weapons.

PILK.
First you will set down your says in direct positions. and that you have
done as straight as a Rams horn.

CHAMP.
Mark you the crookednes and discouerit, that others may see it besides your
self.

PILK.
Secondly you will prove it by holy scriptures which you cite to as good
purpose as the devil did against Christ.

CHAMP.
Note you the impertinencies when they occur, and discover them that other
men may see them as well as your self.

PILK.
Thirdly you will produce them in the ancient Bibl. complut. in prefat.
vulgar translation: no marvel, for that hangs between the greek and the
Hebrew, as Christ did between the two thieves in your friends opinion:
whereas it has been the Cameryne that has vented from it many of your
errors. Hence you have marriage to be a Sacrament, because your translation
reads, magnum hoc Sacramentu^, and in greek it is Mysterion. Hence alms to
be meritorious because huiusmodi sacrificijs promeritur Deus, and in the greek
it is (...). Hence definitions of councels to proceed from the holy ghost,
because in this corrupt false version it is read, the holy spirit shall
suggest unto you all things, that I will say, whereas it is in the original
that I have said. Infinite almost are the additions, detractions,
deprauations, wherewith this sweet translation of yours has corrupted the
fountaynes. That Isodore Clarius woundered at the negligence of learned men
that have not purged it from these inumerable errors, wherewith it swarmeth
and wherein himself had observed and rectified eight thousand places, and
yett this is the apparel wherein you will set before us the holy scriptures.

CHAMP.
Take you here the counsel the painter gave to the unskillful censurer of
Zeuxis work, which you spoke of not far before, and look upon the vulgar
translation with S. Ambrose. S. Aug. S, Hierome and S. Gregory's eyes, with the
rest of all the Latin fathers, who lived a thousand years before your
heresy was hatched, whose judgments are of more authority then many Clarius,
and you will find it to be entire, perfect and good. Your exceptions against
it with many more are already answered by Bellarmine, which answers shall
stand for good till you confute them. This is all your learning, to repeat
old ouerworne objections, and to conceal their answers; a great piece of
wit I wisse.

PILK.
Fowerthlie you will add the testimony of some ancient father, whom
nevertheless you regard no further, then you can make them speak your
language, which if they do not, you can shave their locks, and scrape
their tounges, and make them pronounce Siboleth for Shiboleth as your purginge
indexes do proclayme unto the world.

CHAMP.
This art of shauinge and scrapinge I leave to you and yours, who are so
accustomed thereunto that they cannot deal otherwise. Your industry in this
kind has been sufficiently showed in the few precedent pages. Our Indexes
do not corrupt the fathers words and sentences, as you foolishlie or
maliciously insinuate, but they note plainly the faults of later writers;
which plain and open dealinge if you would use, no fault would be found with
you.

PILK.
Fiftlie you will answer, these scriptures which seem to contradict your
faith. Then if the same right belo^ge to Accius that is to Titius, you will
afforde your adversary the like liberty.

CHAMP.
You are not prohibited to use it to your best and most advantage.

PILK.
Sixtlie you will set down the contradictory positions, that the reader may
judge, and the answerer find what he has to prove, if he will prove any
thing to the purpose. But some of these positions you have devised out of your
own brain, which noe protestant ever allowed, and so you fight with your own
shadow, and then triumph as Tereus the poet. Vicimus exclamat, mecum mea vota
feruntur.

CHAMP.
You have your answer to this in the refutation of your roll of forged
positions. Look back thither and see whether you or I may be said to be
deuisers or forgers of false positions.

MANVALL SECTION 10.
Who is to understand, that though the protestants do maintain the negative
part in almost all the positions contiouerted between them and the
catholics, yet is he not for all that not to be excused from the proof of
those points, unless he will withal confess that in the^ the protestants
have no faith at all, but only a mere denial of faith. For faith being not
a simple denyinge, or not beleeuinge, but a positive assent, and belief of
such articles, as are revealed unto us by God, it has positive grounds,
whereby it may and ought to be proved, even in those points which are
negative. And therefore as catholics do prove their faith in these negative
points; that only faith does not justify; that we are not certain of our
justification or salvation, and the like: So likewise are the protestants to
prove their faith in these: that there is no purgatory: no real presence:
no sacrifice of the Mass, and the rest; unless as is said before they will
confess, that they have no faith in these points, but only a mere denial of
faith.

For it is a far different thing, not to believe purgatory to be, for
example; and to believe purgatory not to be. The first being a mee^e negative
or denial of any act of faith; the second being a positive act of faith of a
negative object. Having thus advertised the good reader of these few things,
I leave thee to peruse the treatise it self, desiringe thee to expect only
the bare positions proved with the self text of holy scripture, and some few
fathers, without any flourishe of words at all. The work being such as it
does rather resemble the bones of a great body tied together, with dried
sinews, then a body througlie furnished with flesh and other habiliments of
friendly nature. For which cause though to such as rather respect fashion
then substance, it may hap to appear hideous, yett to others of contrary
appetite, (for whose contentment it is specially intended) it will not
peradventure be judged altogether without form.

PILK.
If non credimus quia non legimus, bea Hier. cont. Heluid. cap. 9.
sufficient argument, as both the scriptures and the fathers teach us, we shall
with noe great difficulty prove our faith, as well in the negative as in the
affirmative.

CHAMP.
Non credimus quia non legimus is not a sufficient argument of faith, but in
such points only as are proved neither by tradition nor by scripture, of which
sort was the heresy of Heluidius; denyinge the perpetual virginity of the
blessed virgin; which falsitie being contrary to the received tradition of
the whole church and not proved by holy scripture, was sufficiently refuted
by S. Hierome saying; non credimus quia non legimus. Which saying is not any
argument for the denial of such articles of faith as are proved either by
scripture or traditions, and much less for them that are proved by both.

PILK.
For S. Paul proouinge Christ to be above the angels in regard of his
original, that he is the son of God. Heb. 1. 5. and in regard of his
majesty, that he sits at his right hand verse 13. takes his argument from
the scriptures negatiuelie. To none of the Angels he said etc.

CHAMP.
S. Paul takes not his negative argument from the scriptures only, but
absolutely from all divine testimony saying. Cui Angeloru^ d^^^ Or if you will
have S. Paul to argue out of the scriptures only, tell me out of what
scripture he concludes this. Nonne omnes suns administratoris spiritus in
ministerium missi propter eo^. oui hereditatem ca^iun^ salutis? unless you will
suppose that for granted unto you, which is in controversy, to wit that there
i^ no other divine testimony but that which is written, this instance of S.
Paul's argument serves you for nothing.

PILK.
S. August. often charge the Donatists to Cap. 12.
prove their church out of the scripture, and he will believe, if not he
will reject them, specially in his book de vnitate Ecclesiae, if they cannott
(says he) read these things in the scripture but persuade them by their
contentio^s, I will believe those things that are written in De carne Christi
cap. 7. Orig hom. 1. in lere. cir medium. De vocat gent cap. 3 libr. 4. Mat. c.
23.
the scriptures: I believe not those things that are spoken by vain
heretics; I receive not that which from without the scripture (says
Tertullian) thou producest of thine own; without the scriptures our senses or
expositions have no creditt says Origin. Who will speak when the holy
scriptures speak not? says Ambrose. Many says Hierome think Zachary to be
the Father of John and that he was slain because he preached the coming of
Christ. This thing because it has no authority from scripture, is with like
facility contemned, as it is proved.

CHAMP.
All these sayings of the fathers how truly soever cited (which I will not
stand here to examine) do prove (if they prove any thing, that you are
bound to produce positive testimonies out of the scriptures for your negative
faith, if you will be thought to have any faith at all in them, and not a
mere denial or negation of faith. For you must understand, that it is one
thing to believe that there is noe purgatory, for example, and another thing
not to believe that there is a purgatory. The first being a positive act of
faith, requiringe also a positive testimony and revelation of God, though of
a negative article; the other is a mere denial or negation of faith of a
positive article, and is as well in horses or asses as in men; only with this
difference, that men are capable and may have the contrary positive act; but
horses and asses cannot. If your faith therefore of the negative articles which
you houlde, be of the first kind, you are bound to prove it by positive
testimony of holy scripture If it be only of the second kind, then have you
no more faith in these articles then have horses, asses or other brute beasts.
Now to the fathers testimonies so far as they may seem to make any thing
against the catholic doctrine of traditions or the churches authority, I
answer (supposinge they sound as you set them down, which I will not stand
to examine Lib 1. con. Crescon. cap. 33. Epist. 1. ad Sympron.
here) that whatsoever is proved by traditions or the churches judgment, is
warranted by the scripture, which gives testimony to the church and
traditions. Which answer is S. August. lib. 1. cont. Crescon. cap. 33.

PILK.
Therefore concerning the proof of our faith in the negative points of
purgatory, Real presence, Sacrifice of the Mass; since there is noe footinge
for them in the word of God, we answer with Basil, that it is not faith, but
a manifest defection from faith to deny that which is written, or to bring in
any thing that is not written, where as Christ JESUS our Lord says, my
sheep hear my voice.

CHAMP.
The judicious reader shall be judge whether these catholic articles have not
much faster footinge in the holy scriptures, then your contiarie negatiues.
Neither does S. Basil any ways favor you. For he confirminge his saying
with these words of our Savior, my sheep hear my voice; excludes not that
word of our Savior which is more properly his word then the scripture. For
he says not my scriptures, but my sheep hear my voice; therefore he speaks
of the voice as it is delivered by word, and not as it is written.

PILK.
And yett to satisfy you, we shall find sufficient weapons out of the
scriptures to lay these Anekims on the ground. Now as the Roman Emperor that
meant to subdue Germany, brought out his army, and put them in array upon the
sea shoore, and presently charged them to gather shelles, tellinge them that
they were spoils of the Ocean, due to the capitol: So you having marshalled
your forces and putt them in order, tell your reader, that the whole body of
them is but a Scheleton, bare bones, tied together with dry Sinews, and then
without question you will attain a glorious victory, and bring spoils fit
for the vaticane. Yet you doubt not but your treatise will please some men's
appetite, and I am of your mind, for like lips like lettuce. Thus from your
prolusion I come to your main battaille, which thus you begin.

CHAMP.
What sharp weapons you will find in the scriptures, for* your negative faith,
or no belief, I will with patience expect, and having with all indifferency
pondered them, I will tell you with all sincerity, what weight they are of, in
my judgment. In the mean time I must tell you, that your conclusion seems to
me as little witty, as all the rest of your discourse is learned, and therefore
findinge by the little experience I have of you, that such lettuce suit well
with your lips, I leave them wholly to your self.

Manual. The first controversy.
It is known that the catholic Roman church does admit more books and
parcelles of holy Bible for scripture then the protestants do, and
cons^quently acknowledge a larger Canon then they, and yett notwithstanding
she teaches.

PILK.
The Grecians are ever children, rightly fitteth you Romanists that still
lispe like littell children, and excellently speak without sense For to say
the catholic Roman church, is as good sense as the universal particular
church.

CHAMP.
It is your dull understanding, and not our lisping language that makes these
words the Catholic Roman ^hur^h without sense to you. For the attribute
Roman does not restrain any whit the amplitude of the signification of that
word catholic or universal either in re^pect of time or place as you
ignorantly imagine; but does only distinguish it from all such sects as
falselie and presumptuously term themselves catholic, but dare not call
themselves Romans or Roman Catholics. As in former ages the word catholic
was added to the name christian for the same purpose as ancient Pacianus
signifies Therefore when we say a Roman Catholic we would say no more but a
true, and not a falsely termed catholic. And because you are a member of one
of those sects which are discried by this word Roman, you hate it as thieves
hate the light, whereby they are discovered.

PILK.
For who can conceive the catholic church to be Roman, which was in the
world before Rome it self was, for it is the general assembly of the Saints
Heb. 12. ^3. from Abell the first just, unto the last that shall believe in
Christ, as S. Aug: speaks. Moreover all the nations in the world, not the
Romans were promised to Christ psalm. 2. Ask of me and I will give thee the
gentiles for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession, and so S. Aug: writes, that God promised to the seed of Abraham,
not the Romans, but all the gentiles, and sealed it with an oathe, by which
promise it came to pass, that many nations not contained under the Roman
jurisdiction received the Gospel, and were joined unto the church.

CHAMP. Reed Pacianus of the a^ditio^ of this name to the church in the
epistle cited. Matt. 16.

There is no greater difficulty to conceive how the catholic church may be
called Roman, then how the christian church (which denomination began first
at Antioch is called Catholic. And if you would know he reason why it is
denominated of Rome rather then of Antioche or Jerusalem, it is because S.
Peeter, who was Bishop of Rome received promise of our Savior Christ, that
his church should be builte upon him, as upon a firm rock, and that hell
gates should never prevail against it. Which promise our Savior Christ
having performed, it is come to pass that the church of Christ which was
first called christian, then Catholic, is now called Roman, and thus much for
the name Roman. Now I would have you mark, that whatsoever you say in proof
of this attribute catholic, you say in condemnation of your own
protestanticall assemblies, which were never heard of before Martin Luther, no
more then the Arrians were before Arrius, and the rest of the sects and
heresies before their masters and authors. Which one argument had you but
any indifferency, joined with any mean judgment, would be sufficient to
make you detest the felloweshippe of such new masters.

PILK.
Besides the modern Roman church has made a defection from that which the
primative Roman church maintained, in so much that S. Paul's Epistles written
to the ancient Romans, may justly be called an antilogie of that Religion
which now is professed in the city of Rome.

CHAMP.
Some substantial proof of this your assertion, would assuredly get you
the victory in all the rest you contend about, without all further dispute.
But the manifest falsitie of your affirmation, does not only make your cause
desperate, but also deeply wounds your creditt, having no care to affirm
so apparent untruths without the slenderest show of proof or probability
at all.

PILK.
Besides we do not find in any ancient creed either that of the Apostles
or of Nice, or in any other of the ancient counsels, that the church was
styled the cathol^cke Roman. Finally how can a part be the whole? Now the
Roman church (though she were pure) in her farthest extent, is but a part
of the universal church.

CHAMP.
Have you not yett learned how vain a thing it is to argue ab authorita ^
ne^a ua? Produce you some aun ient creed, where the church is called the
christian church, which though you cannot do; yett I hope you will not deny
the catholic church to be rightly so called. Neither is the Roman church
taken for a part of the catholic church, as you either falselie or
foolishlie surmise, but for the whole: as the king of England is not taken
only to be king of England but of the rest of his kingdoms also, the whole
taking name of one part, as is ordinary even in common speech which you
cannot be ignorant of.

PILK.
Yett you say this universal particular church admits a larger Canon then
the protestants, you mean the Apocripha. And so it stands her in hand,
otherwise she might bid a dieu to diverse profitable points that help her to
vphoulde her Monarchy. But the church of God before Christ received them not,
but the same which the protestants do embrace. Neither read we that Christ or
any of his Apostles did cite any testimony out of them, to confirm any
doctr^ne by them, which they did out of all the canonical books. Besides if
we follow S. August. de consen. Euang c. 1
August. judgment, whereby we may discern suspicious writing from canonical,
then these will easily appear to be conterfaites. First says he they are not
such as the church credited, and received into canonical authority.
Secondly there be many things embarked in them which Apostolical rule of
faith and sound doctrine does contradict, both these are verified of, the
Apocripha. For neither the church of God before Christ received them, to whom
were committed the oracles of God. Romans 3. 2. (which Christ would have
reproved them for, if they had without just cause rejected them, as well as he
did reprehend them for the misinterpretinge of the canonical books) neither
yett long after Christ, did the Christian church embrace them. And besides
in the books them selves: there are certain brandes, whereby they may be
discerned from the canonical. First the addition Hest. 12. 5
unto the book of Hester says, that Mardocheus had received rewards for the
detection of the conspiracy of the kings Chamberlaynes; the true Hester says
he received none. The suppositius Hest. 6. 3.
Hester says, that Haman intended the the destruction of Mardocheus for
detectinge the Eunuchs. Hest. 12. 6. The true Hester says for Hest. 5. 2.
Hest. 15. 7. Bar. 1. 2. Ier. 52. 12. 2. Reg. 25.
denyinge him worship Hester. 3. 5. The true Hester the king looked
graciously upon her: the conterfeit, he looked angerlie. The book of Baruch
says that the city of Jerusalem was taken and burnt at the same time:
Jeremy teaches the contrary and the books of the kings. The additions unto
Daniell say that when Danyell delivered Susanna he was a child: the true
Daniell says that he with two others made by ca. 13. 45. cap. 2. 48.
the king were chief over 120. princes, that they might take all the accounts
of the kingdom, and the king might not be troubled. But children use not to
be set over such affairs. Commentitiues Daniell says in the story of Bell,
that he was fed by Abacucke. 14. 36. whereas Abacucke prophesied long before
the captivity 1. 6. In the book of Tobie cap. 12. 15: the Angel calls
himself Raphaell the Angel of the Lord; but chapter the 5. 12. he is of the
kindred of Ananias and Azarias the great, if he be the Angel of the Lord, he
cannot be the son of a man. As true is that medecin wherewith the devil is
driven away: but corporal creatures use not to make any impression into a
substance simply intellectual as devils be. In Judith the cruel murder
committed by Symeon and Leui is propounded to be imitated cap. 8. 23. which
Genesis the 49. is reprehended and accursed. The book of wisdom is falselie
entitled, as it had been composed by Solomon, whereas the author of it was
Philo the Jew. Ecclesiasticus craves pardon if he come short in some words,
which the penmen of the holy Ghost used not to do. In the books of the
Maccabies a parricide is commended that laid hands on himself, which is
forbidden by the law. So your long Canon has but certain inches that are
true and perfect; the rest are but leaden and crooked; yet for all this you say.

CHAMP.
That the catholic Roman church admits a larger Canon, that is (as the
Manual says) more books and parcells of the Bible for holy scripture, then
the protestants do, is so manifest that you dare not deny it. Now whether
these books, and parcells of books be apocripha or not, is in controversy,
you affirminge them so to be, and we denyinge it. Which question cannot here be
disputed or discussed for confoundinge of matters. Only this I say by the way
to your objections made against them; that if you do stand to S. Aug judgment
in this point (to whom you make show to appeal) the cause is lost on your
part, and if you will not See what is noted of this before in my answer to
your second Antithesis
believe me, read his second book de Doctrina Christiana cap 5. and 6. and
be your own judge. Again your exceptions against the books in controversy
are such, as if they were admitted for sufficient to prove them Apocripha, I
dare undertake to prove all or the most part of the books in the Bible to be
Apocripha. And this I will make good whenever you dare upon equal
conditions to challenge me thereunto. See therefore I pray what a friend you are
to the holy scripture, that open such and so wide a gappe, to take quite away
all scripture. And this shall suffice for answer to all your tedious discourse
in this section.

Manual Catholic position the first.
That all such articles as by her (the Catholic Roman church) and the
protestants, are believed and holden for articles of faith, are not so
expressly contained in the holy scriptures, as out of them only full proof
may be made thereof.

PILK.
This position is so doubtfullie set down as if of purpose you would walk in
a cloud, that your reader might not perceive you. For if by expresselie, you
mean words and sillables; then it is true that all articles of faith are not
contained in holy scriptures in so many words: but if you mean the sense and
substance, and that which may be deduced by necessary consequence, then it is
false that full proof cannot be made of all articles of faith out of
scripture. In the former sense, there is not any protestant, that has taught
that the scriptures expresselie contain all articles of faith, and this you
papists know. For Eckius reprooueth the Lutherans, for that they will have
nothing believed, but which is express scripture, or can be proved out of
scriptures. So that your own side perceive we believe things that are not
expresselie set down in scriptures, but nothing which has not a just proof
out of it.

CHAMP.
The cloud is in your own brain, and not in my position, which is neither
dark not doubtful but to you; who perceiuinge it to press and pinch, would
gladly find some doubtefullnes therein. For if you had not been either blind
or blind foulded, you would have seen that the position denies full proof of
all articles of faith out of scriptures, in the same sense and meaning that
you profess to mayntaine the affirmative; and not only the express
contayninge them in so many words or sillabels.

Manual, proof of the Catholic position.
The articles which protestants believe to be of faith as well as Catholics,
and yett are not contained expresselie in holy scripture, are many, but we
will give instance but only in a few. First that there are three distinct
persons and one only substance or essence in God. Secondly that the second and
third persons are of the same substance, and of equal glory with the first.
Thirdelie that the third person proceeds from the second and from the first.
Fowerthly that there are two distinct and complete natures in our Savior
Christ, and but one only person. Fiftlie that there are in him two wills and
two operations, to wit of God and man, about all which have been diverse
heresies as is well known to the learned. And though all these articles have
most true ground and proof in holy scriptures, yett are they not so
expressly contained therein, as they may be fully proved by them alone. One
example shall serve for all; to prove the son of God to be consubstantial or
of one substance with the father, the catholics do allege (and truly) this
testimony (I and Io. 10. 30.
the father are one) yett because there are more means of being one, the^ in
substance, as namely, to be of one will, desire, and affection, of which sort
of unity specially the Arrians did expound this place, alleaginge for
themselves that testimony (I pray that Io. 17. (...).
they al may be one as thou father in me, and I in thee, that they also in us
may be one) Which cannot be understood of unity in substance. Therefore this
testimony without the interpretation of the church (which is the pillar of
truth) does not fully prove the father and the son to be one in substance.
The like may be said of the other articles here mentioned.

PILK.
What a gap you open to Gentilisme, Iudaisme and Heresy, when you deny the
maine grounds of christianity to have a full proof from the scriptures, but
require the help of tradition and authority of the church, as if the
authority of the church would prevail with them, with whom the scriptures
will not.

CHAMP.
Are you a doctor in divinity, and think a great gappe to be opened to
Gentilisme and Iudai^me by denyinge the mystery of the blessed Trinity, to be
fully and clearlie proved out of the scriptures only? would you if you had to
do with them go about to prove that mystery, either out of the new
testament to the Jews, or out of the whole Bible to the Gentiles? It would
well become your judgment indeed, and suteth well with the rest of your
learned discourses. But whatsoever you would do in that case, I know that noe
man endued with one dram of wit, would think that kind of proof to have
any force with them that receive not the scriptures, though they were as
clear and express as you could desire them to be. And a for the gap opened
hereby to heresy: Let the world that sees so many sects of heresies
spronge out of one Luther, judge whether your paradoxe of the sufficiency of
only scripture, without respect to the churches authority and judgment, has
not brought them forth and begotten them. Let the example of Legatt testify
whether your position or mine open the gap wider to heresy. Finally let all
the heresies in the world witness, whether the contemninge of the churches
authority in expoundinge of holy scriptures, has not been the mother of them
all. Take away therefore your paradoxe of the fulness of scriptures, and put my
position of the necessity of the churches judgment in declaringe the true
sense and meaning of the scriptures in practice, and the gap to all heresy
will quickly be so fast shutt, that she will never more appear in the world.

PILK.
But in defense of that royal and holy faith, we are very confident that all
these articles expressed by you, have both a true and full proof from them.
The trinity of persons in the unity of one essence is plainly taught:
otherwise what man or Angel durst pry into that majesty lest he were
oppressed of glory. There be three that 1. Io. 3. 8.
bear witness in heaven, Father, word and holy ghost and these three are one
says S. John: And Mathewe 28. Baptize them in the name of the Matt. 28.
Father, the son, and the holy Ghost. Which places as they prove the unity
of the essence in trinity of persons, so likewise do they, their common
glory, because to be, and to be glorious in the God head, is all one as S.
Aug. argues. The procession of the holy ghost from the father and the son is
fully taught. Io. 15. 26. where he is termed the, Spirit of truth that
proceeds from the father, which very word S. Ioh. uses of the to w-edged
sword, proceedinge out of the mouth of Christ, which is nothing but the
spirit of his lips, wherewith he shall striks the wicked, as Esaias
prophesies. cap. 11. 4. And with the breath of his lips he shall slay the
wicked. And to show his procession, as well from the son as from the father,
Christ breathed upon his disciples and said. Receive the holy ghost, and
for that he is called the spirit of the son. Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts which
cries Abba father. That there be two destinct natures in Christ and one only
person Esaias prophesied, cap. 1. 14. Behoulde the Virgin shall conceive and
bear a son and she shall call his name Immanuell. And like Ierc. cap. 23.
6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall will safely, and this
is the name whereby they shall call him, the lord our righteousness: which S.
John fulfilled. Io. 1. 14. And the word was made flesh and dwelte among us,
and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten of the
father, full of grace and truth, of which two distinct natures there be two
wills and two operations as S. Luke shows, not my will but thy will be do^ne;
Loc 22.
For he that has two perfect natures must needs have their natural
properties and operations, but to will and work are natural proprieties and
operations, followinge both natures in Christ: therefore he had two wills and
two operations. All which places are urged by the ancient Fathers and late
writers protestants and papists to confirm these several points, in so much
that you are forced to grant that they have a true proof from the holy
scriptures. And then I may say as S. August. says to Maximian the Arrian. Si
vox ista vera est quaestio illa finita est. But you papists have nimbler wits
then the fathers, for you are not content with truth but you must have full
proof, as though that proof which to a man is true, were not full. For there
can be noe fuller proof, then that which does convince and satisfy, the
understanding, but a true proof does so: For what is truth but adaequatio rei
and intellectus. And yett if there be any difference between true and full,
these articles are fully concluded out of the scripture. For being articles
of the Apostolic creed, they are plainly set down as Bellarmine
confesses out of S. Aug. And some of them questioned by the Arrians, as the
consubstantialitie of the son (which in the next place you except against) he
says that of these questions which then were moved, clarissima extabant in
scripturis testimonia, quae sine dubio antep^onenda sunt omnibus conciliorum
testimonijs. These things then that have most clear testimonies out of
scriptures, and to be preferred before all testimonies of counsels, have a
full proof from them, but such are some of these articles, yett you proceed
to fight against scriptures, and wringe from Christians, one of the strongest
Bulwarks they have against Arrians. I and the consubstantialitie of the son,
because the Arrians interpreted it of unity of concord and will. But if the
mist of popery had not blinded your eyes, you might easily have seen
unanswerable arguments out of the text to prove the son consubstantiall to
the father, and so to be understood of the unity of substance. For the Jews
require him to tell them plainly whether he be that Christ, he answers
directly he is, there fore the natural and consubstantiall son of God, as
he proves. Matt. 22. 45. out of the Psalm. 100. If then David called him
Lord, how is he then his son?

Secondly he that gives eternal life to his sheep, so that none can take
them out of his hand, is of the same power, and consequently of the same
nature with God; For what is it to be God, but to be of the highest and
greatest power, then which none greater? but the son does so; ver. 28. and
29. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of mine hand. Thirdly the Jews took up stones
to stone him, as a blasphemer as one that made himself God, this cause they
set down in plain terms. verse 33. Because thou make thy self God,
being man; but it is no blasphemy to be of the like will, desire and
affection with God: plain therefore it is by Christ's argument, that he did
preach God so to be his Father, as the Jews understood he would have
himself the natural son of God. See now except you be blinder the^ the
Jews, how plentifully this scripture proves the consubsta^tialitie of the
son, and as for the place of Io. 17. it helps not the Arrians at all, as S.
Aug. shows to Pascentius Epist. 174
the Arrian. For that wheresoever the scripture speaks of two that are one,
as in this place, they are ever of one substance. And therefore he charge both
Maximianus their Bishop, and Pascentius a noble man of their opinion, to
trauers the scriptures, if any where they could show two, said to be one
that are not one in substance; But let this be granted that (I and the Father
are one) proves only unity of will, not of substance, is there not an army
of scriptures besides this to prove the son of the same substance, that we
need not call in the authority of the church?

CHAMP.
You have bestowed all this labor most idly, goinge about to prove to me,
that these articles are true, and to have true ground in the scriptures, which
no catholic ever doubted of. That which you should have labored in (if you
would have spoken to the purpose) is, that these articles have so full proof
out of scriptures only, that an heretic might be convinced thereby without
judgment and interpretation of the church upon the same places. Which is
evidently proved to be false by the many and diverse heresies which have been
maintained against all these articles. For the authors thereof, hereticallie
refusinge the understanding of the church upon those places of scriptures,
and diverse others, as you also do in the places condemninge your heresies, and
followinge wilfully their own judgment therein as you in like manner do*
could not be convinced of their errors* but interpreted these places and all
others brought against them, in such sort as they made not against them at
all.

And as for the particular authorities proouing diverse of these articles,
consulte with your Grand Master Calvin, and see what weight he put^eth in them
for the proof of the said mysteries. Or if you like not to turn his books,
read the little book written by Egidius Hunnius a professed protestant
entitled Caluinus Iudaizans, and you shall see whether he was convinced in
these articles by all the passages of holy scripture alleged for that purpose.
Yett would I not have you to think that I approve his wicked doctrine herein
(which I detest as most heretical) but only produce him as an irreprooueable
instance of my position. Therefore all the long, lose and imperfect discourse
which you have made in this paragraffe (wherein are many paralogismes and
impertinencies) so far as it proves any thing, proves Calvin to have
been a wicked miscreant, but proves nothing against my position; which
denies not these verities, to have most true ground in holy scripture,
according to the true sense and meaning thereof, but not in such sort as the
evidence thereof cannot be avoided by an heretic. And you your self that
wrangle so much here against all experience, as well of the present as all
precedent ages, will not acknowledge the catholic positions now in
controversy, proved by more, or at least by as plain and express scripture
as these are, to be sufficiently proved. So that I need seek no further
confirmation of my position, then the experience of your own peruersitie.

PILK.
Yea to stop your mouth, I add that S. Aug. does evidently except against
the authority of the church, in his polemicall books against the Arrian
Bishopp in two several counsels, the one of Nice, the other of Arriminum, the
former of which had ratified the consubstantialitie of the son, and the other
revoked it, and tyeth both himself and the Arrian only to the scriptures, as
knowinge this point of faith fully to be proved of them.

CHAMP.
Your mouth meriteth well the stopinge that does so far and fowlie ouerflowe,
as to say that S. Aug* does evidently except against the authority of the
church. What, have you so soon forgott that he protested he would not believe
the go pell but that the authority of the church moved him? you have be like
some as evident and express words of his exception against the church,
authority as this is for it, or else your assertion is most shameless: let us
here I pray you what he says.

PILK.
Neither ought I (says S. Aug.) to urge the Libr. ^. cont. Maxim. c. 14.
council of Nice, nor thou that of Arriminum, I am not tied to the authority
of the one, nor thou of the other, but out of the scriptures that are not
parties, but common witnesses unto us both; let matter to matter, cause to
cause, reason to reason be indifferently opposed.

CHAMP.
How willingly you deceive your self and wilfully labor to deceive others?
I must needs think that it is malice or peruersitie, and not ignorance that
makes you abuse this place of S, Aug: who having said that the word
^omo^sion. being by the catholic fathers in the council of Nice by the
authority of truth, and truth of authority established* was after in the
council of Arriminum under the heretical Emperor Constantius by the fraud
of a few disliked, but afterward acknowledged, he comes to say. But now
neither I ought to use the authority of the council of Nice, nor thou of the
counsel* of Arriminum, but such testimony of scripture as are common to both.
Where S. Aug. is as far from exceptinge against the authority of the church
in the council of Nice, as I am now from exceptinge against the authority of
the council of Trent, in that I do not use it against you, but am content to
deal with you by the scriptures, which being received by us both, are
irreproueable witnesses.

In this therefore and noe other sort does S. August: omit to urge the
authority of the council of Nice against his adversary Maximian the Arrian,
and tie himself to the scriptures, then I do now tie my self to the
scriptures omitting to urge the authority of the council of Trent against you
a protestant. And tell me I pray you, did S. Aug: (think you) esteem His
majesty estsemeth himself Catholic because he receives the four first
general counsels.
less of the Nicen council then you do? you will not say it I suppose. And do
not you give unto it that authority to define matters of faith against
heretics? and admit of the doctrine thereof as orthodoxe and catholic, and
which ought to be received of all christians? you will not deny it. Why
therefore do you say S. August evidently excepteth against the authority of
the church, because he would not tie his adversary in that dispute to the
authority of the Nicene council, which he professes to have been decreed by
the authority of truth and truth of authority? But you delight not only to
err your self, but also to draw others into error with you.

PILK.
Where then is your inference, that this scripture without the interpretation
of the church does not fully prove the Father and the son to be one in
substance, as if the scriptures before the churches interpretation prove only
probable; after her interpretation fully. This I gather to be your meaning,
because Bellarmine Lib. 4. de verbo c. 7.
affirms (from whose harvest you have gathered these gleaninges) that the
scriptures expressed by a council, do firmly and certainly prove that,
which before they did not firmly prove. And of S. August. he says, that he
brings certain conjectures out of scriptures, which after the definition of
a council and trial of written traditions, have some force to confirm truth,
which of themselves are not sufficient.

CHAMP.
My inference stands good, nor is it any way impeached by S. Aug: even in
this place by you alleged as already appears. Besides in his book de vera
religione cap. 1. he has these express words* who is not stark madd and
easily understands not, that the exposition of scriptures, is to be sought
from them who profess themselves teachers of the same? He means the pastors
and doctors of the church. And concerning this place. Ego and pater vnum
sumus, read S. Athanasius his Epistle ad Episcopos Arrianos, and see how they
were convinced with it, or if you will not look so far, make a little inquiry
of Legates answer unto it. That which you say of the scriptures before and
after the churches interpretation, and likewise of S. Aug: out of Bellarmine
(though I find noe such thing in the place of Bellar. by you cited) in the
catholic sense is true. That is, Mr. Pilkinton would turn the state of the
question.
the scriptures before the judgment of the church of the true sense and
meaning thereof, make noe full proof unto us of the articles of our faith.
Not because they receive any truth or force in respect of themselves from the
church, they being the infallible word of God, but because they being
capable of diverse senses and subject to be understood diversely, as you your
self will not deny of these few and plain words hoc est corpus meum,
without some authority to interpret them, the true sense and meaning of them
cannot assuredly be known unto us. And therefore has God placed in his
church pastors and doctors to deliver unto his people, the true meaning of his
word, and has promised to be with them always, and that to hear them is to
hear Matt. 28.
himself.

PILK.
Let this be marked. For when we say that the scriptures do prove fully
articles of faith, we take not away subordinate means whereby we may see and
learn the fulness of the scriptures: but we exclude all outward and
aduentitious authority, to supply the supposed weakness in them, and to add
strength and firmenes unto them.

CHAMP.
Necessity and the very evidence of truth forces you to confess some means
to learn the true ence and meaning of the scriptures; but your own
peruersitie and obstinacy will not permit you to speak plainly. What do you
I play understand by subordinate means which you say you exclude not? and
what do you mean by aduentitious authority? do you mean the authority of
the church? so your words followinge do insinuate. But show you as clearly
out of the scripture the authority of the church to be excluded as strange
and aduentitious, as we will show you that it is ratyfied, established, and
commended unto us as an infallible guide and teacher of truth, and then we will
give some creditt to your words; but till then which will be never, know ye
that ye are proved to contemn scripture, and all other authority save only
your own foolish fancy, which you make to be judge of the holy scripture it
self.

PILK.
Which strength the papists say, they have not of themselves, but receive from
the interpretation of the church, and traditions; which is an impious and
blasphemous assertion. For the interpretation of a Sinode, is but a gloss, the
scripture is the text; the interpretation may err, the text cannott err; the
interpretation is the word of man, the scriptures the voice of God: to
conclude this point, whereas the position of the former Roman church was, that
divinity reasons from the scriptures necessarily, from other authors and
learning probably; the wheel now is turned, and men reason from the
scriptures coniecturallie, but from the interpretation of the church and
tradition, firmly and sullie.

CHAMP.
How often have you been told of your wittinge belying your adversaries? you
know well if you know any thing, that the catholics whom you call papists,
do teach the scriptures to be the word of the holy Ghost, and to have their
verity from him independentlie of the church: And therefore that the church
adds no strength or verity to them, no more then the witness or notarie
adds truth or verity to the will and testament of the testatour. Nevertheless
the authority and testimony of the church, is as necessary for the
acceptance and acknowledgment, as well of the letter and text it self, as of
the sense and meaning of the scriptures, as the witness or notaries hand is to
the acknowledgment and proof of the will and testament, or as the sentence of
the judge is necessary for the true sense and meaning of the will, if at any
time it come to be in doubt or in question. Neither is the interpretation of
the church upon the scripture, the interpretation or word of man, as you
hereticallie term it, but of the holy Ghost as (besides other places) you may
learn of that. Visum est Spitui Sancto and nobis. But it avails, like as to
teach a wilful mind wisdom. Your conclusion is yett more childishe,
ignorant, and impertinent. For from the scriptures understood in the sense of
the church which is infalliblie true, we say the argument is necessary and
infallible, whereas from all humane authors taken severally, be they never so
learned, the argument is not certain but probable. But when we speak of
humane authors, we understand not the church nor yett her received
traditions. And thus you see your strongest arguments against the position of
the manual, are nothing but froathie calumnies, paralogismes and
impertinencies, dispersed and blown away with every small blast of wind.

Manual. Catholic position. 2.
All such articles as are of faith and so holden by the protestants themselves,
are not contained so much as indirectlie or implicitlie in the holy scriptures:
but only so far as the scriptures contain and testify the authority of the
church and traditions.

Proof.
Take all the books of the bible and every part thereof, which are
acknowledged for canonical scripture jointly of catholics and protestants,
be such indeed. That the most blessed mother of our Savior Christ,
continued perpetually a virgin. That it is lawful for christians to eat
strangled things, and blood (which were expressly forbidden them Acts 15.
20.) are not so much as indirectly contained in holy scriptures, otherwise then
is mentioned in our position. But this being more amply proved in that which
follows of traditions, this which we have said already shall suffice for the
present.

PILK.
The sun needs to borrowe no light of other stars, nor the scriptures of
the church, or of tradition; For without help of either, they sufficiently
prove all articles of faith.

CHAMP.
It is an usual trick of all deceiptfull and verbal disputers, to inuert and
change the question in hand; that when they can say nothing to the true
question, they may find something to say to the question framed by
themselves. The controversy here is not whether the scriptures do
sufficiently prove all other articles of faith, for that was disputed in the
precedent position, and the negative part there proved against you; but
whether they sufficiently prove themselves to be the holy scriptures or not,
which* was* the first proof of this position: let us hear how you answer
it.

PILK.
But here you trifle in idle Homonomie of articles of faith. For strictly
those things are called articles of faith, which are prescribed in the old and
new testament to be believed, and are summarilie comprised in the Apostles
creed; whereby they are both distinguished from the precepts of the law that
prescribe good works, and from the principles of diuintie, from which as from
conclusions they are derived.

CHAMP.
I know not what you call trifelinge in homonomie; but I know that you babble
in obscurity. It is be like no article of faith with you, that God is to be
adored, his name not to be profaned or blasphemed, that our parents are to be
honored, with the rest of gods commandments, because they be precepts
commaundinge good works. I marvel where you learned this good divinity. But
let this pass, yett it serves not your turn; For the scriptures whereof the
question is now, are not precepts as you know. You have therefore another as
good a shifte. That is, that articles of faith are distinguished not only from
precepts, but also ^ro^ princeples of divinity. from which as conclusions they
are derived; these are your own words, but what you mean by them I cannot
conceive. They seem to sound, that the articles of faith as conclusions, are
derived from the principles of divinity. Then which you could have said
nothing more contrary to truth. For all men know that the conclusions of
divinity are derived from the articles of our faith, as from their principles
and not the contrary as you dream. It had been good you had taken one year
more to have reuewed your writings, that you might have made better sense of
your ayinges.

PILK.
Of which sort of principles these are; That the holy scriptures are divine,
inspired from heaven, immutabely true.

CHAMP.
By what other reason I pray you are these things here named by you, rather to
be called principles of divinity, then articles of faith, more then for your
own bare and ignorant assertion? you should have given some reason for your
distinction, that your reader might have seen it had not been merely forged
only to delude the argument. Again why are these things to be termed
principles, and not articles of faith; God is one; God is omnipotent; God is
truth it self and the first truth that reuealeth mysteries of faith? you dare
not deny these to be principles of the other principles, and yett are they
most properly articles of faith as you dare not deny, expressed in the creed
it self. You see therefore your distinctions of articles and principles of
faith to be vain, foolish and frivolous, invented only to delude your less
careful reader.

PILK.
Improperlie articles of faith are called whatsoever is written as the
principles themselves, precepts of the law, sermons of the prophets,
histories of both testaments, because faith, assenteth to every thing
delivered in the word.

CHAMP.
That is properly an article of faith, that is believed for divine authority,
whether it be written or not, as were all these things the fathers believed
before the law written. And because we believe the books of Genesis for
example, and the rest of the holy Bible, to be written by Gods revelation,
therefore do we believe them to be holy scripture, and to contain gods word.
Which therefore is properly, an article of faith no less then the mystery of
the blessed trinity, believed for the same authority.

PILK.
Upon this ground I answer, first in general, that none of these points are
articles of faith.

CHAMP.
Upon such a false ground you are like to build a good answer. Is it no
article of faith with you that the book of Genesis is written by gods
revelation? Tell me I pray you unto what kind of knowledge or assent you will
reduce it? I will confess you a master in divinity if you can make it well
appear, by what other act of knowledge or understanding we assent unto this
verity, besides the act of faith. Which if you cannot perform, as assuredly
you cannott, you must needs see this your first answer to be noe answer at
all, but a mere supposall of a manifest falsitie.

PILK.
Secondly I answer to every one in particular. I answer to the the first.
That all canonical books and every parcel thereof be such, is proved out
of themselves. For besides that the old testament proves the new, and the
new the old (for whatsoever we read in the old testament, the same is found
in the gospel, and whatsoever is found in the gospel that is deduced from
the authority of the old testament, as Hierome speaks) so in special Ad
Damasum.
every book proves it self, both by its own light as formerlie was
showed, and by the testimony of Christ of the Prophets, and Apostles, that
were the secretaries of the holy ghost. The testimony of our Savior Christ.
Luc. 24. 44. These are the words which I spoke unto you while I was with you,
that all must needs be fulfilled which were written of me in the law of
Moses, and in the prophetts and in the psalms. Of S. Paul. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
All scripture is given by the inspiration of God, and is profitable to
doctrine, to reproof, to correction, to instruction which is in righteousness.
Of S. Peter the 2. epist. 1. 21. The prophecy came not in old time by the
will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost,
do abundantly prove the books of the old testament, to be canonical,
besides that there is not any of them, out of which some testimony is not in
the new testament extant.

CHAMP.
Your second answer is as much to the purpose, as your first. Neither the old
testament proouing the new, nor contrariwise; unless the one be believed
before. Yea you make your self ridiculous to all men by such a natural or
circulare proof, unless you suppose the assured belief of some part before.
For example if one should demand of you how you know, or why you do
believe those words of our Savior which you cite out of the 24: of S. Luke
either to have been spoken by him, or written by S. Luke; would you say that
they evidently prove themselves so to be? surely this you must say, both
according to your doctrine here, and according to the necessity you putt
your self into by denyinge the authority of tradition and of the churches
testimony. And yett in saying that, you shall evidently prove your self to
be senceles. For there is noe such evidence of the thing, but any man that is
not moved with the authority of gods church, and tradition would esteem it
very uncertain and most doubtful. For unless these words, (and that which I
say of them, I say of the rest of the scripture) were God himself, and spoke
to us as imediatlie as he did to Moises, and the rest of his prophetts, they
cannot be said to be known by their own light, nor believed for their own
truth.

Again suppose you had certain knoweledge of this by what means soever, how
could you be certain that he speaks of those books of Moises, psalms, and
prophetts, which we have under those names? This certainly would be impossible
for you to prove, saying you reject the authority of tradition and the
churches judgment, by which only it is assuredly proved. Furthermore you
know, that our Savior speakinge in his own person, required not to be
believed but by the testimony of his works, Ioh. 15.
saying: Nisi opera in eis fecissem (...) nemo alius fecit peccatum non
haberent Much less therefore does he require that we should believe a written
book to be his word, without other proof then the self light of the book,
which is not so great as that of his own lively worde^. The saying of S
Hierome is nothing to the purpose. For he speaks only of the mutual
consent and concord of the two testaments, which to christians that already
believe them both to be the word of God, is no small confirmation of the
verity of the doctrine they both contain.

PILK.
The Gospells of the Evangelists the Acts, and Epistles of the Apostles, the
revelation of S. John, prove themselves out of themselves, to be theires whose
titles they bear. And if we creditt the books of historians and Philosophers,
Beware how you attribute any thing to the defluxion of time least you fall
upon tradition.
ancient and modern, divine and humane, to be theires whose names they
carry, in their foreheads; what madness were it to think the divine
scriptures not to be written by them, who are said to be their penmen, after
the defluxion of so many ages, wherein never any good christian called them
in question besides wicked Jesuits, impure Manichees, Cerdonians, Marcionists,
and Ebionites.

CHAMP.
None of all these books say, they were written by such and such, as is
manifest. And though they did, yett were not this sufficient to prove them
theirs, unless it were certain this were their testimony, and that they were
infallible in their testimony. As for the titles they bear, there is the same
difficulty. For it is not otherwise known to be theirs then by faith and
belief, of which we seek the ground. And if titles were sufficient proofs
of the true gospells, we should have many more gospells then we have, as you
cannot be ignorant. Again the Epistle to the Hebrews bears not the name of
any of the Apostles, and how long it was thought by diverse not to be S.
Paul's you know, unless you be very ignorant. For the works of other humane
authors why do you believe them to be theirs, if it be not for the testimony
of all succeedinge ages brought unto us by tradition? Give some other
sufficient ground of your belief in this point, if you can, and if you
cannot, say you are senceles to reject ecclesiastical tradition in receiuinge
the books of the Bible, or else that your judgment is foolish and idle.
Moreover were it certainly known unto us that S. Mathewe wrote the gospel we
have under his own name, as it is now by tradition and the churches
authority; yett unless it were further certain that he wrote by divine
inspiration (which without some divine testimony we know not) it could not be
certain to us that his gospel is the word of God. Now if you had left out
of the number of those that have called the scriptures into question (
Jesuits) and putt in their place, Lutherans or Protestants, your words might
have passed for current. But tell me in the small honesty of a protestant
minister, did you ever know that any Jesuit called any book of scripture
into question or doubt? you cannot, though you burst your self, give an
instance. Whereas you do not only call many books of the holy Bible into
doubt, but absolutely reject them as Apocripha, and your Grand father Luther
with his truer disciples, does many more, even of those which you say is madness
to call into question. Has malice so blinded you, and wilful rage against the
truth made you so madd, that you feel not the deadly wounds which you give
your self, whilst you strike, or at least think to strike your adversary.

PILK.
But what iuglinge is this? we believe these books to be theirs whose names
they carry, for the authority of the church, that is the Pope, who is S.
Peeters successor, and holds all his authority from him, and yett we cannot
believe S. Peeter himself, that this Epistle is his, but because the present
Pope has so determined it.

CHAMP.
I cannot say that you iugle here you are so grossly impertinent, and hoodle
up so many apparent absurdities in these few words. Where learned you I
pray you that the Pope is the church? or that he holds all his authority
from S. Peter and not from Christ himself? Again where does S Peter testify
that this is his Epistle? have you or any of your reformed brethren heard him
say it? no such thing. Seeing therefore neither you nor any man now a live
ever heard him testify any such thing, what great iuglinge is it I pray you,
to believe a lively and living witness, assisted by the spirit of truth, and
taught by those who lineallie descended from S. Peter testifiinge that these
are S. Peter's writings, rather then to believe a doombe paper or parchment*
which might be written by some other as well as other things, that went a
broad under the same Apostles name? And by that which has bee^ hitherto said
on both sides, you may see (if you will not shut your eyes that you may not
see) that it is clear* (notwithstanding all your childishe ianglinge) that
all articles of faith are not contained in scriptues, otherwise then is
mentioned in the position of the Manual: now let us see your answer to the
other proofs of the same position.

PILK.
To your second instance, we say with Saint August. that we are not willinge to
move any questions about the Mother of God, for the honor we bear unto her
son. Yett since you stir the coals, we answer that it is an high point
of our faith, and sufficiently proved in the scriptures, that Christ was
borne of an intemerat Virgin: but whether after his birth she were known of
Joseph, though the negative Homil de Natiuit. Domini.
be a seemly and reverend truth; yett we say with Basil, that it touches
not our faith.

CHAMP.
You would seem to be religiously affected toward the blessed Virgin, but
notwithstanding you minse S. Aug: words least you should do her too much
honor, his words are these. De Maria propter honorem Saluatoris nullam cum de
^eccatis agitur habere volo quaestionem. And in the end you are content rather
to incline toward the old heretic Heluidius, then to believe with the holy
catholic church concerning the perpetual virginity of the blessed Virgin.
Where is now I pray you your rule of faith before mentioned, non credimus
Look before* Sect. 10.
quia non legimus? I conjure you upon forfeiture of your honesty and
integrity, either to reject that rule as noe sufficient ground of faith, in
any article, or else to believe that the blessed Virgin was never known of
any man. Take whether part you please and you shall give sentence for me
against your self.

PILK.
Your third instance is no article of faith but ^ Canon of manners, so in the
number not of things to be believed but to be done. Wherein though to the
Apostles for the auoydinge of scandal, for the eatinge of things strangled,
and blood, yett when the offense was removed the eatinge was allowed. Romans 14.
14. 1. Tim. 4. 4. and Saint August. proves it out of S. Cent. Fab. ^. 32. c.
13.
Mathewe cap. 15. 17. 18.

CHAMP.
Are you so blockishe that you do not, or so perverse that you will not, see
the difference between the practice of any thing, and the doctrine of the
lawfulnes of the same practice? Whereby you might be taught, that though the
first be not an article of faith, yett the second may be. For example though
it be not an article of faith for two single persons to marry together, but a
matter of practice, yett is it a matter of faith that they may lawfully marry
together, as I hope you will not deny, and so in five hundredth more things.
That the Apostles did make that prohibition for a time only and not to
continue ever, where is it written* or whence have you it, but by the churches
authority and interpretation? The places of scriptures by* you cited (were
they to the purpose as they are not) would be sufficient arguments to make
some of the books doubtful as co^tradictinge the one the other, were there
not a judge to reconcile them, and bring them to atonement together. And
thus you see all the three instances brought in proof of the catholic
position in the Manual, to remain firm and solid, and your euasions to be
childishe wranglings without truth or substance.

PILK.
Thus you see you fight against God, when you war against the perfection of
holy word. Which that you may more plainly perceive in the last place I will
set down the protestants doctrine, not in such double terms as you devised,
but their own words as they have positiuelie delivered with the several
authorities of holy scriptures, whereby they confirm it, and testimonies of
fathers, whereby they show the consanguinitie of it with the purest
Christians. For the positions set down by you, are not by them acknowledged.

CHAMP.
If you deny my positions to be true as (having hitherto disputed against
them) you seem to do, then must you of necessity acknowledge the
contradictorie to be true, and maintain them as yours, unless you will have
both contradictories to be false, which no man yett ever heard of. But why do
you not put down the positions which I call the protestants positions, that
the reader might see how justly you deny them to be yours? I will supply your
defect, that the indifferent reader may judge whether the positions set down
in the Manual under the title of protestants positions, be not truly theirs.

Manual, protestant positions.
All articles of faith are so expresselie contained in scriptures as out of
them only full proof may be made thereof.

All articles of faith are at least so contained in holy scriptures, as without
any testimony or authority of the church, or traditions they may thence be
plainly and distinctlie deduced.

These are the positions in the Manual in this first controversy under the
title of protestant positions, which you say are not acknowledged by them. And
yett if I understand your words you admit them, neither can you iu^l^e
deny them as I said before: but let us hear what you say for your self.

PILK.
They say not that all articles of faith, are expresselie set down in holy
scriptures, but either expressly or analogicallie, and so they have a full
proof out of them.

CHAMP.
Compare this position with that set down by me in the first place, and see
wherein they differ. Only you make the first part of your position absolute,
as if it had been so set down by me, but this is your own fraud and
deceipte. For I made it not absolute but modall or comparatiue, as appears by
the thing it self. The position therefore set down by me is yours, and
therefore to be proved out of the scriptures* as the position it self
requires? ^herein if you fasle, your position will be convinced to be false,
and your faith accordingly.

PILK.
Secondly they admit of the testimony of the church both concerning
articles of faith, and the scriptures themselves; First to discern true from
false; Secondly publicly to preach them; Thirdly to interpret and expound
them, but ever according to the scriptures themselves, without any addition
of her own, either of sufficiency or perfection unto them.

CHAMP.
That is in good speech: they admit the testimony of the church so far as it
contradicts not their errors Or they admit of it not to be judged by it,
for so all disputes would quickly have an end; but to judge it themselves,
for so they know they may wrangle eternally.

PILK.
Here then is the difference, that the papists say the church adds
sufficiency to the scriptures and fulness. The protestants say she adds
none, but shows that which is in it. The papists say she brought light unto
them. The protestants say she brings none, but declares and manifestesh
that which it has in it self. This then is their doctrine.

CHAMP.
The catholics do teach and believe that the church of God has infallible
authority to declare what books are holy scripture, and also to deliver the
true sense and meaning thereof* neither of which the scriptures do perform by
themselves; and yett are they both necessary if not to every Christian in
particular, yett to the whole church in general. They do not teach or
believe that the church adds any truth or verity to the scriptures, which
they immediately have from God himself, whose word and revelation they
contain, but she declares unto us infalliblie what are the verities
contained in them. To which belief and doctrine you seem to come very near
in your last words, if you were constant therein. But you say and unsay at
every turn. Now let us hear the positions which you say the protestants
acknowledge in this controversy.

PILK. ANTITHESIS.
All truth concerning faith and good works necessary unto salvation, is
sufficiently and fully delivered unto us in the holy scriptures.

CHAMP.
Saying you voluntarily enter combat, why do you not observe the conditions
prescribed? It was required, that in case you would impugn the catholic
position set down and proved in the Manual (as hitherto you have labored
to do) you should prove by express scriptures the contradictorie, which in
that case must necessarily be yours, and not to frame unto your self another,
which may stand with that you impugned, being like a shoe that fitteth every
foot.

This I say, because the position set down here by you understood with these
two restrictons, is not denied of any catholic. The first is, that it include
not the scriptures themselves, but suppose them as believed. The second that it
speak only of truths or articles necessary to every man's salvation. For
these are few and sufficiently expressed in holy scripture. Your position
understood in this mannet has noe adversary, and therefore needs not your
feeble and weak proofs. Nevertheless because your proofs seem to suppose a
further meaning in your position; to wit that all things whatsoever without
exception or restriction, are to be believed either by every man in
particular, or all men in general, are fully set down in holy scripture,
which is opposite to the catholic position of the Manual, I will examine your
proofs and try what weight they bear.

PILK. Proof of the protestants position.
Deuteronomie 4. 2. ye shall not add unto the word which I command you,
neither shall ye detracte from it, that ye may keep the commandments of
the Lord your God which I command you. Argument. That whereunto nothing must
be added, nothing detracted, contains a perfect and full doctrine of faith
and manners, such is the scripture: ergo.

CHAMP.
What will you understand* by the (word) which God here commands? only the
five books of Moises which then were only extant? If you understand it so
(as truly you cannott otherwise) what will you say to all the rest of the
books, both of the old and new testament written since, were they added
against gods commandment? you will fear to say so. What then will this place
serve you for? to make a poor show of some proof out of scripture to deceive
your less skillful reader, and for noe other purpose. But peradventure you
will contend that it ought to be understood of all that which God should
speak, as well after as before, and so to comprehend the whole scripture. This
sense (though not very probable) I am content to accept of, that you may see I
do not deal niggardlie with you. To your argument therefore I say, you iugle
something in itt, but not cunningly. If you would conclude any thing out
of this place of scripture, you must say in your minor, but such is the word of
God. And then the conclusion will be directly against your self, who
detracteth from gods word both written: denyinge many and sundry books of
holy scripture, and also unwritten, reiectinge all traditions* which the
scriptures themselves command us to receive. And so have you concluded your
self a manifest transgressour of gods law and commandment. When you shall
answer sufficiently this argument, I will pay you a fee worth your doctors
Cappe.

PILK. Proof 2.
Prou: 30. 5. 6. Every word of God is pure, he is a shield to them that put
their trust in him, add you nothing unto his word, least he reprove thee,
and thou be found a liar.

CHAMP.
Therefore what? Therefore all articles of faith are fully delivered in
scripture? make this conclusion by lawful argument but of this place, and I
shall esteem you a Master Logician. But it is enough for you to quote a place
of scripture though as fitly for your purpose as Pruritanus does many in your
behalf.

PILK. Proof 3.
Revelations ^2. 18. 19. I testify unto every man that hears the words of
the prophecy of this book, if any shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book, and if any shall
take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away
his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the
things that are written in this book.

CHAMP.
What if I should say with your Grand Father Luther that this book is
apocriphall, and therefore your proof of no worth? But God forbidd I should be
so profane as to use such an answer. I say therefore that to conclude any
thing out of this testimony against me, you must conclude not only your
self but S. Paul also, and all the rest of the writers of holy scripture to
be subject to this curse here mentioned, seeinge they have all added many
things to this book; that is they have taught and written many things to be
believed and observed not contained in this book, which is the sense and force
of your argument and which you are bound to solue. So blind has heresy made
you, that you see not what is with you, what against you.

PILK. Proof 4.
Gal. 1. 8. 9. Though we or an angel from heaven preach unto you besides that
we have preached, let him be accursed. 1. Cor. 4. 6. That ye might learn in
us not to be wise above that which is written. If neither an Apostle nor Angel
from heaven may preach any thing besides that which is written, nor be wise
above it, then that which is written contains a full doctrine both of faith
and manners.

CHAMP.
This argument is like the rest, and as truly deducted from the places quoted.
In the first place the Apostle faith not (...) that which is written (as you
fraudulently soist in) but besides that which we have preached. That your
argument therefore may conclude, you must show out of scripture that the
Apostle had not preached any thing more then at that time he had written;
which will be a task impossible for you ever to perform, especially 2. These.
^. 15.
seeinge the Apostle himself testifies the contrary commaundinge his
disciples. To hold the traditions which they had learned, whether by word or
Epistle. Again when he says besides that we have preached, he means
contrary to that we have preached Tract. 98. in Ioh.
as S. Aug: expounds him, 1200. years before your heresy was hatched.

In the second testimony the vulgar translation, which was received for
authentical in S. Hieromes times, has not these words not to be wi^^. But to
do you a favor I will admit of your text; and I answer that your argument
is foolish. For he that is wise with the church, teachinge or beleeuinge with
the church, which the scriptures testify to be the pillar and ground of
truth, is not wise above that which is written, but conformeablie to that which
is written. And thus you see your position, though positive or affirmative to
be so far from being proved by express scripture, that it has not the least
ground therein.

Whereas the positions of the Manual, though only negative have express
insta^ces out of the holy scripture. Let therefore the indifferent and
judicious reader judge whether of them has greater arguments of truth. And if
we should follow you rule, non cre^^imus quia ^o^ ie imus, how would you
persuade us to believe, that all truth pertayninge to ^aith and manners
necessary to salvation is fu^lie delivered in holy sceipture Seeinge you
cannot show us it written in any place? whereby you see your self either
driven to disauowe your rule of belief or to confess this your position not
to be believed. But peradventure you will make your proofs stronger out of the
fathers. Let us see what you bring out of them. But mark I pray you whether
they be expositions of the places of scripture cited in your favor, or
sayings uttered upon other occasions. If they be of the first sort, they
will be more forcible for you; but if they be of the other kind (as they are
they will be of less moment for your purpose. Well these they are.

PILK. Proof 5.
All things that our lord did are not written, Cyril. Alex. li. 12. in ^o. c.
68
but these things which the writers thought sufficient for faith and manners,
that shininge both in truth of ^aith and virtuous works we might come to the
kingdom of heaven.

CHAMP.
The scriptures testifyinge the authority of the church, and of the pastors
thereof, with the obligation that every one has to hear and obey them, are
truly said by S. Cyrill to contain those things which are sufficient for
faith and manners. For the things that are not directly expressed in them,
are learned by the pastors of the church, authorized by the scriptures. I
marvel you were not afraid of S. Cyrill, seeinge he testifyeth so directly
the necessity of good works besides faith for the gayninge of the kingdom of
heaven. But you receive the fathers no farther then they seem to make for you,
such is your sincerity.

PILK. Proof 6.
Whatsoever is sought for unto salvation, all Chrisost in Matt. 22.
that is now fulfilled in the scriptures.

CHAMP.
Your ignorance or peruersitie in this place is intolerable. For S. Chrisost:
speaks of the institution of the new testament, whereby all things
necessary to salvation are fulfilled, and not of the scriptures contayninge
fully all things necessary to believed.

PILK. Proof 7.
We adore the fulness of scriptures, let Hermogenes Tertull. cont. Hermogenem.
show his opinion to be written, if it be not written let him fear the woe
denounced to adders and detractours.

CHAMP.
Tertullian speaks of the fulness of the scripture in that one point,
whereupon he disputed with that heretic, and not in all other articles of
faith as is manifest by the place it self, which the judicious reader may see
and satisfy himself, for here it cannot without tediousnes and over much
prolixitie be set down.

PILK. Proof 8.
If any shall preach either of Christ or his Aug cont. lit. Petil. lib. 3. c.
6.
church, or of any other thing that pertayneth to belief or life, I will
not say, if we but that which Paul adds, if an Angel from heaven shall show
unto you besides that which you have received in the scriptures of the law and
the Gospel let him be accursed. That which has a fulness in it as Tertull.
and Chris. speak, and contains in itt all things pertayninge to faith and
manners as Cyrill and Aug. say; that does fully prove all articles of belief
and life such is the scripture.

CHAMP.
S. Aug. words have the sense and meaning that S. Paul's have, taking
be^i^es for against or contrary to the scriptures as S. August. explicateth
himself tract. 98. in Ioh before mentioned. Now your argument out of all
these places is showed to be vain and of noe force by the particular answer
to every authority: And thus far have you brought nothing more, for the
proof of your position, the^ any heretic in the world may, or might have
brought for the proof of his heresy. For every heretic can bring single
places of scripture, yea and of fathers in favor of his heresy. But to bring
scriptures interpreted by the fathers in favor of their heresy, is a thing
(if not impossible) at least very hard and rare, being the privilege of the
catholic church alone.

PILK. ANTITHESIS 2.
The scriptures contain in themselves a perfect doctrine of says and good
works necessary to salvation, without testimony authority or tradition of
the church, addinge unto them or bringinge from without them any other
doctrine.

CHAMP.
This position is the same in sense (if either of them have any sense) with
the former, and therefore vainlie is termed by you, a second Antithesis,
unless every time you write a position varyinge a few words in it, but
retayninge the same sense, you will say it is a new positio^. But to let this
pass your proofs, so far as they make any thing against the catholic
verity are to be pondered.

PILK. Proof 1.
2. Tim. 3. 16. The whole scripture is diuinelie given, and profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction which is in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfectly instructed in every good
work. That which perfecteth the man of God to every good work, contains
perfect doctrine, of faith and manners, without addition of any other, but the
scriptures do so: Ergo.

CHAMP.
It must needs be obstinacy in error, and not ignorance, as I think, that
makes you abuse this place. For first you cannot be ignorant, that the Apostle
speaks there of the scriptures of the old testament, wherewith S. Timothy
was acquainted from his infancy, which if you will say to contain a perfect
doctrine, then is all the new testament either superfluous, or at the least
not necessary. Secondly the Apostle peaketh not of the whole scripture taken
together, but of every part thereof severally; meaning that every part of
scripture is proffitable to teach correct, and instruct, which is true, but
nothing to your purpose. And that he speaks not of the whole scripture in
the former sense, but in the latter, it is manifest. For when he wrote this to
Timothy, the whole scripture which the church now has, was not written.
Lastly let it be said that he speaks it of the whole scripture in the
former sense; yett he says no more but that it Sect. 2.. ^ very willingly.
is profitable to teach, instruct etc. which I easily grant you, and yett I
say your argument drawn from thence is most frivolous, as appears by the
like set down before in answer of this of yours, whereunto I refer you.

PILK. Proof 2.
John 5. 35. Search the scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal
life. Luke 16. 29. They have Moises and the prophetts let the^ hear them.
That which teaches how we may come to eternal life and shun, or escape
eternal death, contains a perfect doctrine of faith, and good works; But
the scriptures do so: ergo.

CHAMP.
Make your minor proposition this as it should be, but the old Testament does
so (for of the old testament only these places speak as is manifest) and
your conclusion will serve directly to exclude the whole new testament from
the perfect rule of faith Fie, I am ashamed in your behalf of such childishnes
as you show in these arguments.

PILK. Proof 3.
Acts 1. 1. The former treatise have I made o Theophilus of all that Jesus
began to do and teach. These things that Christ did and taught contain a
perfect doctrine, but these things are written.

CHAMP.
Conclude, therefore the only gospel of S. Luke contains a perfect
doctrine. Is this your intent? noe, but blind malice against the evident truth
draws you into these gross absurdities. If you have noe care of your soul,
have yett for shame some care of your credit and reputation, for the gayninge
of which you have traveled these four or five years to bring forth this
miserable heap of unshapen absurdities. A miserable labor I wisse, whereby
you gain nothing but the reputation of an impertinent minister, deuoyde of
ordinary judgment. To these few testimonies of scripture so miserably
mistaken, you add some passages of the fathers, to as good purpose as you did
in the former Antithesis. These they are.

PILK Proof 4. Athan de incarnat. cont. Apolinar.

If you be the disciples of the gospel says Athanasius speak not iniquity
against God, but walk in those things which are written or done. For if you
will speak diverse things from these things that are written, why strive you
with Iren cont. here is. li. 2. cap. 42.
us without them. The scriptures are perfect as spoken from the word of God
and his spirit.

CHAMP.
S. Athanasius speaks of such things, as are not only not directly in
scriptures, but are against and contrary to scriptures. S. Ireneus says the
scriptures being spoken by the spirit of God are perfect, as the things
spoken by men are not, which have imperfections and therefore are subject to
corrections and amendments. You abuse therefore your reader with an equivocal
term of perfect.

PILK Proof 5.
The order of this present tecture teaches, Amb. to. 4 lib de paradis. c. 12
that we must not add any thing to the divine precepts, for if thou addest
or detractest it is a preuarication of the precept. Oftentimes when a witness
adds any thing of his own he spotteth the whole creditt of his testimony
with a lie, nothing therefore though it seem good, must be added. And a
little after, if S. John has said of his writing, if any man add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book,
and if any man shall take away from the word of this prophecy, God shall
take away his part from the book of life, how much more nothing is to be
added to godds precepts?

CHAMP.
That which is taught or commended by the church, which the scripture
commands us to hear, is not superadded to gods commandments or precepts but
is comprised in them, you therefore that will not hear and obey the church,
which you are so expressly commanded to hear, evidently and damnablie
detract from divine precepts. Therefore this authority is so far from
proouinge any thing to your purpose, that it overthrows it rather.

PILK Proof 6.
O Emperor do thou demand what our Hill. ad Constant.
faith is? Hear it not out of new papers, but out of the books of God; hear
I pray thee the things that are written of Christ, least, under them those
things that are not written should be preached. Open thy ears to those
things that shall speak out of the books, lift up thy faith unto God, I
will not defend any thing scandalous, nor any thing that is from without the
gospel.

CHAMP.
This authority is like the rest; impertinent to your purpose, and rather
against you then for you. For he that defends the authority of the church,
and these things that are taught by her, defends nothing from without the
books of God; but he that defends the contrary as you do, does evidently
impugn the gospel. S. Hill: wills the Arrian Emperor to hear these
things, that are written of Christ as this, he is one with his father, and the
like, and then he should be far from beleeuinge that which is no where
written, to wit, that he is a creature and inferior to his father. Your cause
is most miserable and despicable, seeinge it is forced to beg testimony of
such extorted witnesses.

And now I leave to the judicious reader, be he catholic or protestant to
judge, whether the catholic positions of this first controversy set down
in the Manual, be not both more clearlie expressed, and more firmly and
truly proved by scripture, then the protestant position set down by Mr.
Pilkinton, which is the chief issue of our controversy and dispute. And
further whether the positions set down in the Manual under the title of
protestant positions, be not truly and justly ascribed unto them, and more
directly pertayninge to the controversy here discussed, then the others
proposed by him.

MANVALL. The second Controversy of traditions, Catholic position 1.
The holy Apostles diliuered by word of mouth, more things to be believed and
observed by the church, then either they found written or wrote themselves.
And these things are usually called traditions.

PILK.
You have gotten a wolf by the ear, when you fasten on traditions, if you
let them go they carry with them a great part of your faith, if you hold
them fast, you show you cannot prove your faith from scriptures. For you
freely and plainly tell us what your church means by traditions; not
interpretation of that which is written, but addition and suppliment of that
which is not. For more things say you, are to be believed and observed then
either the Apostles wrote or found written, and these are traditions. Let the
reader mark this; for the question here betwixt us, is not of interpretation
of scriptures, nor of rites and ceremonies, that have correspondence with them,
which here he carries under the name of things to be observed, but of
doctrines and matters of faith, which are things to be believed all which
(says he) were never written in the old testament, nor yet in the new.

CHAMP.
You putt me in mind of the fable of the fox that having lost his own tail,
would needs persuade his fellows to cut of theires. So you being out of
love with traditions, would persuade us to reject them also. But we are not so
soon moved, we profess to believe diverse things for traditions sake, and
that by warrant of scripture. whereunto if you did give so much creditt as you
would be thought to do, you would also believe the same. And seeing you yield
already the one half of the controversy, to wit traditions of things to be
observed (for of these things you say there is no question between us) I will
not despair to euict the other part, of things also to be believed, from you.

PILK.
Now this is a manifest untruth. For there is not any article of faith, which
the Apostles found not in the scriptures of the prophetts, nor which either
the evangelists or themselves, did not consigne unto us in their writings,
which thing any man may find to be true, that will take pains to consider
the articles of the Apostolic creed, one by one, which either have proof out
of the old testament, or else the Apostles did not double all their doctrines
out of the scriptures. Contrary to S. Paul's practice, acts. 26. 22.

CHAMP.
How manifest an untruth it is that the Apostles taught more then either they
found written or wrote themselves, we shall see, in the process of this
controversy. In the mean while I tell you that you affirm boldly but prove
nothing. And why do you referr us to the Apostles creed for proof of your
universal affirmation? Is nothing to be believed but that which is therein
contained? what find you (I pray you) in the creed touching either the number
or the nature of the Sacraments, of their efficacy or necessity, of
original sin, of the fall of the Angels, with many more articles believed
by all christians? And yett you confirm your proof far more absurdlie, by
supposinge that the Apostles doubled (that is your word where you learned it I
know not) al their doctrine out of scripture: which is the thing in question
and therefore most absurdlie brought for proof of the same. Again what
necessity had the Apostles to double their doctrine (as you say) out of the
scriptures? Hadd they not authority to preach any thing but what they found
already in the scriptures? What Christian ever dreamed of such doctrine as you
have delivered here? But this was S. Paul's practice you say. But you are
either ignorantly or wilfully mistake^ and that most grossly. For though
S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles preached nothing contrary to the
doctrine of the old testament, but contrariwise showed how the ancient
prophecies were fulfilled by our Savior Christ (which S. Paul's auditors at
Boerea findinge, by conferinge his doctrine with the prophets, were much
confirmed in their faith) yett is it nowhere said, that either he or the
rest preached nothing but that they found written. Neither did this paradoxe
ever enter into any man's head but Mr. Pilkintons.

PILK.
Read says Ireneus diligently the Gospel, which the Apostles have given us,
and read also diligently the prophetts, and you shall find all the actions
and passions of our lord, yea all his doctrine for to be preached, your
proofs have as much truth as the Carthaginians faith.

CHAMP.
S. Ireneus says no more but that there is a great and manifest conformity or
agreement, between the Prophetts and Apostles preachinge and doctrine, which
as it is most true, so is it as much to your purpose as Paul's steeple is to
Charinge Cross. And whether my proofs or yours have more affinity with the
Carthaginian faith, let the indifferent reader judge.

MANVALL. Proof of the catholic position. 1.
Having more things to write unto 2. 10. 12. 3. 10. 13.
you, I would not by paper and Ink; For I hope I shall be with you, and
speak mouth to mouth.

PILK.
These well conclude, that in this short Epistle S. John did not write all the
points of faith, but that others of the Apostles did not write them he says
not a word. What loose reasoninge is this? S. John did not write all in these
Epistles, therefore the rest did not; For whatsoever is necessary unto
salvation, and of faith though there it be not to be found, yet in the writings
of the other Apostles it is to be read.

CHAMP.
Seeinge I have by your confession proved out of the scripture, that this
Apostle taught more things by word o^ mouth then he wrote (which was my
Position) it now belongs to you, either to grant my position to be true, or
to prove by scriptures that the rest of the Apostles wrote that which he
taught by word of mouth, and omitted to write: For to say it only without
proof, yea and such as you require of your adversary is to make your own
affirmation a law and rule of your faith. Which though it appears well to be
so, to your self, yett will it not be admitted of others. And if I should here
again press you with your own rule; non eredimus quia non ^eg^nous; you
would find ei(...) your rule too strickt, or your assertion here (that the
other Apostles committed to writing, that which S. John taught by word and
omitted to write) to be false. Choose whether part you will. You see therefore
that my reasoninge was not loose, but that your judgment thereon was light.

Your reason followinge, is a miserable begginge of that which is in question,
and which you should prove, and is more easily and truly denied then
affirmed. And for your better instruction I wish you to mark a little more
diligently the words of the Apostle, and you will (as I suppose) perceive the
argument to be of more force then you took it to be of, unless you dissembled.
For he giuinge the reason why he would not use paper and ink, to make known
unto them to whom he wrote those things which he had to teach them, he says
not, that it is for that either he himself or any of the other Apostles had
or would set them down in writing, but because he hoped to be with them,
and to speak unto them mouth to mouth.

Manual Proof 2.
And the rest I will dispose when I come. Where the Apostle evidently shows,
that he reserved something more to be ordayneth by word then he wrote.

PILK.
This is little to the purpose, for the Apostle does not there speak of matters
of faith, which is our question, but of such things as belong to order and
comelines, as it is plain by the word in greek which properly signifies
orderinge of rites, and matters of decency, not teachinge of doctrines and
matters of faith, as appears (...) the same epist: cap. 16. 1. concerning
the ga^^^^inge for the Saints, as I have given order to the churches of
Galatia, even so do ye. The In hunc locum.
rest says Aquinas, videlicet these things that are not of such danger will I
dispose of when I come, how you shall observe them. But let it be granted
that he means doctrines and matters of faith, it is an inference without
coherence, that because he writ them not then, therefore he did omit them
for ever, or because he wrote them not, therefore the rest were silent and
writ them not. When you consider of these consequences, then you may see that
it is as far from your purpose as Gades is from Ganges.

CHAMP.
Your second answer to this testimony is effectually frustrated in my reply
to your answer of the precedent testimony, and therefore needs no further
confutation. Your former answer (admittinge it in your own sense) does
expresselie grant traditions in matters to be observed, and practiced in the
church, which seeinge they concern the use of the Sacraments, and other holy
observations to be kept by all Christians established and ordained by the
Apostles by the express commandment of our Savior Christ. Matt. 28. 20. I
would know of you some reason why you deny the authority of traditions in
things to be believed, and grant them in matters to be done and observed,
will you say that they are more fallible in the one, then in the other? To say
this only without some ground or reason, will have small grace or force.

Manual. Proof 3.
The Apostles were commanded to teach all nations to observe all things which
our Savior had commanded. Which doubtless they fulfilled, but they were not
commanded in any place to write all the same: neither does it appear by any
scripture that they did write all things which they taught men to believe and
observe. This is a demonstration that they taught more then they wrote, if
nothing be to believed but that which is contained in holy scripture.

PILK.
That Christ charged the Apostles to teach all nations whatsoever he
commanded, which they fulfilled also, but he charged them no where to Iren. li.
3. cap. 1.
write all; The fathers shall answer. We know not the dispensinge of our
salvation, from any where, then from them by whom the gospel came to us,
which then they preached, and after by the will of God delivered unto us in the
holy scriptures to be the foundation and pillar of our De consensu Euang. l. ^.
cap. vlt.
says. S. Aug. says, that when the Evangelists and Apostles did write what
God showed and said, we may not say that he writ it not; for whatsoever he
would have us to read either co^cerninge his words or works, he commands
them as his own hands to write it. If what the Apostles preached after they
writ as Ireneus says; If what God commanded them so to do, as S. August.
avouches. Then it plainly follows, that they writ as much as they
preached, and that not only by the allowance, but by the commandment of our
Savior Christ. For they writ nothing but that with which they Lib. 4. de
Pon^.
were inspired. Now inspiration is a commandment, as Bellarmine confesses.

CHAMP.
Stand to your ground and do not flinche from it, you say nothing is to be
believed but that which is written. If you will therefore that it should be
believed that the Apostles wrote all things they taught, show it written, or
acknowledge your ground to be false. The scripture testifies that the Aposties
were commanded to teach all things necessary to be observed, but that they
were commanded to write the same, it no where appears. If therefore they did
it, either they did it by Christ's commandment, and then you must needs
confess something necessary to be believed more then is written; for it is no
where written that he commanded them to write all things they taught. Or they
did it without his commandment. And then it was not necessary they should
do it, and consequently was it not necessary there should be any thing
written at all in the new testament. And though they writ nothing but that
was inspired into them, yea and that they were inspired to write, both which
things you believe, though you find neither of them written, yett it no
where appears, that they were inspired to write all they had by inspiration.
You say the fathers shall answer for you; but I receive not their answer as
sufficient, unless you will stand to the fathers testimony in all other
points. You promised scripture for all your positions, perform therefore your
promise, or confess your position of beleeuinge nothing but that which is
written, to be false.

Notwithstanding because the testimony of the fathers is venerable with me, I
will not refuse it if they say any thing for you. But neither of the fathers
cited by you says, that the Apostles wrote all they preached, which is our
issue here. And as for the former to wit S. Ireneus, you have his plain
meaning laid down unto you before in the beginning of our dispute, to wit,
in the answer to your second Antithesis which you frame out of these self
same words of S. Ireneus. And as for S. Aug. he says not that Christ
commanded to be written whatsoever he would have us to believe of him, or his
works, but only whatsoever he would have us to read; Which is most true.
For he could not will that we should read any thing but that which was
written. But let us yield yett further unto you, and suppose these fathers to
say as much for your purpose as you would have (which you see is far
otherwise) yett would I ask, you where they had that doctrine? not from the
scripture, for no such thing appears therein. If therefore you will admit
of their doctrine, though not taken out of the scripture, why do you profess
that nothing is to be believed, but that which is written and contained in the
scripture. And thus you see your self so inuolued with your doctrine, that you
can find noe way to escape some manifest absurdity.

Manual. Proof 4.
They (the Apostles) taught baptism given to infants to be good and lawful,
or else the Anabaptists are not heretics for rebaptisinge them.

PILK. Bell. li. d. ^ap. c. 8.

The Baptism of infants may by good and necessary consequence be derived from
the scriptures otherwise your friend Bellarmine has brought chaffie arguments
against the Anabaptists. The first is from the figure of the old testament,
children were circumcised, therefore they ought to be baptized: this is so
strong says he that it cannot be eluded. The second is taken out of the
third of John. Except a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whereunto may be added Christ's
commaundment Matt. 19. 14. Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such
is the kingdom of heaven. And in how many places does S. Aug. prove from
the holy scriptures, the necessity of Baptism against the Pelagians, who
imagininge children to be without original sin, thought it unnecessary;
whereas he shows out of John that without it original sin is not remitted,
and therefore if it be needful certainly it is lawful.

CHAMP.
The arguments used by Bellarmine are not chaffie but substantially good,
because they are taken from the scripture interpreted by the authority of the
church, and the canonical practice thereof, received from the Apostles, which
is sufficient to prove the Anabaptists to be heretic denyinge the Baptism of
infants to be lawful. And seeing you confess the testimony of the 3. of S.
John to be so effectual to prove the lawfulnes of the Baptism of infants,
you must likewise confess Calvin and all his followers to be heretics. For he
denies the necessity of Baptism to salvation which is much more clearlie
proved out of that place, then is the Baptism of infants. And so whilst you
would avoid one evil you fall into a worse. The same inconvenience follows
against you upon the argument of S. August. For if he prove rightly against
the Pelagians that Baptism is necessary; he concludes directly against your
Master Calvin. Yea against the doctrine delivered in the first days conference
of Hampton Court. Read it and see whether I say not true.

Manual Proof 6.
They (the Apostles) taught the sunday to be solemnised and the Jews Sabbath
to be left without all solemnity. Though most strictly commanded by God to
be solemnised as an everlasting Covenant.

PILK.
The observation of the sunday and alteration from the Iewishe Sabbath we find
written in the scriptures. For John terms it the Lords day; not only for
that it was consecrated to his public service, but for that he was the
instituter Epist 119 cap. 13. Chrisost. sermon. 3. de resurrect.
and ordayner thereof, as S. Aug: speaks. It was prefigured in the eight day
wherein the Jews used circumcision as both the same father, and Chrisost:
teach; and if prefigured then prescribed. In this day did the Apostles come
together acts. 20. 7. and accordingly they taught the church to observe it,
not by voice only, but by writing 1. cor. 16. 2. Every first day of the
week let every one of you put a side by himself, and though it were
commanded by God to be observed as an everlasting covenant, yett who is so
meanly skilled in the Hebrew, that knows not Gnolam, sometimes to signify
eternity, sometimes a definit time, as to the Iubilee, Exad* 21* 6* then his
master will bring him unto the judges, and set him to the door, or the post,
and his master shall bore his ear through with an awle, and he shall serve
him for ever, and as the passover was termed Exo: 12. 14. an everlasting
ordinance, which yett was but to continue till the fulness of time. So the
Sabbath is termed an everlasting covenant, which yett for the day was only
under the state of the old testament.

CHAMP.
Here you exceed your self in impertinencie and wilful obstinacy. If I
should have brought out of the scriptures for traditions such proofs as you
do to overthrow them, you would make sport thereat, and worthelie, saying
they were not only loose arguinge, but very seely Sophistry, S. John
terms one day, the Lords day, ergo say you the scripture testifies the
abrogation of the Jews Sabbath, and establishment of the sunday, and that
fully, for of full proof and testimony we here dispute. Again the Apostle
willed the Corrinthians every first day of the week to lay a side by
themselves etc. Ergo say you the Apostle did not only teach by voice, but by
writing also the observation of the christians sunday insteede of the Iewishe
Sabbath. These are your best and strongest arguments in this matter, which if
you truly think to be fully sufficient of themselves, to prove that you
desire; with what face or conscience can you reject the proofs of express
scripture and clear instances brought for the catholic position, as not
sufficient to prove the same?

Manual Proof 6.
They delivered and taught the creed by word of mouth and not in writing,
which from their time till now has continued in the church by tradition
only.

PILK.
The creed we confess the Apostles taught, and find every parcel and
portion thereof in their writings, which if you deny we can quickelie make
good. S. Aug. tells us so much. Lib. ad Catech. de Simbolo.
These words which you have heard (he speaks of the Simboll) are scattered
in the holy scriptures; from them collected and reduced into one, to help the
memory of dull men. But here you delude your reader again with a triflinge
Homonomie of this word creed. For if thereby you mean words and sillables,
then it is true, that the Apostles use not in their writings, some words
expressed in the creed, neither is it necessary to believe that they wrote
the words thereof, and then it is not to the purpose to prove your positio^,
which is of things to be believed, and not of words. But if by the creed you
understand the matter of it, and things to be believed, then it is untrue
that the Apostles writ it not, and all things contained therein; which
things have continued in our church as the object of our faith, not for
tradition only, as you ignorantly say, but because they are recorded in the
holy scripture.

CHAMP.
Show me then in their writings, I mean the Apostles, the discention of our
Savior into hell; and the catholic church, which Luther loved so little,
that he turned it the christian church. Though we believe not only the
parcells of the creed, but the whole creed together. And that the Apostles
made it, which is no where expressed in scripture. And if I say ignorantly
that the creed as it is composed by the Apostles and therefore received and
believed of all christians in all ages, has continued in the church until this
day by tradition only; show it me written in the scriptures, and I will
confess mine ignorance, and correct my words. But seeinge you cannot perform
that, I tell you, that you impudentlie affirm that it has other continuance
then by tradition, opposinge tradition to the canonical scripture only.

Manual. Proof 7.
They taught Baptism administered by heretics to be good; and therefore S.
Aug. speakinge thereof says. Many things which Aug li 2. cont. Donat. c. 7.
are not found in the Apostles writings nor in the latter counsels, yet
because they are observed by the whole church, are believed to be delivered
and recommended by none but by the^. Again he says. There are many things
which the whole church does hold, and therefore are well believed to be
commanded by the Apostles, albeyt they be not found written.

PILK.
That Baptism ministered by heretics, was preached by the Apostles, but not
written, has as much truth as the rest. For whereas Cyprian has taught, that
Baptism of heretics was not good, and therefore to be reiterated, S. Aug.
crosses him and proves the contrary out of the gospel, and out of the
words of the Apostle Ephe. 4. And this is so frequent with that father, that
it makes me think you have not read him of that argument, but gleaned out of
others that might serve your turn. So p^lpably are you deceived to think that
S. August: conceived this to be an unwritten tradition without ground of
scripture, for thus he writes. (That I may not seem to prove it by humane
arguments, I will bring forth certain documents out of the scripture). And
whereas Cyprian had taught, that for proof of this we must have recourse unto
the fountain of Apostolical tradition, that is the scriptures, S. Aug:
approoueth it, and says that the Apostles delivered, that there is one God,
one Christ, one baptism, and therefore baptism of heretics is firm, and
not to be repeated. When then he says of this as of other things, that they
are not found in the Apostles writings, nor in latter counsels etc. And
there be many things which the whole church does hold, and therefore are
well believed to be commended by the Apostles, albeyt they be not found
written. Which words are in his 2. book contra Donatistas I cited the same
place you do if you could see it, though the printer added the other unto it.
cap. 7. and not lib. 5. cap. 27. as you cited them. His meaning is they are
not written in so many words, but the grounds of them are laid in the
scriptures and thence necessarily they may be concluded. This is plain out of
Aug. for having uttered these words urged by you, when he draws to an end
of this disputation, he thus concludes. It might suffice that our reasons
being so often repeated and diuerselie debated and handled in disputinge, and
the documents of holy scripture being added, and so many testimonies of
Cyprian concurringe. By this time I think the weaker sort of men understand,
that the baptism of Christ cannot be violated, by the perverseness of the
party that gives or receives it. Lo how be brings documents out of
scripture, to prove that the perverseness of heretics, peruerteth not the
baptism of Christ, and therefore baptism ministered by heretics is good.

CHAMP.
Is it be written by the Apostles that the Baptism of heretics is sufficient,
and not to be reiterated, why do not you show the place and confound your
adversary? But you had rather impude^tlie affirm an untruth, the^ ingeniously
acknowledge a clear verity. As though if it hadd been so clearly and fully
taught in holy scripture, as you are bound to show it, S. Cyprian who had a
much judgment to discern it as you at least, and noe less good will to
acknowledge it, nor yett less industry and diligence to seek it, could not
he have esped it? And howsoever here you wilfully wrangle out of S. Aug: as
though he acknowledged not the Baptism of heretics by tradition, yett two
pages after, you in express words confess, that he says: neither baptism
of infants, nor by heretics are written in scripture. And though you interpret
him both here and there, to mean that they are not found written in so many
words, but that the grounds notwithstanding from whence they may be
necessarily concluded are laid in the scriptures; yett is this your gloss
meerelie voluntary, clearlie against S. August: meaning and common sense. Or
i^ not, why do not you frame some argument which by necessary consequence may
conclude out of the grounds laid in scripture, abstractinge from the
authority of the church and tradition, either of these two articles? But it
is more easy for you to affirm twenty positions, then to prove one.

Manual catholic position. 2.
The Catholic church does, and ought to believe those things which the
Apostles delivered by word of mouth without writing, in the same degree of
faith with those that are written.

PILK.
For answer unto this, let the judicious reader Bell. lib. 4 de verbo. cap.
11, respons ad Ireneum. The heretics abusinge the authority of traditions
proves their authority, as it does also that of the scriptures which they
likewise abuse.
observe that it is the usual doctrine of Papists to teach, that all points of
Christian belief, which are necessary for all men, were publikelie preached
by the Apostles to all men and recorded in the register of holy scripture. But
besides these there were diverse things committed to prelates and priests that
were more perfect men, which they taught them a part, according to that which
S. Paul says, we speak wisdom among them that are perfect. And these be
their traditions which they would have equally credited with the scriptures.
Now this was the very doctrine of the ancient heretics, Valentinians,
Cerintheans, Marcionists etc. For abusinge the scripture and aduancinge
traditions grounded on the same foundation, as the fathers tell us. And these
be things which the protestants deny to be equal with the scriptures, for
they grant that the Apostles in the beginning of their embassage, write not
the whole doctrine which they preached, but delivered part by word of mouth,
and part by writing; howbeit they consigned the Canon of the scripture, and
writ that formerlie they had delivered as Ireneus and August. do teach. This
being the true state of the question, if the papists mean not these former
secret matters that Bellarmine mentions and are not written, his position is,
de non ente. For that there is nothing or faith now, which the Apostles did
not after they preached either find or leave in writing unto the church, and
these being delivered at first, partly by lively voice, partly by letters,
were to be embraced with like acceptance and creditt. But if he mean these
secret doctrines delivered a part, and only by word, never by them written,
then we deny that the Apostles left any such thing equally to be credited,
with the holy scriptures, neither the allegations infer any such matter.

CHAMP.
You have here multiplied a great heap of unnecessary words, making the
thing obscure, which of it self is clear enough. The question is not now (as
you say) whether the Apostles taught not more by word of mouth (whether in
secret or in public, that imports not) that, having been disputed before,
and proved against you. But of what authority the things delivered only by
word of mouth are, of which question you have the belief of the catholic
church set down directly in the position of the Manual, and the proof
thereof out of express scripture, whereunto let us hear your answer.

Manual. Proof 1.
Therefore brethren stand and hold the traditions which you have learned,
whether it be by word or by our. Epistle S. Basil says I account it
Apostolic to continue 2. These. 2. 15. Basil de Spiritu S. cap. 29. Fulke 2.
These. 2. Sect. 17.
firmly in unwritten traditions, and alleges this place of S. Paul S.
Chrisost cited by fulke himself says this. Hereof it is manifest that they
(the Apostles) delivered not all by Epistles: but many things without letters,
and the one is of as great creditt as the other. Therefore we think the
traditions of the church to be worthy of creditt, it is tradition, inquire noe
more.

PILK.
To your first testimony, if I should answer that S. Paul means not he
delivered some things by writing, somethings by word only, but the very same
by both, first preachinge it, and after writing, it would trouble you to
prove the contrary. For the disjunctive (whether) argues not diversity of
things delivered, but diverse ways of deliueringe the same, as in other places
Romans 14. 8. whether we live or whether we dye, we are the lords: it follows
not dying we are one, and living we are another 1. Cor. 5. 11. whether I or
they, so we preach, and therefore Paul preached one gospel, the Apostles
another.

CHAMP.
You do wisely not to stand much upon your new invention, least to your
own companions you might become ridiculous, neither though you should stand
there upon, should it putt me to much trouble to prove the contrary: unless
to establishe your novelty you would think to inuert the common and usual
manner of speakinge and understanding of all men. For the disjunctive (
whether) does always signify the diversity of the thing joined with it, as
is manifest even in your examples, whether we live or dye; whether I or they:
but so as one and the same thing is affirmed of them both, and so it is in our
testimony as also in these sayings followinge; retain the goods you have
received whether in money or merchandise. Keep the present I sent you, whether
in Jewels or in play With five thousand more. And it is a ridiculous conceit
to think, that the Apostle commended unto his disciple the same things both
written and preached: in which sense his saying should be no more disjunctive
but copulative in this manner, hold those things which you have learned both
by word and Epistle: Which is not to interprett the Apostle, but manifestly to
corrupt him. Seeinge therefore you dare not stand upon this interpretation,
let us hear your auowed answer.

PILK.
But I add that if one understand these things of diverse points of
Christian religion, which S. Paul delivered unto the Thessalon^a^s and writ
them not: it will not follow, that other Apostles writ them not, and still
your thesis is de non ente this testimony is to no purpose, since what point of
doctrine Paul delivered by voice, we find recorded in the scriptures.

CHAMP.
It follows right well that the other Apostles writ not these thing which
S. Paul delivered only by word. if your rule be true, non credimus quia non
^egimios For it is nowhere written that they wrote those things; therefore
according to your doctrine, not to be believed. Again I having proved by
express scripture interpreted by the fathers, that the Apostle taught
something more then he wrote, and commanded it to be believed equally with his
writing (which is the position of the Manual) it behooves you that maintain
the contrary, to prove it by express scripture, or else to confess that the
catholic doctrine has better and more firm ground in the scripture then
Protestantisme. You prove bravely my thesis to be de non en^e, and the proof
thereof to be to no purpose, by your ordinary miserable, absurd, and
ridiculous begginge of that which is in question, and supposinge that for true
and granted, which is expresselie denied But to such shameful shifts is
falsitie worthily driven. Let us see the rest of your answer if it be any
better.

PILK.
The testimony cited out of Basil, is wrongfullie fathered on that
worthy-Bishoppe, and contradicts that which he writes in other places, and
are acknowledged on both sides to be his, and namely his sermon de fide, where
he says, that it is a manifest desection from faith, to bring in any thing
that is not written. Besides in this very chapter mentioned Epist 44. and 67.
by you, he speaks of Meletus, as a rare man that lived an dyed before his
time, as appears by diverse of his Epistles. And if we creditt Baronius he
dyed after Basil. For Basil dyed. 378. and Meletus 381.

CHAMP.
Here indeed you go roundly to work, and like yourselfe, for not knowinge
how to answer the authority, you deny the author; for two weighty reasons I
wisse. The first is a pretense of a contradiction, which is as much a
contradiction, as to affirm Mr. Pilkinton to be a minister, and a doctor. For
he affirminge it to be Apostolic, to continue firmly in unwritten
traditions: says it is infidelity to add any thing to the scriptures that
is contrary unto them. The second is a weak conjecture, that he lived after
one Meletus, who notwithstanding is said to die after him.

PILK.
Chrysostom is the only man that seems to favor your assertion, but truly
understood he helps it nothing. For he speaks not of traditions that are
not written at all, but of such as are not written in so many words. And it
is usual with the fathers, to call them unwritten traditions, which are not
verbatim set down in the scriptures, and yett have a true ground in them, as
formerlie I showed out of S. Aug. who says that neither baptisinge of infants,
nor baptisinge by heretics, are written in the scripture, and yett proves
both out of them. This is the answer of that worthy divine D. Fulke.

CHAMP.
Both you and your worthy divine D. Fulke, corrupt S. Chrisost: who says it is
manifest by the testimony of the Apostle, that they delivered not all by
Epistles, but many things without letters, mark these words without
letters, and see whether they will stand with your gloss. You here confess
against your self, that S: Aug: says, neither baptism of infants, nor by
heretics is written; and therefore consequently believed by tradition. But
you say he nevertheless proves both by scriptures. He shows indeed by
scriptures, that they are not contrary to scriptures; but that they are either
commanded or warranted by scriptures he showed not; but recurreth to tradition
and the authority of the church. So that the confirmation of your gloss
upon S. Chrysostom out of S. Aug: is as voluntary as the gloss it self.

PILK.
This is the answer of that worthy diu^ine Dr. Fulke to the objection of the
Rhemists cited not by him, but by them out of S. Chrysostom; which I wounder
how you impute to him, except you would have your reader to conceive that he
favors your opinion, which he directly impugneth in that place.

CHAMP.
I know that amongst other peruersities of that affected wrangler Fulke, this
is one, which for his name, has not the more, but much less probability,
because he every where impugneth the manifest truth. Nor did I impute it to
him for the end you say, for I desire not his favor in the behalf of the
catholic truth, being a perverse enemy thereof; but for this reason, that
the protestant reader should not suspect the place to be cited by me more
favorably then it was in it self.

Manual Proof 2.
O Timothy keep the depositum, that is that which is committed to thy trust,
not certes by writing. For little or nothing written of the new testament was
known to Timothy then. See a large discourse hereuppon in Vincentius
Lirinensis.

PILK.
This is nothing to the purpose. For whether 1. Tim. 6. 20.
that which was committed to Timothies trust, be understood his flock as Lyra
conceiueth it, or those gifts which were bestowed upon him for the edifiinge
of the people, as Aquinas judges; it is far from your inference, that
unwritten traditions are of equal creditt with the scriptures. Vincentius
favors not your traditions at all; For that which was committed to
Timothy, is in his opinion the talent of catholic faith, whereof, he was not
the author, but the keeper, not an ordayner, but a follower; not a leader but
one that is ledd. Lo this is the catholic faith contained in the scriptures,
not traditions of other doctrine beside them or without them.

PILK.
The depositum which S. Paul speaks of, is the whole christian doctrine
delivered by the Apostles to their disciples to keep, and to deliver to
others as is manifest, by the words followinge in the same text. O Timothy
(says he) keep the depositum, auoydinge the profane novelties of voices and
oppositions of falsely called knowledge. Very little of which doctrine being
then written, it must necessarily be understood of tradition. And this is
Vincentius Lirinensis doctrine; which you cannott deny, though you would
obscure it a little in words, saying the depositum is the catholic faith;
where if you mean, the things believed* you say the same that I say, if you
mean the act or habitt of faith, you speak against common sense.

For that is not the depositum committed to Timothy, by S. Paul, but the
virtue of faith, given him by God, neither is it formallie opposed to the
profane novelties to be avoided by him; but the virtue or act whereby we
assent unto the articles of faith and verities proposed unto us.

Manual Proof 3.
But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom nor the
church of God. Where S. Paul alleges the custom of the church, as a
sufficient disproofe of any practice: why not therefore for the proof of any.

PILK.
Our question is of doctrines of faith, to be believed and received of all, not
of rites and ceremonies concerning external order of the church, whereof the
Apostle treats in that 1. Cor. 11. 16.
place. This therefore is nothing to the purpose, nor touching our question
at all: and yett S. Paul alleges not only custom, but gives a reason of
it in the words goinge before; which you seldom do satisfy your proselites,
but persuade them to believe and hang faith upon your credit, as if it were
impossible you should be deceived.

CHAMP.
Our question is as well of manners or things to be observed, as of faith, and
so is the former Catholic position of the Manual conceived, and set down,
neither is the authority of traditions either more fallible, or less
necessary in the one then in the other. Or if you think the contrary, give
us some sufficient reason or proof thereof, besides your own bare assertion.
Which if you cannot seeinge you are constrained by the evidence of scripture,
to admit the authority of tradition in the one, you cannott without wilful
obstinacy reject it in the other. And though S. Paul gives some reasons of
his doctrine in that place, yett he recurreth to the custom of the church, as
to the most effectual and forcible argument against those that are obstinat
and contentious as you are.

Manual Proof 4.
The things thou have heard of me by many 2. ad Tim. 2. 2.
witnesses these comend to the faithful men which shall be fit to teach
others also. Lo no word here of writing, but of hearing and teachinge by
word of mouth.

Now having proved by scripture it self and evident instances, that many
things are to be believed, that are not directly contained in scripture, it
appears a senceles thing to demand proof of every thing we believe, out
of scriptures.

PILK.
Whereas Paul charge Timothy to commend those things to faithful
witnesses, which he had learned of him, where there is no mention of writing
but teachinge by word, I would gladly demand of this Papiste, if he would
with patience endure any of us thus wildlie reasoninge. These things were
taught and heard, and commended to faithful witnesses, therefore not written.
The Bereans heard S. Paul teach, but the same things they found in the
scriptures. Thus Aquinas interprets this place, these things which thou have
heard of me and of Christ, I say not of one only, but confirmed by many
witnesses vid. the Law and the Prophetts. So things were not only taught by
word, but confirmed by the doctrine of the oulde testament.

CHAMP.
This reasoninge is not wild but firm and good, especially according to
your grounds, who teach that nothing is to be believed that is not written.
For seeinge it is no where written that these things which S. Paul taught and
commended to Timothy to teach to others were committed to writing, you cannot
believe that they were written, but by contradictinge your own rule, non
credimu^ quia non legimus. Again S. Paul exhortinge Timothy to teach others,
and not to write unto them these things which he had heard of him, not read
out of his writings, does manifestly show, that not only things writter^,
but also things spoken (yea these principally) are to be believed. And
therefore this arguinge is not wild, but that your wits were one
wooll-gatheringe, when you wrote this and saw not the force of the argument,
unless peradventure you would be politic in dissembling the force thereof,
because you could not avoid it. And though S. Paul confirmed much of his
doctrine by the authority of the oulde testament, yett that he taught nothing
more, then that which was written before, I suppose you will not dare to say.
And if you think the commentary of S. Thomas here alleged by you to be true,
why do you condemn the beleeuinge of things not written, seeinge you find
not his comment written in all the whole Bible. Or if you condemn it not in
him* why should you condemn it in us, or abhor it in your self? And thus you
see you are forced which way soever you turn your self, to admit of
unwritten doctrine for good and canonical, when you have spited all your can
against it.

PILK.
Now that you may know that protestants have both a shield to defend
themselves, and a sword to wound their adversaries, hear their positions
with the confirmation thereof.

CHAMP.
If your sword be no sharper, then your shield is strong, it will no more
wound your adversaries, the^ the other has kept your doctrine whole. Which
has been so often pierced, as hadd your shoulders received so many but dry
blows, as your doctrine has done overthrows, they would give you but small
rest till you had taken some sovereign Elixir to cure them.

And why do you not put down the protestants positions set down in the
Manual? If you had disliked them, you should have told us why; if you did not
dislike them, they had been more easily set down in their own words, then
in others. Well I will here set them down that the reader may see them in
their own shape.

Manual protestant position 1. The holy Apostles delivered not by word of
mouth more things to be believed and observed by the church, then they either
found written or wrote themselves. And therefore are there no traditions to be
holden or believed.

Position 2. The catholic church ought not to believe those things which the
Apostles delivered only by word of mouth without writing in the same degree
of faith, with those which are written. Now let us hear yours.

PILK. ANTITHESIS. 1.
The Apostles delivered not by word of mouth, more things to be believed, or
observed by the church as necessary to salvation, then they wrote themselves
or found written.

Proof. 1.
Acts. 26. 22. having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this
day, witnessinge both to great and small, saying none other things, then
those which the prophetts and Moses did say should come.

Argument.
They that preached no other things then that which is in Moises and the
prophets, delivered no more by word of mouth then is written (then was written
you should have said) but the Apostles did so. Ergo.

CHAMP.
Your argument if it did prove any thing would conclude that the Apostles
taught nothing more then which was written in Moises and the prophets; which
if it be true, what necessity or profitt^ is there of the gospells and the
rest of the books of the new testament? Whilst therefore you impugn
traditions, you overthrow the whole new testament. S. Paul therefore taught
nothing contrary to the law and prophetts, yea those things which he
preached to the Jews of our Savior Christ, he proved to be conformable to
their own prophetts. Which kind of proof to the gentills would have been of
small moment, and therefore you see your argument not to be effectual nor to
conclude universally.

Again why do you use the like manner of reasoninge which you reprehended in
me a little before, concludinge that because S. Paul at one time, or in one
audience preached nothing without the law, and prophetts; that therefore
neither he or any other times nor any other of the Apostles* did preach any
thing more then that which is contained in them? Which kind of argument
though I may justly maintain against you, as conformeable to your own
principles, denyinge traditions and beleeuinge nothing but that which is
written, yett are you ridiculous to use it against me, who profess to believe
many things not written. And much more ridiculous you are to use it for the
impugninge of traditions, assuminge that for the ground of your proof, which
you know is denied you, and which ought first to be proved.

Further where do you find in all the prophetts or Moises, the vision whereof
S. Paul makes a recital in the chapter cited by you? Certainly no where.
And yett this he preached with much vehemency in an assembly of great
personages, and himself thought it worthy of belief. Something therefore you
see he preached more then that which was contained in Moises and the prophetts.
And this I give you for an example only, and not as the sole thing wherein
instance may be made.

PILK. Proof 2.
2. Tim. 3. 16. From a child thou haste known the holy scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation, thoroughe faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

Argument.
The Apostles delivered no more by word nor writtinge but that which makes a
man wise to salvation. But all this written.

CHAMP.
If you dare stand to this argument, I will easily prove you to be more a
Jew then a christian by this Sillogisme. He that holds all that which is able
to make a man wise to salvation (so that no other thing is necessary) to be
written in the oulde testament is more a Jew then a Christian. But Mr.
Pilkinton holds this. Ergo. The minor which only needs proof I show
thus. Master Pilkinton holds the scripture which S. Timothy knew from a
child to be able to make a man wise to salvation. But this was only the old
testament. Ergo. By that time that you shall have quitte your self of this
argument, you will I suppose find your own not to deserve the name of an
argument, nor yett of a witty Sophisme. For to believe one only God, is able
to make a man wise to salvation, because it makes him wise in some thing
necessary to salvation, as no man of common sense will deny. And yett that
alone is not sufficient to salvation, as I think you yourselfe will confess.

PILK. Proof 3.
Io. 20. 31. These are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the son
of God, and beleeuinge you might have life thoroughe his name.

Argument.
They that writ all things, whereby we might come to eternal life, wrote
all things necessary unto salvation, and more they preached not: But the
Apostles did so.

CHAMP.
This argument is all most as wicked as the precedent. For if it conclude any
thing, it proves the Apostles to have preached nothing but S. John's
gospel. And consequently all the rest of the new testament, either to be
Apocripha, or at least not to be any way necessary to salvation. This man
thou see (judicious reader) to be as little a friend to scripture as to
traditions, seeing to impugn the one, he destroys the other. Is this your
sword Mr. Minister wherewith you would pearce and wound your adversary? no
wise man I think but will say it was made to cut your own throat with,
rather then to draw one drop of blood of your adversary. But you will
bring sharper weapons out of the fathers. You should remember that the
testimonies out of the fathers, should be explications of the scriptures cited
for the same purpose, and not their single sayings. But let us take them as
they are.

PILK. Proof 4.
We know not the disposition of our salvation, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1.
from any other then from them, by whom the gospel came to us, which first
they preached, and after by the will of God delivered it unto us in the holy
scriptures, to be the foundation and pillar of our faith.

CHAMP.
This authority has been once or twice satisfied before, and it says not;
they wrote all they preached; but the same doctrine which they preached, they
writ, and not a diverse or contrary, as some heretics fabulouslie taught,
against whom S. Ireneus there writes; and this is the true meaning of that
place, as any one that looks thereon will easily see.

PILK. Proof 5.
These things are chosen to be written, Aug. trac. 49. in Io.
which are sufficient for the salvation of the believers.

CHAMP.
This is true and not against the catholic doctrine of traditions. For he that
believes that which is written, believes sufficient for his salvation, if he
have not repugnancie in his mind not to believe any more.

PILK. Proof.
It is a manifest defection from faith, and the crime of pride, either for to
refuse any thing of those that are written, or to bring in that which is not
written, as our Savior Jesus Christ says, my sheep hear my voice.

CHAMP.
It is an equal crime^ to deny that which is written, and to bring in any
thing not written, contrary to that which is written, as the Arrians did who
made Christ to be a creature, different in substance from his father,
contrary to that which is written in many places. And this is S. Basills
plain doctrine, which is nothing for your purpose, nor against me.

PILK. ANTITHESIS 2.
The catholic church ought not to believe these traditions which the papists
say the Apostles delivered by word of mouth only, in the same degree of faith
with these things that are written.

Proof 1.
Esaias 8. 20. To the law and the testaments, if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

Argument.
That which speaks not according to the law and testimony has no truth,
and is not to be credited as the law: But papists traditions are so.

CHAMP.
The answer to your argument shall be to return it upon you in this manner.
That which speaks according to the law and testimony is true, and is to be
credited as the law it self. But such are catholic traditions. Ergo.

PILK. Proof.
Gall. 1. 8. 9. But though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other
gospel unto you, then that which we have preached, let him be accursed: as we
said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other gospel unto
you then you have received, let him be accursed.

Argument.
That which is not the same but another, besides that which Paul preached, is
not to be credited but accursed. But popish traditions are so.

CHAMP.
I must needs say that the catholic doctrine should be very weak indeed*
if it should be overthrown with such lame and limpinge arguments, that have
not so much as one good leg to stand upon. And what shall we say then of the
protestants doctrine, that is supported by such bean-strawe pillars? Your mayor
were it true, would conclude all the Apostles writings besisides S. Paul's to
be accursed, at least in all such thinge^ as are not found in S. Paul: Your
minor may as easily be affirmed of S. John's Gospel or any other book of the
bible. So that your conclusion is like to be very protestanticall. See
therefore how strongly you have proved your protestant position, or
antithesis, and consequently how deeply you have wounded your adversary.
Ever so blind may the enemies of gods church be, to impugn it in this
manner, so long as they do impugn it.

PILK. Proof.
2. Petri. 1. 18. 19. And this voice which came from heaven, we heard when we
were with him in the holy Mount. We have also a more sure word of prophecy,
whereunto you do well that you take heed as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts.

Argument.
That which is more firm and sure, then revelation from heaven, not then
written, is more to be credited then any thing now not written: but the
scriptures are such.

CHAMP.
Do you think that the writing of any revelation makes it more firm? or
that it receives any increase of authority thereby? you seem to be of this
opinion, but it is most absurd to think. For the authority all revelations
have, is from God almighty, and not from the writing of them in paper or
parchment. And therefore the prophecy S. Peter speaks of (whether it were
written or unwritten, for he says not it was written, but rather the
contrary, tearminge it a prophetical speech or sermon) is said by him to be
more firm then the testimony received in the holy mount, because that had
been auncientlie promulgated, credited and received; whereas this had never
yett bin preached or proposed to be believed; and therefore no marvel though
that were esteemed more firm then this hitherto hadd been; not because this
had not been written, but because it had not been preached or published at all
till that time.

PILK Proof.
John. 5. 36. 37. 38. 39. But I have greater witness then that of John, for the
works which the Father has given me to finishe, the same works that I do,
bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. And the Father himself which
has sent me, has borne witness of me; Ye have neither heard his voice at any
time, nor seen his shape. And ye have not his word abiding^ in you, for
whom he sent, him ye believe not. Search the scriptures for in them ye have
eternal life, and they are they, which testify of me.

Argument.
That which is greater then the testimony of John is more to be credited, then
an^e thing not written: But the scriptures are greater then the testimony of
John.

CHAMP.
The farther you go the more foolish and impertinent still you are; upon
what ground do you assume in your minor? But the holy scriptures are greater
then ^he testimony of John? not out of the texts of of scripture cited by you:
for they say no such thing. They say that, indeed, of the works of Christ,
and of his fathers testimony, which notwithstanding were nowhere then
written; but of the scripture they say no such thing. And therefore your
argument is as fitly founded upon these text* of scripture as those are which
Pruritanu* set down in the name of your fellows, the author of which pamplett
had he seen your book, might have increased his not a little out of it. As
with this for example. I have greater witness then John* ^r^^ there are noe
traditions; or traditions are not to be believed equally with scriptures. For
amongst all his I know not whether there be one more impertinent then this.
But you will think to make some force out of the last sentence: search the
scriptures etc. but with as much probability as out of the other. For were it
as you read: For in them ye have eternal life, and not: For in them you
think to have eternal life Which is the true text* yett have you thence no
other thing then that the old testament, (for of that only our Savior
speaks) does testify of him. Which how it either proves your Antithesis,
or improoueth my position, judge you by this consequence. The old testament in
which the Jews thought to have eternal life bears witness of our Savior
Christ; Ergo traditions are not of equal authority with scripture. Do
doctors in Oxeforde use to make such consequences? if they do I dare say it is
the pain of sin and heresy, for the which they are deprived of the very
light of natural reason and discourse.

PILK. Proof.
Whatsoever is confirmed by the authority of Aug. epist. 112*
divine scriptures which in the church are called canonical, is without al
doubt to be believed. But you may believe or not believe other witnesses or
testimonies (which men persuade you to believe) as much as they deserve or not
deserve to be credited by the force ye find in them.

CHAMP.
If you dare stand to this authority, I will evidently prove against you,
that you are to believe purgatory, prayers for the dead, the gua^de of Angels,
and diverse other things which you condemn in the catholics. For these
things are evidently confirmed in those scriptures which the church in S.
August* time did call canonical as he witnesses. Further the books received
by your self for canonical, do confirm the authority of traditions, as is
plain out of the second Epistle to the Thessalo: cited before. Again it is
not only men, but gods church, and consequently God himself by her* that
persuades us to believe traditions, and therefore this your argument is as
foolish as the rest.

PILK. Proof.
Abraham when he was desired to send Lazarus, answered, they have Moises and
the prophetts, if they will not believe them, nether will they hear the dead
raised up. Christ brings him speakinge in a parable to show that he
would have more faith given to the scriptures, then if the dead should re^iue:
Moreover Paul (and when I mention Paul I mean Christ for he knew his mind)
prefers scriptures before Angels that descend, and that in great
congruitie; For an Angel though very great, yett are they servants and
ministers, but all scriptures came unto us not from servants, but from God,
Lord of all. Chrysostom in cap. 1. ad Gallatas.

CHAMP.
There is no end of your impertinencies and absurd parologismes. Christ would
have more faith given to the scriptures then if the dead should revive say
you. Ergo what? Ergo Mr. Pilkinton knows not what he says. Certainly this
is the best consequence any man can make of this testimony, as it is cited by
him. Again S. Paul yea our Savior Christ prefer scriptures before angels,
that should teach any thing, against that which the Apostles had taught, say
you, because the angels are ministers, but the scriptures came to us from God
the Lord of all. Ergo traditions are not to be believed equally with
scriptures. A learned consequence I wisse, and like the rest of your doctrine,
having as much truth and connection in it as has this. God is in heaven. Ergo
Mr. Pilkinton is a Roman Catholic.

Now look back I pray thee judicious reader upon the catholic positions
set down in the Manual, with the proofs thereof out of the scriptures, and
compare them with Mr. Pilkintons Antitheses, and the proofs thereof, and pass
thy impartial judgment on them, whether of them have better ground in holy
scripture.

Thus far I have gone with your Parallel Mr. Pilkinton examininge the weight
and truth thereof and in a few leaves have found so many absurdities
falsities and impertinencies, that your whole book seems to me to be no
other thing then a deformed lump or mass of mouldinge past, which makes not
any resistance, but is without all difficulty, cut in pieces, pierced, or
thrust thoroughe, even with every wooden knife, or other instrument. For if I
had no more difficulty to coppie and transcribe* your words, out of your
book into my paper that they might go to the printe with my reply, then I had
to confute them, you should not have been so many days without your answer.

I go no further with you in discussinge your doctrine, because I will not
bestow good hours in such unnecessary and unprofitable labor, learning of
your self in the last page of your book, that as to know the sea water to
be salt it is not necessary to drink up the whole sea, or to know an
earthen statua gilded over, not to be gold, it is sufficient to scrape of one
piece only of the guildinge. So for any man to discover the absurdity, and
impertinencie of your book, it is not necessary he should go thoroughe it
wholly, but it abundantly suffices to have examined one part thereof only.
I would not let it go wholly without refutation, least you should have
interpreted my silence to have proceeded from the difficulty there had been to
confute your doctrine; and least your less skillful reader might think you
had said something to the purpose, in answer of the catholic doctrine or
proof of your own. I would not go any further in mine answer, for the
reason already set down out of your own words. If you please to lay down
your wilfulnes to defend your errors, and with some in differencie to consider
the sincerity of the catholic truth, I make no doubt but by this little
which has been said, in reply to your answer, you will see the vanity of
your doctrine delivered in this book of yours. But if you persiste in your
obstinate will, not to give ear to the truth, you may well be vanquished and
overcome (as S. Hierome says) but you will never be persuaded. Dialogo cont.
Luc.
Neither is my pains herein bestowed so much out of hope to proffitt you, whom
obstinacy may have made incurable as to help others that embrace error and
falsitie, rather out of ignorance then malice or obstinacy.

FINIS.
The Errata.
Page 3. line 1. to Mr. Abbat, for, three whole years I appealed, read, three
whole years since I appealed. page 5. l. 11. perferring, preferring. p. 15. l.
6. This in, This is. page 20. l. 30. is he, he is. page 41. l. 29. depise,
despise. If there be any other, they are so small that none in reading, but can
correct them.

APPROBATIONES.
LIbrum D. Antonij Champnei Doctoris Sorbonici inscriptum, Master Pilkintons
Parallela Disparalleld legi, in quo nihil inuenio quod contra sanctam fidem
Catholicam Romanam, aut bonos mores sit. Quare cum hominis haeretici ineptias
aperte detegat, and auctoritatem Ecclesiae Catholicae Romanae in definiendis
fidei Controuersijs propugnet, vtiliter praelo committi posse censeo.

Audomari 23. December. 1619. Ioannes Floidus Societatis Jesus S. T. Professor.

VIso hoc testimonio Reuerendi Patris Ioannis Floidi societatis Jesus S.
Theolog. Professoris qui Anglicum hunc libellum visitauit prout superius
habetur, Reuere^diss. Dom. Episcopus Audomarens. permittit vt typis mandetur.
Datum Audomari, Anno millesimo sexcentesimo decimo nono, mensis Decembris die
vigesima octaua.

D^ mandato Reuerendiss. Dom. Praefati, A. Deleau Secret,

Faults escaped in the text.
IN the first line of the Epistle read, four years since. p. 11. l. 3. r.
positions. p. 13. l. 22. r. the. p. 24. l. 19. r. your. p. 30. l. 4. after
session add. 6. p. 35. l. 13. r. Nilo. p 37. l. 7. r. things. p. 47. l. 13.
after counsels add which. p. 55. l. 22. r. redundant. p. 66. l. 5. after give
add an. p. 74. l. 19. after that, add which he affirms himself. p. 90. l.
31. after velvet, add by another. p. 105. l. 21. r. Bethanen. p. 124. l. 33. r.
is. p. 127. l. 20. r. (...). p. 126. l. 8. r. an unskillful. p. 127. l. 19. r.
promeretur. p. 132. l. 7. after unless, add therefore. p. 134. l. 11. r. For he
says not my sheep read. p. 146. l. 16. r. dwell. p. 147. l. 30. r. l and the
father are one, does not fully prove the. p. 156. l. 2. For like as read
little. p. 174 l. 1. r. your. p. 185. l. 34. r. ordained. p. 205. l. 14. r. do
to. Ibid. l. 15. r. hang their. p. 209. l. last. r. For, he or. r. he at. p.
210. l. 31. r. This is. p. 215. l. 16. r. So to.

In the margent.
Page 80. against these words look back, wants this mark page 112. in the
midst of the page wants, de vtilitate ^redendi cap. 6. page 128. against
the line 14. wants libro 2. de verbo Dei. cap. 14. page 136. against the line
2. wants epistola prima ad Simpronianum.


