THE HARVEST IS AT HAND, VVHERIN THE TARES SHALL BE BOUND, AND cast into the
fire and brent. Math. xiii. D. G
VUherfore here the word of the Lord (O ye gentiles) preach in the isles that
lie far of, and say he that has skatered Israel, shall gether him together
again, and shall keep him as a sheperde does his flock, for the lord has
redeemed Jacob, and tidde him from the hand of the violent, and they shall come
and rejoice upon the hills of Syon, and shall have plentiousnesse of goods:
which the lord shall give them, and their conscience shall be as a well
watered garden, for they shall no more be hungry, and when it is new builded
and set up on this facion, it shall never be broken nor cast down any more.
Ieromi. 31. B. B. Nevertheless woe be unto them that call evil good, and good
evil. which make darkness light, and light darkness. Esaie the.v. D.

The contents of this voke wherein is me^cioned, the policy of popyshe Prestes,
and what we ought to pray fore, and a comparison between them and the prestes
of baal also diverse textes and sente^ses of the holy scripturs, to put me^ in
remembrance of the wrath of god to com against al ungodly people. declarynge
also what man is of him self in the old Adam. what ye Law is, and wherefore
it was given. what Christ has done for us, what promys he has made and to
whom, and who be the true ministers of his gossple. and also who be the
deceyuers of the people. and an humble peticion desired of ye kings majesty,
and a discovering of titud of antichrists and likewise abrefe declaracion of
ye Joyful time to come. with ageneral absolucion for our feigned speritualtie,
whom I do most commonly name in the process here of marked mean or marckt
mo^sters, not only because they are marcked in their bodies and sometimes wear
disguysed mo^strus garments, but because their doctrine is marked also, for yt
that they would have the people to believe part of the holy scriptur as it was
spoken and written unto us, and some other parts thereof they would not have
them to believe in the true litterall sense, but would have the people to believe
it and receive it, only as they do mark it and appoint it out unto the^, and
where as soumtimes do also name them marked mo^sters, it is because they are so
shamles and so far waxen in their abhomynacions, that they dare do al
unspeakable myschefe. Ose. vi. c. wherefore because no man knowing the word of
god, may justly and with out offense name the^ to be any of ye people of god,
therefore I name them by such names, as be most agreeable to their
conuercacio^, know ynge yt all they which has been of the mark, and be now
truly converted, perceives this to be true, wherefore none of them, which
knows true godlynes wylbe offended

To the reader
Grosely compyled without any clearkly Eloquence by John Champneys, an
unlearned lay mane borne in the county of Somerset, alytyl besides brystowe,
haueynge more affection in the plain setting fourth of y^ troth, then in
alonge Sophystycall Ipocrystishe tale craftily uttered. wherefore I desire you
to bear with my rudenes, in that yt I have so grossly gathered certain places
of ye holy scriptures, and have even so likewise written the^ herein, to put
such men in remembrance as be of god, and yet does not much excersyse the^
selfues neither in readyng nor hereyng of the holy scriptures, that by the mean
hereof I may partli move them to use more diligence there in and also to be more
earneste to god in their faithful prayer, for the assistaunce of his grace,
both to attain spiritual power thereby to live acordenge to the true relygio^
of ye gosple of christ and also to have the true understanding of his word,
by the gift of the holy ghost, in aperfyt faith, being establyshed in
anvndouted hope, of all things promised therein, and not to be of awauerynge
mind, and so be desceaued by the sophistical ipocrytishe doctrine, with our marked
monstres of their own minds does set forth, but utterly to abho^re and
despise it. gal.

Like as all men which be of god moves and procures one another to seek the
true knowleage of all godly leuynge only of god by assistaunce of his grace in
ye holy scriptures, other in hearing or reading thereof, according to y^
co^ma^nde meant of god both in the old testament and also in the new. Esai.
xxxiiii. Iere. ii. f. John. v. c. Col. iiii. d. Tim. ii. a. and iiii. b. So
likewise our shameless mo^sters would have men to believe, that their clerkly
sophistical doctri^e should sufficiently instruct the people, in the knowlage
of the holy scriptures, for they them selves know not what the regeneracion of
ye spirit of christ is, but what the deuel and the subtlety of man's wit by
out ward nynge knows, yt many of the^ be perfect in, and thereby they set
forth their doctrine. Wherefore I have rudly in this litill botke set forth the
trouch as it is written in the holy scriptures, in a witness against their
clerkly sophistical co^ueiaunce, knowing perfectly yt all people which be of
the elect of god and regenerate in christ, does delit more in eueri part of the
truth being never so rudely written or spoken, then they do in aclerkly
sophisticallye, although he be never so pleasantly vttred, how be it our markte
men set them forth apase, for now that they perceive yt the high powers, will
not suffer them to use their old abhominacions, they set forth new
Ipochritish doctrine to bring their children aslepe, and so to keep them out of
the way, how be it if the childern did know perfetly what nurscis they be that
rock them, they would sleep no more in their cradels, but would rather ly in
ye bare plain ground with the elect people of god i christ, among whom god
says by ye prophite Esai. xxxiii. c. ye shall not se people of astrange
tongue, to have so diffuse alangauge that it may not be understand neither so
strange aspeche but that it shall be perceued, for all that be the true ministers
of christ and have his sperite in the^ as saint paul and wother the appostles
had, despise their out ward holiness and clerckly learning as saint paul did.
philipp. iii. b. for saint paul being learned would in no wise precahe or write
any thing co^sernynge the gosple of christ, after ye manner of outward
learning. i, cor. iib. and gala. i. c Wherefore be ware of y^ doctrine that is
be side this, for to make mani books it is an e^dles work. preacher. xii, d.
but all scripture given by inspiration of god, is profitable to reach, to
improve, to amend, and to instruct, in righteousness, that the mane of god may
be perfect, and prepared unto all good works. the ii timo. iii. d. for all the
words of god are pure and clean, and he is ashelde unto all them yt put their
turst, in him. Wherefore friste know this that no prophicy in the holy
scripture has any private interpretation, for the scripture came not by the
will of man, but holy mean of god spoke as they were moved by the holy ghost.
y^ ii. peter. i. d. and even so now ye things of god knows no ma^e but y^
sperit of god, which sperit sercheth althynges even the bottom of gods
secrets, whereby we know the things that are given to us of god, which
things also we speak not with words which man's wisdom or learning
teaches, but with words which the holy ghost does teach. i. cor. ii. c.
praynge always in sperit for grace merci and peace from god our father, and
from our Lord Ihesus Christ. to be with all them which love the profession
of his gosple unfeignedly. Wherefore our faithful prayers being mad to god,
for the vnyersal assystaunce of his (...) graces, our most bounden duty is, to
pray, for the preseruatyon of the most Royal estate of the Kings majesty, my
Lord protectors grace and all other of y^ kings most honorable Counsel that
the kings highness procedynges may prosperusly take good effect to ye glory of
almighty god, to the kings honor and to the increase of all godlynes, in ye
utter dystructio^ of y^ whole Incorporatio^ and power of all marckt pressed hod,
and to restore the people of god within all his realms and dominions, again
freely in to the true lebertie of ye gosple of christ, like as the godly King
Josias being young of age in the begynynge of his time, distroyed all the
priests and prophites of baall, and of other false gods, and also restored
the people being Jews to the true worshippynge of god after the law of
moses. As we reed the iiii kings xxiii. and the.ii. of cronicles xxxiiii.
Where with all god was well pleased, and is always with all Kings and high
powers, which seek his glory, and the deposition and utter suppression of all
such tirannous Ipocrires as all our marked me^ be, which in tim past has
caused Kings and other high powers to assist the^ to execut their abhomi^able
deuelish tirani, and to mai^tayne al other of their abhomynations, which does
fare exced all other abominations, yt any man may read of in ye holy
scriptures ye has beenn sense ye begynynge of the world, both for long
continuance and also for great delusion, namely it does fare exceed the
abominations of the prestes and prophites of baal, for where baales prestes be
fore the raygne of the said godly king Josias, caused y^ people to worshipe
Idols, our marked men have both caused y^ people to worshipe many mo Idols,
then ever baalles prestes did, and be like wise worshipped themselves as
Idols, and be also named the ministers of the gosple of christ, although they
delight in habo^ndance of temporal possessiones, having names of dignity like
te^porall Princes and rulers, clean contrary to the doctrine of christ. math
xx. d. and. xxiii. v. mark. x. ^. luke. xxii. c John. xiii. v. Pet. v. a.
Which is an open presu^ptuo^s blasfemi of ye gosple. and like as baalles
prestes procured ye death of many of the true prophets of god, so have our
marked me^ procured and sougth the death of all manner of people which profeste
ye true religyon in christ, and like as baales prestes did contrary to ye
ordynancis of god written in the law of moses, so have our marked mo^sters
don and yet dayli does so fare forth as they dare for fere of the temporal
power clean contrary to all the ordynau^cis of christ written in the gosple.
and yet would still be nae^d to be the ministers of christ, be cause they can
talk of gods word, and have many crafty arguments and sophystycall
dysputations thereof, and therefore they say they know god, but with their deeds
they deny him. Cit. the first chap. b. having but a similitude or vain
shadow of godliness, but have openly denied the power thereof, the.ii. of Cim.
iii chap. a. whereby they are plainly known to be the children of the devil and
dampnacion. Ihon. viii. f and the first epistle of Ihon. iii. b. Wherefore God
says by the Prophet Esa i the.xiiii. chap. e. Let there be a way sought to
destroy them which be in their fathers wickedness that they come not up
again to possess the land. And it is also written in the Psalms. cxxxvii. b O
daughter of habilo^, happy shall he be that rewards the as thou have served
us: blessed shall he be that takes thy children, and throws them against
the stones: for the time is come that whosoever will not receive the true
doctrine of Christ shall be destroyed from among the people. Acts. iii. d. And
the ungodly transgressors and such as are become unfaithful unto the Lord,
must all together be utterly destroyed. Esa. i. g. For the Lord Ihesus shall
show himself from Heaven with the Angels of his power with flaming fire,
which shall render vengeance unto them that know not God, and that obey not
unto the gospel of our Lord Ihesus Christ, which shall be punyshed with
everlasting dampnacion, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power. The second to the Thessalonyans the first Chapter. d. In which
power he is now come in spirit to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
magnified in all them which believe. The second to the Thessalonia^s, the first
chap. d. which is the bynding of Satan and the first resurrection spoken of in
the Apocalipses the xx. chapter. a. b. that is, where as the true professyon
of the Gospel has been so much persecuted and hated ever since the Apostelles
time, that no man might be suffered openly to follow it. Now God will glorifye
all them that love it, for ever and ever, thoroughoute all posterities. Esai.
lx. c. And will clearly destroy the whole power of all the enemies thetof. Esaias.
lx. b. O consider this, ye that forget God. Psalm, l. d. And hold you still in
the Lord, and abide patiently upon him yet a little while, and the ungodly
shall be clean gone. Psalm. xxxvii. b. wherefore put nothing to the words of
God lest he reprove thee, and then thou be found a liar. Proverb. the.xxx. a
as all our marked men be, therefore keep always in remembrance, and submyt your
selves to the commandments of god. Deuteronomy. iiii. a. xii. d. where he says:
you shall put nothing unto the words which I commau^de you, neither take ought
therfrom: for if any man shall add any thing to the holy scriptures, God shall
add unto him the plages that are written therein: And if any man shall minish any
part thereof, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. Apoc. xxii.
d, Nevertheless such is the disposicion of man: for the first man Adam Man.
bare a wicked heart, tra^sgressed and was overcome, and so be al they that are
borne of him, The iiii of Esdxas the.iii. chap. c. for the imaginacions of man's
heart is evil even from his youth, Gene. viii. d. And is but earth, earthly. i.
Corin. xv. f. Endued with wit and reason. Genes. i. And subject to affection
and lust. Gene. iii. And no man has attained to the whole knowledge of his
own sin. Psalm. xix. d. For in the flesh of man remains no good thing.
Roma. vii. d. Wherefore those things which men have in high estimacion be
abominable in ye sight of god. Luke. xvi. d. For the natural man perceives
not the things which belong to the spirit of God. i. Corin. ii. chap. d.
Wherefore it is undoubtedly to be believed, that all people remaynyng in the old
Adam, being of natural discressyon, which be not yet regenerate of God, with
the spirit of Christ, are thus farfurth until this time. the subjects of the
devil and abiectes from God. Roma. viii. b What wisdom or learning soever
they have, or what outward life soever they live, and knows nothing of the
things of god. i. Corin. ii. c, the.iiii. book of E^dras the.iiii. b.
Nevertheless reason and learning by the works from the creasion declares and
confesses God, so that they are without excuse that so know God, and glorifye
him not as God. Romans the first c. Howbeit no man, by any gift of nature may
glorifye God, or do any thing which is godly: for it is God which works al
goodness in us, both the will, and also the deed, the Philippians the
second. c. Wherefore, the only true and perfect remedy is for all reasonable
people to seek of God in prayer, the regenacio^ promised in Christ. Esaie.
liiii. d, Ihon vi. c. Mat. vii. chap. b. and Luke the.xi. b. Whereby they shall
have both the true understanding of his word, and also power in spirit to live
always according to the true professyon of the Gospel: for otherwise no man
may be acceptable with God and a partaker of everlasting life with Christ.
Math. xiii. c. and Luke. viii. b. For neither reason nor learni^g can declare
the true religion in Christ wherewith only God is pleased and pacified by
Christ: wherefore woe be unto them that are wise in their own sight, and think
themselves to have understanding. Esaias v. e. And precheth or sets forth any
doctrine of the holy Scriptures, without the spirit of god, Esai. xxx. a. And
cursed be ye man that puts his trust in man, and that takes flesh for his
arm: and he whose heart departs from the Lord, he shall be like the heath that
grows in the wilderness: and as for the good thing that is for to come, he
shall not see it. Jeremy. xvii. b. But shall be as ignorant of the coming of
the glory of the Gospel, as the most part of the Scribes and Phariseis were
of Christ: for God has wrapped all nations in unbelief, that he might only
have mercy on all his elect. Romans the.xi. Chapter. e. for in the time of
the Law, the Law.
high learned Scribes and Pharyseis being ignorant of God for their
unthankfulness sake thought to establysh their own righteousness by the
law. Romans the.x. chapter. a. Like as our marked men now being destitute of
the spirit of Christ, thinks to minister the gospel by their outward
learning: for other knowledge they have not, but do therein now like as the
Scrybes and Phariseys did, which knew not that the law was spiritual, and
that it required more perfection then may be observed of any erthly man, namely
in that that it commands, that we should not lust. Exodus. xx. chap. c.
Deuteronomy. v. b, For who soever lusts or desires in heart any thing which is his
neighbors, is condemned by the law. Math. v. c. For they knew not that the
law was given to utter sin, and to show the imperfection of our flesh, and
that thereby no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God. Romans iii. c.
Wherefore they were ignorant also of the promise made to them in the law: for
there was never no promise of everlasting life made unto man therein, but only
that those Isralites which did the things of the law, should live therein,
Gal. iii. b. Receiuyng the benedictions promised in the law. Exo xxiii. d.
Deau. vii. b. where Moses said unto them: if ye hearken unto these laws and
observe and do them, the Lord thy God will love thee and bless thee and
multiply thee, and he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, the fruit of thy
land, thy corn, thy wine, and thine oil, and the increase of thy oxe^, and
the flocks of thy sheep, and ce. These and such other like were the
benedictio^s promised of GOD to them, which lived in the law, so that the
receiuyng of these benedictio^s declared what righteousness was in them
concerning the law, nevertheless the doing of the things of the iawe did not
help them to everlasting life, for that was given before to Abraham, and his
seed by promis, Genesis xii. a. the.xviii. c. xxii d. so that all people after
that time, which were partakers of everlasting life, drank of the same
spiritual rock of faith which Abraham did, i. Cor. x. a. both in the time of
the law and also before the law, for the inheritance of everlasting life,
comes to all people only by grace, through faith, Ephe. ii. b for the law
was but only added because of transgressio^, till the seed came to whom the
promise was made (which is Christ) Gal. iii. c. So that what so ever the law
says, it says to them which are under the law, To. iii. c. for the law
was a scolemaister, till the time of christ, but syns that time, all people
which be regenerate in christ, are no longer under the law, galath. iii. d.
for the law is not given to no person which is made righteous in christ,
by a true faith, having the power in spirit by the gift of the holy ghost, to
love all the elect people of god, according to the commandment of christ,
Ioh. xiii d. for the hole commaundeme^ts of the law are included in the
perfection of love, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of a
faith unfeigned from the which things because the whole multitude of our marked
men have erred, they are turned to bayne iangelynge about the law, and would be
techers thereof, and yet understand not what they speak, neither whereof they
affirm. i. Tim. i. chap. b. But be even such like teachers, as we read of
Act. x b. that troubled the co^gregacio^ in the Apostles time, which would have
had sircumsicion and the commandments of Moses law kept, which never no man
else in his flesh was able to keep, but only Christ: wherefore the Apostles by
one assent, wrate a contrary commandment that we should believe no such
doctrine, but to abstain from things offered to images, and from fornicacion
and such uncleanness, and that so doing we should do well. for our markte me^
which teach the law, observe not the law. Gala. vi. c. Neither they know not
that Christ is thendt of the law, to justify all that believe. Romans x. a. But
they be very desirous of the benedictio^s of the law, and think them selves to
be in the favor of god, because they have habundance of al worldly things, the
first of Tymothy the vi. chapter. b. Unto whom saint Paul says. Galat. v. a.
That al those which trust in the law (and seek the beuedictions thereof) are
fallen from grace, and would that all such teachers were clearly separated
from the company of all Christen people. Galathas the.v. chap. b. For they
are the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is damnacio^, whose belly
is their God, and glory to their shame, which are worldelye minded,
philipia^s. iii. d, wherefore let us wholly depend of Christ, which has
fulfilled all things that (...)
was written of him, in the law of Moses and in the prophets, and in the
psalms, luke. xxiiii. E. which also has all power in heaven and in earth, and
has made a general peace between god the father and us, and has also put
away through his flesh the cause of hatred eue^ the law of commandments,
contained in the law written. ephe. ii. c. so that he has clearly put out the
hand writing that was against us, contained in the law written, and that
has he taken out of the way, and has fastened it on his cross, collos. ii. c
and has also established a new testmaent, not like unto the old according to
the promysses of god, spoken of by the prophets Ieremye. xxxi. f. xxiiii, b.
xxx. d. Ezechiel. xi. d. xxxvi. e. where he says, I will put my laws in
their minds, and in their hertes I will write them, and I will be their god, and
they shall be my people, and they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying: know the lord, for they shall al know me, from
the least to the most of them, Ebre. viii. c. and x. c. Here ye may se and
perceive plainli that the promise of this testament, is made only to the^ that
be regenerate in christ, and thereby knows ye true profession of ye gospel,
according to the doctrine of christ, mat. xiii. c. luke. viii. b For whosoruer
knows it not being of natural discression, has no promise made within any
part of the new testament to be saved by Christ, if he depart this present
life in such ignorance: wherefore god says by the Prophet Esaias the.ix.
chapter. c. All they which inform the ignorant people, that they be in a
right case, they be disceiuers, and such as men think to be perfect among
the^, are but cast awayes, For it is also written. Esaias the, liiii. d That all
those people which shall be saved in Christ, shall be taught of God, which
words Christ himself does also verify. Ihon. vi. b. and says likewise, that
they shall be all taught of God. And saint Paul says. ii. Corin. iiii. a.
That the Gospel is not hydd, but only among them that are lost, whom the
devil has deluded. Wherefore Knowsege
to know who theibe that knows the gospel, and who they be that knows it
not, and whereby ye shall know them, as the scripture teaches: ye shall have it
expressed in this treatise hereafter following, specially who be the true
ministers of the gospel of Christ, and also who be the disceiuers of the
people: for Christ says. Math vii. c, A good tree can not bring forth bad
fruit: neither can a bad tree bring forth good fruit: wherefore he says, by
their fruytes ye shall know the^: for either the tree is good and his fruit
good, orels the tree is evil and his fruit evil Math. xii. c. for it is not a
good tree that brings furthe evil fruit neither is that an ill tree that
brings forth good frnte luke. vi, g. wherefore it is expedient and necessary
to know, first what fruits these be that christ speaks of, whereby all
people may be known, that is to know, what good deeds they be which an evil
man cannot do, and also what evil deeds they be which a good man cannot do
First christ says John. xiii. E, that all his elect people shall be known by
love, which they have one to an other, and says also luke. xiiii. f. If a man
come to me and hate not his father, and mother and wife and children, and
brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be mi disciple,
and whosoever does not bear his cross likewise and com after me, can not be
my disciple. And furthermore says luke. xviii. d, who so ever receives not
the kingdom of heaven as a child, shall not enter theri^. And says also. mat.
xviii. a. Except we turn and become as children, we shall not enter in to the
kingdom of heaven, wherefore by these things before rehearsed both ye people of
god and ye people of ye devil, are perfitly known, Fiyst all the elect people
of god, are known by godly love, one to an other according to the saienges of
christ before mentioned, which godly love comes only by the gift of the holy
ghost. Romans v. a. And falls never away from them which be regegenerate in
Christ. i. Corin. xii. b. So that envy and malice be sins which the people
of God being regenerate in Christ, can not be infected with all: wherefore they
be the principallyst evil fruytes that Christ speaks of. Math. vii. c.
which no good tree can bear: for the spirit of God remains always in them
that be regenerate in Christ. Esaias lix. c. Ihon, xiiii. b wherefore they can
not do contrary to the commandment of Christ. Ihon. xiii. e. which is love,
because they are borne of God, and his seed remains always in them, the
Epistle of Ihon. iii. chap. b. But the people of the world can have no such
perfection of love to the people of God. Ihon. x. c. For perfect love is the
moast principallest gift of the holy ghost. i. Cor. xiii. c. wherefore it is
also the principalest good fruit which Christ speaks of. Mat. vii. c. Which
no ill tree can bear: and likewise as there remains in the people of God a
perfect love to al them that be obedient to the Gospel of Christ, so is there
also in the^ a spiritual hatred according to the saiyngs of Christ. Luke xiiii
f. Against all worldly affections and lnstes, both in them selfs and in all
other people, but specially against the whole conuersacio^ of almarked me^, and
other which dispyse or refuse the true doctrine of the gospel. ii. tim. iii. c.
so that ye unfeigned hatred of al worldly affections and lusts, and the hole
conuersacio^ of al merkt me^ and other which refuse ye true doctrine of christ,
is also a gift of the holy ghost, only to them which be of the elect
people of God, for worldly people can not hate all worldly affections and
lusts, wherefore the universal hatred thereof is also an other good fruit
which no evil tree can bear, howbeit by this fruit the elect be not
perfectly known but only to them selves, nevertheless by doing of the
contrary, as by loving and delyting in worldly affections and lusts: the
people of the world ar plainly known to be the subjects of the devil, for who
so ever loves the world, or the things of the world the love of god is not
in him, the first epistle of Iho^. the second chap. c. And as for the bearyng
of the cross of Christ before mentioned, which is to have alwai a spiritual
patience in all aduersyties, tribulacions and persecucions, and to rejoice only
in them. Gala, vi c, Being therbi assured in a steadfast hope the secoud of Tim,
ii. chapter. b Roma. v. a, Knowing also undoubtedly the occasyo^ why god
sends such aduersyties, tribulacons and persecusyons to all his elect
people, is likewise a principal gift of the holygost, and also the spiritual
conforte and joy which the elect people of God have therein, unto that time the
gospel be fully glorified, is clean contrary to the natural disposicio^ of
al worldli people: wherefore it is likewise an other good fruit which no ill
tree can bear. And where Christ says. Luke. xiii. d. That who so ever
receives notte the kingdom of God as a child, shall not enter therein: and
says also. Mat. xviii. a. Except we turn and become as children, we shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven. This does manifestly declare unto us,
that all people which shall be saved in Christ, and receive everlasting life,
shall receive it only by grace given of God, in the merciful promise made in
Christ, without any assystance there unto of any of our own works. Ephe. ii.
b. For every one that enters into the true rest of the Saboth of God,
ceasseth from doing of their own works. Ebrues iiii. b. And submits them
selfs as elect children, wholly to be taught and lead in their conversation
only by the spirit of Christ, unto whom they give the honor of al godly
enstructions, so that they do not after their own ymaginacion, neither seek
their own will, nor seek their own words. Esaias the.lviii. d Which the
Scripture says, Apoc. xiiii. a In such a song as no earthly persons could
learn since the time of Christ, but only the nombre appointed, of whom there
be some reserved by the merciful goodness of God, to declare the true
everlasting gospel of Christ, to the glory thereof through out the universal
world. Apo. xiiii. b. wherefore it is also a principal gift of the Holy ghost,
which no worldly person has neither knows of Tho^. xiiii. b. And an other
good fruit which no ill tree can bear, so yt by these fruits before mentioned
and not otherwise by any other outward appearau^ce, both the people of God, and
also the people of the devil be perfectly known to all them that knows the
true doctrine of the spirit of Christ. Howbeit the worldly people which
worship the beast and his image, yet unto this time, thynkethe to know and to
deserne what sorts men be of by other outward hipocritish works, wherefore they
condemn the people of God in their judgments, as the scribes and pharise is
did Christ. Tho ix. c Because they seem not to them to be so holy in their
outward appearaunce, as the worldly hipocrites do. Howbeit the best mean and
way to know who be the true ministers of the gospel, and who be the
disceyuers of the people, if they be strangers unto us, so that we can not
know them by their spiritual fruits before me^cioned: then the surest way is
to search diligently whether they preach the gospel in like manner as the
Apostles of Christ did, and as Christ commanded al his elect ministers to do,
that is only by the instruction of the holy ghost, and not otherwise. Luke.
xxiiii. e. For that, that the excellency of the power of the ministracio^ of
the gospel might be Gods, and not ours. ii. Corin. iiii. chap. b. So that
all the elect ministers of Christ, give the glory and praise of the
ministracio^ of the gospel, wholly to the spirit of Christ, which is given to
every one of the elect people of God, which shall be saved in Christ. Act. ii.
f. and the first. Corin. xii. b. Wherefore whosoever preaches the Gospel after
any other manner then only by thinstruction of the spirit of Christ, is a
disceiner, whom the spirit calls Ihon. x. a. A theife and a murderer, for
that that he takes upon him to enter into the sheep fold of GOD, which is
his word contained in the holy Scriptures, by another mean and way then by
the most holy Spirit of Christ, which is the only door whereby all the elect
people of GOD enter into the true knowledge of the holy scriptures, so that
all our marked men which preach without his spirit, are spiritually both
thieves and murderers: for they are thieves, because they take from Christ that
which is his, that is the ministracion of the word of God, which ought only
to be ministered by the power of the spirit of Christ: for otherwise as by
outward learning, or any other mean or way, no man can minister it purely
and truly, the first to the Corinthians, the second chapter. b. c. According
to the Commandment of Christ. Wherefore, our Markte men are also
Murderers, because they do as much as in them lies, spirituallye to
murder all those souls to whom they have so preached. For likewise as we
have but one Christ, so is there but one true doctrine of Christ, and but one
spiritual conversation for all people to keep, which be regenerate in
Christ. Ephe. iiii. a. Phil. iii. c. For all our marked men which inclyn not
unto ye good words of our Lord Ihesus Christ, and to the doctrine which
accords to godliness, are pufte up with the delusion of the devil, and
knows nothing that is good, but wastes their brains about questions and
arguments and strife of words, with many vain disputacions after their
corrnpte minds, being clearly destitute of all true knowledge. i. Tim. vi. a.
Nevertheless all true ministers of the gospel of Christ, seeks with most
diligence to have all people to come to Christ: that is, to believe all the
promyses made in Christ, and to seek of God by Christ, all things that he has
promised. Whereof the most principal thing is to be regenerate of god with
the most holy spirit of Christ, without the which spirit no man can enter
the kingdom of God. Ihon. iii. a. That is, no man can know the thing that is
godly, nether wherewith GOD is pleased. i. Corin. ii. c. Wherefore it is most
needful and expedient for all people having the gift of natural reason to
examyn their conscience surely and plainly by Gods word, either in hearing
or reading thereof, and so to know them selves what estate they be in: or who
soever has not his conscience agreeable there unto, wholly and directly without
other wrestyng or writhyng thereof, has no promise made within any part of
the holy scripture to be saved in Christ, but the wrath of God remains upon
him. Ihon. xii. g For although that the apostles would that the Elders of the
congregacio^s in the primative Church of Christ, should be are with the wekenes
of the Jews which received the Gospel at the beginning of their conversion
in their scrupulosytie for etyng of meats and other like things, yet
nevertheless they would not suffer any of them to continewe in the
congregation which converted not, after certain admonicions from al kind of
such bondage. Tit. iii. c. But vtterli expulsed them out of the congregation,
and all that taught any such doctrine to lai any manner of yoke of bondage upon
any of the congregacions. Gal. ii. a. more then that which the Apostles them
selves had taught: wherefore they co^man^ded, that if any man preached or taught
any other doctrine although it were a^ Angel from heaven, we should hold him
acursed. gal. i. b Wherefore here is to be noted, that all they which minish any
thing fro or adds any thing more to ye Apostles doctrine, then yt which they
and the Eua^gelistes and the Patriarchs and prophites have written unto us, ar
accursed of God. Apoca. xxii d. which saint Paul calls other doctrine,
because there is other things in it, then that which the holygost teaches:
For the Apostles of Christ were the last people that God appointed to write
scripture, whose doctrine shall remayn to the worlds end. Act. i. a. Roma. x.
d Wherefore, whosoever believes any man's imaginacio^ conserni^g the doctrine of
the holy scripture, thinkyng that by any exposicion, other written or
preached, he may have the true understanding thereof, may be well lykened to
such a blyude man, which being without eyes thinks to see with an other man's
eyes if they were set in to his head, and consydereth not that the syghte of
the eyes is a gift of nature, only to them, in whom naturally they be, and
that no man's cunning can do any such works: much less then may any man's
doctrine either written or preached make them which be but natural men to see
and perceive the spiritual light of gods word. Before that time they be
regenerate of God, and after regeneracio^, all those people in whom the spirit
of Christ remains, have no more pleasure in man's clerkely curiosytie in the
doctrine of the holy spirit, then a natural man has being unlearned, and is
very desirous to have the knowledge without book by heart, of some thing that
is written, and one that should read it: and so teach him, does sing it to
him in prickesong, hanyng much fine descant there in, by the mean whereof he
does not perceive the words perfectly which he desires to learn by heart: in
this case he that were so taught, would think that he had a froward
scolemaister, and even so likewise do all the elect unlearned people think,
when any man makes long clerkely protestacion and sircumstaunces in the
doctrine of the holy scriptures, because it hinders them from that which they
would learn by heart, that is the true literal sense of the holy scriptures
as they be written. For the true understanding thereof is given them of god. Esa
liiii. d Ihon. vi. e. and. x. a. whenever they hear the true literal sense
there of spokrn, being written for our instruction. Wherefore they delight not in
such clerkely curiosity of men, but do utterly abhor it, because so many
me^ have been disceyued by it, and do note also much presumption in all them
that use it, because saint Paul and all other which were godly refused it,
the first to the Corinthians the second chapter. a b. and to the Galat. the
fryst. b. c. For like as the natural reason of man discusseth all reasonable
erthly things, so does the spirit of Christ only discuss all godly things
necessary to be known unto Galat. the first Epistle of Ihon. ii. c d. and the
first to the Cort^. the second Chapi. c. Wherefore like as reasonable men do not
commonly use to shutt the doors and wyndowes of their houses in the mids of
the fair day light, and so burn candles and other lyghtes: no more do the
elect people of god being regenerate in Christ, refuse the spiritual light
which they have of Gods word by the spirit of Christ, and seek it by men's
ymaginacions. And furthermore, like as reasonable people think it folly to
burn candles and other lyghtes where the day light may sufficiently serve: So
likewise all people which be regenerate in Christ does think it deuelish
madness for any man to trust in man's doctrine, because Christ has promised.
Mat. vii. b. Luke. xi. b. Ihon. xvi. f. a good spirit, and all things else
needful for our salvation, to every man which saketh it in faithful prayer
of his father in his name: wherefore it seems to us which be regenerate in
Christ, that al such men which saketh it not of god, according to the doctrine
of the gospel, do not regard the life to come, orels mystrust the promyses of
Christ. and believe men better then they do Christ: For no man living is able to
prove that he has sought it of God in a true faith which has it not: for at
this present time god is so merciful too offer it to all people, which have
not openly blasphemed the holy ghost, and yet but a small nombre in comparison
to the multitude do receive it, wherefore his wrath will shortly be known.
Howbe it, in all those people which be be regenerate with the spirit of
Christ. the wonderful works of God are seen at this present day. For what is
a gretter miracle then the whole and clear alteracio^ of the heart of man,
which may undoubtedly be perceived in all them which be regenerate in Christ:
For the old stonye heart is clean taken out of all the people of God, and
they have a new heart given them of God, which is always obe die^t to the
spirit of Christ. Ezechiel. xi. d. and the.xxxvi. l. and the Ebrues the viii.
c. and the x. c. So that in whom so ever the Spirit of Christ is, that
person can not be unfruitful: For by their spiritual fruytes that they
minister one to another, which is love, joy, peace, longsuffryng,
gentleness, goodness, faythefulnesse, meekness and temperancy, they may
both know them selves, and also be known to all other godly people, and not
otherwise. For no man is known by any outward appearance after the flesh.
Iho^. vii. c. ii. Corin. b d Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature. ii. Corint. v. d. whose whole delight and conversation is in heaven,
from whence we look for our Savior Jesus Christ, Phillippians the.iii.
Chapter. d. For we confess our selves to be as strangers in this life,
vsyng the things of the world as though we used them not, the first to the
Corinthyans the.vii. Chap. e. Not doing our bodily labor with the respect of
our own lucre, but for that we would not live idely, and also to have
wherewith to help the impotent members of Christ, neither loving the world, nor
the things of the world, but receiuyng all needful necessyties of the body
in worldly things, geuyng God thanks, without any scrupulosytie or grudge of
conscience: For all the creatures of God ar good, and nothing to be refused, if
it be received with thanks giving. i. Timo. iiii. a. For like as God does
forbid all men from the loving and inordinate vsyng of worldly things, so
likewise does he permit all his elect people their bodily necessities of all
worldly things, and when soever of two euyls, the one can not be avoided, God
permits the less for the eschewing of the greatter in all earthly things.
Mat. xii. a. Mar. ii. d. Luke vi. a Genesis xix. b. Wherefore the scriptures
says. i. epist. of Ihon. ii. chap. e. If ye know that Christ is righteous, ye
know also that every one which follows righteousness; is borne of him: for
every one which loves Christ, loves also all people which be regenerate in
Christ. Ihon. v. a not only in words, but in actu all deeds. ep. Ihon. iii.
c. for all people which does the contrary be the children of the devil. ep.
Ihon. iii. b. By whose delusyon our Markte men have so long disceiued us: for
the just proof whereof, if it may please the Kings maiestee, by the godly
godly advise of my lord Protectors grace and other of his Pelicion.
honorable counsel, to grant and permit like liberty to some one of them
being of small reputacio^ and learning, which be now regenerate with the spirit
of Christ: as was granted to Elias, in the time of Ahab, King of Israhell, as
we read the third book of Kings, the xviii. chap. That like trial as was
beetwene the said Elias, and all Baals prophets, by the offering of sacrifice,
may be now openly and only by the holy scriptures written, after the true
litterall sense: between one such of the elect in Christ and the whole
multitude of our marked ministers: that likewise all the multitude of them, now
may confer their lernynges together: or severally whether they list, and then
to be openly and plainly known and seen, whether they can show the word of God
written after the true litteral sense, for the clear discharge of their
conscience, for their doctrine and conversation, ye or no: and if they can not,
all men ought to refuse and to despise their doctrine, how clerkely or
eloquently soever it be uttered: and none otherwise to accept them but as the
mynisters of the devil and the Beast, whose mark they bear. ii. Corin. xi.
c. Jude. c. d. e. And on ye other side if the co^piler hereof, a poor lay man,
and of small litterature, be not able by gods assistau^ce, only by the power
of the Spirit of Christ, to show the word of God written in the true literal
sense, both for the clear discharge of his own conscience and conversation,
and also of all other that be regenerate in Christ, let it be death unto him.
Wherefore in so much as the people being present with king Ahab, converted, and
confessed God, when they saw that he sent fire from heaven to consume that
Sacrifice which Elyas offered, and wereful certified that he alone was the true
Prophet of God, and that Baals Prophets being. ccccl. were all false teachers,
because their Sacrifice which they had offered remained whole vnbre^t. How
much more then now should the word of God written, be a sure undoubted
trial in the plain literal sense for all Christen men to believe, and so
thereby also to know, who be the true ministers of the gospel of Christ, and
who be the disceyuers of the people. Wherefore if such trial may be permitted
in manner before said, who so ever should then mistrust it to be a good and a
sure trial, and worthy to be belened of all people, his blyndnesse were very
wonderful, because we have no certainty of the trut he but by the holy
scriptures as they be written unto us, and by the gift of the holyghost.
Wherefore if our marked men, having much lernyng, had also the gift of the
holyghost in them, as they have not, it were not possible for any man to
disprove their doctrine and conversation with the holy scriptures written,
which were ordained and preserved unto us by the holy ghost Wherefore the clear
confutacion of them and also of their doctrine and conversation, with the holy
scriptures written, by one man of small literature, shall manifestlye declare
the incomprehensible power of God. Deuteron. xxxii. e. against whom nothing
can prevail, and in whose doctrine like as he that fulfylleth the whole law,
and yet fails in one point is gyltye in all. James.. ii. c. So likewise he
that has a faith to believe part of the holy scriptures in the literal sense
as they be written unto us, and believes not all his faith is imperfect. For
Christ promised not that any man should be saved for the beleni^g of part of
the gospel, but for the beleuyng of all things which he promised therein,
dooyng all things also in spirit which he commanded in the establishment
thereof. mat. xxviii. d. Whervuto the promise of everlasting life is made, and
not otherwise: for God does abhor all vain hope, Jeremy. ii. g. which is not
establysshed in a perfect faith, wholly agreeable unto his word Ephesians
the.iiii. chapter. c. Wherefore if we should believe any man's opinion to be
good and godly doctrine, in any thing more or less then is written within the
holy scriptures, or in any thing contrary to the true literal sense thereof,
whereby should we know whose opinion we ought to believe. For every part of the
holy scripture spoken by the holigost. for our instruction is of like
authority. and may no more be altered from the literal sense in one place
then in an other. But I speak not of the parables which christ spoke to the
high learned Scribes and Phariseys, the predesessors of our marked men, to whom
they do succeed in like power of the Beast, being of a long time ascended out
of the bot homlesse pit. Apoca, xiii. a. and. xvii. b. But I speak of the
plain declaracio^s which Christ made of al parables to his Disciples: For he
declared all things plainly unto them. Mar. iiii. c. And so likewise all other
parts of the holy scriptures be evident and plain to all them which have the
same gyste of the holyghost, which the holy scriptures were spoken by. Ihon.
xvii. c. d. How beit if any part thereof be altered from the true meaning of
the literal sense, we are uncertain what to believe more of it, for because
that then diverse men might make diverse interpretacions, as they have done in
times past. And few of them agree one with another, and yet every man colored
his opinion with the holy scriptures. And he that had most sophistical
conueiaunce and temporal power to maintain his opinion with all, was best
believed: So that our marked men having the upper hand, suppressed the truth always
by terible imprisonmente and death: For they made the fire to defend them
against al those people which professed the true religion of the gospel of
Christ. Wherefore whosoever believes any part of their doctrine to be good and
godly in any thing which is contrary to that that is written within the holy
scriptures after the plain literal sense thereof, is clearly destitute of al
true belefe. For no man has authority to alter the literal sense of the
holy scriptures contrary to ye other manifest scriptures written. For that was
the invention of the devil, and executed by our marked men, and other such his
ministers: whereby they deluded all people. For of the holy scriptures there is
but oue true sense which is directly and plainly expressed in the letter
thereof, being compared together: so that there is no part of it repugnant one
against another. But because that natural men can not do that which the
scripture co^man^deth in the letter, therefore they believe not that the literal
sense is always true: For they eonsider uot that there is a new creacion by God
above nature, and yt every man which in Christ is a new creature. ii. Corin..
v. Chapter. d. shapen and fourmed in righeteousnesse and true holiness, to
the Ephesians the.iiii. Chapter, c. And that thereby they do that which the
letter of the holy Scripture commands. For they understand not that
Article of their faith, that the true catholyke people in Christ do the will
of God by the power of the holy ghost. Iho^. iiii. c. And that only by that
law of the spirit of life, Christ has delivered us from the law of syn and
death. Roma. viii a. Neither they perceive not the division between the spirit
and the flesh, because ye spirit of Christ is not in them. For it is not
possible for any man to discern the operacio^ of that which he knows not of:
Wherefore that was the most principallest part of our markte men's doctrine, to
make the people to believe that there was no such spirit given unto man whereby
he should remain righteous always in Christ, the Epistle of Ihon. iiii. a.
Which is the most deuelysh error that may be, because it breeds a a doubt
in all them that be infected there with, whether the Holy Scripture be true or
not, being written by men having but the very self same Spirit of Christ that
all other reasonable people has, which shall be ever lastingly saved in
christ. Act. ii. f. the first Corin. xii. b. Notwithstanding in outward
ministracion, the Apostles had power to do that which other members of the
same mystical body of Christ can not do: as in doing of miracles, and other
things. Like as in a corporal body, every membre has not one office,
neither one membre can do the offece of an other, nevertheless, every lively
member of a corporal body has life and felyng in them. And even so lywyse
every membre of the mystical body of Christ has one spirit and one
intelligence of the word of God and one purpose of heart in all godliness,
the first to the Corinthia^s the xii. chapter d. Ephesians the.iiii. a. c.
Ezechiell. xi. d, and. xxxvi. f. So that, advisedly and willyngly they do
nothing against the will of god. the Epistle of Ihon the.iii. chapter. v.
Therefore the holy Scriptures in the true literal sense is sufficient for
their outward instruction in all godly doctrine. For within the letter of the
New Testament there is sufficient instruction concerning the true Religion of
the gospel, among all them which believe it to be true in the literal sense.
And who so ever does not so believe it, believes nor knows nothing that is
good. Luke. xvi. g. i. Tim. vi. a. but may goloke for unwritten veryties among
these vnnedefull ministers our Marked Preesthod. For what less deuelish
presu^ption is it to think the holy scripture insufficient or imperfect in the
literal sense for all godly instruction, but even a plain denial of Christ.
For Christ is included in the word, and the word in Christ. Ihon, the first
chap. a. Wherefore to think the word insufficient, is to think Christ is
insufficient, and also the holy ghost to be imperfect, which wrought always in
them that wrote it. by who^ also it has been always preserned, and shall be to
ye worlds end. Iho^. xv. c. Act. i. a. To. x. d. Which scripture does also
manifestly and plainly declare unto us, that the Apostles left nothing
unwritten which was proffitable to our faith, but have declared the whole
counsel of God, being needful for us to know. act. xx. d. e. g. nevertheless
like as we have promyses of mercy in Christ, so have we war nyng by Christ.
Math. xxiiii. Mark. xiii. Luke. xxi. that many should come in his name saying:
I am Christ: and should disceiue many. and cet. Wherefore note this, that
Christ meant not that many should name them selves Christ, as it were by their
proper names: but this word Christ has this significacion, to be anointed of
GOD, or to have a godly power: For Jesus was anointed of god: and had also the
godly power in him. Wherefore he is called Ihesus Christ, an only savior
anointed of God, for the iustificacion of all his elect people from syn. Mat.
i. So that all those men, which has taken upon them any part of his office in
remission of sin, saying they have power given them so to do, has in so
saying said they were christ's them selves, because they take that upon them
which was appointed by GOD only for Christ to do. Nevertheless by the
regeneracion of the spirit of Christ, all the elect people of God have power
to know and to declare whose sins GOD has forgeuen in Christ, and also
whose sins he does retain to judgment. For the Spirit of Christ is the
only key of the Kingdom of Heaven, which was promised to the faith of saint
Peter's confession. Mat. xvi. c. For faith is the gift of God and makes us
righteous. And the gift of the holy ghost which is the Spirit of Christ,
makes us perfect both in knowledge and power to do the will of God in
spirit. But faith of it self has neither perfect knowledge of the holy
Scriptures, neither power to do that which the Scripture commands: for
that comes only by the gift of the holy ghost after faith, sometime
immediately, as we read. Act. x. g And of the good theife, Luke. xxiii. d. and
some time long after. For there were diverse congregacions in the Apostles
time which were baptized and received faith in Christ, long before they
received the gift of the holy ghost, as we read in the Acts the.viii.
chapter. c. the xix. a. How be it, their knoweledge was always imperfect
until that time they were regenerate with the Spirit of christ. i. cor. iii.
a. viii. a. For his Spirit is the oil which the wise Uirgins shall take in
their lamps of faith, to meet with the trwe Bridegroom Christ. Mat. xxv. a.
And is also ye oyntme^t, which techeth us all godly knowledge. Ep. Iho^. ii. d.
wherefore. s. James. v. c. would that the people which were disesed, should
anointed there with, which ointment comes most comenly upon the elect people of
God, by prayer in faith, and by laiyng on of hands of the elect ministers of
God in Christ, in like manner as we read, Act. viii. chapter. c In which
chapter is also mentioned the request of one Simo^ which offered the Apostles
money, to have had like power to have given the Holy Ghost to whom he would,
by the laiyng on of his hands. Notwithstanding the Apostles refused his money,
and also declared unto him that he had no part of that ministracio^.
Nevertheless since that time, our markte mo^sters having the full power of the
Beast in them, have ordained other things instead thereof to minister to
sick people, and ask ye ministers of Christ no leave. And do use also to
minister to them in chyldhod, a certain oil or grease, which is commonly
called the Confirmacion of their Baptysme, making the ignorant people to
believe that that is the gift of the holy ghost, like as Mahomet made the people
to believe that the holy ghost in the lykenes of a dove. taught him what doctrine
he should teach the people. Howbeit, the delusion of Mahomet es priests now
at this present time is not so much to be merueyled at, as the delusio^ of our
markte men. because Machometes priests do live according to their profession,
and also th(...) doctrine is agreeable to those Scriptures which be written
unto them: but our marked me^ live clean contrary to the true profession of
the gospel, and contrary to the example of Christ, and of all his Apostles,
and also ministers crafty doctrine, contrary to the holy Scriptures written.
Wherefore the acceptyng of them as true ministers of the Gospel, is not only a
declaracion of ignorance in godly knowledge, but also a declaracion of
blyndnesse of natural reason. For how may reason conceive truth to be in
them, in whom so much falshed is found. Wherefore what worldly affections so
ever we have to them, we ought only to be ruled by the word of God written,
vsyng them but like as natural me^ do use the members of their natural bodies.
For a natural man which has rotten teethe in his head, that does never rest
from paynfull ache, will seek a remedy: but if he can have none, he will
have his rotten teethe drawn out of his head, rather then to have all his
body continuallye disquyeted. And even so likewise our Marked men are like
unto rotten teeth: for they can not minister the word of God as they ought to
do. And as for the spiritual ache, which al godli people have by them, we see
plainly that the high powers have sought as much the reformacio^ of them as
may be, and yet they be as craftye as ever they were, disguisyng themself with
sophistical hipocrisy, either new or old, as fast as ever they did, and the
devil is as familier with them as ever he was: Wherefore God send us remedy of
them shortly. Howbeit, most men be in like case with them as women be with
their Parrottes: for women use much diligence to make their Parrottes to
speak, and yet with all their diligence. they can not make them to talk so
reasonabli as a reasonable creature can. And no more can no man make those
ministers which be only appointed by me^ to declare the true meaning of the
word of God, so plainly and truly as it ought to be, whatsoever be devised
for them. For the true understanding of the holy scriptures is as dyffuse to
them, as the words of a clasped book, which no man opens. Esaie. xxix. c.
For God has sent them strong delusio^, that they should believe lies, because
they received not the love of the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.
ii. These. ii. chap. c. For they are clouds without water and trees without
fruit at gatheryng time, beig twice dead. wherefore god shall pluck them up by
the roots: For they are like the ragynge waves of the sea, fomynge out their
own shame: They are the wandering stars, to whom the myste of darkness is
reserved for ever. Jude. d. For in so much as God promised but one Ihesus to be
Christ. Gala. iii. c. A full satisfaction, redemption and sustificacion of all
his elect people from sin. Ebrues. x. c. As is before mentioned, all men may
see and perceive plainly, what shameless Antechristes all our Markte men be,
which have taught the people to believe in others satisfactions, other
instificacions, and other remission of syn, deniyng also the power of the Holy
Ghost, saying that the spirit of Christ was insufficient without outward
learning, to discern the true meaning of the holy Scriptures, when the elect
people of God did hear them or read them, which is an open blasphemy of the
holy ghost, which Christ says shall never be forgeuen. Mat. xii c. Mark. iii.
b. Luke. vii. b. Wherefore, whosoever trusts upon their conversion, shows
himself to mistrust the true literal sense of the holy scriptures spoken by
Christ, and written for our instruction. For like as God is merciful,
according to his promise, so is he righteous according unto his word, and
thereby shall judge the world. Ihon. xii. g. And by his word declares also
al things needful to be known to his people before it come to pass, Amos.
iii. b. iiii. d. Which the world can not perceive. For what worldly man in
the Primative Church did believe that it was the will of god, that al his elect
people in Christ, should be persecuted and hated of all nations of men, until
that time wherein God will glorify the gospel: which time is also manifestly
declared in the holy scriptures, both by the Prophets and also by the
Apostles, nevertheless all worldly people both learned and other, are as
ignorant thereof, as the high learned Scribes and Phariseis were of Christ. For
the devil being changed into the likeness of an Angel of light bath given his
power unto marken men his ministers. Apoca. xiii. a. By whom all earthely
people have be^ disceiued, whose incorporacion and power, the holy scripture
calls the beast, because the spiritual whore of Rome, which corrupted all
the people of the earth with her fornicacio^, did sit upon their doctrine, and
was maintained thereby Apo, ca. xvii. a. Whose abhominacion God has disclosed
to diverse Kings and high powers, and has put in their hertes to abhor
and dispyse her. Nevertheless they have given her kingdom and power unto the
Beast, until that time the words of god be fulfilled. Apo. the.xvii. d, That
is now in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, which begins to
blow, in which time, the mystery of God shall be openly publysshed, as he
preached by his servants the Prophets. Apo. x. chap. b. That is, that the
elect people of God shall only with the spirit of Christ and the word of God
written, clearly confute and confound the abominable cauteilous delusion of
all markte men. ii. These. ii. chap. b. Whose power ascended out of the
bothomlesse pytte, and shall now be distroyed with all the glory thereof: for
the whole beast shall be taken and confounded and come to naught, Esaye, the
xxviii. a. and the Apocalipses the.xix. Chap. d. So that they shall be hated
and abhorred of all flesh. Esaie. the.lxvi. g. For the time is come that God
will utterly distroye them, because they have distroyed the godly people of
the earth, the Apoca. the.xi. chap. d. Wherefore they shall be cast into the
great wine fat of the wrath of almightye god. Apo. xiiii. d. For their
cauteilous delusion shall prevail no longer, but shall be uttered to all men,
the second of Tim. the second Chapter, v. For the light of Israel shall be
the fire, and his Sanctuary shall be the Flame, and it shall kyndle and burn
up his thorns and briars in one day, Esaie x. d. That is, that the spirit of
Christ, which is the only true light of all the elect people of GOD, shall so
lyghten and kyndle knowledge in his elect high powers and ministers, that with
the holy scriptures written, which is their only sanctuary, they shall clearly
confute and confound all imaginacions of Marked men, which is signified by the
briars and thorns, because they be the most noious and un pfitable trees that
grows, like as Marked men be the most falsest and deuelish people that
lives. And where it is said that they shall be burned in one day: that
signifies that they shall be utterly confounded now at this present time, in
the appearaunce of the second coming of Christ, according to the saying of s.
Paul, ii. These. ii. chap. b. And also agreyng to the other scriptures before
me^cioned in that he half, so that iniquitee shall be taken a way out of the
earth, and righteousness Joyful time.
shall reign among the people, the.iiii. of Esdras xvi. e Psalm. xlvi. b.
lxxvi. a. For God says by the Prophet, Esai ii. chap. a. and Micheas. iiii. a.
In the later days it will come to pass that the hyl of the Lords house shall
be set up higher then any mountains or hills: yea, the people shall preasse
unto it, and the multidude of the Gentyles shall have them thither, saying:
Come let us go up to the hill of the Lord, and to the house of the God of
Jacob, that he may teach us his ways, and that we may walk in his paths. This
shall the Heathenysh markte men see, and be a shamed Micheas. vii. c. For the
earth shall be full of the knoweledge of the Lords honor, Abucuc. ii. c. And all
the Islands of the people shall worship him every man in his place. Sophony
the.ii. c. And God will make his people to have a good name and a good report
among all people of the earth, Sophony. iiii. d, Therefore thus says the N^t^
Lord of hosts: let your hands be strong, you that now here these words by
the mouth of the Prophets, and be living in the earth in those days.
zachari, viii. v. For the power only of the spirit of Christ shall reign over
all the earth, so that there shall be none other savior named upon the earth but
only Christ. Wherefore men shall go about the whole earth, as upon a field.
zachary the.xiiii. chapter. c. And as for all rule, power, and might that is
under heaven, it shall be given to the holy people of the most highest,
whose kingdom is enerlastynge. yea, all powers shall serve and obey him,
Danyell the.vii. Chapter. g. For God will make his people glorious for ever
and ever, and joyful thoroughoute all posterities. Esaie. lx. c. Thus shall
the hand of the lord be known amongst his elect people, and his indignacion
among his enemies, Esaie. lxvi. e. For all manner of people which by grace have
gotten the victory of the beast, and of his image and of his mark, and of
nombre of his name shall sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and shall
also sing the song of Christ, saying: Great and merueilous are thy works, lord
God almigty, just and true ar thy ways, thou king of saints, who shall not
fear the, o lord, and glorify thy name, Apo xv. a. For all thendes of the world
shall remember themselves, and be turned unto the lord, and al nations shall
worship before hi, Psalm. xx. f. Wherefore, be glad ye righteous and rejoice in
the lord, and be joyful all ye that be of a true heart. Psalm. xxxii. c. For
the Temple of God shall be open, and the Arc of his Testament seen therein. Apo.
xi. d. That is, that the people shall convert to the Gospel. and have clear
conscience to god, having his word for a witness, which is the Arc of
Christ's Testament. For unto them which have the Lord before their eyes,
strength shall be increased Esaias. xl. g. Wherefore God says also by the Prophet
Esaias, to all Markte men, the.xli. f. Stand at your cause, and bring furthe your
strongest ground, and show openly what scriptures ye have in the true literal
sense, to deferde your doctrine and co^uersacion with all. For your subtyl
arguments may take no longer place, because the scripture says, the first
of Timothy the.vi. chap. d. your study therein is a false science and naught,
and so be al you that use it, in any thing concerning the doctrine of the
holy Scriptures. Wherefore now show your selves as co^firmable to the plain
truth of the holy Scriptures written, when ye shall fortune to comen thereof,
as the devil your first prouincial did, when he was confuted by christ, mat.
iiii. v. For in so much as he being the aucthor of that profession of your
incorporacion, dignitee, and power, confessed the truth of Christ and of his
Apostles. Mat. viii. d. Luke. viii. d. Acts. xvi. d. after that he was ones
confuted with the scriptures written. Be not you no longer more comberous and
obstinate against the truth thereof now, then the devil was at that time, and
alleged other things to be meant in the holy scriptures, then is expressed in
the true literal sense thereof. For if ye do, all men will know shortly that you
ar worse, and more worthy of condempnacion then the devil is: for belyke he
had not so much falshed, orels he was not so folyshe when he tempted Christ by
the scriptures, to allege other meanynges therein, then was express in the
letter thereof: neither he defended not his own imaginacio^s against the holy
scriptures written, as all you markte men have done a long time. Wherefore
now from hencefurth suffer the people of God, wholly to pourge out your old
rotte^leuen, for other wise we can not be new dowe in Christ: for a little of
your leven Ab^osucion
sowreth a great piece of dowe. i. Corin. v. b. For your salt has lost his
saltnes, wherefore there may nothing be seasoned therewith: for it is neither
good for the land, nor yet for the donghyll. Luke. xiiii. g. That is, that all
you markte men which have taught and affirmed doctrine against the power of the
spirit of Christ, which all the elect people of God does receive, shall not
be forgeuen, neither in this life, nor in the life to come. Mat. xii. d. Mark.
iii. d Luke, xii. cha. b. Which is meant by your salt that has lost his
saltenesse. And where the Scriptures says, that it is neither good for the
land, nor for the donghyll. By the land is signified, doctrine for the
people: and by the donghyll, is signified temporal worldly business: so that
your doctrine and counsel is not good nor meet to be received among the
people, neither in the doctrine of the gospel for their instruction, neither
yet in temporal matters: For Christ says, Mat. v. b. It is good for nothing,
but to be cast out and trodden down of men. For who so ever favors any of
you, which blasphemeth the spirit of christ, is a partaker of your ill. ii.
Epist. of Ihon. c. Wherefore God commands all his elect people to depart
out of your company, and to separate them selves clearly from you, and not to
touch any of your uncleanness. Esaie. lii. c. ii. Cor. vi. c. the first.
Timo. vi. b. Apo. xviii. b. For your shame shall be discovered, and your preuye
abominable delusio^ shall be seen. For God will aduenge him on you, and will
show no mercy to you, as he does to other people, Esaie. xlvii. a. For you are
the people whom god has appointed to his wrath, within the Ila^des of this
part of the world, whereby the name of the Lord might be feared, Esaie. lix.
b. Wherefore we ought to have no more in nombre of you, to remain as ministers
of the gospeil, but even so many as Elias suffered of Baals Prophets to live
when he had confounded them, by offering of Sacrifice, the third of the Kings.
xviii. g How be it, it is to be thought, that Baals Prophets had not so much
sophistical conueiance to make their excuse at that time, as you Markte men
have now, orels subtle excuses were les regarded at that time, then they be
now: for your abhominacion and crafty delusion, does far excede, and is
much more then has been found in any manner of people, since the beginning of
the world. The particulers partly whereof, by Gods assistence, shall be more
plainly expressed in another book here after this.

Finis.
The word of the Lord remains for ever.
God save the King. my Lord Protector, the Nobility, and all those, which
unfeignedly loves the gospel: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us
all. Amen.

Imprintyd at London, by Humfrey Powell, dwelling Above Holburne Londuit.

Cum priuilogio ad imprimendum solum.

AN. Do. 1548.


