SARAHS SEPVLTVRE, OR A FUNERAL SERmon, preached for the Right Honorable and
virtuous Lady, DOROTHIE Countess of NORTHVMBERLAND, at Petworth in SUSSEX.

BY RICHARD CHAMBERS Doctor of Divinity.

The dying of friends is the cutting off a portion of our own flesh.
Iusti and misericordes homines sunt fundamentum seculi.
Dictum Hebraeorum veterum. LONDON, Printed by G. Eld, for George Fairbeard,
and are to be sold at his shop, at the North entrance of the Royall-Exchange.
1620.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader: As it is small comfort to the husbandman, to behold the
blasting of his wished wheat, while the cockle and darnell grow up in his
field: So it is no great comfort to the Christian world to see the brambles of
iniquity ouer-grow the whole Land, whilst the Cedars of Lebanon are cut down:
To see Cain live, Abel die; Esau hunt in the mountains, Isaac offered on the
mountain: Saul pursuing, David pursued: and Dives to fare delicately every
day, whilst Lazarus must lie at his door full of sores, this has been some
trouble to the Servants of God. If we knew the good the godly bring to the
world, we would desire they might long live in it: for they bring a blessing
wheresoever they come. Abraham by prayer is profitable to Abimeleck: Joseph by
providence is beneficial to Pharaoh: David by valor is good to Israel: and
Abigail that beautiful and blessed woman, withdrawes the ruin of Nabals
family.

Among many mirrors of modesty in this world, this elect Lady was a true
mirror. Had any cause to boast in the flesh? she more: She was descended of a
Princely family, espoused to one of the greatest Peers in the Land, blessed
with an hopeful seed, graced with all outward lineaments of beauty, and
endowed with all inward ornaments of virtue: yet it pleased the Lord so to
exercise her here, that albeit in her Savior she found peace, yet in this
world she had many afflictions. By these was she weaned from the love of this
world, and by these she is now entered into the Kingdom of heaven. To the end
she might live in some memory hereafter, the Author of this Sermon, her
sorrowful servant, did first preach, after pen, and of late sent to me this
ensuing discourse, which being allowed by authority to be published to thy
view, I cannot but commend it to thy reading: and whatsoever else thou shall
learn by reading, I hope it will teach thee to contemn this world.

Farewell. Thine and the Churches servant in the Lord, R. H.

SARAHS sepulture.
GENESIS 23.1.2. 1 And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old:
These were the years of the life of Sarah.

2 And Sarah died in Kiriath-arba, the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan.


HEre begins the fifth Section of the law called (...) Chaije Sarah. Where we
may see how holy Abraham in his old age Paulus ab Eitzen. lib. 1.
is tried with a new and a great domestical cross, viz. deprived of the
crown of his glory, Pro. 12.4. has lost (...) Gnezer his help, (...) Samech
his staff, prop and stay of comfort. Now this is written for our instruction
and consolation. Romans 15.4. Paulus ab Eitzen. lib. 1.
.

Instruction, to teach us that the children of God must not look to live at
ease and quiet in this life. They must not prophecy of peace to themselves,
and that there shall be no leading into captivity, and no complaining in their
streets. They must not dream that always they shall be carried on Eagles
wings, Exodus 19.4. and that all the sheaues in the shocke shall fall down at
theirs, Genesis 38.7. But their dreams must be of Willow trees by the waters of
Babel, Psalm. 137. 1. Of sheaues thrashed with an iron flaile, Seneca Trag.
in a word, of afflictions and crosses. Non est ad astra mollis e terris via,
The way to the kingdom of Heaven is not strawed with flowers, 2 Timothy 3.12. A
Christian must look to be a daily cross bearer; Stella de contemp. mundi.
For ad immortalitatem non nisi per aerumnas patet aditus; A Christian must not
think to walk always in plain and easy paths. Orig. Tom. 1. Hom. 5. sup.
Exodus 14. fol. 37.
Non procliue iter est, quo tenditur ad virtutes, sed ascenditur, and anguste
ac difficulter ascenditur. He must clime hard, it is all up hill, the way
lies, (...), Exodus 14 1.
inter Epauleum and inter Magdalum, Orig. ibid.
as the Sept. read it, that is, by turretting and towering, turning and
winding, as Origin expounds it. Crux vitae aeternae prodromus.


It is via arcta and angusta, Mat. 7.14. strait and narrow; therefore no way
for a Libertine to walk in. Those whom God will have to sail to Heaven must
first be wafted a long by the suburbs of hell, Psa. 116.3. And they whom the
Lord intends shall arrive at the place of bliss, must first creep along by
weeping cross, Luke, 9.23. It is not possible without afflictions to enter
into Christ's Kingdom, Wirth. de vita Christi lib. 5. Cap. 2, page 324.
Mar. 10.38. Ad regnum coeleste peruenitur, non nisi mundana infoelicitate,
cruce and afflictione: non honor, fed onere. In a word, never went any to
Heaven with dry eyes. The first man that ever dyed went to Heaven, but yet
take this by the way, The Thargum Ierusalemy affirms that the cause why Caine
slew Abel was, because holy Abel oppugned Caines hellish and atheistical
opinions, as that there was no world to come, no recompense for good, no
punishment for evil, etc. 1 John 3.12.
The first that ever went to Heaven dyed a Martyr, Genesis 4.8.

Furthermore, here we may take a good hint for Consolation in the midst of our
greatest miseries and highest pitch of our tribulations, namely, That the
dearest servants of God have suffered no less Paulus ab Eitzen lib. 1. in
locum.
, but have endured as great a storm as we can do. Take blessed Abraham the
Father of the faithful for an example, and see how the volume of Scripture
sets forth the prints of his piety and gracious behavior, as also
describes at large his life, and the many occurrences, alterations, crosses
and afflictions, which he suffered in his life; as to instance in some
particulars. First, he is constrained to forsake house and home, kindred and
friends, Genesis 12.1. Secondly, No sooner is he come into that strange land, but
he is enforced away from thence by famine, Genesis 12.10. Thirdly, In Egypt
wonderfully is he perplexed, Genesis 12.12. whether he will save his life, or
hazard his wives chastity. But what need I reckon up more? for wheresoever he
went, he found neighbors outragiously barbarous, which would not suffer him so
much as to drink water out of the Wels that himself had dug with great
labor, Genesis 21.25. Wherefore let us have an eye to a better then this present
life Non est requi^vbi quaeritis ea^ Quaerite quod quaeritis, sed ibi non est
vbi quaeritis. Beatam vitam quaeritis in regione mortis: non est illic. Quomodo
enim beata vitae, vbi nec vitae? Aug. Tom. ^. lib. 4. Confess. cap. 12.
? Happiness is not to be found here.

But to shut up my self within some lists and limits, this Chapter spreads
it self into two branches. The one contains the death of that Noble,
Virtuous, and Religious Lady Sarah. The other, the gracious behavior of
Abraham her Lord at her death: namely, Luctus, he mourns for her: Secondly, a
godly care for her funeral rites, and decent interring of her corpse, verse.
3.4. together with that which may seem strange, Emptio agri, The purchasing of
a place for burial: for though he had as good a title and right thereto as any
man has to his possession, it being conueighed unto him by indenture, and
confirmed by the broad seal of the Covenant Circumcision, yet is this great
Lord glad to crouch to the sons of Cheth. Thirdly, there is specified the
burial it self, verse. 19.

To look back unto the first branch of the Chapter, which in some sort may
not unfitly be called Sarahs Epitaph, is contained these two things: First, the
time when she died; secondly, the place where she died. And besides, the time
and place whereof we presently will speak, she is honored with a (...) autem
sci^e non fuisse morem. Hebraeis neque diuinae Scrip^^^^ genealogias ^exere
mulierum, Damas, Orth: sid: lib. 4. cap. 15 fol. 163.
and whose number of years are recorded of God. In Scripture women are usually
excluded not only from Genealogies, but also from Chronologies: That they
lived is recorded, but how long they lived, and when they died is not
specified. Yet here the Lord by the pen of that man of God Moses, Beda Tom: 5.
in Luc: lib. 1 page: 190:
does set down the length of Sarahs age: First, because she was to be the
mother of all the faithful: 1 Pet. 3.6. as Eve was the mother of all living,
Genesis 3. And therefore the great God of Heaven would have some notes of eminency
set upon her above other women. Secondly, that womankind may know that though
they be the weaker sex, yet their life is no less regarded of God then is the
life of man, and that their death is as precious in his sight, as is the death
of man, Psalm. 116.15. this caution by the way being observed: Si modo
permanserint in fide, in dilectione, and sanctificatione cum sobrietate; 1 Timothy
2.15. If they continue in faith, and love, and holiness with modesty.

The second privilege is, that she is the first for Genesis 50.9. And it is a
great and fearful judgment, and sign of Gods wrath, to have the burial of
an Ass, to have none to lament, none to mourn for them, Jeremy 22.18.19.

To come to the words themselves, because the years of Sarah are distinctly
numbered, and the Hebrews read thus: Lyra in ^^cum.
And the lives of Sarah was an hundred years, and twenty years, and seven
years: the Jewish Rabbis collect that here is commended her beauty and her
chastity: viz. That she was as fair at an hundred, as at twenty; and as chaste
at twenty, as at seven. That Sarah was pulchra, and casta, cannot without
impudency be denied. Pulchra, well featured, well favored, the current of
Scripture is pregnant for it, Genesis 12.11. And the holy Ghost makes her a
figure of the new Testament, and of the heavenly Jerusalem, the mother of us
all, Gal. 4.24.26. The spouse of Christ is fair, Cant. 4.1. Casta, well
nurtured, sweet natured, pure and chaste, is no less evident, 1 Pet. 3.6. in
that the Apostle sets her forth for all women to behold, and as a glass for
them to look into, and an example to follow in their lives and conuersations:
But nevertheless that which the Jewish Rabbis would gather is not from the
words warrantable, such idle dreams afford little or no edification. But from
the words we safely may collect for our comfort and consolation, viz. that the
Lord does number all our years, and whether they be few or many he has noted
them down in his book of remembrances: The Scripture shows that the Lord
does very carefully take a reckning of our life; here Sarahs days are
precisely numbered. And Job 14.5. mentions months and days, how that our
days exact praefiniti sunt, are exactly determined, and the number of the
months which man has to live, are in the Lords own hand. Wherefore no good
man need make any question, but that the Lord has a care of him, and that the
thread of his life does not depend upon the skill of any Aesculapius, but on
the good pleasure of our God: Christianis est haec magna consolatio, ut sciant,
mortem non esse in tyrannorum vi, nec ullius creaturae manu posita^, neue anxij
sint multum de morte, sed velut pueri moriantur, quando Domino placuerit. Luth.
Tom. 3. fol. 253.
Our life is in his hand, Psalm. 31.15. He counts our wanderings, which (God
knows) are many, he puts our tears into his bottle, and all our miseries
are firmly registered, Psalm. 56.8.

Concerning the time we may see the quality of it, Chaiiee, lives, there is
intimated misery; the quantity of it, for many a year, even for the space of
an hundred twenty and seven.

The word Chaiiee, and Psalm. 16.11. Chaiim, is translated in Greek by the holy
Ghost, life: Act. 2.28 Thou have made known unto me (...), the ways of life.
And it is so named in the form plural, Chaijee, lives, for diverse reasons.

First, to note, that in the life of every man are Mel and fell, but more of the
one then of the other. Man's days are evil days, Genes. 47.9. Days full of
labor, Man cannot utter it, Eccles. 1.8. Because every day has suam malitiam,
Mat. 6.32. his grief; and every night suum terrorem, his terror, Psalm. 91.5.
in so much that the life of man is rather calamity then life. A good hint to
put us in memory of the fall in Paradise, and of the transgression against Gods
precept, Genesis 3.16. Multiplicabo aerumnas tuas; I will greatly increase thy
sorrows. Greg. lib 11 Mor. cape.
From this Multiplicabo aerumnas tuas issued our misery. For (as Gregory
speaks) Quid in se habebit fortitudinis, qui natus est in infirmitatem? Quid
aliud ex carne, quam caro prouenire potest? Quid ex misera matre aliud, quam
misera creatura? Can good come out of evil, light out of darkness, strength
out of weakness? Can there come from a woeful mother ought saving a woeful
creature?

Secondly, to point back unto the History going Haran, which is the current
and received opinion of all the Jews, then was she an Orphan and fatherless
almost as soon as she was borne: Genesis 11.27. No Eues (...), Ish Iehouae, the
man, the Lord, Genesis 4.2. Jacobs Shiloh, Genesis 49.10. Daniels Dan. 9.24. Paul's
second Adam, 1 Cor. 15.45. our Lord Jesus Christ. Thirdly, constrained to
forsake her house and home, kindred and Genesis 12.1. and for the space of 62.
years to live a Pilgrim. Fourthly, in this pilgrimage she felt the smart of
want and famine, Genesis 12.10. Egypt Genesis 12.15. as also in Palestina, Genesis
20.4. she was in hazard of her honor, the Genesis 14.14. Seauenthly, she was
encumbered with domestical dissentions, ouertopped by her own servant, no
small vexation, Genesis 16.14. Where by the way in a short passage observe, that
domestical Moses she might truly say: Psalm. 90.10. Optimum in vita labor and
dolor. The best day she saw dawne was full of labor and sorrow.

From all which learn this lesson, and ye may write on the truth thereof;
Nulla calamitas sola, No misery is alone: but (like the waves of the Sea) one
follows in the neck of another: never let us look for rest in this miserable
life, till we come to rest with Christ Jesus in the world to come.

To conclude this point, because that they who in Job 7.2.3. Therefore Moses
does not set down her years in gross, but draws them out at length: q. d.
Sarahs life and days were not so short, that she forgot them, but God did so
remarkeably mark them forth with one misery or another, that she might easily
count them on her fingers ends. That which happened to Sarah is or may be
likewise incident to all the godly: 2 Timothy 3.12. In the book of Exodus chapter
the 15. verse 25. there is this passage, Ibi posuit deus iustitias and iudicia,
There God made the Israelites an ordinance and a Law. Ibi, ubi amaritudo, ubi
sitis, and quod est grauius, Origin Tom. Hom. 7. fol.
sitis in abundantia aquarum, ibi posuit Deus iustitias and iudicia. Alius non
erat locus dignior, aptior, vberior, quam iste, in quo amaritudo est. Where is
this there, God made them an ordinance and a Law? even there, where was the
bitter waters of Marah, there, where the people were like to perish through
thirst, though there was water at will, and in great plenty: There God made
them a Law, and gave them ordinances, no fitter or more convenient place could
be found then it, where was the bitter waters of Marah.

Hitherto of the quality of Sarahs days, now of the quantity and continuance
of the same namely, 127

Although this noble and virtuous Lady endured many a sharp shower, yet
nevertheless the Lord continued the thread of her life for many a fair year:
To make manifest to all ages and generations to come, that the Lord preserved
her life in the midst of death, Psalm. 23.4. If ever any afflictions could have
hastened the death of any, then might they have hastened hers, who for the space
of little less then 90. years, was continually subject to one calamity or
another: In so much that it may seem the worlds wonder; how she was able so
long to endure. But God in whose right hand are length of days Pro. 3.16.
Mortem times, vitam perennem exoptas? in dextra sua longitudinem dierum habet:
Qui viuit and credit in me, non morietur in aeternu^. Ioh 11. Immortalis est,
mortem superavit: Immortali dextra, immortalitatem porrigit: Baynus lib, 1 in
Pro. Salom.
did preserve her life in the midst of those miseries. Miseries cannot shorten
the days where the fear of the Lord is, but sin may, Pro. 10.27. The fear of
the Lord increases the days, but the years of the wicked shall be
diminished. And Isreal's Singer says, Viri sanguinum and dolosi non dimidiabunt
dies suos, Psalm. 55.24. Wicked men shall not live out half their days.

To conclude, though Sarahs life was replenished with a world of woes, yet did
it not want some singular comforts. For this virtuous Lady lived after the
birth of her son Isaac (as appears Genesis 17.17) the space of 36. years. The
Lord Gods good pleasure was, that for some good space she might fol ce her
self with that child so greatly wished, so long expected, and so often
promised. Thus the good God of heaven suffers not his servants to depart out
of this life without some especial comfort, which sweetneth and mitigateth all
other sorrows.

The current of the Scriptures is plentiful to prove this point, Psalm. 42.11.
In the multitude of the sorrows that were in my heart (says David) thy
comforts (Lord) have refreshed my soul. Showing that as the world had a
multitude of sorrows to assault David, so God had a multitude of comforts to
refresh his heart. As our sufferings abound, so consolations abound, 2 Cor.
1.5. Elias for a time mourned and was persecuted, but at the last (besides the
comforts 1 Reg. 19.6.7.18.) there came a chariot which freed him from Iezabels
rage, 2 Reg. 2.11. Sperandum quod qui in vita mortes and infernos tulerint, in
morte mitius h^bituros. Luther Tom. 2. page 75.
The man according to Gods own heart ( David of whom before I spoke) had
anguish and sorrow, dangers and perils, many and mighty, Psalm. 18.4.5. Funes
mortis, the cords or bands of death compassed him about; Dolores inferni, the
sorrows of hell compassed him: he was environed with the pangs of hell and
death, Psalm. 116.3. yea and as it is in the 11 ver. of this Psalm. 116. he
breaks forth into words little less then of infidelity, accusing holy Samuel
the Lords Prophet of a lie, and that he deceived him in the promised kingdom
of Israel. The God of comfort takes not this his servant David out of this
life, when his mind was not in quiet, when he was oppressed with inward and
outward sorrow, Mortem iustorum vocat pacem, quoniam a mundi pugna liberati,
coelestem pa em cosequuntur. Hector Pintus in Isay 57.2.
but gives him a comfortable deliverance, Psalm. 116.6. O the infinite goodness
of a gracious God! Hitherto of the time, now of the place.

And Sarah died in Kiriath-arba, the same is Hebron the land of Canaan.] Sarahs
days and years before were numbered, and found to be full of labor and sorrow:
And now at Hebron those days of misery have an end: now she is at rest from
her manifold troubles, Apoc. 14.13. now peace is come, and she rests in the
bed of peace, Isay 57.2. o praeclarum diem, o blessed and happy hour.

Horat. lib. 2. Car. ad Lycinium Ode. 10.
Our Latin Pindarus could say, Non si male nunc and olim sic erit, It is a
strange storm that lasts ever: Nocte pluit tota redeunt spectacula mane,
which I english by a better Poet, Psalm. 30.5. Weeping may endure for a night,
but joy comes in the morning. Many are the troubles of the Righteous, Psalm.
34.50. These words, Many troubles, are able to amaze many a man; but what
follows? The Lord delivers out of all, This is able to comfort and raise up
any man. In the Gospel of Saint John we have the promise of our Savior, John
16.20. Verily, verily I say unto you: Christi iuramentum, Christianorum sit
fundamentum, says Augustine, Christ's oath and strong asseueration, may be to
christians the stay and staff of consolation. And what is Christ's
asseueration? Ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall rejoice, and ye
shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned to joy, Genesis 8.4. Long was
righteous Noah tossed with a tempest, but at the last, he and his Arc rested
upon the mountains of Ararat: from whence the sweet Singer of Israel took the
original of the Bibles brief, a sentence full of consolation, Psalm. 55.22.
Cast thy burden upon the LORD and he shall nourish thee: Non dabit in aeternum
fluctuationem iusto, The just shall not always be floating, There is never a
Go my people into Egypt, but there is, Come again my people out of Egypt.
There is no leading of them into captivity, but there is a bringing back out
of captivity. There is not Enter Noah into the Arc, but there is, Come forth
again Noah out of the Arc. Non dabit in aeternum fluctuationem iusto. At
Hebron the days of misery have an end.

And to take a survey of this Hebron. This City had three names: At the first
it was called Mamree of the name of the first founder and builder of it, Genesis
13.18. Afterward it was called Kiriath-arba, of one Arba a great man among the
Anakims, who repaired the same, Josh. 14.14. and 15.14. Lastly it was called
Hebron of the nephew of faithful Caleb, 1 Chro. 2.4.2.

It is most certain that at this time it was the Metropolitan and Lady City of
the whole land, having under it many other Cities, Josh. 10.37. As it is said
of Sion, Psalm. 87.3. So it may in some sort be said of Hebron, glorious things
are spoken of it.

First, Antiquity, Number. 13.23. it was an ancient City, seven years ancienter
then Zoan in Egypt.

Secondly, it was a Princely City, even a mansion for a King, Io. 10.3.

Thirdly, it was for Calebs worthy service given to him for an inheritance,
Josh. 14.14.

Fourthly, it was appointed for one of the Cities of refuge, and given for the
Levites to dwell in, Josh. 20.7. Josh. 21.11.12.

Fifthly, in it David first reigned over Gods people, 2 Samuel 2.1.11.

Sixthly, to this came the blessed Virgin the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ to
visit Elizabeth, Luke 1.39.

Lastly, it became a place of burial for many worthy persons, 2 Samuel 4.12.
Here was buried Abraham and his Sarah, Genesis 23.2. Isaac and his Rebecca, Jacob
and his Leah, Genesis 49.31. The first letters of the principal of all their
names, who were buried in one grave, are contained in that one name of Israel.
And in this place some affirm was buried great Adam the first Father of us
all. Hierom


The observation which I collect is, that sin and sinners stain, pollute and
defile all things, Genesis 6.7. Romans 8.20. yea makes each place where they come a
hell, Fulk. in locum.
Apoc. 2.13. Ibi thronus Satanae, vbi pietas profligata, impietas vero summa
regnat; There is a hell, where grace and goodness is shoued out, and where
sin and iniquity bears the sway. So on the other side, wheresoever grace
and goodness is, whersoeuer a good man treads he gives a dignity and a kind
of sanctity unto it, he imprinteth on it and into it a kind of eminency, and
inuesteth it with firm and constant stabilitie. To go no further then my
Text, Kiriath-arba is made excellent by Abraham and Sarah, and from their time
is made a sanctuary and refuge, and a seat for a godly king to sit upon.

What has the spirit of God observed concerning the death of this worthy
personage? Here is never a word of the disease whereof she dyed: not a word of
the last words which she spoke, which questionless were comfortable, holy, and
heavenly. But the holy Ghost windeth up all in three or four words, Mortua est
in Hebron, leaving the rest to our further consideration.

These words, Mortua est, she died in Hebron wishes us to meditate upon the
precedent history: It is well known to all such as are conversant and
exercised in the holy Story, the blessed Bible and book of God; that the
mother of the faithful, Sarah bare her son Isaac at Beersheba, thirty seven
years before her death, Genesis 17.17. compared with Genesis 21.2. As also that at
Beersheba, Abimelech made a league with Abraham, the tenure whereof was: That
the one should not hurt the other, Genesis 21.23. Hereupon Abraham supposing he
should set up his staff, rest for ever, and lay his bones, did there plant a
grove, Genesis 21.33.4. And when the Lord by especial commandment sent him to
mount Moriah to offer his son, for trial of his faith and obedience, Genesis
22.2. he returned back to Beersheba, and there dwelt, Genesis 22.19. Yet for all
this, Sarah dies not there, but dies at Hebron, certain miles distant from
it.

It is very probable that after the death of Abimelech that good and moderate
King, the inhabitants brake the league before made, and troubled Abraham, in so
much that now in his old age, when more then one foot was in the grave, this
godly aged gray headed man, with his aged wife, are constrained to seek a new
seat: Luthar.
and in this their remouall religious Sarah dies. Dies, I say, Paulus ab
Eitzen lib. 1. page 6^1
in absence of her yoake-fellow Abraham, and happily without the presence of
her son and other acquaintance: dies in a strange place, and among strangers.

Chr. Tom. 1. Hom. 66. in Genesis 48. Ne dicat quis miserum in alieno solo vitam
finientem, neque cum qui insolitudine ex h c vita decedit. Neque enin ille
dignus ut miser dicatur, sed qui in peccatis mortuus est, etiam super lectum,
etiam si praesentibus amicis omnibus spiritum exbalet. Et ne mihi frigida illa
verba, dicat aliquis, Quod ille cane vilius est mortuus, nullo famil arium
praesente, neque sepulturae and funus ei contigerunt, etc. Preciosa mors
Sanctorum, Psalm. 116.15. mors peccatorum pessima, Psalm 34 21. Atque etiam sidmi
suae moriatur and muliere and filiis praesentibus. etc.
The profitable uses we are to make, are: First, if the like happen to any
other, that the Lord vouchsafe them not to die in their own country, or among
their own nearest and dearest friends, wanting them to close up their dying
eyes, and perform the duties and offices of love, let it not be imputed as any
sign of Gods heavy and fearful wrath, for though friends be absent, yet the
best friends, God and his Christ, to the faithful are ever present: And when
all forsake, yet they never forsake, Psalm. 27.10. and heaven is no more remote
from one place then from another.

Again the consideration of that which has bin delivered, may be unto all a
continual memorial of sin: It thrust Adam our first parent out of Paradise,
and made him a pilgrim, and has made us all liable unto wavering and
wandering. That the cause of affliction is sin original and actual, Psalm.
51.5.14. occasioned and increased by means of the world, the devil and the
flesh, Ephesians. 2.2.3. appears not only by many places of the Scripture Leuit:
26 14.15.16. Deuteronomy: 28.58.59. Psalm: 32 1.2.39.11: 1 Cor. 11.30.
: But by many examples, as of Adam Genesis 3.14 ad 20.
, of Ioab 2 Samuel 3.28.29.
, of David 2 Samuel 24.15:
, of Miriam Number: 12 10:
, of Gehezi 2 Reg: 5 27:
, of Iehoram 2 Chronicles: 21, 12:14:15.
, of Assa 2 Chronicles. 16:12:
, of the man sick of the palfie Math: 9.2.
, as also of him that was sick thirty eight years lying at the poole
Bethesda, John 5.2.5.14. and many others.

Moreover, the consideration of the premises may serve fitly to stir up in us
all a longing desire of heaven, where all joy is, even riches of pleasure for
evermore, Psalm. 36.8.9. seeing here we have no happiness, no rest, no
quietness. Here is only the valley of tears and weeping, elsewhere we must
look for the happy place of rejoicing, where there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain, Apoc.
21.4.

The same is Hebron in the Land of Canaan.] Where is Hebron situated? Not in
Egypt, but in Canaan. Now Canaan is a type and shadow of the Kingdom of
heaven, which Abraham and his Sarah longed and looked to enjoy, Heb. 11.9.10.
Moreover at Salem a City of Canaan, Melchisedek the Priest of the most high
God, blessed Abraham, reigned and ruled, Genesis 14.18.19. This Melchisedek was a
figure of Christ the true King of peace, Heb. 7.2. Though Sarah dyed out of the
sight of her Abraham, yet she dyed in the sight, favor and grace of her good
God; and in the Land of peace, under the protection of the Lord Jesus Christ
the Prince of peace; who lived at Salem, preached at Salem, and dyed at Salem.
So therefore this worthy and blessed Lady dyed there, and was buried there,
where she might rest not far from the promised Seed, and might rise again with
the promised Seed, Math. 27.53.

But left (my beloved) the stream of discourse carry me beyond the compass
of the time, and I should tire out both my weak spirits, sickly diseased body,
and your christian patience, I will come briefly to some short application
concerning this present doleful occasion, and sigh out, rather then speak out
some few words: esteeming my self in some sort happy, the case thus standing,
that I have the opportunity to show Officia postremi muneris as Augustine
speaks de Verbis Apost. But as I wish all honor bounded within sobriety, to
my honorable Lord and his house, and so likewise to the name and blessed memory
of my most honored Lady and mistrisse, who was no small glory to that house:
So from my heart I wish, that in the performance of this last duty, she might
have been honored with the pains of some grave godly Augustine, some
powerful preaching Ambrose, or some golden tongued Chrysostom, that as she
was honorable and honored in her life, she might have had an honorable person
to have honored her death. O that it had been the pleasure of the Almighty,
that time and place might so have fitted, that the worthy Servant of God, The
B. of London.
who visited her in her sickness, might also have performed this last office
of love for her. The Lord grant unto him and his, mercy at the great and last
day: Remember him, O my God, and wipe not out his kindness that he has showed
on the house of God, and to this Honorable Lady the servant of God.

As it was said of Othniel a good Judge in Israel, Judge. 3.11. That he died,
because (says the gloss) Indignus erat populus habere talem principem, Such a
sinful and unthankful people were unworthy to have so worthy a prince. So may
I truly say, we have lost a worthy peer, Heb. 11.38. Dorothy.
the world was unworthy of her: her nature was answereable to her name, given
by God as a great gift unto the world; (it is no small blessing to be both
honorable and holy, to be great and good) Taken away she is for a great
punishment especially of her servants, Isay 57.1.
who survive her in this world. Such was her conversation in this slippery and
vnwoman-like age, wherein many fall and most do slide, that I am of clear
opinion, that malice it self must needs acknowledge her to be no less then an
earthly angel, and a Phoenix of this world. Thousand thousands better know it
then I am able to tell it: They are either blind and cannot see, or too far
transported with malice and will not see the many noble virtues of this noble
Lady. She was pulchra, prudens, pudica, pia: she was of comely personage, of
discreet and wise carriage, she was loyal to her Lords bed, and loving to his
friends: And for her piety, I know most certainly, that she had more
holiness inwardly, then she ever showed outwardly: her diet was moderate, her
apparel modest and only needful for her estate, comely it was rather then
costly: all ye of that sex read Tit. 2.3.4.5. and when ye have read it once,
let me entreat you to read it over again, there you shall see what virtues
the Apostle requires at your hands, and if you desire to have an example to
illustrate the Apostles doctrine, come hither and behold them here intombed:
And in no one thing did she more excel her self then in the religious and
virtuous education of her noble children, seasoning them to the great good I
hope of this kingdom in the flower of their years, with heavenly Religion. O
daughters of Israel weep: Ambros: Tom. 3. page 17. de obitu fratris Satyri.
Itaque licet priuatum funus, tamen fletus sit publicus, Though for good cause
the funeral and solemnity of her burial was private and upon the night;
Lachrimae pietatis indices, non illices sunt doloris Amb. Tom. 3. page 18 de
obitu fratris Satyri.
yet let your mourning be public and continue day and night. The Marble
weepeth against a storm, a strange storm is now lately fallen: ye have lost
the glory of your sex; to speak in a word, a virtuous Lady, whose price was
far above pearls, Her honorable Lord following most Christianly the good rule
of that golden Trumpeter, Chrysostom. in Ioh. 19. did Tob. 14:10: honestly, seemly
and nobly, perform officium humanitatis, charitatis and dilectionis, giving a
good president to others to show mercy to the dead, as also to the liueing
Chrysostom Tom. 3. Hom. 84. in Ioh: 19: page: 137
a peaceable woman and of a good heart, Eccles. 26.14. one in whose tongue was
clemency, meekness and wholesome talk, Eccles. 36.23 This good gracious Lady,
one of the daughters of the faithful, was for all the world like Sarah the
mother of the faithful: For from the beginning of her life, to the end of her
life subject to the cross. I may well and truly say, Ipsius animam pertransiuit
gladius: Many a sharp sword of sorrow pierced through her heart and soul. Now
at her end without the comfortable presence of her honorable Lord, without the
comfortable presence of her Isaac, her son of joy and comfort, whom the great
God of heaven make heir of all his parents virtues and graces, and (if it be
his blessed will) turn from him all their miseries and calamities, and make
his name more famous then ever theirs was.

But will some say, thus to be crossed is to be cursed: Cursed, a heavy word,
and so to affirm were to condemn the generation of the just, Psalm. 73.15. Yea
and the Lord Jesus Christ the Savior of the Just, Isay 53. For further answer
hereunto, and for the rectifying of men's unsettled judgments, I entreat you
observe, that there are two things which do not a little trouble very often
not only the weak, but even the best in Gods school, Psalm. 73. verses 2. and
13. The one is, Crucis duritia, the godlies great misery: the other is,
Impiorum laetitia, the wickeds seeming excessive felicity.

For the first, Crucis duritia. The estate of the godly, is usually harder then
other men's. If any look for chaste Joseph where shall he find him but in a
prison? If for upright and just Job, Genesis 39.20.
Job 2:8.
with a pot-sheard upon the dunghill? For godly Lazarus, Luke 16.20.
at the Richmans gate full of sores? For the mother of the faithful, tossed
from post to pillar, wandering up and down. Yea, in a word, it is the portion
of the godly, Romans 8.36. Aestimati sumus tanquam oves occisionis, We are
counted as sheep for the slaughter.

For the other, Impiorum laetitia. If misery were equally the portion of every
man, then each might say, Et mea cum multis iuncta querela est: My comfort is,
though it be but a poor comfort, my hap is no harder then other men's. But the
wicked are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued with other
men, Psalm. 73.5. Baals priests, and the priests of the grove are full fed: they
eat at Iezabels table, 1 Kings 18.19. when as good godly Eliah the Prophet is
glad to get his bread by begging, 1 Kin. 17.11.

Surgunt procellae stagni huius, says St Augustine; The storms of this world
arise. Vides malos florere, bonos laborare; Thou see the wicked live in
iollity and prosperity, the godly drooping under penury and poverty: Poor
innocent Isaac led to the slaughter, while scoffing Ismael sits at home: Good
godly Jacob set to tend and keep sheep, whiles my Lord Esau rides on hunting.
Tentatio est, fluctus est; A sore trial, a billow able to beat a man's breath
out of his body. Aug: in Psalm. 25. page 39.
Et dicit anima tua, O Deus, Deus, haeccine est iustitia tua, vt mali floreant,
boni laborent? And does thy soul with sobs and sighs say; Is this, O good
God, thy just and indifferent carriage of business? That bloody Cain and his
sinful race should take the Tymbrell and the merry Harp, solace and rejoice
themselves in the sound of the Organs, Genes. 4.21. when if we look for
Daniel, we shall find him in the Lions den: for Jeremiah in the dungeon:
for Isaiah tortured upon the rack: for the Apostles of Christ in a common
loathsome Goal: Acts 5.17. for the mother of the faithful, living in a
strange land, and dying in a strange land? Dicis Deo, Haeccine est iustitia
tua? Et Deus tibi respondet, Haeccine est fides tua? Haeccine tibi promisi, aut
ad hoc Christianus factus es, vt in seculo floreres? Say thou to God, Is this
thy justice and righteousness? And God says again to thee, Is this O man thy
faith and confidence? Was there ever any such stipulation or promise, which
passed betwixt thee and me at the time when thou tookest that glorious name of
Christian upon thee, that all should outwardly go well.

Prosper Epigran page 209.
Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam discrimina desunt,
Et cum quo certet men's pia semper habet.
Quae carnem oblectant, sancto sunt noxia cordi:
Contra animi legem praelia corpus habet.
Pulsant exterius diuersis motibus hosts:
Intus civil est, and sociale malum.
We must not in this world look that our flesh shall have rest, but we must
look to be troubled on every side, Fightings without and terrors within, 2
Cor. 7.5.

Since the fall of Adam no man passes to Paradise, but by the burning
Seraphins, Genesis 3.24. No man to the land of Canaan, but by the bitter waters of
Marah, Exodus 15.23. No man to Jerusalem but by mount Caluery and the valley of
weeping.

The tenure whereby we hold heaven is the Cross, Mat. 16.24. and 10.38. That
was the Indenture betwixt Christ and his Father, that he should not enter into
heaven, but that he must first suffer, Luke 24.26. O fools, and slow of heart
to believe all that the Prophets have spoken; Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his glory? And it is the indenture betwixt
Christ and us, 2 Timothy 3.12. Whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer afflictions.

The mouth that cannot lie, that faithful and true witness, Apoc. 3.14.
says, If any will follow me, tollat crucem suam, let him take up his cross,
ego meam, ille suam, I have taken up mine, and he must take up his, Luc. 9.23.
A Christian must be a daily Crosse-bearer: For, Aug: Tom. 6. de Pastoribus.
exceptus a passione flagellorum, exceptus a numero filiorum; This is good
Catholic doctrine, Heb. 12.6. The Lord scourges every son that he
receives. It is a shrewd sign that he shall never receive the crown, who did
not first taste of the cross. Heb. 12.8.

In the Book of Job there is made this inquision, Job. 28.12.13. Sapientia
vero ubi inuenitur? Et quit est locus intelligentiae? the answer is, Non
invenitur in terra suaviter viventium, as the vulgar latin reads: So may I
say concerning Piety, the fear of God, grace and goodness, where are they to
be found? Non in terra suaviter viventium, Not in the Land which lives in
pleasure, Iam. 5.5. If you find a land of good fellows, if you seek for grace
and goodness, you must seek some where else, for you shall not find them
there. But to return unto this worthy Lady, though she were afflicta, yet was
she not derelicta, Psalm. 37.26. She had her many comforts, Olive plants about
her table, Psalm: 128.3. not one but many dutiful children, children tractable
to piety and goodness, children free from the common stain of this sinful
age. Moreover she died in good time for her self, though too soon for me and
many more: Sibi mature, aut mihi cito.
she came to the grave in a good age: to the grave often before wished, often
before desired, Phil. 1.23. Often have I heard her utter the effect of these
following verses: Vita diu mihi poena fuit, me nulla voluptas
Incitat, ut cupiam longius esse super.
Mors melior vita, certa mihi mente videtur,
Quae ridimit cunctis pectora fessa malis.


But my spirits fail, my passions will not suffer me speak, the fountain is
full, therefore well may it ouerflow: we therefore that do remain have this
for our comfort, and it is no small comfort, that she lived and died in a Land,
where under a gracious Prince of peace the word of life is published: and in
this vale of misery she took up Christ's cross, she passed the burning
Seraphins, therefore has she entered into Paradise Habent omnes animae cum de
seculo exierint diversas receptiones suas, habent gaudium boni, and mali
tormenta. Aug. in Ioh: 11. Tract. 49. page: 442.
: she did drink many a deep draught of the bitter waters of Marah, therefore
she has set foot into the Land of promise the true Canaan: she has climbed
up mount Caluarie, and waded many a wet footstep through the vallie of weeping,
therefore she is ascended mount Sion, and come to the City of the living God,
the Celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to
the Assembly and Congregation of the first borne, and to God the Judge of all,
and to the Spirits of just and perfect men, Heb. 12.22. where with Christ Jesus
she lives for evermore Fideles etiam defuncti, membra Christi sunt: quamvis
ergo cum suis corporibus nondu^ sunt, iam tamen eoru^ animae regnant cum illo:
Aug.
.

But I must leave thee, Noble Lady: thy body to rest in thy grave of peace
until the great Resurrection, when you shall receive full blessedness Quum
vero ab hoc somno evigilabunt, simul omnes quod promissum est, accepturi sunt.
Promissa enim est fidelibus resurrectio carnis, mortis consumptio, vita aeterna
cum Angelis: Aug. Tom: 9. Tract: 49. in Euang. Ioh. page 442.
, and thy Soul to be with the God of peace, and with the blessed Angels, and
all the congregation of the first borne, where you sing the song of Moses, a
song of victory and thanksgiving, Reu. 15.3.

And as for you my Christian auditorie, take this by the way, and think upon
it, This place and this Country is, Terra suaviter viventium, a Land that
lives too much in pleasure, too much given to the common sin of this age,
Hor epist. lib. 1. ad Albium Tibullum.
that is, too many are, Epicuri de grege porci: to english it in the Apostles
phrase, 1 Cor. 15.32. Beasts of Ephesus given to eating and drinking To remedy
this great evil which has bin the ruin of many of his Majesty's Subjects,
the wasting of their goods, and loss of their lives in these parts: I wish the
worshipful Justices would be pleased to give ear to these my requests: First,
That no Alehouse be suffered upon the edge of Commons, and in obscure places,
where Rogues, and Thieves may resort. Secondly, not to license any in a
village, when the Minister thereof and all the whole Parish shall think it
unfit. Thirdly, not to license any, who has justly stood for misdemeanors
excommunicated a year or two. Fourthly, when the abuse shall grow so great,
that poor women out of the anguish of their souls shall crave aid, that
their husbands may not spend all at the pot, and they statue, that then there
be made some redress. Lastly, that painful Preachers or other Officers may be
heard, and not checked, when they justly complain at your Benches against such
places as suffer drinking, carding and fighting upon the Sabbath days in the
time of Divine Service. If these requests be just and good, I request you
harken unto them.
. Consider that here lies a Saint, therefore be not so gross sinners: Here
God has erected the standard of his Word to his people, Isay 49.22. His banner
is displayed, and whosoever are guided hereby, to them appertain peace and
mercy, Galath. 6.16. Here the great Trumpe is blown, Isay 27.13. O foelicem
populum qui agnoscit clangorem, Psalm. 89.15. O blessed is the people that know
the joyful sound, giving ear unto this voice, for they, O Lord, shall walk
in the light of thy countenance, Job. 14.23.

And (I pray you) is not this his word or voice, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your
selves, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and
drunkenness.

But at this time I will press this point no more, here I will abruptly end,
and that portion of Scripture, which was lately my text for a Sermon, I will
make now the conclusion of this my Sermon. Now the God of peace, that brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through
the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to
do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

