GERARDO THE VNFORTVNATE SPANIARD.

OR A PATTERN FOR LASCIVIOVS LOVERS.

Containing several strange miseries of loose AFFECTION.

Written by an ingenious Spanish Gentleman, Don Goncalo de Cespedes, and
Meneces, in the time of his five years Imprisonment.

Originally in Spanish, and made English by L. D.

London printed for ED. BLOVNT.

1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, IN NAME AND NOBLENESS Brothers, WILLIAM Earl of
Pembrooke, Lord High Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, And PHILIP, Earl
of Montgomerie, Baron of Shurland, Knights of the most Honorable Order of the
Garter: His GERARDO and Himself, with his truest wishes for all increase of
felicity to both their Lordships, D. D. L. D.

Right-Noble, My Lords:
TRanslations (as says a witty Spaniard) are, in respect of their Originals,
like the knottie wrong-side of Arras-Hangings: But by his wits leave, as the
fair outside could ill be seen, without help of the knots within; no more
can the fame of a wel-deseruing Author be far spread, without the labor of a
Translator. This made me, for the present Spanish Author his sake, venture to
make him speak English, and to do a public good, by publishing the moral
Examples contained in the present Tragical Discourses. Now, that I presume to
offer my weak endeavors to the view and protection of both your Lordships, I
shall no way despair of a pardon; since the world, that takes notice of your
Noble Goodness, (the first, best of your honored Titles) gives me assurance,
that (though a stranger, rather then an intruder) I shall be esteemed

To your Honors both, a devoted Servant, LEONARD DIGGES.

TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader,
I Present to thy view six exemplarie Discourses of Gerardo the unfortunate
Spaniard, written originally by Don Goncalo de Cespedes a Spanish Gentleman,
who in the time of five years of his Imprisonment, under the borrowed Name of
Gerardo, personates himself in his own misfortunes. And so partly with truth,
partly with fiction, makes up a first and second Part. Something there may be
in the weauing and contexture of the Work, that may give thee delight: sure I
am, thou shall find profit in it; especially, if thou be such, as has any way
been subject to wanton lust, or loose affection. The best is, if the Work
fall short of expectation, let the Authors credit look to it; for a Translator
has no commission to better (suffice to come near) his Original. Some of the
Verses in the Spanish Copy, I have purposely left out, as being (in my
judgment) unworthy to be ranked with the Prose; others I have altered, to
make them more suitable to an English Reader. One by-discourse I have left
wholly out, as superstitiously smelling of Papisticall Miracles; in which I
have no belief. To forestall thee no longer, Begin and read; and though I
undergo thy hard Censure, yet I will not be so uncharitable, as not to bid thee

Farewell. L. D.

THE TRAGIC POEM
To the READER.
THou that art taken with a female smile;
Thou, whom a look, a sigh, or tears beguile
Of Wind-like Woman: Thou, that at first sight
Part'st from thy thoughts, and give thy mayden-right
To irreligious Man, whose smooth-tongu'd Art
Made up in Oaths, steals on thy foolish heart:
Both you, and all inthralled Lovers, read,
Whether my tears may just acceptance plead.
Still the frightfull noise increased, and the Shepherds their fear; till one
more hearty then his fellows, taking a Box out of his Scrip, with Flint and
Steel soon kindled the Tinder, and lighted some shrubbe sprigges, though wet,
by reason of Rain that fell, and bidding his companions follow him, taking
their Slings and Sheepe-hookes, they m^rched down the Hills side, and with
their lighted Sticks (serving them for Lanternes) guided toward the doleful
sound: Soon they approached, where in an intricate thicket of Bushes and
Briars, they might hear a voice wrapped up, as it were in sighs, bringing
them so fearfully on, that though they drew near, they made a pawse; till
hearkening more wistly to the sad complaints, they plainly ghessed them to
proceed from some wretched creature, and the rather, since they might hear the
Author of that sorrow, crave aid and favor of just and compassionate Heaven:
Whereupon (laying all fear aside) they rushed through the rude Bushes, and
bushy Trees, at one of whose strong Trunkes (by the help of their lighted
shrubbes) they might behold a (dead as it were) dismayed Youth laid on the
withered Grass, his face pale and wanne, his teeth fast closed, and his eyes
eclipsed, only now and then with a doleful sigh he would accompany his
mortal pangs, which springing from a woeful cause, and in the dead of night,
might doubtless occasion the fearful effect here related.

The sad spectacle stirred up the poor men's compassion, which they showed and
celebrated with their pitying tears. The wounded party had dyed the near
thick grass with his blood, in which the rage and torment he felt, made him
furiously welter, his pain seeming to be such, that after each groan, they
expected his life's end. The Beholders, though they entreated him of his
disaster, could know nothing, for much loss of blood had made the party quite
senseless; so that seeing it bootelesse to satisfy their desires, they
sought, if it were possible, to help his hurts, to which purpose they began
gently to unclothe him: and vnbuttoning a thin Tyssue Doublet he wore,
perceived two wounds in his breast, which (though bloody, deep) yet appeared
not to be mortal; besides which, he had other three (less dangerous) in
several parts of his body: by all which, they might perceive, that the Authors
of them were most willing, not to have left their work unfinished. Their best
and wholesomest purpose was to cut down boughs, which tying and fitting
together, as well as the shortness of time would permit them, they made a
carriage like a Beer, on which as the compassionate Swains were about to have
laid the dismayed body, so to have conveyed him to a neighboring Village their
habitation, the trampling and neighing of a Horse, that seemed to be near,
stayed them; and being as yet scarce free from their former fear, a small
matter was sufficient to affright them: for imagining some came back to
dispatch the bloudlesse Corpse, without expecting the certainty; cold in their
commenced charity, they swiftly took them to their flight. But the same
effect, which the Horses noise caused in them, frighted the same Horse, who yet
had not forsaken his wounded Master, till now that they with their lights flew
through the thicket, so amazed the swift Beast, that he (like wind) making
contrary speed, they soon lost sight of him, which made them think, that he
whom they left among the Trees, was some person of quality, and owner of that
Horse, which made them afresh desirous to put their pious intent in execution:
and so turning back, and not once suffering the wounded person to come to
himself out of a deep Trance in which he lay* putting him upon the Boughy
Coffin, and rearing him on their strong shoulders, they went toward their
Village.

In this manner they marched through the intangling Wood, till such time, as
(skillful) they got out of it, and willing to take a narrower path, which
served them as a shorter cut to the neighboring Village, somewhat out of the
rode way, they might hear great cries, humming of Slings, barking of Dogs,
such a noise as made them think verily all the Mountainous Inhabitants were up
in Arms.

But first let me show the cause of this notable Vproare, which, though
needless, suffice proceeded from those rude and barbarous Mountainers.

You heard how the three Shepherds with their fearful flight, frighted the
swift Horse, who by his Masters hard fortune, was there loose, grazing in the
Desert Mountain. It happened next, as these charitable men's (...) luckes would
have it, that the furious speed of the swift Beast awoke certain Keepers, that
belonged to the Woods, to look to the Game, and such recreations as were
committed to their charge* who straight stood on their Guard, supposing
somewhat else to be the cause and breaker of their rest: when ((...) risen
from the ground, and looking what way the bloudlesse body was brought toward
them) seeing so many lights, ((...) doubtless their fear made them seem
flaming Aetna's to them) and not knowing what might be the cause, or who
should walk in that unseasonable time and manner, full of astonishment, and,
like madmen, (though wanting courage to expect the issue) not staying one for
another, they ran to the nearest Village to cry out for help: and this with
such howling and strange clamor, that they raised all the neighborhood and
adjoining Farmers up in Arms: and the hurry was so much the greater, at what
time (crying out for help) the fearful name of the King and his Justice was
interposed; for then, Men, Women and Children, some with Halberts, others with
Lances or Swords, (at the Bells ringing) ran which way the Keepers affirmed
there were some setting the King his VVoods on fire; who conducting the
troops, brought them speedily to the place, from whence the poor careless
Shepherds were vvalking fair and softly in prosecution of their charitable
office; sometimes exchanging their burdens, otherwhiles resting upon the bare
and naked Rocks, so that ere they could get to the Village, these cruel
people were ready to encounter them: and these were the cries and noises the
secure Shepherds heard, upon their sally from the enclosed Mountain. No
sooner saw the Savage Crew those strange lights, when straight (as by aim)
they discharged a thick shower of stones, making the hollow Valley resound
with their wouen Slings: wherefore the poor men (seeing themselves so hardly
entreated, and that though they cried out to the others to hold their hands,
'twas but in vain, since they could not be heard) left their burden, and fell
to their defense, at what time it grew to be toward day-breake.

(...) again restore; and, so with some comfortable remedies the Surgeon
applide, the Gentleman came a little to himself; only for fear of the worst
it was ordained, that none should trouble him with speaking to him, till he
might more strongly recover his Senses, without which he remained most part of
that day. When he grew at last to be better, and considered in how different a
place he now was, from that, where he received his vvounds, he could not but
extremely vvonder, and (calling to mind his misfortunes) grew somewhat
passionate, and addressing himself to the Noble Gentleman, that never so much
as once parted from his beds-head, requested him to tell him, in what place he
was, or how brought thither: In which, the Noble Leriano (for so was the
compassionate Gentleman called) lovingly satisfide him, desiring him withal
not to grieve himself with the thought of any thing save health, which he and
his servants were as careful of as their own. At which the unfortunate
Gentleman was somewhat more courageous, and yielding his due thanks, thought
fit to be silent, and so as much as his wounds would permit him, rested
joyful, seeing his lost and dead hopes of recovering new life, so much
bettered.

It pleased Heaven after to restore him wholly, reserving him to other
innumerable unfortunate accidents and misfortunes; and now within some few
days he understood more largely from Leriano in what manner he found him;
who told him likewise, that himself was a Branch of that Ancient Stock of
the Noble Perafanes de R^bera, and borne in the Royal City of Seuil (Spaines
Babylon) from whence he was traveling about certain Law suites to the City
and Court of Valladolid, which voyage he now more willingly deferred out of the
care of his health, then undertook, that he might be feasted and welcomed by
his kindred and friends: Here the unknown Youth was as thankful, as
contented at such true and faithful professions, thinking now his miseries and
wounds well inflicted, since by their sad occasion, they acquainted him with so
worthy a friend.

Not long after, he was able to rise, but not so boldly, as to venture out of
his Chamber, where he wanted nothing to entertain time with, or divert
Melancholy, which by fits exceedingly afflicted him: and at one time amongst
the rest in Lerianos absence (who was walked into the Town) falling into his
sad Dumpes, and willing to beguile his fancy, he called for a Lute, (which
cunningly tuned) with a clear Voice and pleasing Dittie he mustered up his
life's former passages, in the ensuing Verses.

Soul. Since she has proved untrue,
Leave to love her, bid, Adieu:
Hope, for naught from such an ill,
But to be a Prisoner still:
Can she ever be reclaimed,
That has thus her honor stained?
Vanish, vanish, (my desire)
Loyal thoughts (like lingering fire)
You consume me. Hence, Away,
Since your Mistress went astray.
Soul. Remember to forget
Her, whose falsehood haunts thee yet:
Try no more, nor longer prove,
What it is to live in Love;
Least, so, (like a sudden Thief)
Thou be seized by winged grief.
Say, with sorrow she should pine,
'Twas no base neglect of thine
Caused it: her fault sets thee free:
Reason bids, Take liberty.
Soul. Thou mai'st forget, I know,
Justly, her, thy cause of woe,
Who abhorred thee; Nature weak,
Passion (though) would gladly speak,
Says, I loved her once: It Is right:
But, then, wanton appetite
More, art thou (my wronged soul)
And may flesh and blood control.
They are mortal, but thy name
Still must have a purer fame.
Soul. No longer weep: forbear,
(Patience bids) to shead a tear.
Cruel she that lost all troth,
Well may teach thee now to loath.
Blame no birth or crosser Star,
But their sex that faithless are:
Soul! yet weep (though) stillament
(All my life) in woe be spent:
Least (forgetting to complain)
Thou be drawn to Love again.
Soul. Clarinda, and sad moan,
You that never leave me alone,
You, to hear me, weary still:
But content and pleased to kill.
Now you hear a grieved Lover
(All his former hopes given over)
Promise to forget: which way,
Shall I t^en forget, Soul? Say!
I: begin: for that is the most
Leave to Love; since all faith's lost.
Whilst he was yet even in the middle of his Song, Leriano entered, but loath to
interrupt him, staid, till by a scorching sigh, with which his Song had end, he
knew the Music had wrought in him, her accustomed effect of sadness; so he
came nearer, where he found him laid on his bed, and his eyes distilling
tears: which in vain he sought to hide from his dear friend, who coming
toward him with open arms, said; There is no reason, gentle Sir, that from a
stranger, and one that showed so much good will as my self, you should
conceal that grief, which, by what now, and at other times you have
demonstrated, I conceive to be very great: and if I, till now, have not been
very earnest to demand the cause, you may know it was not willingly to reduce
such pitiful accidents to your memory, as might happily have endangered your
health, in which you are now so forward. You must not but satisfy me, and let
me know vvithall, who, and whence you are: For I vow to Heaven and you, that
be it necessary for your sake and revenge, I will hazard Honor, Life, and
Fortune. I rest fully assured (replide the concealed Youth.) Noble friend
Leriano, of the pure affection you have showed me, moving you to save my life,
by restoring it, and giving me the being I now enjoy, which, next Heaven, I owe
to your self; and though the remembrance of my past disasters be most grievous
to me; yet in respect of my engagements to your self, and because I would you
should perceive how much I desire to fulfill your commands, though I renew old
sores, unrip ancient wounds, I will satisfy your wish, giving a short account
of my inward thoughts, youthful days, and young employments, as forerunners of
my present storms and shipwreck.

I cannot sufficiently express Leriano's gratitude, to hear his friends
willingness to the thing he so heartily desired, and thinking each minute an
Age till he began the promised Discourse, he commanded his servants to ^^ue
them, and with a cheerful countenance and still attention gave ear to what
follows.

My name, worthy Friend, is Gerardo: The great and famous Village of Madrid
(most worthy Mansion of our Catholic Monarks) my loved Country, the common
general Mother of different people, and remote Nations. Near her high-reared
walls, by whose ruins her ancient strength is yet seen, is the house of my
Ancestors, ennobled as well by their births, as it is own Antiquity; there was
I borne, there first bred. It were needless to enlarge my Discourse, by
recounting the tender exercises of my infancy, therefore I will begin from my
yeer's of fifteen, which accomplished, I was forced to obey my Father, by
accompanying him to one of the best places of Government in Castile, which his
Majesty had as then newly bestowed on him. My elder Brother Leoncio went also
along with us, a valiant young fellow of towardly hopes; all of us were most
iocund with our Fathers new fortunes, our journey was short, for in four
days we arrived, where (according to custom) we were solemnly welcomed. My
Father took possession of the Government, and to the general satisfaction went
on in his Triennium.

This was the famous City of Tal^ora, one of the best and most populous in the
Kingdom of Toledo; whose situation is fructified with the silver streams of
gold-bearing Tagus, and makes it one of the most pleasant and delightfullest
upon all his Banks: the Inhabitants are loving, courteous, and affable,
particularly the Gentry (of the best qualified houses of Spain) most worthy
Pillars to so ancient a foundation.

Here (me thought) I was ever at home, with friends of mine own Age and
rank: our exercises for the most part were riding, running at Bulls, at the
Ring, Maskes, Barryers and the like, with (which delighting the multitude) we
made our selves cunning practitioners. In the field, Hawking and Hunting were
our sports, for both which that Country is plentifully provided. These, and the
others, that took up our whole times, were my chief delights, to a heart yet
untouched by loves flames: which made me as contented, as free; as satisfied in
my self, as by others envied. Yet not long could I so boast, not long was I
thus joyful: how soon from a freeman became I a bondslaue? From merry to
melancholy; from tractable, to the contrary; from happy, to unfortunate?
Sooner then I could with (dear Leriano) shall you hear the change. Amongst
many other shows and Triumphs we usually had, one drew near, appointed by our
City in honor and commemoration of the blessed Virgin Mary's happy Nuptials,
much celebrated throughout all Castile, at which time, an infinite number of
common people, and great concourse of Gentry resort thither, as well from the
Court and the City of Auila, as the Imperial Toledo, and other parts of the
Kingdom. The wished day came on, being the six and twentieth of April,
duskish and cloudy, a season natural to that Climate, or belike Phoebus knew
his beams might well be spared, where so many, so beautiful lights would
appear. We were two and thirty Gentlemen, that in several colors entered the
Marketplace: my self performed the office of Stickler betwixt my Father and
Brother Leoncio. The sport began, the Bulls were let loose and chased, the
whole solemnity, to the general good liking and applause of the Spectators,
ended in a well-ordered skirmish of Canes on Horseback, there having happened no
disaster or mischance at all, save mine, which considering the state it has
now brought me too, was the greatest could arrive.

At my first passing over the place on horseback, my careless eyes chanced to
glance at a Bay-window, (where certain Gentlewomen strangers were placed) they
pawsed a little as being attracted, no less by the novelty, then the goodly
presence: Back I went with some other friends and Gentlemen, that I might
reenioy a suller sight of those beauties, and fair and softly, as prauncingly
as our Horses could pace, we drew near, passing to and fro, with more turns
and windings, then does a poor prisoners restless imagination in a loathsome
dungeon. Neither had we (think I) till this time quitted the place, had not
the Gentlewomen, seeing all ended, raised themselves up to go down to their
Coaches that attended them beneath. Here my foundation failed, and from this
instant began the ruins of my fiered Troy.

One there was amongst those Ladies, that till the present still masked,
discovered so rare a beauty in so young a body, that we were all suddenly
astonished. Me thought (unaccustomed to such brunts) the fair creature even
tore and parted my heart, to make it part of her tender own: For sure I am, by
the effect, any one might judge how ill I was wounded, so powerful piercing
was the sovereign glaunce of her eyes. At her rising up, she approached so
near the iron window, that s^eing her lay her fair hands on the forepart of
the Bay, ^ was bold to tell her, The hardness of those bars (fair Mistress) is
not safe, from being softened by those snowy hands, if happily they partake with
the virtue of your scorching eyes, since with their rays, you melt the most
obdurate flinty-hearts.

These, and such amorous flashes, I imperfectly blundered out: she only
answered with a gracious smile, and paying our salutations with a Curtsie,
followed her company.

At entering her Coach, I alighted to have held the Boot, to which, neither
her self, nor another Dame (I knew since to be her Aunt) would by any means
consent: only as they entered, I passed a complement, and they returned
thanks. I asked them whence they were? They told me of Auila: had it not been
for being noted, I should have known their lodging, the end and limit of their
Voyage. I could scarce take leave, that Angel had so transported me: but
seeing there was no remedy, was forced to patience. They were gone, and left
me so amazed, that I had scarce memory to get to Horse, or to perceive that my
friends expected me. Yet up I got, and gave order to a servant, to watch where
the Coach stopped, and to learn truly who they were that went in it. This
done, we gave a turn about the joyful City, though the distemper, (caused by
the late accident, I felt within me) made me weary of my friends irksome
company, of whom (faining my self not well) I took leave. By the time I got
home it was night; so I shifted clothes, and (my mind brooking no delays)
went into the street, and Senabria with me, so was the servant privy to my
secrets, called; him I willed to direct me to the house of my beloved
stranger, and likewise to tell me what he had heard of her quality: who
said, she lay in one of the richest men's houses in the City, whose Niece she
was, and that she, who accompanied her in the Coach, was her Aunt, that they
were within two days upon a journey of Devotion, to the Monastery of
Guadalupe. So that now thinking I had relation enough for my purpose, I would
needs fetch a turn in the street, hoping that the very sight of those walls
that concealed my Sun from me, might give me some comfort. But one of my
nearest friends prevented me, who hearing I was not well, came to visit me:
we straight saluted, embracing, as if (...) long time we had not seen each
other. He vvondred at the novelty, and having power of commanding friendship
on his part, soon forced from me the cause of my malady.

Fernando (so was my best friend called) was glad in his soul, that my
sickness was no other then what I made known; and endeavor with his best
persuasions to divert me from my purpose, telling me by what I had let him
know of the sudden departure of those Dames, how small hope there was to
obtain my desire. But finding me fixed, it behooued him to give way: so
together we went to the street and house of which Senabria had informed me;
and passing under the vvindowes, I might see at one of them, being the
lower-most, the North-Starre that guided me; her eyes contending to give light
with those rays that showed in the still night: She and another Dame of like
stature, and (in likelihood) years, were discoursing together: that party
was known by Fernando, to be Francisca, Daughter to Segundo Octauio, owner of
the house, whose quality was before mentioned.

Feign would I at the instant have spoken; but Fernando thought it not fit too
suddenly to affright the game; so we drew nearer by degrees, only so long,
till we thought we might be discovered by the Moons light: and they seeing
us make a stand, would have broken off their Discourse, clapped to the
vvindowes, and retired, had not Fernando (as having more freedom) stayed them,
by saying, Let not our boldness (having so good a discharge as the ^ight of
your beauties) interrupt your pleasing Conference; or if this may not serve for
an excuse, you may punish us, as you would household servants.

Francisca, a little frighted, thus answered; If it were lawful for us to
make longer stay, we should not greatly complain of your boldness; the
rather, since your humility has thus satisfide; only the growing late, makes
us of force retire. Nay, but said I (removing with this occasion) you cannot
but leave us doubtful of your displeasure, which I shall esteem as my
greatest unhappiness.

All this while my Divine stranger was silent, when, applying my self to her,
I thus said; I beseech you, fair Mistress, be not you of that Ladies rigorous
mind: since your sweetness is shortly to leave us, to make so long stay from
this Country.

Do you know me, quoth she, with a gracious disdain, or that my departure
shall be so soon? Francisca now demanded of Fernando (whom she knew) who I
was; and so I had leisure, to speak more freely to my Mistress, saying, If
(fair creature) you remembered but so well him that this afternoon kissed your
hands, and to them rendered a heart more firm then these irons, as he in his
inflamed breast has the rare image of your face engraven; sure I am, you could
not so neglectfully answer me.

I understand not your meaning (said she) though (me thinks) ever since your
beginning to speak, I should know you: but the habit you now wear, is so
different from what you had on in the afternoon, that you need not suppose
me to be forgetful. Loath I was to spend the short time in fruitless
Discourse, and therefore to the purpose demanded, saying, When is your sad
departure? or to say truer, my sudden death? and this with so faint and
pitiful a voice, that my Mistress touched with my feeling, with some little
earnestness, (though smilingly) answered, I should think you were sorry for
my departure, but that I guess you can dissemble. I have neither time, nor
place, fair Dame, said I, to express my just sorrow in, which is such, when
I think of your absence, that if I follow you not, the being mine own
desperate executioner, must be my latest refuge, serving as an Antidote against
the poison that burns and consumes me.

You do much endeere your sickness, said she, (giving as it were to
understand that I flattered her) which if it be such as your presentment
shows, my knowledge is small, and my ability less to apply a brief remedy:
though I suspect, that as you grew quickly sick, you will the sooner recover:
for it is the fashion of you men, to make things far difficult with us, and
for your advantages to facilitate and level Mountains of impossibilities.
Let Us have plain Song, if you will have me agree in the tune; and that you may
know, I would not willingly contradict you, nor prove nice to the much good
will you profess unto me: you shall understand, that two days hence I am for
Guadalupe, and hope my return may be this way; and both now and then, if (...)
any thing I may serve you, believe, and command me, and see whether I be
thankful, or neglect your vows, though perhaps they be but flatteries.

Thus far held on our Discourse, (my self the ioyfullest man alive) when
some one calling from within, they were forcst to be gone; and Francisca only
stayed to utter this. Fernando tells me, you have an excellent Musician serves
you; and I having extolled our Country voices to my Cousin Clara, desire you
that she may be satisfied in hearing, and I prove no Liar in relating: and to
morrow about this time we will here expect you. Feign would I, with the
greatest thanks that might be, have kissed her hands for the favor she did
me: but her farewell was so sudden, it was impossible: and so Fernando and my
self passing through the street, having appointed to meet again next night,
took leave and departed.

The remainder of the night I spent in a thousand several imaginations, all
proceeding from the difficulty of the enterprise I had in hand; till the
clear morning giving truce to my confused thoughts, I got out of their
Labyrinth, and from home likewise: and having notice where my Mistress used to
here Mass, I and my friend Fernando were there present, where I received from
my life's Owner, in as much as her amorous but wary, looks, would permit rich
and inestimable favors.

Thus passed we the morning, and the afternoon in often walking through her
street, till night came on: and being fit time, with my dear friend and the
Music we drew near: and finding all hushed and quiet, standing where we did
the night before, my Musician began to sing what I had instructed him, to the
sweet melody of a vvelltuned Violl.

If, like Phoebus, in the West,
Now thy fairer eyes at rest,
Weary, longer, are to see
One, that dies for want of thee:
Then, must I of force (my Dear)
Hope the morn will soon be here:
And a Truce to slumber give,
So shall I return to live.
Shall I; of those Suns, thine eyes,
Be the flower that at Sunne-rise,
Spreds with him, and shuts again,
When he dives into the maine?
But, thine eyes might plainly see
Yesterday that truth in me,
Since, when they were present, I
Lived; (but they being gone) now dye.
So that now, at thy command,
Life and death are at a stand:
Doubt not, Coward: her good will
How can a good Angel kill?
If, a wretched Prisoner, whom
Law and a foul fact does doom,
Once, by chance, spy but the face
Of his Prince, he hopes for grace.
Iustlier may thy beauty give
Me assurance, then, to live:
Since I happy was, to view
That: no guilt or crime else knew.
Eagles by the Sun do prove
Right, or Bastard brood; so Love
My amazed daz^ling eyes
Of thy splendor purifies.
Love, that safely does incline
Me to trace those eyes of thine:
Fearing not what e're betides,
Once to lose my sovereign guides.
And, although those North-Starres now
Darkened are, and thy fair brow;
Yet, my Love, the Loadstone, may
Soon discover lightsome day.
Just as he began, the window opened, but not a creature to be seen, which
made us not a little wonder, (ignorant who within might keep my Mistress and
her Cousin from appearing) but the Musician with that sweet Sonnet following
which he sung, interrupted our doubtfulnesse.

Whether, or fixed, or wandering, Lights of Heaven!
(Though lesser Tapers, to the Moon, you be)
Bright Scutcheons of the gods, and Planets seven
Whose cheerful influence does best agree
With amorous minds: a breast most pure and even
Inuokes your fair aspects; Look down on me,
And (as your powr's, me power to Love have given;)
Light her I love, that she my thoughts may see.
And oh, thou cold and more then sober night!
That in dull calm'nesse sleep'st until clear day,
In absence of thy Suns all-glorious light.
Were thou like me (sad night) to go thy way
By absence grieved, to lose so rich a sight;
Tears, sorrows Tribute; and not sleep, thoul'dst pay.
This Sonnet ended with so sweet a cloze, that soon the Ladies showed
themselves, and from the window willed us to come nearer, saying, From the very
beginning Clara and I have hearkened to your servants admirable voice, and
deferred our being seen, for fear of marring the Song.

Fernando replide with thanks: and I turning to my Clara, asked her how she
liked the Voice? to which with a pretty smile she answered; 'Twas harmonious
enough, but that the Musician, in declaring so liberally his Masters passion,
had somewhat more enlarged himself then was there expected: Why, sweet love
(said I) do the scorching amorous effects of my heart offend you? If so, my
breast from henceforth shall like another A^^na boil inwardly, and my tongue,
in stead of expressing pain, turn Marble.

I blame you not, Gerardo, somewhat milder now said she; but since your
affection is such, I could have wished that neither my Cousin, nor your friend,
should be privy to it: For the return on my part, I know not what to say, but
would God I had never left Auila. (This said) her right arm set on the windows
great Bar, and her cheek resting upon the white hand, with a gentle sigh, I
might perceive, that her eyes trickling some drops, dried, or rather caught the
crystal pearls in an olorous Handkerchiefe. I presumed, such an accident
could be no less then favorable, and so urged the reason of the sudden
passion, withal making large protestations of my love and service, that in it
I would spend my life, though I hazzarded it in any kind of death. To which, in
the mood she was, thus she replide, Have I not reason, think you, Gerardo,
to be troubled, in seeing my self thus estranged from mine own affections?
and by casting my self so loosely upon yours, to know (to my unhappiness)
that I have no command over my free will, and that in this respect, I am forced
to part (though my heart and life be parted) since my Cousin and her Parents
cannot with infinite entreaties obtain of my Aunt to leave me with them,
perhaps as presaging my desires? Oh know, mine eyes do but counterfeit my
hearts grief, and the greatest affliction which that can feel, is the
impossibility (in absence) to repay the affection you bear me. And so ending
in tears and sighs, turning to her Cousin without expecting my answer, she
said; I think it is time to retire for fear we be missed. Francisca was about
to have answered, when Fernando crossing Trumpe, prevented her, saying to
Clara, Your desire, fair Dame, cannot as yet take effect: for, if you want
sleep, Francisca must make good the field alone, til we determine a certain
doubt, in which there must be a known Victor, or else it is not to be given
over.

It Is the best in (...) world, quoth Francisca, but so tediously controuerted
^^^weene a number of people, that should we set it afresh on foot, 'twere never
to end. Well, it must be resolved, said I, and Mistress Clara with her wisdom
shall arbitrate for the more certain conclusion of your opinions. Why, none
may deny, said Fernando, but that mine is true: for what reason is it, that our
constancy should be paralel'd with that of women, past or present? and
certainly, my so reasonable earnestness in this point, shall last with me as
long as life. And I (said I) will reenforce it to the last gasp. Well then,
said Francisca, there is no more to be done, but set up the Lists. What need
you, quoth I? the iron bars of your window already serve in their stead. But
leaving this, as a thing settled in our favor, the Instrument with some
pleasing Ditty shall make our peace.

The two Cousins were pleased with my motion, especially when they might see me
take the Violl from my man, and settle my self to sing these Verses:

Stay, bold thoughts, refrain your ^ill,
Silent be and suffer still:
What? not speak if she be by?
Torment: if you do, you dye.
Say, the flame to rise begin,
Tears without, may quench within.
Better die in easy pain
(Suffering) then (if not) be slain.
Is there (though) no remedy?
Silence, then; I Will welcome thee:
And thou, tongue of mine, conceal,
What the heart must not reveal.
When I had ende^ the fair (...) ^eganne highly to commend the Ditty* ^ut so
to (...) singer, that had not chaste Lucina lost her (...), they might have
seen shamefastness in the (...) cheeks. Leaving this, I began to offer my
self (...) their service, and to Clara thus spoke, that both (...) hear me:
We shall be very solitary (your (...) being so sudden as last night you told
me:) but indeed this Country cannot contain such a treasure long; besides,
the place of your birth is so eminent, that it must needs as equally attract
you, as your kindred or friends. I know what it may do, said she, my will is
now my Aunts, whilst I am with her; though let me tell you, that for my Cousin
here, (whom I love equally with my self) I could be content to leave not
only mine own Country, but forget my nearest friends. And so she ended,
beholding me so amorously, that I plainly perceived to whom her speech was
directed, which entangled me wholly in her pleasing Labyrinth, in such sort,
that before I got free, it cost me much time, and many misfortunes.

But now seeing day come hastily on, we took leave, and I of Clara, as if it
had been my latest; indeed to both our griefs we parted, which I in
melancholy expressed: which when Fernando saw, he could not but break into
this speech unto me: It much troubles me, friend Gerardo, to see you thus
droope: what do you want? what is not abounding to you? yesterday you were not
acquainted; to day, you have Caesar's Vici: Clara loves you, how much your self
and I well perceive. She goes to Auila, the journey is not so long, nor your
means or mine so short, but that we may be Ghests any where as well as at
home. And since this is so, since you take me to be your friend, there is no
more to be done, but take courage; and, like a man of Valor, withstan^^^^
difficulties.

Ah my loving friend said I, your noble breast at no time ever failed me: your
Discourse reuiues my afflicted heart; you raise my dead hopes, which were even
now given over, so that I am now wholly disposed to the present occasion you
urge; and if so you please, to morrow, (when we shall hear that Clara has
left the City) we will secretly follow to the Bridge, and so take the lower
way of the River (being out of the high way thither) where they will
undoubtedly lodge: and for fear of being benighted, make it their first days
journey. You say well (quoth Fernando) and perhaps we shall have a joyful
return; only (for the maine) it behooues us to be secret. That concerns me
most, said I, and therefore my advice is, that without more company then our
selves, we go both disguized: In which resolution, we bade Adieu till the next
day, that knowing my Mistress with Francisca and her Aunt were to depart after
Dinner; I went to Fernando's lodging, where I was again encouraged by him;
who showed his Noble desire in the following Sonnet.

A brazen heart, an Adamantine mind
(Doubtless) had he, whose restless working Brain
First launcht our mo^uing houses to the Maine,
And slippery hindges gave to waves and wind.
Fanaticke fury, zeal, aspiring blind,
Had he, who rashly sought to fly (in vain)
But rasher he, that heavens bright Carre, so feign,
Down headlong drove (against his fathers mind.)
A daring Act, a pretty enterprise
'Twas, to descend and conquer Erebus,
To bind the Triple-Porter in a Chain:
But to presume to venture on her eyes,
Without more note or merit court th(...)t thus,
(As greater madness) so, a greater gain.
And next having clothed our selves in the best manner we thought fit, we
departed out at a back door of his house; and by the River side, with cool
traveling, and good discourse, about Sunset we arrived at certain houses,
not passing half a League from the Bridge; and alighting we laid us down
upon the green Grass behind certain ruinous mudde Walls, where we
resolved to expect my Mistresses passing by: which happened not long after: and
knowing the Coach, in which she went, giving it leave to go on before, we
followed softly after, and kept the noise of it still in our ears, though see
it we could not, by reason the darkness of the night began more and more to
thicken upon us. So we came to the town, and marking what Inn they took,
entered into another, where, alighting, I delivered my Horse to the Oast, and
Fernando turning back again upon his, we went out into the street, where I
clapped a Hunters Cap on my head, and an open Cassocke at the sides, of which I
came provided over my shoulders, and taking off my Spurs and Sword out of the
Hangers, carried it under mine arm, lively resembling one of our Mul^tiers; I
desired Fernando to follow, who was ready to burst with laughter: and in this
disguize we came to my Mistresses Inn, her (as we entered) I saw set very
sorrowfully in a Chair by her Cousin. I demanded a chamber for my new Master,
which when we had showed us, in a spacious Court at hand, I gave order for
prouendring my Horse, which done, whilst supper also was making ready,
confident in my Livery, I went where my dear Pledge was sitting, sometimes
crossing from the street to the Court; otherwhiles, from the Court back again;
and then drawing near to her presence, sought by the brightness of a candle,
that lighted all the forepart of the house, to make my self known to her fair
eyes: all which endeavors had bin vain, had not Francisca, that kept her
company, left her alone, by going into another room where her Aunt was resting
her self: and thus acknowledging the opportunity heaven bestowed upon me, I
quickly made my approach, saying* Is it possible, light of my darkness, that this
your Slave has bin so unknown to those clear eyes? when she amazed, I seized
on her white hand, and taking off my Cap and disguize, made my self better
known: So that when she was fully satisfide, out of pure astonishment, long it
was ere she would leave crossing her self, and with the sudden alteration
this unexpected change had caused, said, Are you Gerardo? in beholding you,
sure I become blind.

Who should it be, dear sweet (said I) but he you name, who transformed into
your precious self, am never absent from you? Lord, my best Sir (quoth she)
how came you hither? What base attire is this concealed your Noble being from
me? whither do you go? Do you think I mean to undo my self, or fear that my
being so slightly guarded, may make me a prey to bloody Robbers that frequent
the uncouth Mountains? I cannot think, said I, North-starre of my desires,
that there can be so cruel a Thief, who, seeing those divine looks, would
not cast his arms at your snowy feet; touching my coming hither, know:
Fernando my friend (worthy al confidence) and my self have thus on horseback
followed after you; and if you please to give a reward to my small labor
(though to bear the name of your Servant, is sufficient) vouchsafe that I may
this night speak to you, since if you be willing, no occasion can be wanting.
I willing (said she?) if that be all the difficulty, never go from me. Oh no,
that were unfit, Mris said I, your Cousin will come out; and though my disguize
might excuse her, not knowing me, I am loath to put it to the venture. Well, a
Gods name leave me a while, said she, and expect me somewhere, where we may not
be seen. Thus I returned to my friend, and making known my success unto him,
withal the fright my disguize put my Mistress in, it gave him notable content.
And so as well to beguile the time of my expectation, to see my Mistress, as
also to excuse the transformation of my base disguize, in imitation of the
valiant Hercules, given over to the unbridled Love of Iole; by way of allusion
he took a subject in these following Verses.

(...) that strong Club of his
((...) feet the twelve sad labors laid)
That (...) (a glorious Constellation made)
Whose Owner ((...) high mounted) is;
With Iole does change: (...) of this,
Gives him her Reele and Spi^dle (woman's Trade)
With which the Semi-god grows (...) ^paid;
And to her work to fall, thinks not amiss.
She like a second sterner god of War
Appears; and he of wanton Venus shows
A perfect draught, fond Lovers to descry.
Yet I not wonder, since I know there are
Stranger effects that Cupid does disclose
With Blood, Stars, Words, and powerful Sympathy.
Whilst we discoursed of these and other matters, Clara and her company were
gotten to Supper; and she, ere the Cloth was taken away, faining an excuse,
with her Maid only accompanying her, came through the Court by our Chamber, and
going toward the farthest part of it, sent her back, only bade her call, if
she should be missed: I perceiving the device, soon followed after; and though
my feet had wings, yet Clara fained the necessity of her return, having
staid so long: only said, Now, Gerardo, you have no reason to complain, since
you see how true I am to your desires.

When, said I (owner of my life) ^an I form complaints of you that may not
prove unjust; since with this present favor only my reward is more, then had
I undergone an Vlissian Navigations?

You do overmuch indeare it, said she; but tell me, Think you to see me at
Auila, if, to my grief, my Aunt change not her mind? though doubtless, in
this I hope Heaven will be propitious to me. To this I answered, From the very
hour, nay instant, mine eyes beheld you, and my soul made election of your
rare personage, I determined to follow you, not to Auila, which is so short a
step, but even the whole world over: and of this pure truth (dear Pledge) rest
assured and satisfied.

It Is well (said my Mistress) I am alone, and like a vveake vessel acknowledging
the advantage of your strength, am therefore forced to believe you, confident,
that time at length must best discover your constancy, and my affection. Yet
tell me, mean you now to accompany me to Guadalupe? No (my best Mistress) said
I: for though I cannot enjoy a greater happiness; yet I fear, being missed
at Talbora, it might happily breed some ouer-curious suspicion: to excuse which
(as loath to hazard your reputation) I had rather lose my longing. Your
wariness does much please me (said she:) continue it still, and when you hear
of our return, neglect not, but that very night come to the usual stand; and
till then, farewell, for I fear I have staid too long. You must not so part,
quoth I, to leave me in so long absence, without a favor from you that may
cherish my hopes of seeing you; and in so saying, with all my might, I took
her about the neck, and to her seeming anger, and my glory, gathered the sweet
flowers from her rare lips: at which, I cannot set down, how altered, how
angry she was at my licentious boldness. But in such wars, peace is soon
made: so love, to whom we became both subjects, easily forced her to pardon my
boldness, and confirm our friendship, by hanging a rich chain about my
neck, and precious jewel at it, which formerly served to adorn her own
breast, saying, Though you have angered me, yet in hope of your repentance,
receive this pledge, in remembrance that she that now parts from you to
Guadalupe, bears you with her, set in the secret Relicke of her heart. Feign
would I have replide, but the coming of her Maid hindered me; wherefore
slipping into a corner, Clara passed on, and my self soon went back to my
Chamber, where Fernando and I with equal content took our rests, seeing my
suite so much bettered by these prosperous beginnings: which being the
Originals of my present ills, 'twas necessary (my good Leriano) I should be
thus prolixe in recounting them.

We never so much as staid for daylight, but taking horse, with good speed,
in few hours, Fernando got to his lodging, and I to my Fathers house.

Fifteen days my inflamed heart suffered in the torment of my Mistresses
absence; and upon the joyful night of her arrival, like a most punctual
Lover (Fernando in my company) some hours before the usual time, I expected
the vp-rising of my bright Sun, which at length, more glorious then he that
usually gives his light, appeared from her accustomed window. Excessive joy,
they say, often causes sudden death: and though by heavens particular goodness,
in me it wrought not that sorrowful effect; yet it so troubled me, that I was
scarce able to send forth those effectual reasons, Love and desire prompted me
with. What my tied tongue made difficult, I remitted to the action of my eyes
and hands; with which laying hold on those whiter then snow of hers, imprinting
my lips in their pure Crystal, my outward actions, declared my inward
motions. In no less suspense was my loved Pledge, till Fernando with his
accustomed freedom, loosing the knot of our amorous silence, kissing Clara's
hand, and animating me to do the like, I bade her welcome home, to which she
returned thanks, and straight joyfully told me, that her stay in Talbora was
now effected with her Aunt, at the importunate suite of her Cousin Francisca;
which when I heard, I was even transported with gladness: and as things
stood, nothing could succeed more luckily to my purpose. I asked after her
Cousin; she told me, weariness had sent her to sleep; besides, she meant not
to make her acquainted with their loves: at which, I received no small content,
as well in respect of secrecy, as that I might more freely converse with my
Mistress.

Many a night we conferred in this close manner, so warily, that (excepting my
friend) none else was privy to our affections. Two years were expired in
these amorous meetings, in all which time I could never arrive at the wished
end of my hopes, or obtain a recompense for my long service. My heart was even
tired with the delays and obstacles Clara laid in my way, but the hopes she
mingled with these distastes, drew me on to be still constant.

And now the Festival of our glorious Patron S. James was at hand; against
which time great triumphs were preparing in the City of Auila, which possessed
her with much fear, and me with no less trouble, to think, that her
friends, desirous happily to see them, would have her along, whereby her
return might be uncertain: And though this our doubt came not to be put in
execution, yet served as spurs to my lively heat, and so with more violent
importunity, I pressed to be admitted into my Sweet-hearts chamber, against
which, the difficulty was; That Francisca lay there, though this might be
removed by the experience of her sound sleeping; and withal, there wanted not
good conueniencie, by reason of a window without grates, which opened to the
room next Clara's chamber; (a little door being only between) informed of
which from her self, I requested her to give me a print of the Lock in soft
Wax, that by this device I might have a Key made to serve the turn. With much
ado, (after many sighs and tears, and continual entreaties, her flintie
heart overcome) my plot took effect: and as soon as the Key was made, I
delivered it to her, to try the certainty of it; which was such as my heart
could wish, though for (...) return of it, I needed more effectual tears and
supplications; so stiff was her obstinacy, or rather honesty. But urging
still my affection, and how much she was indebted to my loyal constancy, she
could not but at last restore it: when I had it, I could willingly have made
speeches to it, but for deferring my glory; and so clapping wings to my feet,
like a second Icarus, with Fernando's help, I mounted, and lighting on the
door, gently opened it, and went in, where I soon found my life's comforter: I
embraced her often, and lest her Cousin might spy us, we got within the
Curtains of my Mistresses Canopi^, and quickly without more conditions, save
only her modest contention, before I left the room, I might reckon my self
amongst the happiest, reaping at length the joyful fruit of what I had sowed
with so much sorrow and labor. 'Twas now with me another world, and a new
content: I had now possession of a fort, which I held once inexpugnable; I now
feared no storm, since I was gotten to the haven: So ignorant was I in the
changes of blind Fortune. For her, I may well affirm, she was no less pleased
then I, and at parting, with a world of tears, she besought me not to forget
her (which how far was I from thinking of?)

From the very hour that I made her sole Mistress of my thoughts, (without
boast be it spoken) neuer-certaine or unsure suspicion kept me waking; or
jealousy, vvatchfull: so true was she, though tractable to all, yet was
there never any so hardy, as to offer so much as a daring thought to her
beauty, even to the time that I predominated in my loves height, and had
absolute command, there being none but mine, no vvilling or nilling but what
I pleased. Thus lived I so comforted; confident, that no night-walkes, Letters,
Tickets, Messages, Maskes, Ring-running, or Barriers, performed in her service,
could make me once think that she would look aside to wrong me.

At this time a Gentleman of our city used almost hourly to frequent my
Mistresses street; a young Gallant (though elder then my self) rich, an heir,
and my especial friend, whom I likewise often saw (though suspecting nothing)
at the Church where Clara used, where he was still one of the first, and
that never ^ailed: yet for all these fearful motives, the least malicious
prick never touched my heart; not dreaming of any diligence of his toward my
Mistress. Many a time (I wholly ignorant) would Fernando advertise me of this
suspicion, as foreseeing how much Rodrig^ (for so was the Gentleman called)
would puzzle us. But as I was in the midst of my happiness, and absolute
over my Clara's will, nothing could make me careful, or think of a
competitor.

Amongst many gladsome nights I passed in her cherishing embraces, one (the
first that stung me with jealousy) in midst of my iollitie, she (first
coniuring me, and earnestly facilitating the distaste I might receive, and I
assuring her not to be angry, greedy of the delivery this mountain of pregnant
discourse promised) began the ensuing Discourse:

The fear I have (my dear Gerardo) at any time to offend you, or give a just
occasion, to make you suspect my loyal faith, enforces me to give you early
notice of the obstinate pretension of one, your near friend. Heaven knows,
if, when Clara proceeded hither, my heart were not ready to burst within me.
She went on: Rodrigo (my choler now at full) that against my consent employes
his foolish thoughts in my service, as you may have seen in diverse occasions:
of which, if I till now forbore to give you account, it was, that I thought my
disdain, and the small comfort he received, might make him desist from his
purpose: but seeing that from my denial his intent takes greater hold, I could
no longer conceal thus much: nor this paper, which to day I received from the
hands of a maid of my Aunts, who coloring her boldness, with telling me, it
was from my father, made me take and read it, desiring after an answer; which
she had, such as her shameless proceeding deserved. This is the perfect truth,
that the Ticket, I she, that received it, but free from a thought of offending
you, which I shall never have as long as heaven shall please to keep me
yours. And giving me the paper she was silent, and I less confident in my
security, resolving thenceforward to be more wary, as having to contend with
a powerful opposite.

I could not but chide her for deferring the advice, for the inconueniencie it
might have caused, since the careful solicitation of a new Suitor, might
easily discover the affection of secure Lovers. But we were soon friends, and
I somewhat calmer, demanded what answer she sent by the Messenger; who
replied, that first drawing another paper, fained to be the Letter out of her
pocket, she tore it, threatening the wench withal, that her Aunt should punish
her lewdness: with which somewhat satisfied, I took leave, and going out,
went to Fernando's Lodging; who when he had left me with my Mistress, used to
return home. I came to his door as he was newly going to bed, to his no small
admiration to see me so hastily with him, though by the sadness of my look, he
conceived some sudden change in my affairs: After we had saluted, and sat
down in his chamber, taking out Rodrigo's Letter, by the light of a white Wax
candle, I read it to my friend, and which I can never forget, these ensuing
contents:

RODRIGO to CLARA.
My mind fearing (as in reason it may) a just punishment for my boldness,
(yet confident in the clemency of your noble breast) expects a definitive
sentence of life or death, either to perish in the waves of your disdain, or
by your gracious hand to be raised out of a sea of troubles that oppress me.
I shall receive comfort, if you strike the sails of your rigor, which has
been so cruel as my affection constant, which springs from a heart that
offers it self to your mercy: receive it, fair Dame, but with more
compassion use it then the afflicted owner; whose life and death rests to the
arbitrament of your glad or unhappy answer.

I think (noble friend) neither venomous trodden Viper, or poisonous Serpent in
sandy Africa, were ever so stirred with rage, as my enflamed breast, by that
time I had ended my adversaries Letter: and certainly, had not my friend caught
hold on me, I had then sought him, and revenged my furious jealousy. But my
friend with reasons, worthy his wisdom and discretion, stayed me, mitigating
my violent passion. He first thoroughly understood the cause of my distaste,
and next the Papers owner; both which considered, he proceeded thus: By heaven
(Gerardo) when I saw you so full of fury, I verily supposed, you had found
this Letter unwittingly about Clara, and that on her part way had been made to
some greater mischief: But beware, be not too rash, the fort is better
defended then you can wish; she her self is her own guide, her own guard,
what would you more? Why complain you? Clara is faultlesse, Rodrigo not to be
condemned: for, for each man to good himself the best he can, where he knows
no detriment to parties, or prejudice of friends, I think it is tolerable. Not
he, nor any, save my self alone, know your thoughts; so he is blameles. It
concerns you to be careful, that since you have more eyes added to your waking
care, you must take heed, and for a time leave the enjoying your Mistress, till
you may with more quiet obtain your pleasure.

These and the like reasons Fernando knew so well to lay before me, that he
convinced me to him: so (determined to follow his advice) we tooke^ leave, and
I betook me to my home and rest. Ever after (considering how weighty an
occasion I had in hand) I went always well armed, and having a new enemy,
was not too secure in the defense of my person, purposing (if ought should
happen) by way of anticipation, to be still beforehand. Fernando and I often
met Rodrigo in his amorous pursuit in Clara's street early and late, which
made us for fear of being discovered, vary more shapes then Proteus. One night
amongst others, (the first of my misfortunes) Fernando and I were near the
windows, and having taken stand, expected the hour to come that I might
enter, at such time as two, muffled came toward us; and drawing near, were
known to my friend; who turning to me, said: There goes your Rival and his
man, who mean to take notice of us, (as indeed they went about it:) So that
supposing it was best for us to be gone, for fear of some ill accident, I told
Fernando so much; who, though he liked my counsel, yet was unwilling we
should forsake the place, fearing lest Rodrigo might at the instant possess
it, and that Clara vnaduertised, opening the window to call me, and seeing two
men there, without distinction might make the sign, whereby Rodrigo happily
would fall into the right suspicion, which was sufficient to make us still
keep our place. A good while we remained thus discoursing, and Rodrigo
appeared not; till at last, when lest we thought of it, we might ^ee him pass
by: for having fetched a large compass, he came at our backs through the same
street; which much distasted me, and Fernando no less; for we were now
engaged, and though we might have departed without being known, (disguized)
yet the aforesaid occasion enforced our stay. The time of my Mistrisses
approach was now near, which Rodrigo (it seemed) little dreamt of, and made
me as fearful as impatient, and perceiving the like passion in my friend,
seeing withal how dangerous it was for my love to be discovered and yet how
hardly it could be avoided without some ^^lence, we determined by dint of
sword to rebate their vn^annerly proceeding: and with this resolution, without
giving a word, clapping aside our Clokes, and laying hands to our swords and
targets, we suddenly flue upon them; who perceiving our intent, with no less
forwardness met us in the encounter. Rodrigo I hated deadly, who falling to my
lot, without warding the point of his sword I ran on, and luckily clozing, (not
favored by my adversaries weakness, for to say truth, he was a valiant
Gentleman) gave him some wounds, at which he fell, crying out for confession:
which as soon as I heard, supposing I had made sure work, I returned where I
had left Fernando and the servant, but found them retired further into the next
street, (purposely done by my friend) where making a stand, he quickly ran my
youth through the sword arm, and with a back-blow, sliced him over the noddle,
leaving him to cry out as his Master had done before him. The noise had raised
many persons, as well at Segundo Octauio's windows, as at the rest of the
neighborhood; from whence seeing some issue out, crossing through by-Lanes, and
flying from those that followed, we soon (without being known to any) got
to our Lodgings.

Rodrigo (as you heard) was a gentleman wealthy, and, well allied by blood in
the City, so that by morning nothing was in men's mouths but this business:
the sorrow was general, each man heaping up confused conjectures, but none
could hit upon the right: from himself nothing was to be gotten, for his
wounds had made him yet senseless, which (as we cunningly learnt) were diverse
and dangerous; two especially, one that was through the right side of his body,
and the other in his throat, accompanied with a terrible gash over the face.

My father used extraordinary diligence to find out the authors, and so to
punish them, but Rodrigo's man declaring the place, disguize, and disposition
of the actors, he was wary in his proceeding, as ghessing the business to
have bin premeditated, and the defamed honor of some person of equal merits
interested in the same. Whilst this business was thus in the heat, by
Fernando's advice, in the night time, we came not into my Clara's street; and
if in the day time, for my comfort I desired but to pass that way, 'twas like
Capuchines, our eyes fixed on the earth; though now and then love overcame my
fear, and would force me sometimes to look up for a sight of my Suns
comfort from her Eastern window.

Within some twenty days Rodrigo being upon the mending hand, gave way to his
friends to visit him: Fernando and my self (by good providence) being not
the last, nor which least frequented his Lodging: and one time amongst others,
finding him alone, we earnestly requested him to make known to us the cause
of that unlucky accident; and this as well to be assured of Clara's loyalty,
as also to dissemble the matter. But Rodrigo in a manner refusing, yet seeing
my earnestness and my friends desire, at last he began: Though it grieve me to
the soul to renew the occasion and motive of my wounds, yet relying on your
secrecy, I will make it known unto you. It is now fully six months, that I
have been a true frequenter of Segundo Octauio's street, and a Suitor to his
Niece Clara at his house; who, in respect of her rare beauty, I suppose, is not
unknown to either of you: in all which time, I have used many several
diligences to make known my affection to her, which though she might easily
have read in my eyes, that have expressed my inward passion, (besides the
shows and triumphs which I have publicly for her sake set forth) yet my
pains have been all bootlesse, neither had I ever so much as a look from
those fair eyes for a recompense. Who but a Prodigy of nature could have
neglected those lively and fervent demonstrations of mine? Who but she, blind
to the tears that I have shed, and deaf to my parching sighs, which for her
cruelty I have scattered to the vvind? To be brief, all my hopes have
produced no other fruit, then what you now behold in me: for having assayed by
diverse means, particularly by the solicitation of a maid of hers, to effect
my desire, I wrote unto her by that party, Lines, which had you seen, might
have deserved some compassion, even from a breast of Adamant. This Rodrigo so
feelingly uttered, as might have caused pity in any less interested then my
self in the business: and so to a different intent, I interrupted him,
saying; And received you Sir, any answer? if you did, me thinks your suite
should not have been so desperate. Marry did I, quoth he, and such an one as
my services did merit. At this I quite lost footing, my judgment was clean
rent off the hindges, supposing Clara now proved false to me: but Rodrigo did
soon rid me of that doubt and jealousy, saying; These wounds, whose skarres
you see, were my answer, and that which ever I expected: for the Messenger I
imploide, having told me I should repair some certain days after, for the
resolution of my business to one of Segundo's windows (as my unfortunate
Stars would have it) going at the appointed time, I found two men at a corner
of the street, muffled, whom I could not by any means I used force from the
place, till fetching a compass back upon them, I came so near, that
doubtless they knew me, for instantly they set upon me, and gave me these
hackes, and had certainly sooner put their business in execution, if they had
sooner known me, for it must needs be, that they lay purposely in wait for
me. By their valor (though it were dark, and they disguised) I ghessed them
to be persons of quality* Since my hurts, I came to notice of my Letters hard
usage, and how Clara threatened the Maid that delivered it; whereby I suppose,
that Segundo Octauio having notice of what passed, caused some of his kindred
to watch me. But heaven has been pleased to free me from their murderous
intent, and ere long I hope to be abroad, and not to want the help of friends
that may return them the like.

Gentle Sir, said Fernando, it is no fit circumstance you have declared, to
confirm your rash determination; for Segundo Octauio (besides his pacifique
goodness) is discreet (as we all know:) and put case Clara should inform, or
he believe his Niece, he is not a man to be moved so slightly, to the
execution of such bloody rigor; besides, neither he, nor any one would
presume that you would make court to any Pledge of his, otherwise, then to
make her a Wife: and therefore give no credit to a rash opinion, or ill grounded
suspicion. I am at such a pass (quoth the sick vvounded Gentleman) that
though I have had these, and other considerations I am not to be blamed, if I
think or speak what you have heard. In fine if what I have told you,
touching Segundo, should be otherwise; it must be, that either this Dame, or
her kins-woman had their Gallants whom it concerned, to turn me out of the
street; and it shall go hard, (if Heaven favor me) but one day I may meet
with them. Ah (thought I to my self) 'twas a wise fellow therefore, that
said; Better kill an enemy, then let him live with a wrong: and had I (as lay
in my power) done so, I had never (friend Leriano) seen my self in this
lamentable vvretched plight, in which your charitable presence found me. And
before we left Rodrigo, he thinking his own distastes were irksome to us,
desired to give us a pleasing farewell in this following Sonnet, which he had
made to express the rigor of his danger.

If, of a wretched state and all forlorn,
That be the wretched'st; not at all to be:
(Since in condemned Prisoners, we may see,
Though they must die, they l'd not, not have been borne.
Then, (by oblivion) to be slowly torn,
Or vexed with absence in extremity,
Or plagued with rage of restless jealousy,
These nothing are to not being loved (a scorn:)
He that is forgotten, yet, a being had;
He that is absent, may return again,
He that is jealous, may find constancy.
But still to follow shadows, love, in vain:
Still to be hopeless (worse then to be mad)
That never was, is, or, shall happy be.
In these Discourses we past a great part of the afternoon; when at length,
taking leave of Rodrigo, my dear friend and I marched to my Mistresses
street; debating by the way, of the mischief our enemy might do us, in the
curiousness of his revenge, if happily time did not alter his mind. For this
cause therefore, said Fernando, it were fit you talked with Clara, and
contrived some better course for the priuacie of your secret meetings. This,
(said I) and my not knowing whether the past skirmish have caused any
alteration in Segundo Octauio's house, makes me melancholy, and unsavory to
my self; this night therefore without doubt must I be resolved.

'Twere well (said he) your desire could take effect, though, for Clara to come
to the window, without any advertisement, I hold it very difficult. Let us but
go thither (quoth I) and perhaps my desire alone may bring her, and that which
falls not out to day, may to morrow happen better.

Without thinking on our way, and busy in discourse, we were (ere aware) got
into my Mistresses street, when my self (not thinking to be so happy)
lifting up my eyes toward the window, might see my Mistress leaning on the grate
as sad and pensatiue as I was upon the way: she beckened me with her hand to
stay; wherefore most joyfully obeying, Fernando and I stood talking, and making
as if we looked another way, till Clara returning to the vvindow, brought a
paper in her hand, and looking to see if the street were clear of Spies, cast
it down; when taking it up, and withal a short leave, we got us two or three
streets off, where opening the Ticket, I might read these Contents.

I know not (dear loved Sir) what excuse you can make, for so long
forgetfulness; neither can I attain to the cause, that your most firm and
true Slave has given you, worthy such rigor, so great cruelty. It Is now
twenty days since I last saw you, and two thousand years that my soul longs
for you. May I deserve this night to see you, and know from your own lips,
what mortal dislaste keeps you from me.

Scantnesse of time (quoth Fernando) has made her forget to firm her name: to
which (said I.) Thinks my best friend, that these lines have not fuel
sufficient to add to the flame that consumes me? I am all sadness, till I
satisfy her for my slacknesse. I vvonder (replide he) that Clara should be
ignorant, how important our absence is, though love be painted blind, and a
very child, runs through all hazzards, even to cast his followers headlong.

By this time it grew to be night, and Moone-shine; so by the accustomed time,
we went toward the street, where we found my Mistress in expectation; and
looking about us, to see if all were sure, with my friends usual help, I
mounted, and taking my afflicted Mistress in mine Arms, soon satisfide her
unjust complaints; telling her withal, how impossible it was, to avoid the
late encounter. She gave me to understand how much that business had
scandalized her friends, and how vehement Segundo's suspicion was, that the
cause of Rodrigo's vvounds lived in his house, and other matters to this
purpose that much troubled me: though desperate love that bereaved me of my
understanding faculties, made me set slightly by all accidents, and determined
still to go on in my love, took leave for the present, willing her
thence-forward (to excuse such another bickering) that though she chanced to
see any body under her window, she should neither call, nor make sign, till
she perceived the pulling out of a Handkerchiefe: so finding Fernando, who
stayed for me, we returned to our several homes.

In this manner, I repaired many nights after to my Mistresses shelter: but
variable fortune, that began to show her usual condition, holding it high time
to cast me from the Throne, whither, to make my fall the greater, she had
raised me, would not that my delights should any longer proceed in the same
calmness, that hitherto, and therefore bred a curious itching in the
imagination of some neighbor, who, busied with thinking of the past conflict,
his superfluous diligence gave him an open view of my night-walke, and frequent
entrance, which soon after, began to be common talk in every man's mouth;
howsoever, I presumed upon the secret: and one time amongst others, being
careless enough of any such matter, my good friend, taking me by the hand,
told me how necessary it was, to endeavor by all possible means, that the
prosecution of our loves might be by some more hidden place; or, if this could
not be, that I should resolutely suffer; or altogether retire my self from
Clara's friendship: for in the contrary, he foresaw a Tragical event.

I much wondered, and was not a little angry at the speech: and so requested him
to tell me plainly the cause that moved him to this harsh counsel, to forget
her, without whom it was impossible for me to breathe a minut longer: and
speaking this somewhat passionately: Fernando perceiving my sudden alteration,
with his accustomed discretion thus stayed me: Friend Gerardo; If my true
affection, and that you are persuaded of it, did not fully credit my intention,
I would not so (rudely as you may think) divert you from the dangerous course
you hold; nor give you those particular motives I have for doing so. If your
love, egresse, time, place, and each circumstance were not public, I should
not advise you against what were just and due to your Mistresses faith. Your
loves, indeed (that you go in and out at Clara's Chamber) are every where
notorious: Many have told me so much, (though I fained to know nothing;) we are
both forewarned, you are wise: think this to be a happy lot: and chiefly, my
Gerardo, believe that my care is only of your safety: for, for mine own part,
if your mind be to proceed, I must not leave you till death. So he ended,
leaving me in the confusion you may well imagine. Doubt of my friend I had none,
no more had I any answer. I heard how reasonably he spoke, and perceived how
fit it was I should follow reason: on the other side, her affection was so
rooted in me, that but to think time might (as a thing mortal and perishable)
consume it, struck me into an Extasis of extremities. It was (me thought)
impossible to leave her; nay, the least thought of her: so with a deep sigh,
sprung from my secret soul, I thus answered. My heart (best friend) has not
felt a blow of more wounding pain, then your reasons have given it; besides,
the despair of remedy, has brought me to that woeful pass I know not what
to say. I see a miserable and adverse ruin threatens my affairs, nor find I
so much as a Prop, to stay up my weak frame. I see I run headlong, that my
thoughts, my discourses, are all to pieces, and my clear Judgment, formerly
guided by reason, now faint and feeble without a Superior power: though I know
this to be most true, yet know I not how to follow what you aduize.

Well, this night will I see whether Clara can light upon any better sally for
our business, and accordingly must we shape our course. With this resolution
(day passing on) Fernando took leave till the prefixed time, by when we came
better provided, then formerly to my Mistresses street.

The night was as clear and calm as might be; so deaf and hushed, as bred in
me a most secure confidence. Every thing (me thought) fadged to the measure of
my desire, as having never found less lets, fewer inconveniences: for where
misfortune must come, till she be even at hand, all is broad highway, and
delightsome passage. Clara stayed longer then she was used to do; insomuch
that I was once about to have turned back; but the Dice were cast, and I must
stand to my unlucky chance. So at last she appears, and (the Signal given
(up I got; and being with her, without scruple gave my self to her embraces,
and those Arms whose close culling made me mad with joy. Yet I have since
thought with my self how disquieted and troubled I found her when she would
speak to me; for she would break off abruptly in the midst of her discourse:
Or when I asked her a question, she would answer quite from the purpose. Yet
blinded with my too true affection, I perceived not her deceitful hugges, nor
marked those cunning accidents. At first she desired me to undress my self;
and this, more earnestly then at other times, yea, with such importunity, that
any one, not mad like me, had doubtless known her devilish mind. A while
(seeing my unwillingness) she left importuning, but plied me again, and not
long after desired to take of my strong, sure (which she called troublesome)
Coat of Maile; for her ease (forsooth) and though in these, and other strange
demands, I satisfide her, my breast could not harbor the least suspicion, to
think they were in my prejudice. When I consider this Woman's base intention, it
makes me rage like a madman, and call on Heaven for vengeance, for my ill
recompensed affection. But assuredly (friend Leriano) she will not fail of a
due reward, that hangs over her disloyal treacherous head.

To return to my Story, not passing half an hour had I been with her whom I
took to be my greatest treasure, surest refuge: when with an unlooked for
noise I might hear the doors fly off the Hindges, and ready to start up at
the sudden accident (as thinking now what might be the matter) it might well
have gone ill with me: for Clara closely embracing me, (I at length perceiving
her treachery) before I could vnfasten my self from her, her Uncle, and most
of his servants, were upon me, with more Arms and noise, then were fit to
endanger a tender Youth of eighteen: So, that perceiving the extreme danger I
was in; and thinking to have laid hold upon a Pistol at my girdle, I might see
Clara have it in her hand; wherefore knowing my ruin, and hearing her Uncle
cry, Kill him, Kill him: drawing my Sword, and recovering the door by which I
was to pass, in spite of all that withstood me, I leaped out of the window
into the street, helped only with the butt of a Halberd, that made me come
sooner to the ground, leaving my Hat, Cloak and Pistol as spoils behind me.
As soon as I got upon my legs, I bade Fernando (who heard all that passed)
follow me; and in a trice Bird-like we vanished.

I could not brag of my escape, having layne in afterward almost a months
time of my hurts, with a cut in my Head, and a thrust into the Groine, which
growing as then cold and stiff upon me, Fernando was forced to take me on his
back, and like another Anchises, convey me to a Monastery of Dominican Friars,
where I was charitably received, and cured. Fernando at my request (for I
feared to make him accessarie) went home to his lodging.

When this misfortune happened, my Fathers trienniall Government was expired, and
he summoned to give account of his behavior to a severe Judge, appointed (as
the manner is) by the supreme Counsel. This party caused much search to be
made, for the finding me out: and after many diligences used, there wanted not
a Spy to inform him of the truth; so that notwithstanding the breach of Sacred
privilege; and the protestations the Friars made against him, he caused me to
be fetched in, and in a close Chair, conveyed to a strong hold, where with
sufficient guard he left me Prisoner. My loving Father much resenting this
affront (though setting a good face on the matter) procured by aggrauations,
censures, and excommunication, that I might be restored again to the Church,
against which, much was alleged; and what in proofs and several orders, I
endured a tedious imprisonment.

All this while I could not light upon the true cause, that so seduced Clara
against me, whose declaration firmed under her own hand, was showed me by my
Brother Leoncio to my greater confusion: in which, she not only accused me,
but pretended also a Rape; and that (because she sought to defend her self) I
had violently set a Dagger to her breast; for fear of which (promise of
marriage preceding on my part) she was content to condescend to my pleasure;
(a thing so contrary as you have heard, and Heaven can witness from the
truth.) To this was added the breach of the house, and other circumstances,
that left my business upon so foul terms, that had not the holy Sanctuary
been interposed, my life had been dangerously hazzarded.

The deposition of that ravenous Viper, was most fearfully cruel, intended
only to glut her self with my blood. The Paper I had in mine own hand, and
though I knew it to be hers, I could scarce give credit to mine eyes, as
thinking they wanted their visible faculty. I was astonished, amazed, my
Judgment utterly lost, and in this mood requested those that were in my
company to leave me; and casting my self on my Bed, the most part of that day
I spent in pitiful lamentation, growing with my grief so desperate, that
had I not stood in awe of a more eternal punishment, I should have made quick
riddance of this frail mortal life. At length considering I was a Christian,
and how unworthy she was of this my resentment, I determined for ever to blot
her abhorred remembrance out of my thoughts, as you may well perceive in the
ensuing Sonnet.

Babel and Siren in thy tongue and tone,
Chymaera in each monstrous different part;
Hyena, Crocodile, in v^ice, in moan;
Sphinx in thy cruel and ambiguous Art.
Thou Cave and Circes, Herb to wound the heart,
Host Diomed quiet (till trod upon
Serpent unseen in flowers, we feel thy smart.)
Fair Spring to see to, that turn'st flickes to stone:
Now I thy double-dealing plainly see,
And like Ulysses, fix on reasons Tree.
Some two months after my imprisonment, my father understanding the change of
my affection, leaving my business upon indifferent terms, and my Brother
Leoncio with me, with his servants and the rest of his Family went back to
Madrid.

My storms and shipwreck ceased not here, rather from this instant took new
beginning: for within a while after my Father came to the Court, it pleased
Heaven to take him to mercy, bereauing me of my greatest worldly felicity. As
soon as news was brought us, my Brother straight took Post. And though now
in Talbora we had many friends, whom as well my Father, as Leoncio and my self
had purchased: yet I soon felt and bewailed his absence; for when he was gone,
Rodrigo declared himself my open enemy, and my Brother and me for Authors of
his wounds. There wanted not some friends of mine, that mightily opposed him,
and he that never failed me, was the good Fernando, in whose discreet
conversation I found comfort in midst of my extremities; it was not the least
that afflicted me, that Clara should again put me in mind of her, by vvriting
a Letter full of deceitful excuses, and reasons wanting all foundation. She
would have indeed qualified her proceeding, and the manner of her confession.
For the first, that she was betrayde by her kindred, who persuaded her, that,
to be the only way to soulder her lost honor, and to make me her Husband,
which I had promised her, as she (though falsely) affirmed. For the latter, she
was enforest for fear of death, if she did not something to mitigate her past
fault, by confessing in that manner against me. Yet the circumstances of my
wounds, and her disposing them, on one side dis-arming me, on the other with
new extremes securing me, the better to betray me into her friends clutches;
these she could neither salve, nor free her self from a vehement suspicion;
that, either frighted, or convinced by her friends, she consented with them to
my death, and the revenge of her amorous wrong; whicst failing in the effect,
accommodating themselves to the time, they were forced to direct her in the way
of my imprisonment: And though as yet this my suspicion may seem slight, by
what follows you shall be satisfide; since Clara in her after actions not
only confirmed it, but gave further testimonies of her incontinency: for had
she been loyal, nothing could have made her seek my destruction; and were
this pardonable, her libidinous leuity, how can that free her from blame? I
will not (Noble friend) anticipate my griefs, with those woeful Laws, you
shall hear in my Relation; and therefore have patience, till each circumstance
come in it is proper rank and place: Let me only tell you, that her Letter so
stirred my offended breast, that hurried on with such a violent choler, I sent
her a perpetual abhorring answer on the back side of it, as follows.

Base Pandora! thy cursed mind
Is nor lofty, nor unkind,
Nor will I a frown allow
Once, unto thy falser brow:
These were terms might well appear
Where true love, just dealing were.
(Language for the chaster fit)
Such as you deserve not it.
Wool^ish woman farewell: Place
Where I first her false embrace
Felt, farewell: Awake then, Fame,
Lowdly my affront proclaim:
What though her lascivious Fire,
Kindled once my rash desire,
And bereaved my soul? Alas!
I like Flax or Paper was,
Or Bay-leaues that ^indged were:
Yet, their Victors wreath I bear:
Once, (Adonis-like) mine eyes,
Lustful Venus, were thy prize:
And, as she, the bloodlesse youth,
Redder flowers beheld in ruth.
So thou ioyd'st when as each vain
Flowed from me, and earth did stain.
But at length in safety, I
Swifter thee then Daphne fly.
I know, such an enemy might deserve the bitterest farevvell that could be, at
least what I wrote, was enough to deter her from prosecution, or persecuting
with her vexing Lines. Not long after, my brother Leoncio seeing how slowly my
affairs went on, determined at last to put in execution, what he had long
before purposed, but for disquieting my mother: and so having beforehand given
me notice, upon Twelfe-dayes Eve, he came with a couple of horses to the
Castle gate, and leaving a trusty servant to tend them, came up stairs,
where I was expecting: and having seen him, nothing slack to fetch a sword
secretly hidden in my chamber; and so amongst the Keepers we (...) from whom
we soon freed our selves; for they unwilling to hazard where the profit was
small, and the danger great, calling out for help only in the Kings name,
ran hastily into the street: So leaping into our Saddles, we soon left the
City behind us, only I got my man up behind me: at what time the Town was
even now coming to the Keepers aid upon us. That night, by the way toward
Toledo, before morning we got to a Village called Ocea, where my brother had
the greatest part of his Lands and inheritance. There, more securely, and free
from the delays of a lingering suite, some persons of quality mediating, we
began to take the speediest course to end my business; and being in some
likelihood of agreement, the sudden death of Captain Escobar, Clara's father,
marred all, our treaties and conditions for the time (as then) breaking off.
Some month after this, I understood by a Letter from my loyal Fernando, how
Clara one night had stolen out of Segundo's house, to the old Gentleman's great
sorrow, and whole Cities scandal; and the more, when (all diligence used)
there could be no tidings had of her. Touching this unexpected accident, my
friend vvrote me diverse aduertisements, which bred no small trouble to me,
musing what violent fancy might move her to such a leuitie and madness:
neither was I perfectly my self, supposing, that when I least suspected, I
should see her enter my Lodging: so that fearing such an accident, within two
days after, I resolved on a journey to the City of Valldolid; whither some
years before, the Court was removed, from the ancient seat, my loved
Country. The aforesaid doubt clapped quick spurs to my desire, which made
me leave Ocea, taking a faithful servant Senabria with me, whom I much
affected. I omit some ill-boding signs that that day happened to me: and
though I were never that way superstitious, yet had I observed, that when
being out of the town in a plain field, my horse stumbled and threw me, I
had never fallen into the cruel and treacherous hands of mine enemies. But
returning to my journey, about Sunset we trampled on the fiery flints of the
ancient Mantua, leaving behind us, on the fertile banks of golden Tagus, and
hidden Xarama, that rare celestial Aranjuez, viewing by those famous and
Crystal streams, the dry and withered flowers, how as well they, as the
other, accompanied the swift and celebrated Mansanares, who in his low silver
margent, strewed in his parched Priuet, Trifol, Juniper, and Veruine, the
tears he had distilled for the absence of his great Master: The very snowie
cragges, and staring mountain Guadarrama tearing it self; for even rocks and
insensible creatures, with their mourning made known their sorrow for so
undeserved a change. And to deal truly, my eyes accompanied the sad streams
with tears: which effect was increast, by seeing the desert streets,
unfurnished Marketplaces, doors turned to mud-walles, houses disinhabited,
Bars broken, and Bay-windowes dammed up, all topsie-turuie, all even a Chaos
of frightfull confusion; mourning, farewels, sighing and grieuing: so that I
stood upon thorns till I was gotten from my ruined Troy: And having seen my
mother and home, the next day by Sunne-rising, I turned my back to the
Village, traveling on fair and softly, accompanied with a world of people,
that left the motherlesse forsaken Court: for so in misery, men's own children,
even their own flesh leave them.

No sooner was I out of the intangling Grove of the Kings royal House called
Del Campo, when one of a reasonable handsomnesse ouertooke me, riding upon a
wel-paced, flea-bitten horse; who saluting us, asked me, if I traveled toward
Valladolid; and telling him, I did: expressing some signs of gladness, he
told me he went the same way; and that (if so I pleased) would be glad of my
company. I that desired nothing more, (for he seemed a good fellow by his
fashion) with no less courtesy returned my acceptance, and we agreed. That
day we dined at a little Village; where finding house-roome and Victuals
scarce, after we had a little rested, (fearing to light upon no better
conueniencie for lodging at night) I commanded Senabria to make haste before to
the Hill-towne, and take up lodging early for us: and my companion that
counseled him to this, hastening him forward, obtained his desire: so we two
remaining alone in the cool of the evening, then took horse and went on our
way: and amongst other discourse, my companion demanded accidentally (as it
were) of me, if I had ever traveled that way before. I answered, not; not
dreaming of the plot prepared for me; which fell out pat for him, as to me
unfortunately. It grew to be toward night, when my guide leading on in a
blind path, I supposing we were out of the rode-way, told him so much: his
answer was, that this was a shorter cut to the Town whither we were to go;
with which way, out of long experience, and often iourneying, he was well
acquainted. Behind me I might hear some trampling of horses; and therefore
thought what he affirmed was true, and so believed it. This foolish confidence
made me wholy lose that aim, which one encompassed with so late troublesome
affairs might have had: for in stead of that wariness with which I used to
be fore-armed, not considering now with what vigilancie mine enemies might
come upon me, I ran my self into a thicket with one I knew not, and in a
Country I was unacquainted with. But my misfortune was directed by a superior
power, and it was not possible for me to avoid it. Let me tell you, Signior
Leriano, we had scarce traveled a short league in the narrow path, when three
on horseback ouertooke us; which, to my seeming, were the same that a good
while followed us behind. My companion went somewhat aloof, so that I remained
in midst of the four, encompassed on both sides with the close dark
Mountain: and thus we went silently on, till night came on us; and when I
least thought of the future success, I might hear my self called by my name:
and certainly (were it not ridiculous to think so) I should swear, it was
the very voice of Clara I heard; and with the sudden alteration this
apprehension begat in me, about to turn my horse, my treacherous companion
turned his upon me more nimbly, and before I was aware, struck fiercely at me:
the blow (doubtless) saved my life; for cutting my horses raines, when I
looked about, I had nothing left to guide him with, so the other three had
leisure to fasten some wounds upon me: yet standing with my sword to my
defense, as well as I was able, one of the three (whom by the falling off of
his Vizard, I knew to be Rodrigo) discharged a Pistol; but Heaven was pleased
to keep the bullet from me; which (I suppose) wounded my horse: for the beast
at the very instant, (I unable for want of a Bridle to rule him) like a
whirlwind rusht into those brakes and thickets; and (though they followed)
ran so fast, that 'twas impossible to overtake him: or happily they imagined
his owner was deadly wounded; for I my self too thought so, perceiving my
spirits fail me, and my extreme fainting, with which (I remember) I fell from
my horse, and so remained, till such time as I found my self in your company:
and that which makes me most wonder, is, you^ finding me so far from the
Mountain, in the midway to this city, on such a kind of Carriage as you
described: whereby I guess, that some or other before your arrival, began to
do me that charitable office, though to be left in such manner, quite passes my
intelligence; only assured I am of your most affectionate care, for which I
owe the service of my unfortunate life, as restored by your self (next heaven)
to your unhappy servant. Here Gerardo ended his doleful relation, whom Leriano
re-embrac't, and condoling with him his hard success; tears standing in his
eyes, he thus cuts him off: No more ceremonies betwixt us, dear Sir, your
mishaps make me as compassionate, as desirous to help you (as I have promised)
in your revenge. Certain I am (quoth he) that be it never so bitter on the
traitor Rodrigo, none will condemn me, time only must produce the event;
for as yet, I think it best to dissemble my wrongs.

Gerardo's long discourse had made it time for his friend and him to suppe;
which ended, and they passing the rest of the night in sleep, as soon as it
was day, their Oast awaked them, wishing them to get up, if they pleased to see
the execution of three famous prisoners in the City: which when Leriano heard,
he demanded what their crime was, but the Oast could give them no certain
knowledge; only he said, the common report was, that for a strange robbery they
had committed: vvhereupon the two calling a servant for their Clothes, and mine
Oast seeing their care to rise, told them they need not make so much haste, for
that they were to pass by his door, and he would give them notice: not long
after they might see an infinite number, and some religious persons, pass by
the window; and amongst them, the wretched delinquents; behind them followed a
reasonable handsome Youth well clad, making most extreme moan: and the two
Gentlemen looking somewhat wistly on him, he was presently known to Gerardo:
for you must know, that this was the loved Senabria, whom (if you remember)
the afternoon before his misfortune, he sent before to take up lodging; which
when he had done, and seeing his Master came not, neither imagining what might
cause his so long stay, presaging some disastrous accident, before day-breake,
he returned back the way he came; asking as many as he met withal, for his
lost Master. As fortune would, at length a poor shepherd crossed the same way
that Senabria came; who hearing his demand, to his no small admiration, told
him, that not passing an hour before, he saw certain men dragged out of the
Mountain, and carried by a troop of Keepers and Country fellows, with their
arms bound (as prisoners) to a Village some two leagues from that place; and
the reason (as he heard) was, that in the thicket they had killed a Gentleman
for his Money; who (it seemed) had ouer-night lost his way on horseback: which
when the afflicted Youth understood, crying out like one distracted, and
believing 'twas his Master they had slain, without more enquiry of the
shepherd, he spurred his horse what way he with his hand directed him. The
fellow that thus informed Senabria, was not mistaken, if you call to mind the
three compassionate shepherds, that in the beginning of this Discourse, we
left rushing into the thicket, followed by those rude and savage Mountainiers:
they could not so nimbly escape, but that before day-breake, (being shrewdly
baited) in spite of their teeths, they were by their persecuters taken; and
some of these barbarous people that were scattered to and fro in quest of them,
lighted on the horse, which the night before had frighted the poor prisoners,
and others returning to the selfsame place, where Gerardo fell, seeing the
ground and green grass enamelled with fresh blood, could not but be troubled
at the nouelty: and desirous to know more, prying about the near trees, they
found a laced Cloak, and fair embroidered Hat, with a naked hackt sword; at
which their wonder increasing, without farther search, they ran to the rest
of their company, who by this time with much ado, had seized upon the poor
horse; which they might easily do, by reason of the Pistoll-shot and wound
that now grew stiff upon him: they also were amazed to see the spoils that
their companions brought, and were now all of opinion, that their prisoners had
robbed and slain the owner of them for his goods; and though the poor
innocent men with the truth would have given their discharge, 'tvvas but lost
labor to those barbarous people; and though some were their kindred and
allies, yet for fear of the Keepers, and the heinousness of their crimes,
they durst not set them at liberty: so that, deaf to all pity, with cries
and outrage, they dragged them on, at what time the woeful Senabria, hasting
as speedily as his sorrow would permit him, hearing the noise, and directed by
those rascals clamours, without the thicket ouertooke, and having saluted them,
asked the hindermost touching his charge; but he straight knew the swift horse,
that was now led by one of them, and with a grievous scrieke, bereaved of his
senses, he fell to the ground, insomuch that some of them which were nearest,
going to help him, flew back; seeing that, quickly raised, with his sword in
hand, he ran toward them, crying out to show him the villains that had
slain his Master. Whereupon the Keepers had no small ado to pacify him: but
at last with four of those fellows that were skilfullest (having promised to
reward them) he went back to look for him whom he now accounted in another
world: but unable to find the least tracke of him, he took his way toward
Segouia, where giving notice to the Governor of the City, of what passed
within his jurisdiction, and also making known who the murdered party was,
without taking any rest, he traveled all that night, and the next day arrived
at the widow Gerardo's mothers house, who (as you heard) lived in Madrid.
Here was mourning indeed, true sorrow, penetrating sighs, sad groans, from
the woeful Gentlewoman, whose heart even bled, while others eyes ran tears.

With all speed she dispatched a Messenger to her valiant son Leoncio, who
was still at his Village of Ocea, where he and all thereabouts with new tears
celebrated their sorrow and the sad news: but the loving Brother, knowing that
such tenderness was not the way to his revenge, with infinite speed taking
continual Posts, arrived at Segouia, where he was by Don Manuel de Oxanto, the
Cities Governor, more particularly informed of the Tragical success, and
also that the homicides (innocents indeed) were in fast hold. Leoncio now
present, and strong evidence brought in against them, shortly after they were
put upon the Rack, and their courages failing, all three plainly confessed as
much as was required of them, and were legally condemned to suffer for the
fact, and carrying them through the streets to the place of execution, as their
good luck, or rather innocence would have it, the vvounded Gerardo knowing
his trusty Senabria, astonished at his incredible moan, caused a servant with
all haste to call him; which when the afflicted Youth heard, (for he well
knew Gerardo's tongue) he cast up his eyes, and seeing him in the window,
stood stock still, like one in an ecstasy, stirring neither hand nor foot.
But coming quickly to himself, leaving hat and cloak in midst of the
street, he ran and prostrated himself at Gerardo's feet, who was now gotten
down to the Inn door, where an infinite company of people were flocked about
them, that drawn thither by the nouelty of Senabria's extremes, drew near to
see what would be the issue of the matter. And is it possible (said the
faithful servant, crying out) that you are my beloved Gerardo? Is it true that
my eyes behold you, my hands feel you, and ears hear your loved voice? Oh
dear Master, and are you that dead he, whose loss has been so much
deplored by your kindred, servants and friends? Yet why doubt I, since these
hands touch, and eyes not blind really behold you? Heaven, that has had
compassion on your misfortunes, has discovered the traytrous villains that
would have slain you, allotting a just punishment unto them.

These, and such Phrases used Senabria, moved by extremity of joy, at the sight
of his Master, who wondering to hear what he said, touching the Authors of
his wounds, thinking they were apprehended, retyring to his Chamber with the
noble Andasusian Gentleman, his friend; he demanded more particularly of him
what he knew touching the business? who declaring to him all that has been
formerly related, knowing in what danger the poor innocent men were, with
tears in his eyes, full of soft compassion, having (as well as his vvounds
would give him leave) gotten on horseback, and Leriano likewise, they hasted
out of the Inn, and galloping on, with their good speed saved the poor
Shepherds lives, that were now at the Gallows foot.

When the Officers of Justice saw this troop with servants and others that
followed them, thinking they meant to have disturbed the fatal execution,
crying out for help in the Kings name, they went to oppose them, whereby no
small vproare arose in the Marketplace, and whole City; which coming to the
Governors ear, he came, accompanied with many Gentlemen; and amongst them,
the noble Leoncio, into the place; where hearing the just demand of the two
friends, they began to be in more quietness, and Leoncio having known his
Brother with open arms, bathing his cheeks in joyful tears, on horseback
all as he was, ran to embrace him, and after him the discreet Don Manuel, and
the rest of the Gentlemen in order: and so Gerardo's declaration being taken
(in all save discovering Rodrigo) and the Shepherds also telling in what
manner they found him, and upon what terms they left him: Their innocence
known, to the great joy of the two Brothers, as also of the worthy Governor,
and whole City, they were stripped out of their mournful weeds, and were
carried to Don Manuels house, where Leoncio also lodged, and by Gerardo's
bounty, they were carefully cured of the hurt they received upon the Rack, and
after by him plentifully rewarded for their trouble, and losses. The two
Brothers consulted next how they might be revenged; but thought it best to
defer it for the present, giving their enemies first leave to be secure. And
taking leave of the Governor and the Gentlemen of that famous City, they
traveled toward Madrid, (where by this time the happy news was diu^lged) and
with them the good Leriano, who importuned by his friends could not but consent
to the Journey.

Being arrived, consider how her fortunate Gerardo might be welcomed by his
Mother, who hugged him like one newly raised from death, and with no less
love, at least, with like demonstration his Andaluzian restorer, to whom the
whole family with unspeakable joy applide themselves. But fortune that loves no
long quiet, would not that this joy should long continue in Gerardo's joyful
mansion, who with his dear friend was the happiest man (as he thought) alive,
expecting shortly the return of his Brother Leoncio, that with some friends
and kinsmen of his, were gone to the Village of Ocea, to prepare some sports
and pastimes for Leriano's entertainment.

One night amongst others, the two friends wanting Leoncio's company having
retired to bedward sooner then their accustomed hour, about the dead of night,
(the whole household asleep) the two, when they least dreamt of any such
thing, were beset and apprehended by a Judge; vvho^, with store of officers,
the supreme Council had sent to that purpose; which exceedingly amazed them,
though their innoce^ce made them courageously to suffer the blow. The subtle
Judge straight bestowed the^ in several Prisons; and to avoid delays, without
giving them time once to deliberate, examined Gerardo, laying to his charge his
enemy Roderigo's death, and his intent likewise to have slain Clara, with such
sharp and bitter language as extremely troubled the poor Gentleman, not so
much for the bloody crime laid to his charge, as for that the Judge told him
Clara had been married to his treacherous enemy; for though he were dead and
she long ago given over, yet such was his rage and unreasonableness of
jealousy, a passion that pardons not the dead. To what was urged against him,
he knew no better answer then the story of his own wounds and Roderigo's
treachery, alleging withal how much more justly he might have used his best
diligence against the other, since his wickedness and baseness deserved it:
these and the like reasons he uttered, which even satisfide, or at least
somewhat abated the severity of the rigorous Judge.

Touching Clara he spoke indifferently, as not only ignorant of her marriage,
but whether she were alive or no: yet he was still kept in strong hold, with
store of Keepers about him, whilst the cunning and active Judge in the mean
time busied himself in privy searches, sifting of witnesses and the like. But
these exquisite endeavors had all proou'd fruitless, if heaven (when they
least expected) had not maruellously discovered the whole business.

The loyal Fernando, Gerardo's intimate friend, arruing with heavy news, he
brought from Talbora, dispersed these clouds, that thus blinded them in
amazement and ignorance; who casting his valorous arms about his imprisoned
friends neck; and with his ancient past love, arming him to patience, sitting
him down betwixt the compassionate Andaluzian, and the Noble Leoncio now
returned from Ocea, with his known stayednesse and modesty, he thus began:

As soon, my Gerardo (as you had left my Country and me) I endeavored like a
true friend, to do my best deuoir in your absence and service, seeking to
pierce and discover the impenetrable designs and stratagems of your
Adversaries, chiefly Rodrigo, and to give you frequent advertisement by
Letters; and amongst other things (if you remember I wrote you of the daily
visits, night-walkes, and extraordinary diligence he used in Clara's service,
more eagerly, and with more passion, then at any time formerly. Whereupon
Captain Escouar her father dying, to the whole Cities great admiration, one
night she was missing in her Uncles house, and consequently Rodrigo in his,
some nine or ten days after this, happened the sorrowful news of your
treacherous death was bruted in Talbora for certain, which I at that time much
bewailed, suspecting no other to be the Author of it then Rodrigo: and to this
presumption, the shortness of his return served as a stronger motive,
together with his marriage: for, taking Clara out of a Monastery, where he
gave out she was put by his order; seeking to effect his desire, he was much
withstood by all his friends: but he saying he married Gerardo's widow,
passing through all inconveniences, made up the match, and all us his
acquaintance to wonder, considering what we knew of her infamy: Some six
weeks since we heard of your recovery, and not passing three, Rodrigo was
found dead in his bed, with seven deep and dangerous wounds, and his wife by
him with two in her breast, crying grievously out, that you were, the bloody
homicide. All Rodrigo's people were presently clapped up, and the Highways laid
for you; the poor servants had the Rack, to know which of them gave you
entrance into the house. Neither had they till this time ceased tormenting
them, had not Clara, finding her self mortally vvounded (willing to excuse the
neuer-dying death of her soul, advised by her Confessor) told the (...) cause
of that horrible disaster, and the rest; of which she made an admirable
declaration, beginning from your first loves, and proceeding to the cause for
which with so much rigor you left her, she said, That seeing how much she
was by you despised, and how impossible it was for her to return to your
favor (these things forcing her to a despair) she converted that love and
affection, which till then she had borne you into mortal hatred (so much the
greater, by how much our loves are violent) and so looking to nothing more then
a bloody revenge, she used as an instrument, the bold breast of the offended
Rodrigo, of whose love she was confident, being as then more earnestly then
ever courted by him: and therefore sending secretly for him; (all comforts,
promises, and tears that his desire could vvish preceding) she proposed the
business, telling him how much she was bound to him, and only deferred her
recompense, till she saw what might become of her Husband Gerardo, (that name
she still afforded you) saying, that you (as the only let removed) she
forthwith protested to be his Wife, giving him her hand to boot: besides this
(though to so blind a Lover any part of this had been sufficient) she put him
in mind of his disgraceful hurts, the more to incense him, and withal of
your securenesse that made the matter so much the more facile: which effected,
without prejudice to her honor, she might yield her self to his pleasure.

At this Rodrigo sufficiently incited, and stirred up with the remembrance of
his wounds, without further delays, and with a determined courage, promised to
fulfill her commands, though in the accomplishment he lost both honor, life and
fortunes: and so thoroughly agreed, she resolved to commit her self to Rodrigo's
company, as the ensuing night she did; and a few days after with three
servants, tall fellows, and well-armed, they rode toward your Village of
Ocea, where having enquired after you, and hearing you were to go to the
Court, keeping always in kenning, they followed you to Madrid, which place you
left, after you had seen and taken leave of your loved Mother; and being on
your way, near the Kings House Del Campo, one of the servants came into your
company, whom trusting as your guide, you were by him conducted that night,
into the train that was laid for your death, (her husband and the rest of his
servants, setting upon you in that rough and thick Mountain) where (she also
present) they left you, to their thinking, slain with many cruel wounds, which
was also soon published through all the Province, as soon as they arrived at
Talbora. The marriage was after struck up between them, and the Traitor
received the reward of his bloody service: but not long after, he had one more
deserved; for (the sad news of your death cried down again) when Clara heard
it, she was ready to have killed her self* such was the dolor of her
afflicted heart, to think that for the price of your death (vneffected) she was
now married to one she ever mortally abhorred: and thus cheated, her rancour
more increased, making her fall upon a piece of the most barbarous inhumane
cruelty that has been invented, to kill her Husband, and wound her self;
that with that devilish device, she might, without all spot or taint, free
herself from the indissoluble knot, and likewise be revenged on you, with
saying, Gerardo hid within the Curtains, stabbed her husband and her; but the
divine justice (for an exemplary punishment) brought her by her own hands to
this end, which she confessed; and closing up her Discourse, a while after, her
wounds fistulated, and their venom pierced even to the secret virtue of her
afflicted macerated heart, at what time the vital spirits failing, weary of
struggling with her latest pangs, that Gallant sprightly corpse gave up the
reuengefull spirit, whose sad and speedy report no sooner came to my notice;
when knowing how much your life depended upon the Narration, I took this
Posting-iourney.

Here Gerardo with true signs of sorrow, and souls torment, showed the pure
and effectual love he once bore her, that was his Clara, since all those rude
wrongs were not sufficient yet to change him, rather as soon as ever he
heard the fatal report of her miserable untimely end; his tender heart unable
to sustain such a tormenting stroke; and his strength failing, with a
pitiful profound groan, in the sight of his friends, none able to relieve
him, dismayed and swouning, he sunk down to the cold earth.

Here ends the first Tragical Discourse.
GERARDO: THE VNFORTVNATE SPANIARD.
The second Discourse.
LIke some happy Passenger escaped from a violent storm, our Gerardo at length
came to himself out of a deep trance, into which the sad and Funeral news of
the deceased Clara had cast him, once his souls inestimable pledge; but now
the Original of all his woes, imprisonment, fetters and chains that
encompassed him; from which, yet in short time (the truth of all discovered) to
the great rejoicing of his kindred, friends, and his much loved Leriano, he
was at wished liberty; though extremely oppressed with melancholy, which made
him wholly ruin himself, which he so wilfully affected, that his amiable and
pleasing condition was quite changed, being burdensome to his very servants and
whole Family, which bred no small grief to his Mother, Brother and friends,
that entirely loved him; even so Leriano, who in midst of the triumphs that
were prepared for his entertainment (leaving his friends) returned to his
formerly commenced Voyage; the like did Fernando, to his City, where leave we
them, till swift time restore us, the one with an end no less Tragical then
the present. Time, that must now serve as a wholesome Physician, blotting with
his various course out of Gerardo's remembrance, the torment that so rigorously
possessed him, time only could consume, and extinguish it in him; yet not so
thoroughly, but a long time after, the ashes of his former fire sent forth some
smoke.

Gerardo now undoubtedly believed, that in Clara, all the Treasons and deceits
of women were deciphered, but his want of years, and shallow experience,
soothed him on in this opinion. Time brought him further on shore, and at every
step, made him discover new and greater precipices, beset with flattery, vain
shows, false dealing, and dissembled affection; which serving to cool his
youthful blood, and hot affections, with new misfortunes, gave matter to this
second Tragical Discourse.

Long the late accident of his sad love kept him in this retirement, in which
he longer had remained; but that the general noise of extraordinary triumphs
at Court, rowzed up his drowzy spirits. 'Twas now in the year six hundredth
and five, the eighth day of Aprils month, when our wished Prince, Don Philip
the fourth, of this most famous name, was borne, to the wonderful joy of the
third Philip his Father, and no less of that inestimable Australl Margaret his
Mother, and in general of all their Subjects, who with sumptuous
preparations, set forth their true affections, by celebrating the birthday,
with what shows of unfeigned loyalty their hearts could excite them to. To
these universal solemnities, the forgotten Gerardo, accompanied by his
Brother, some kinsmen and other friends arrived at Valladolid, moved as well
through his own desire, as importuned by his friends and allies; or indeed by
his melancholy thoughts, which by the greatness of that renowned City were
diuerted, drowned in the tempestuous Sea of his past misfortunes; for here
every look, each step, presented him with new and several objects. I omit the
description of those Festival Triumphs, as magnificent as stately, worthy a
nimbler quill then mine, my wings dare not soar to so high a pitch: only the
present subject, forced me to touch upon this Summarie Relation and mention.

Gerardo lived near that street, which takes name from the ancient stock of
the Illustrious Ziungas, in an honest private lodging, together with the rest
of his company, where, by their diligent and careful Oast, they were observed
with particular respect (no small happiness in so great a concourse to be so
well accommodated.) One time amongst others, Gerardo, after he had dined,
finding himself not half current, excusing him to his kindred and company,
laid him down to rest: his indisposition though was not so great, but that
within an hour or so, being better refreshed, he could get him to one of the
iron grates of his Chamber window, where, to his no little admiration, to the
found of a shrill Harp, he might hear (though vndistinctly) something sung
with a voice, whose melody even rapt his senses, yet he was not able to guess
from whence those celestial notes should proceed; nor the place, or being,
that concealed this Angelical Orpheus that thus attracted him; till the
suddenness of it passing over, with more vigilance he might perceive, that it
came from a neighboring opposite window, but 'twas not possible to see the
party, by reason of a close green Lettice that was between the bars and the
inside: yet he ghessed it was a woman, as well by the sweetness of her
trebble, as a kind of blush of her presence, which he might confusedly behold.

The pleasing tone ended; at what time Gerardo more violently longed to
re-enioy it; and having a glimpse yet of the Harp, and presuming that in such
occasions 'twas no impudence to beg a courtesy, he was bold by an amorous
sign to re-sollicite the celestial harmony. The hidden Dame was nothing
squeamish; so for his sign, returning him a condiscending nod, with a
sprightly carelesnes, she once again struck up the Royal Instrument, and to
it as to Gerardo's incredible delight, suited this excellent So^net.

Winglesse to mount, or saile' against wind,
Extract from Wormwood Nectar pure,
Imprisoned in a Cave obscure,
Or think the Sunne's light we see (blind:)
An Antidote in prison find,
In midst of danger most secure,
(Laughing) the Torture to endure,
To say that Lightning's light is kind,
Or that dead men do live:
Such power sole Love can give.
The unknown courtly voice had clean transported him, and suspended the very
streets passengers; but something in the Song inwardly affected him, as if he
should be the subject of it: but (being a stranger) it straight seemed
impossible. He could not but show himself thankful, as the shortness of
time, and distance of places would permit him; for just now his Brother and
Kinsmen were gotten in unto him, so he was forced to an Adieu, for fear of
being by them espied, and the concealed Lady, answering with the like, he
turned back to Leoncio, whom only he acquainted with what happened, whereat
he received no small content, (as desiring infinitely to see him some way
diuerted from his former griefs) though whither, or to whom the present suite
was directed, he was utterly ignorant. Some three or four days next
following, Gerardo, by reason of some urgent occasions, was still from home,
till one fair and clear morning (as he was dressing himself at his window)
he might hear one in an amorous Key, with a low Hist call him; and looking up,
saw (though a little imperfectly) yet better in respect of the Sunne-beames
then the first afternoon, a well-shap't-bodied Dame, and to his seeming, a
lively countenance; whom with a low obeisance, saluting, she returned him her
curt'sie. He was persuaded, that though he wanted either Voice or Music, the
party could not but be the same; especially when peering from an Alablaster
hand, he might perceive two smooth (like-Art-turned) fingers, which was the
most real sight the wood-wouen net would afford him: she beckned him to
descend to her window, which he did; when taking up a Paper she dropped, with
unspeakable joy returning to his Chamber, he opened it, and viewed the
following Contents.

It Is now a month since my happy Star (I careless of the blessed occasion
it reserved for me) brought me to this Grate, from whence I saw you alight at
your lodging door, and from that very instant (though it may seem looseness,
thus soon to declare my self, and a thing so contrary to our sex) you had
free admission into my tender heart, which, whether I would or not, you possessed
as absolute over it; and the Owner, who most earnestly desires you, to accept
of her affection with like recompense.

Your IACINTA.

Much was required of GERARDO in this present Ticket, of whose Contents as
careless, as loath to equal the affection the Letter charged him with, he had
recourse to his past misfortunes, and so feared to entangle himself in others
that might prove of like condition. Yet in respect his answer was required,
more for Courtship then necessity or obligation, after he had dined, taking
pen and Ink, he framed this reply:

It Is not the least part of my debt to gracious Heaven, for induing me with
some measure of humility: for had the Superior powers been scarce in this to
me, well might the soothing of your discreet Letter, fair Mistress, have made
me arrogant. But I acknowledge my mean parts, and so rather in cartesie, then
foolish confidence believe you. Yet let me request your belief of this, that
besides your obliging me by the present favor, such a treasure, and so
admirable a Voice has heretofore wholly surprised me. And therefore since I am
your Prisoner, let me be so happy as to have a sight of the Sovereign Iaylor
that must guard me, otherwise it had been rashness to submit my self
voluntarily to the danger, and you your self would impute my determination to
madness.

Your GERARDO.

Such was Iacinta's Letter, and such Gerardo's answer, which she received,
tied to a slight Ribbon cast down from her window, that served as a Messenger
to these new Lovers, and without help of any third party, they made frequent
use of this device.

Iacinta was much importuned by her Lover to be seen; but it was long ere his
desire could take effect. Some days after, as he was greedy of a sight of her,
he might hear a voice again to the Harp, with these Verses.

How do I live, if I have lost my heart?
If I live not, whence feel I all this fire?
If so much heat torment my forced desire,
Why, of my glory do I make it part?
If I be all on fire, what need I Art
To dry my tears, or make wet grief retire?
Or if a Sea of Tears, what, to require
Water, to quench the flame made by Loves dart?
If looking and a sight may satisfy,
Why do I then so much abhor the light?
If I abhor, why do I seek it so?
Mirac'lous Love; the more (in vain) I try
To loosen the hard knot, thy cunning slight,
The more I labor mine own overthrow.
And the end of the Song was quauered out with an harmonious sigh, which
Gerardo at the instant could speedily answer with no bad Echo; as one that had
been well beaten to such passion. But night coming swiftly on, threatened to
part them, which awhile after it did; and giving a pause to their outward
senses, though not to their inward thoughts, brought on day and morning: at
which time coming both early to the usual stands, after their mutual
salutations, Gerardo taking a paper out of his pocket, went down and tied it
to the String at her window, and so left her to read the gladsome ensuing
Verses:

Sweet Voice! I hear thy pleasing harmony,
Though Air resist it, and rebellious wind:
O that the glorious Angel I could see,
That thus inchants mine ear, suspends my mind!
Love, sure, is no bare Voice, no fancy blind,
Nor feigned intention, but realitie;
A substance and engendered Deity,
'Twixt Mars and Venus in adult'rate kind.
Then, if not wholly Voice, since Body too;
Or, yet, if Echo, hark: so may thy fair
Narcissus soft relent and learn to woo:
But why concealed thus do thou declare
Thy self like him, selfe-louing? if not so,
Why art thou naught but Voice wrapped up in air?
Sure I am, that, could Iacinta convert her self into tongues like Echo, or
into eyes like Argus, she would not have spared these transformations, the
more to have obliged Gerardo with them: but now day was spent, and night came
on, that forced them to part, and give way to the priuacy of their amorous
thoughts; in which, passing the greatest part of darkness and the ensuing day,
they returned toward the ordinary stand; and after their usual loving
salutations, Iacinta (taking a paper out of her pocket, and making signs to
Gerardo to come down: he did so, and received it with his usual content, and
(Iacinta going in) opening it, he read these following Contents:

Your importunity, loved Gerardo, to see me is such, that I am willing at
length to give you the content, (confident) that when you have beheld my mean
parts, your worth and my affection must make up their defects. At this Grate
it is not possible, without the danger of our jealous household; you must of
force turn then to the next street, to which the great door of our house
opens, where to morrow in the afternoon at the Bay-window you shall see me,
clad in the color that my heart affects, which shall assure you, I am there
the same that here tells you so.

Your Iacinta.

With exceeding gladness Gerardo read the paper, and satisfied with the
promise, the brief minutes were long days; and the short hours, lasting
ages; till time, not varying his natural course, though he thought him
slower, brought on the prefixed moment; by when, mounted upon a goodly
vvell-rein'd Bay, set out and trapped with rich furniture, and himself clad
in fresh bravery, with a heart suitable, advanced toward the next street;
where having turned, he soon took notice of the Grate and Bay-vvindow before
him; though as then he saw not his Mistress in the appointed place; vvhereat his
mind was not a little disquieted, and having placed a pretty way on, he
thought to return in despair to his Lodging; and putting it in execution, as
he came back just against Iacinta's door, looking up, he might see where, at
the gilded Bars she expected him, accompanied with so singular Beauty, as
might have amazed the strongest-hearted beholder; an aspect so awfully
maiesticall, as might breed an amorous fearful respect, as of some powerful
Deity; the effect being soon manifest in Gerardo: for no sooner by the
cut-greene of her attire, had he a view of her celestial countenance, when
loosening the reins, and his legs loosing the stirrops, he remained like
Jasper, or an Image; so deprived of memory, that he wanted it to salute her:
neither had his fault so ceased, but that the free Ginet, finding the flexible
reins at liberty, without leave of his bereaved Master, trotted on somewhat
faster then the state of his usual prancing required; at whose uneasy pace
Gerardo awaked, and himself extremely abashed, drew up the reins, and
re-settled in his stirrops, performed (though a little unseasonably) a courtly
salutation; and taking a turn back again, meant fully to recompense that
amorous neglect, (if where love reigns, any may be so termed.) It grew toward
the Evening, so our new Lover glad with the sight of his Mistress, and his good
days work, returned home, and many a time after was favored in this kind,
as also with her Letters and Songs full of sweetness and conceited harmony.
Many a time after he saw her at a Monastery, vvhither she used to repair,
accompanied with her mother and family. All this while he had leisure to
inform himself secretly of her friends qualities and means, which he
understood to be such, and her self every way so complete, that the
happiness of his love began to delude his hopes: though the gentle Iacinta,
with her many favors, more and more encreast and nourisht them. The greatest
part of the Summer was spent in this contemplative affection, he as careful
to conceal it from his friends, as she from her household servants: for this
secret vigilancie was the Sanctuary of their reputation, indeed of both their
lives, as shall farther appear in this Tragical Relation; which even now
drew on, upon the small hope Gerardo conceived of his happiness; since too,
when he least suspected, he was assaulted with one of the accustomed
thwarts of his adverse fortune, which raised a new trouble, Iacinta giving him
to understand by a Letter, that her Parents in all haste meant to marry her,
perhaps presaging some unluckiness to betide her. The knowledge of this
filled Gerardo with fear, as her with grief, though she were resolute to
oppose her parents desires, since hers to Gerardo were so settled, that she
would rather endure a torturing death, then make any other the Owner of her
life. And though with this news, and with what was added by her, Gerardo's
passion daily increased, yet he never used so much as the least persuasion, to
dissuade her from a just filial obedience: for being altogether unresolved
yet to turn married man, he would not openly hinder the party that pretended,
neither yet till he saw the issue, desist from his own loves pretension.
Iacinta's parents were so bent upon the match, that without her consent, the
unhappy nuptials with a kinseman of hers were to be performed: to which effect
the day of the Ann^nciation of our Lady was appointed.

I cannot (though with some digression) but here take notice how foolishly
stupid those parents are, that so rashly thrust their children into an estate,
that only death can separate them from; since such matches have seldom
produced other then some pitiful end, or shameful effect, as the present will
demonstrate, making the fair Iacinta so desperate, as rather resolve to die
then to marry; of which her purpose, though she gave daily notice to Gerardo,
yet he, seeing things come to that extremity, giving small credit to his
hopes, endeavored now by little and little to weane himself from his
affection; which coldness of his, his Mistress perceiving, and the ungrateful
requital; her tears and moanes strongly increased in such sort, that void of
all comfort, with the resentment of her new grief and jealous torment, taking
pen and ink, accompanied with the flowing streams of her fair eyes, she thus
writes to her forgetful Lover.

If the facility with which thou becamest Lord over my life, have made thee so
hard-hearted, as neglectfull to forget me, false and unconstant man! thy
proceeding is as base, as needs must be thy birth; since, if thy dissembling
breast did nourish any noble blood, reason would teach thee to repay my
affection, laying before thee my true and constant love, which only forced me
to so sudden madness, that by my licencious doting on thee, our sex should
lose their principal glory and ornament. But, ay me, feolishly blind! I my
self gave thee power, and thrust those arms into thy hands, that will be my
death, which every moment threatens me; since I shall be forced, rather then
any possess that place which my heart first gave to thee, with my own hands
to inflict it on my self; and rest assured, that though my unfortunate
marriage be upon the nearest terms that may be, neither friends, kindred, or
parents shall make it on my part take effect, nor shall that false faith, with
which thou have sold me, make me less vnderualew thee firm and loyal mine
Own.

Largelier would she have written, but it seemed, the violence of her passion
both tied her hands, and troubled her invention: poor creature! she weeps,
sighs, and laments, and suddenly refraining such passion, checkes those
tears, and her sorrow proposes and disposes herself to forget; and in an
instant abhorres, and repenting her lightness, (resolved now on a permanent
affection, and determined on a more settled estate) means to obey her parents
straight again. Without consulting with her last purpose, she outragiously
cries out upon her self, and as if she were really transformed into her
Gerardo, as effectually alleges for him, excuses his forgetfulness: and
concluding thus (fearful to offend her Lover) tears the Letter she has
written: not long after, all in a rage, punishing the Stars, she curses
their influence; and bepearling the smooth Cristall of her face, bedewes the
paper she writes, and the wrought Ebone Yuory Deske on which it rested, with
her tears; from whence speedily starting, and resolved lastly on her just
choler, she went to the window, from whence she might espy Gerardo; who with
like care stood at his, and so without expecting the least sign, or lifting up
her grieved countenance, she let fall a Paper without further stay; and by the
shutting of her window gave sufficient testimony of her passionate distaste.
All which Gerardo felt within himself, and fearful of some new change in his
Mistrisse, having soon caught up the Letter, and as hastily read it, the angry
contents gave him rather content then trouble, since those rigorous Lines
assured his hopes, which was the ground of his answer to Iacinta, whereby her
jealous sorrow was well abated.

But now the appointed time came on, as acceptable to Iacinta's parents, and
the whole household, as miserable and bewailed by her in such extremity, that
unable to sustain her woes, she fell into several swounings, into her mothers
lap, and arms of diverse Dames her kinswomen and friends, that were then
assembled to see her nuptials performed; which by reason of her indisposition
were then necessarily, till the next day deferred.

These things passed in Iacinta's house, whilst the afflicted Gerardo, unable
to rest in any one place, with unquietness of his thoughts, one whiles on
horseback takes several turns in his Mistrisses street, and then returning
home, gets him to his window another usual way to his Love; till night coming
on, with his own habit and darkness doubly masked, without fear of being
known, he might safely enter into the ouer-ioyed house of Iacinta, which was
now all feasting and music: and increased in Gerardo's breast a more strong
suspicion, that his Mistress at length, like a very woman, had been wanting to
her word and promise; and so with a careless carfulness, he sought to
inform himself of an old serving creature, (whose unpleasing age had freed
him from being one of the Iouiall company) sat down in a chair, who hearing
Gerardo demand the occasion of their iollitie, told him in his slow manner, the
whole matter; confirming his former suspicion: for indeed Iacinta overcome by
the continual importunities of her Parents and kindred, did as at that time
yield her hand and consent to her Cousin and husband. Scarce had the melting
Gerardo heard the last accents of the tedious Seruingman his discourse; when,
his faint body covered all over with a cold sweat, he was forced to lean to
the near wall; dissembling as much as in him lay, his sad passion, but
perceiving the violence of it to increase, leaving the house, he returned to
his own, where his brother Leoncio expected him, with the same care, and
equal desire to know the success of his affairs. But he needed no further
information then Gerardo's looks; so shutting the chamber door, comforting
his brother with a cheerful countenance, thus he begins to set upon him.

Dear Brother, It Is needless to increase your distemper, this day we expected
the event of Iacinta's vows, in which, if, (as I suppose) she have failed,
it is right Woman. If well you note, what becomes your grief, you may make
your comfort; for being now reclaimed, you shall see, heavens blessing,
breaking with the frailty of an unconstant opinion, the strong chains of your
oppressed liberty, an eternal slavery, perpetual, everliving, neuer-dying
grief, subject to the ungrateful proceeding of a light house-wife, whose most
common practice, is, to recompense our love with change, our remembrance with
neglect, toil with disdain, truth with falsehood, and our firm good-wil with
their fading affection; all their thoughts, words, and deeds, full of
continual mutabilitie, tending to our latest destruction, that being the aim
and scope of all their natural dissimulation And this truth, the present case
may make you not deny, nor due thanks to heaven for so remarkable benefit;
take comfort then, since no reason it is, so happy a success should deprive
you of it. The afflicted Gerardo was about to have replide something; at what
time one of his servants interrupting him, said; There was a stranger, at
door would speak with him, which made him (breaking off the discourse) go
out; where when he came, he might see one with his face muffled in his Cloak;
but by the habit seeming some person of quality, and commanding his man to
leave them, desirous to know the party, and what his occasion was, courteously
demanded the one and the other of him. But in stead of an answer, the concealed
Gallant threw himself forward to have embraced him; which being sudden as
unexpected, might have cost him dear; for at the instant Gerardo fearing to be
clozed withal, drew back his left foot, and his sword with his right hand, and
the point clapped forward, missed little of running the other through; besides,
Leoncio (suspecting something) by this time was come, if need had been, to his
brothers defense. And doubtless it had gone heavily with the disguized party,
if, seeing what happened, and Gerardo's misdoubt of him, he had not unmasked
himself, and retired, saying; How now, Gerardo? is this the entertainment you
give me? is this the harbor I find in your breast? have I this contradiction
from your Arms? is my loyalty thus recompensed? my dangerous boldness thus?
Ah, deceitful man, that I should thus be caught by thy flatteries! but,
farewell: I may arrive in some place, where perhaps I shall have entrance. And
the party abruptly breaking off, would feign have departed; which when Gerardo
saw, (for no sooner had the disguized person discovered that fair face, when
it was known, for no less then the rare Original of the most beautiful
Iacinta) and into what error (though unwillingly) he had fallen, hastily
ouertaking her, he brought her back to his chamber; and there with his
Brother, privately locked themselves together, Leoncio desirous to be rid of
the doubt, with which the strangeness of this success had possessed him.
Gerardo thus infinitely obliged to his offended Mistress, falling passionately at
her feet, begs humble pardon for his fault and forgetfulness, since his own
unworthiness of so great a glory might serve for his excuse. And though this
and other speeches passed, yet he still thought himself in a dream, which
only represented to him such a fantastical shape, as was indeed really
before him: and in this sleepie frenzy, he could do nothing but feel
Iacinta's body with his hands; who in no less content and excess of joy,
raising her Lover from the ground, and joining lips, could hardly believe it
was Gerardo she had in her arms.

A pretty while these two Lovers remained in this amorous conflict, their
content making them mind nothing else, till Leoncio satisfide by these
extremes in the truth of which he was before doubtful, wondering at Iacinta's
resolute determination, approached, dissoluing the straight knot that bound them
in their close embraces, and though he could not but apprehend much hazard
from this act of hers, yet beheld such beauty and attractiue merit in her
person, that Gerardo's affection, which before to him seemed blind, was now
blameless: and considering that in so dangerous a business it was fit to take
a mature course, without more delay, he desired to know of Iacinta, what shift
she had made to get thither, that accordingly their after-proceeding might
succeed the better. To which the fair Dame made answer, assuring him she had
no other counselor, but her own secret thoughts, to which no creature was
privy; wherefore by mutual consent it was agreed, that Gerardo and Iacinta
should take a journey toward Arragon, and in the interim, Leoncio to aduize
them of the proceeding of her friends; who, having instantly (as she was
wanting) missed her, used all diligence round about the house in her search,
where they least suspected the mischief, in the garden they found a little
door that opened to the street; and near it a table covered with green and
wouen myrtles, where her Gown and Clothes lay, which should have been the
ornaments of her Nuptials, but were now the Relics of a sad remembrance: For
know, that as Iacinta, at the fond importunity of her Parents, had unwillingly
given her hand to her offended Spouse; so repenting as quickly, and in an
amorous vehemence, shutting the eyes of reason to all inconveniences,
dissembling her discontent, by saying she was not well, she betook her self
to her chamber, and stealing from thence by a lower window into the
forementioned Garden, and suddenly clapping on the man's attire which she had
in a readiness, leaving her own in the place, she underwent the course here
related; so much prevailed the memory of Gerardo in her tender heart, and the
wrong done him, by giving her word to another.

'Twere needless to describe the whole families lamentation for the loss, or
the exquisit pains used in her search: suffice it, we bring these Lovers to a
safe and quiet Port; who now upon their hasty departing, by the good care and
ordering of the prudent Leoncio, before midnight, without being by any espied,
well furnished with Jewels and Crowns, took their way from that populous
City, toward the ancient unconquered Numantia, which they thought at present
to be the securest way, and in few days after, they joyfully there arrived;
and having rested awhile, returned again to their travel, and at length came
to their iourneys end, the desired City of Zaragosa, to the no little joy and
comfort of the two Lovers.

So many and excellent gifts of nature adorn this great City, that deservedly,
above the most famous of the renowned style, it merits the royal name of
Caesar Augusta. Here Gerardo for some years was settled, and in respect of the
content he enjoyed in his loved company, would not have changed his condition
of life for a far greater; so conformable were both their affections, or
indeed so superior Iacinta's, admitting no comparison.

Gerardo had with his noble and generous carriage, in short time gained on the
best affections in that City, whereby he was as equally beloved, as the best of
the Gentry or Inhabitants: to express it, in all their Meetings, Maskes,
Shows, and what ever Solemnities, as well private as public, he still made
one, and was chosen as an Vmpire or Stickler amongst all his friends: his most
especially professed, was one Don Iayme de Aragon, a worthy branch of that
royal Name, and landed in the best part of that Kingdom; from whom Gerardo
concealed not his inmost thoughts, nor the occasions about Iacinta, (parties
only spared.) This Gentleman, amongst other possessions that were of his
inheritance, not past seven leagues from Zaragosa, had a pretty Village, as
well peopled as most in that Country, and the best for Summer and shade
abounding in dainties, of all Arragon; where for his recreation, and fresh
coolness, he often used to pass the scorching heates: and purposing a journey
thither, with much entreaty, or rather daily importunity, he won Gerardo at
length to accompany him: which chiefly in respect of the great obligations he
had to his friendship, he could not but consent to, though it were not possible
that Iacinta should be left one minute alone, so that after some debating, it
was resolved, that all three should go the journey. The same day they parted,
in delightful conversation they at night about Sunset arrived at a Castle
which belonged to a Kinsman of Don Iayme's, where alighting, they were heartily
welcomed, just at the instant that by another way two Pilgrims also entered,
who by their fashion and manner of salutation, seemed to be others then what
their course habits made show of, who in respect they were like to have been
benighted, were forced to entreat the Owner of the Castle to be pleased to
afford them for that night a lodging; to which he willingly condiscended, and
showed the way in to the whole company. Gerardo demanded of them (for they
seemed to be Castilians) of what part they were, and which way their Pilgrimage
lay; to which, one of them answered, that they were of Andal^zia, and
Inhabitants of the famous City of Seuill, from whence they traveled purposely
on Devotion to the best Churches and Monasteries of Spain, whose Patron, they
had already seen at Compostella, and were going at present to the miraculous
Lady of Zaragosa.

When Gerardo heard him name Seuil, he would not (as having the good Leriano in
mind) but ask if they knew such a one, presuming that a Gentleman of his
quality, could not but have come to their notice. But no sooner had Gerardo
breathed out the final accents of his friends name, when the Pilgrim that had
spoken to him, unable to refrain, burst into tears, and with weeping ^ighes
made him see, what passion the name of Leriano had stirred in him, which also
caused no less alteration in Gerardos mis-giuing breast: and so sitting him
down in the forepart of a goodly Bay-window looking to the Garden, whilst
Supper was preparing (together with Don Iayme and the rest) he earnestly
requested him, whose grief made him shead those fresh tears, to declare the
cause of such distastefull sorrow, since it must needs be extraordinary, by the
resentment it had forced him to.

The woeful man hearing himself thus importuned, with a deep fetched groan
(true sign of his interior anguish) thus went on.

Wonder not, gentle Sir, nor think it vvomanish in me, that mine eyes show
this present weakness, since the party you mentioned, whom I above the world
affected, may with his remembrance cause in me* far greater effects: and
therefore I most humbly beseech you, not to afflict my wearied spirits, by any
further inquiries into that particular: when ending, with a new beginning of
tears, his grief served as sharp ^purres to hasten Gerardo's desires, who
for the same cause that retarded the Pilgrims Narration, was more earnestly
persuaded, that some disasirous accident had befalne his old acquaintance: and
with the like sorrow (though dissembling it in his looks) he once again
adventured. The strict friendship which has been betwixt Leriano and my
self, more then impertinent curiosity, obliges me, that (not obeying your
command) I re-intreat you, to deliver me from the mortal doubt in which I
remain, by satisfying me, (though it be something painful) since I dare
assure you that to give you ease, I would hazard my person for you, as also for
my dear and loving friend I ask for; and let me tell you that Leriano has
not a greater in the world them my self, nor one that more unfeignedly owes
him service; for such are my engagements, as extend to no less then debt of
life.

If that be so, said the sad Pilgrim somewhat more cheerfully, you are
(doubtless) Gerardo, of whose marvelous Story I have often heard our dear
friend make mention. Though I purposed (said Gerardo) whilst a stranger in
these parts, to have concealed my name, (being but in Pilgrimage as it were
like you) yet that you may not deny me the favor I require, I must not hide
the truth from you: and therefore you may know me for the same party, your
servant; and since we are both true professed friends to Leriano, I should be
glad you would esteem me so, and not excuse what I have so earnestly
entreated. Here the Pilgrim rose up, and with a less cloudy countenance,
spredding both Arms, came toward Gerardo, saying, Believe me, Noblest Sir, As
great was my desire of knowing, as the happiness comfortable of seeing you;
give me those valorous Arms of yours, let me embrace the lively Representer
of my true Friend, whom, bootelesse I at present bewail; 'twere idle in me
now not to obey before you should command (though I must endure a rigorous
Torment in the recounting of past accidents) and the greater, since of
necessity: for introduction to your friends sad disaster, I must mention one
of the wofullest Tragedies that has truly and really happened to mortal man
in these times: and so saying, ready he was to have begun, but notice being
given that Supper was coming, by common consent, the story was deferred till
after, to the suspicious Gerardo's grief, and the rest of the companies,
though in different respects. So supper ended, the board taken away* and all of
them attentively silent, the mournful Pilgrim thus began:

Though I may well (illustrious company) be discouraged to proceed in my
promised Enterprise, as well for renewing my immense sorrow, as also for the
danger I may undergo, there being some one amongst you, that may justly for
his friend tax me of wrong; yet relying on the innocence of mine own breast,
and the nobleness of yours, I shall make good my purpose, giving a strict
account of my unfortunate successes; yea, the whole progress of my life, even
to the instant you behold me in.

First, know then, that my Mother in her unhappy labor, after her delivery of
me, dyed: (I not deserving to know her) so from my tender infancy, I was
subject to all the discommodities, that children are, wanting the careful eye
of a loving Mother, howsoever my education being in the plentiful house of
Angelo Milanes my father, that want was well qualified. The hearty affection
he ever bore his loyal Spouse, produced so heavy effects in his sad
remembrance by her fatal absence, that no company or entertainment able to
yield him comfort, he became (like one of another world) extremely pensatiue;
but finding that the place where he was, where he had past his youth with a
loving Wife, might be the chiefest renuer of his frequent sorrow; he
determined with himself to have this inconvenience farther off, by putting the
spacious Ocean betwixt him and home: for having sold the best part of his rich
possessions, and turning the moneys into Merchandise, he imbarqued himself in
a tall well-rigged Ship for the West Indies, and so to the rich Province of
Peru, where being with prosperous Gales, after a double Voyage, safely arrived,
landing his commodities, he made of them a strangely gainefull return, and
loading his Ship back (himself remaining behind) he consigned her to Seuil,
where the goods aboard, the remainder of his Estate at home, and my self, were
committed to the charge of a Brother of his my Uncle; and now (by reason of his
riches and content in those remote parts) we despaired of his return for a
long time; and surely there he might have till this time staid, if heaven had
not changed his purpose, as you shall see the occasion of this alteration
proceeding from a certain Castilian Gentleman, of the Imperial City of
Toledo (called Leonardo Argentino) who, having prodigally wasted a fair Estate
his inheritance, seeing himself almost ruined, and his Noble Family have
scarce wherewithal to pass a moderate being (taking up in time before all was
consumed) with good (though necessitous advice) he resolved upon the same
Voyage that my Father had formerly done before him, leaving the loved company
of his Wife, with a grieved heart for his departure, and a beautiful young
Daughter called Isdaura, the only Pledge and comfort of his cares; and though
her tears and tender sighs might in the occasion have melted even Marble;
yet, in the resolute Leonardo, they workt no effect; so his afflicted Wife was
forced to license him, for a limited time of seven years: and then putting the
half of his estate into stock and goods, the rest with his Wife and Daughter,
he made over to the charge and fidelity, of an old trusty servant, whom he
loved as an adopted son, which, and the being a loyal Biscayner by birth,
made the discomfortable Gentleman rely the more upon his faith and honesty.

His good fortune afterward, or rather my ill stars, brought him to the end
of his intended Voyage: and having made sale of his few commodities, seeking
vvithall some kind of employment, as presuming upon the ability of his good
parts, he came in a fit coniuncture, at such time as my Father (having lost his
Bailiffe and Ouerseer of his Herds, newly dead) was hearkening after another,
and by accident they both met (my Father as well satisfy with Leonardo's
person and presence, as the other with his affable and generous disposition:)
wherefore striking up on both sides, for the manner of service and recompense,
he remained with him, and so carefully discharged his duty, that in short time
my Father might see the increase of that estate that was under his hands, with
so plentiful an income, that now he himself (though present) began to forget
and give over all toil, dis-burdening his cares upon Leonardo's shoulders,
with whose vigilancie he lived at ease.

All this while our Bayliffe forgets not the intent of his Voyage, nor those
Pledges that expected him at home; for with his own stock, together with my
Fathers bounty, he had now gotten a good estate of money and goods together,
multiplying the same yearly, by the great and rich fraights that yearly
passed betwixt Spain and the Indies: so that before his seven years were
accomplished, he was esteemed one of the richest men in the Kingdom, which
made him think upon his return and Country: and in this mind, one-day as my
Father and he were alone, he made known his purpose unto him; which when he
heard, I cannot express the resentment it caused in his passion; and hoping
yet that his entreaties might dissuade Leonardo, he sought all he could (all in
vain) to divert him: and yet the other fearing to be thought ungrateful for
so many benefits received, if he should not something satisfy with the just
cause of his departure, after he had made known his right name and quality;
withal, what Pledges he had left behind, that long looked for his return; so
effectual and powerful were his reasons, that my Father had not a word to
reply against them: and the discharge he gave, caused not this effect alone in
my Father, but obliged him also to bear him company, awaking in his heart the
dead affection of his house and home. And so resolved on their Voyage, against
the going of the next Fleet; in the Interim, they had leisure, to exchange,
sell and put off, all their goods and cattle, which to an incredible number
they had in those parts; so that not long after, with two Ships richly laden,
and a prosperous Voyage, they arrived at the famous Port of Saint Lucar, of
which we his kindred having had former notice, by the arrival of a Bark of
advice, were there in a readiness to receive him. My Father, before they came
on shore, taking him, whom he held as his best friend, to him in private thus
discoursed:

Most assured I am, friend Leonardo, that you are sufficiently persuaded of my
love and affection, as I of yours, in which particular you cannot exceed me; I
would therefore that no humane accident should dis-linke this our amity, or
that by absence it should any way be slackned. To make it the more lasting and
perfect: I have thought upon a means, your self consenting, that shall make
that, not only whilst we live, firm, but strengthen it in our posterity, by
mixing our bloods, and conforming with my desire, by giving your only daughter
to my only son Roberto Milanes (for such is my unfortunate name) to Wife; which
may soon take effect, if Heaven have been pleased to bless these our Pledges,
with the life that we desire: I shall be glad herein to receive your
resolution.

Leonardo's answer was, to cast himself at my Fathers feet (his eyes
starting out tears of content) and mustering up the several delights of his
soul, with words worthy his nobleness, after he had extolled my Father in his
actions, he not only offered him his only Daughter, which he demanded for me;
but joined to it a new and transcendent protestation, of goods, life and honor:
and so embracing each other, on shore they came, to our infinite content that
expected him, who had now been eighteen years from his native soil, my
self being about six years of Age when he left Spain. I forbear to
express my own joy, which he may only conceive, that knows what it is to
be the sole son of a Father.

We stayed not long in the Port; for such was my Fathers longing, to see his
desired home, that we were quickly at Seuil, where, I being acquainted with his
mind, touching the match, disposed my self like a dutiful son, to obey his
command, preparing my self, with all alacrity to the journey; in the mean
time, that a Post was now returned, sent by Leonardo, as soon as he came on
shore, to his City, and home, with the news of his landing, and the Posts
return as it gave my Father-in-Law infinite content by hearing of his dear
Wife and Daughter; so it caused no less in me to be informed by the Messenger
to the full of my desire, of my Spouse her excellent parts, and admirable
beauty; which made me stand upon thorns till I might depart, though my
Father-in-law lost no time for us both: and sending before him the best part of
his goods and treasure, and after taking a passionate leave of his dearly
intimate friend my Father, setting down the day of my setting forward, by such
time as we should hear of his arrival at home, he betook him to his way;
and coming in few days to his iourneys end. Consider, worthy Gentles, if, at
his welcomming, those ancient tears for his departure might be renewed, though
producing at present a more different effect.

My Father-in-law with the general increase he found in his house, as well of
the small estate he left, as the rare beauty and discretion of his beloved
Isdaura, health, and content of his Wife, servants and whole Family; Judge
whether he could choose but rest most thankefully obliged to gracious Heaven, to
whose goodness, yielding a due acknowledgement, he gave notice to his Wife, of
the intended match; and finding her, conformable to his wish, to the general
gladness of his household, and friends, he began to prepare for the ensuing
Nuptials. The day of my departure now at hand, with my Fathers blessing, and a
leave taken of yours and my dear friend Leriano, accompanied with a servant or
two, in four days Posts, I came in sight of the ancient walls of Toledo, my
Wife and her Father, Country and Mansion, where being arrived and at the
house, in stead of a joyful receptable, I found it nothing but a harbor of
grief, tears, and confused sadness (a thing that caused great amazement in
me) though when the owners knew of my arrival, I was by them joyfully
welcomed (my presence being an evident comfort to the sorrow that afflicted
them) of which I needed no other information, then to see the dead body of
their old servant, the trusty Biscayner showed me, which was laid under a
black Hearse, struck through with five cruel wounds, found early that morning,
laid at the street doors threshold, and wrapped in a bloody sheet, not any so
much as imagining, who, how, or when he should be thus lamentably butchered,
though extraordinary search had been made to find out the Author. They told
me how they had brought him up from a little one, how much they loved him for
his good service, how faithful he had been in his Masters absence, and what
a miss by his death they were like to have of him; so that (all considered) me
thought their grief was not exorbitant, and satisfide, for that which
otherwise had been somewhat of the slightest, my welcome. Thus by this
accident, my marriage was two days longer adiourned, which to me were years
of tedious prolixitie: for having gotten a gracious sight of my new Mistress, my
ardent desires, incited by so much beauty, increast in me with more violence.

At length the prefixed day came, together with the wished night, in which
having to my unspeakable joy reaped from my Bride the sweet fruit, amorously
passing the rest of it, at length (out bodies mutually in each others Arms
enterlaced) we fell asleep. But not long were our weary limbs laid to soft
rest, when my Wife with her hands and sudden affrighting shriekes awoke me,
and loud loud cries raised me to the help of her Fathers house, that was now
all on a light flame; at which I was so astonished, that without so much as a
question, taking my night-gowne, I nimbly leapt out of the Chamber, where the
smoke and sparkles of the untamed Element, that even now mounted up to it is
own Sphere, even blinded me; and running where the flame was greatest, I
might see my Father and Mother gotten thither, and the rest of the house also,
by which time the Bells had given their accustomed signal of the danger;
whereupon (the neighborhood and City all in a confused vptoare) with their
help, the merciless flames were soon humbled. All our house was nothing
but noise, wringing and wailing; in midst of which, I might most lowdly hear
my wives scrieches, that, fearing lest some disaster had befalne her, finding
her quickly out by the echo of her shrill cries, I might view her supported by
her Mother, having fallen in a deep swoune into her Arms, not far from a
deep Well, about which, diverse of the servants were gotten together with much
stir; vvhereupon, seeing my Isdaura in so sad plight, my torment increast,
and the more, when they told me the cause of her sudden dismaying, no less
woeful then the lamentable end of the unhappy Biscayner; for a handsome
discreet maid-seruant of hers, following his unlucky fate, a little before I
came, having been earnest to draw water to quench the fire (whether with some
fright or other accident falling in) in an instant (there being no means to
save her) was drowned: and being within a while after drawn up, my Wife and
Mothers moanes were again renewed, and so extremely, in respect of their love
to the poor Wench brought up from a child by them, that I thought it
impossible to comfort them, especially for me, that in such cases needed it as
well, as much my self.

But time cured in them their griefs, though with me they are still present;
neither can I forget those prophetical boadings of my vvretched marriage
(which thus accomplished) and not long after, my Father with diverse Letters
hastening our departure, taking leave of my Isdaura's friends, with much grief
we parted, having the good Leriano in our company, who was now (returned from
Court) bound with us for Seuil, from whence some little while after me, he
had formerly absented himself. He came thus seasonably to Toledo, and so we
had a most pleasing journey, understanding from him, by the way, your unhappy
misfortunes. At last we arrived at our home, where we were still expected, and
by my Father welcomed, where Isdaura, with the dainties and variety of the
place, quickly forgot her absent Parents and kindred.

And having for our better freedom taken a house to live in apart from my
Father, we were often visited by my worthy friend Leriano: so well and
happily lived I with my loved wife, that I could scarce be from her sight a
minute; those fair eyes being the Adamants that attracted my whole content.
But cruel fortune would not allow me many years of this prosperous estate,
as, envious of the firmness of our amorous quiet.

At this time Leriano's friendship and mine was as strict, as on both sides
equally requited, not a day escaped us, in which one of us saluted not the
other, either he coming to my house, or I going to his lodging; our love so
reciprocal, as had one womb at first owned us, or the selfsame blood given
us nourishment.

One day amongst others, in which it was not possible for Leriano to see me, or
for me to meet with him, each of us (Louer-like) jealous of each other, and
both attributing to neglect, were willing with the same intent to meet in our
obligations.

So somewhat late at night, I went to stay for him at his lodging, and he to my
home to expect me, where he found that my loved Isdaura, having not been very
well, was gone to bed, and entertaining the time with her in my absence, stayed
thus expecting me till night began to be very far spent; when I
(perceiving also his stay) remitted for that time my hope of seeing him; and
returning to my house, found the door locked, (a thing unusual, I from home)
and having diverse times knocked, wondering at the delays, and suspicious for so
slight a matter, I peeped at a small chinke of the door to see what might be
the cause: but would Heaven, I had been blind, when I was thus curious; a
she slave I might see coming down stairs to let me in, and behind her a
man, who being beneath, crossed toward my Garden door, which bred such an
astonishing alteration within me as you may easily suppose; in this amazement,
as soon as I was entered, I rushed after into the Garden, where I might
perceive the party running to hide himself amongst certain thick Myrtles,
which sooner then my speed were the cause of his untimely death; for being
entangled in those thick boughs, unable to stand upon his Guard, with my
sword drawn, I gave him three desperate thrusts, not heeding his calling me by
name, or crying out to hold, till falling to the ground, I knew him, whom so
inhumanely I had laid at my feet to be my best of friends, my Leriano. And
being fully assured of it, letting fall the weapon from my angry arm, I
remained as near death, as he that lay before me, who now with a faint and
languishing voice, desired me to get a Confessor to him; I lost my senses, and
with the wicked Act was ready to run mad, at such time as in these last
accents of his, I might hear mine own mischief, and my friends innocence.

How has heaven suffered, dear Roberto, that at this time your friendly sword
should become my homicide? in what had your Leriano offended you, that you
should take so rash a revenge on him? But alas, why complain I of you, whom I
pardon my death? an unnecessary diligence of mine own gave way to it, sprung
from a wary care of your wife, whose faith to you has equalled my loyalty,
the which, (heaven can witness) toward you, has ever been inviolable. But
his swift Fate, allowing him not a minute longer to expound his intricate
meaning, clozing his eclipsed eyes, he gave up his spirits in my arms, mine
being so much tormented, that sure I had then followed him, had I been fully
satisfied in the jealous doubts that afflicted me; to which end leaving my
dead friend, to my Wifes chamber I went, whom neither there, nor any where else
I could find, only the squeaking and noise of her maids even rent my heart,
who crying out on their Mistress, doubled my distraction, and still increast it,
when one of them said, Isdaura had cast her self out of the vvindow in her
smock, as soon as she heard the good Leriano cry out, and the unhappy news of
his innocent death, fearing justly her own, from my indignation, which
(though faultlesse) might light upon her. I began to demand the cause, why
Leriano hid himself: they told me, 'twas at her instance; for being (as you
heard) in discourse with her, when she heard me knock at the door, knowing
it to be shut (though through the forgetfulness of her servants) thinking the
novelty, and Leriano's unreasonable company might engender some base suspicion
against her honesty; not calling to mind, that brotherly affection between us,
she grew so timorous, that (without better advice) by pure entreaties she
commanded the unwilling Leriano to that miserable shift: for thus ever
rashness draws on such heavy mischiefs. Consider, Gentlemen, I beseech you,
whether my hand were faulty, or his indiscretion rather, that would suffer it
self to be guided by the fearful counsel of an afflicted woman.

Heaven can witness for me, that as often as I resolve in my sad fancy, the
disastrous end of my dear friend, I am willing to inflict the like on my
self, (though in all equity and rigor I am reserved from it.) But the love I
bore him, obliges me to such a determination, since I may truly affirm, that
the known affection I ought my loving wife, had no advantage over his and
mine: of her I neither heard or knew any thing; and for inquiring was saved a
labor, being necessarily enforced to shift for mine own life; which I did,
getting as soon as I could, out of my troubled house into a charitable Covent
of Carthusian Monks; by whom I was most courteously received; assuring me,
that I should remain in quiet Sanctuary with them, free from any trouble for
my misfortune. There I was for some days visited by my friends, as well as
spyed and hearkened after by mine enemies: for though even in their passion my
innocence might have saved me, yet they would not afford me the least credit
in my accidental mishap.

A while after I had thus rested in Sanctuary, my wife I heard had also taken
refuge at a Monastery of Nuns, called Bethlem; for having (as you heard) that
night leapt into the street, not knowing whither to go, she entered the first
house she saw open, and being received by the owner, when they knew her, and
understood of the pitiful accident; and vvithall, the strict search, that
as well by my order, as necessary obligation of Justice was made for her, they
thought best to conduct her to that Monastery; from whence I had present
notice, and then my mind began to recover some small rest; though it continued
but awhile, considering how my hard fortune began again to torment me. These
grievous, and scarce to be imagined disasters, so vvrung the tender heart of
my beloved Isdaura, that hastened by the terrible bruise she received in her
fall, unable now to avoid Heavens decree, she fell into a desperate sickness;
with which, and the continual remembrance of her tormenting thoughts
terribly assaulted, considering her self now in the tongues of the giddy
Multitude, her honor and reputation in the dust, the pangs of death hastened
upon her; a little before her end she called the Abbess to her, and giving her
a Letter closely sealed, earnestly desired, it might be safely conveyed unto
me, wheresoever I were; which came to my hands, just as the news of her
lamentable death to my ear. I need not here paint out my souls grief, or
loss of senses; for certainly the being deprived of them, was the defense of
my life, which as yet is but a living death, for the owners greater
punishment: and now to give some relief to my memory, with the desired end of
this miserable Story, the remainder you shall have in these last Lines of hers;
which Paper, for a dear pledge, in remembrance of the Writer, shall serve me
as a companion, till Destiny with her mortal stroke divide us. And this said,
to the wonderful compassion of the suspencefull Auditors, vnbuttoning his
coorse haire-cloth weed, he drew out of his bosom, a neatly-wrought silver
Box; and from within that, a Letter; which vnwrapping, and with some sad
tears kissing, he read out in this manner following:

Isdaura to Roberto.
THe time at length is come, Dear Spouse, that I must pay that unpardonable
debt, from whose rigorous execution none can be exempted; and though (as
mortal) I feel and fear the affrighting trance, yet he knows, who expects
to be my Judge, that the for-euer leaving your amiable company, is the greatest
torment that on earth afflicts my soul, which vveepes at this bitter
farewell, it cannot see yet, and a little enjoy your self; the better to
satisfy your doubtful opinion, and confirm my inculpable loyalty, which
from the first hour of our Matrimony has ever been inviolable. And since it
is now high time to deliver truths, (the discovery of my sad hearts secrets
being so necessary to my souls salvation) it shall be fitting, loved Owner
mine, that the world and you, now at length, be privy to a secret; which, to
the too long prejudice of my soul and conscience, I have hitherto concealed.
Pass but your eyes over these last Lines, and you shall be satisfied touching
an offense of mine, (if that might be thought so to your honor, which was
executed against my will and consent, and without the interuention of
Matrimony) though I part assured of your good construction, and mine own
innocence in this particular; for with you and the world, mine honor shall
rest in its true worth unblemished.

I presume, loved Roberto, you have not forgotten your first heavy welcome to
my fathers house, (the sad forerunner happily of these present ills.) You may
also remember what diligence was used to find out the murderer of our Steward
and servant the Biscayner, though to small purpose, since it was never known,
nor would till the day of Judgment, if mine now, swiftly approaching, did not
menace me; for this last eternal danger enforces me to declare my self his
murdresse. I shall carry to the Sovereign Tribunal for my discharge, (though
my repentance be the greatest) his bold and treacherous attempt: Know then, my
best Signior, that no sooner came the arrival of my Father, together with the
resolution of my intended Matrimony to that man's notice; when, to our no small
admiration, he fell suddenly sick in bed of a slow, but tormenting Fever: my
Parents, that loved him as their own, perceiving his danger, sought to get him
some help, though no Phisician in Toledo could apply the least remedy: they
concluded, that his sickness was only of Melancholy, which making us so in
general for him, increased in the sick man more and more, till the night
before your arrival, he broke his mind to me, and to my cost, made known his
infirmity.

About midnight, mine eyes willing to rest, as being long kept waking with the
thought of your arriual, I might hear some paces in my Chamber, and calling my
drowsy senses together, lifting up my face, it had like to have encountered
with the sick man's; at whose sudden approach, I was nothing dismayed, as
nothing misdoubting his intents, rather like a sister I fell a chiding him for
this excess (ignorant of his purpose) to which, with an inward groan, and
furious looks nailed to my eyes, he thus answered:

Howeuer, Isdaura, there be no help for me, but what must come from those
tender hands, (my life lying in them) thou that owe me so much, wilt not
prove ungrateful to my good deeds and service, though thy cruel parents thus
hardly entreat me. Who would have thought of thy Father, that he should so
unthankfully have recompensed the pains, which in thy education, and honest
sustaining his family in his absence, I have undergone: only because I hoped
to reap the benefit in thy amiable desired company, which unjustly, my
Isdaura, he depriues me of? This is my torment, the mischief and sickness
that afflicts me; which, as time runs on, so that increases; and the more,
by thy growing nearer to be in another power: I come therefore, prepared, not
to leave this room, till I have health, by having thee for mine, though it
cost me my life, if in thy presence I must lose it, which is the antidote and
wholesome Phisician to my mind. Thy husband I must be, since Heaven to me
alone has reserved the happiness: thy fair hand must be the answer, defer
not then my blessing, for I fear no refusal, since in mine own will lies the
satisfaction of my desire. I shall make no doubt with this Poniard to kill you,
if I perceive but the least contradiction; and drawing a sharp Dagger, claps
it to my breast, to my no small amazement: for scarce could I give credit to the
success of what I saw before me: the very Chamber seemed to shake with my
fear; and long it was, ere my tongue could utter so much as the least
Syllable: on one side mine honors danger tormented me, on the other, a female
cowardice: I began to think on some slight that might either defer my
death, or preserve my chastity: and to this purpose sought to dissuade him from
his, not so much as vilifying his treachery, rather making him a thousand
promises, with fained oaths, to be his wife, and jointly (because I supposed
that might content him) gave him my hand; which he no sooner got, but me
withal in his arms; till at last, wanting breath and courage to defend my
self, he had his will, making me subject to his lust. But just Heavens, to
whose sovereign goodness the dumb complaints of my woeful heart had now
ascended, would not permit a due punishment for so base a fact to be deferred;
of which, my hands and his dagger were the executioners: for no sooner had soft
rest taken truce with his lascivious fury, (secure that he slept in his wives
arms) when, strengthened by my dishonor, and the dolorous resentment of my
Parents, my feminine fear putting on a masculine courage, and wholly disposed
to a bloody revenge, taking the sharp dagger, which before was a bridle to my
resistance, and thrusting him to the heart, thwarting also his body with many
other wounds, I opened a wide passage to that infidel soul; and dragging the
wretched body, weltring in goare-blood, wrapping it (as well as I could
without being perceived) in a sheet, left it upon the threshold of our street
door. My misfortunes so stopped not, rather with your coming they increast,
in such manner, that but for fear of hell fire, I had sacrificed mine own
life, seeing my self so near a known infamy. But the comfort of a maid of
mine, changed that desperate imagination; one, that was my companion from a
child, and as then Secretary to my most hidden thoughts: though this (as being
of so great consequence) I feared to make known unto her; but she perceiving
my extreme vexation, wondered much, (as thinking I had now most reason to be
joyful) and so with loving entreaties requested the cause of my grief, and I
(for now necessity had no law with me) making choice of Iulia for a dead lift,
satisfied of her true affection, told her the occasion of my distraction, but
without any mention of the Biscayner, laid my dishonor to another charge,
relying wholly upon her person for my lives remedy; and so with the
pittifullest reasons that the necessity of time would permit me, I reduced her
to my will, preparing her to make good my defect, with the integrity of her
honesty, which (I nothing doubted) but was entire. Iulia could not but refuse
the danger, as well for her loss, as other uncertainties of the success. But
to free me (out of her love) from such a strait, made her shut her eyes; and
so my plot took effect: for having the night of our marriage, placed Iulia
behind our bed Curtains, and faining modesty, commanded the lights to be put
out, darkness favoring, and Iulia supplying my room; neither was the deceit
known, nor you perceived the exchange.

Not long after, she belike either wearied, or taken with the sweet of so much
pleasure, contrary to the order I had given, fell asleep, and now I knew not
which in me was most, my jealousy or fear, and my rage increased the more,
when (hearing the Clock strike three) I saw so little memory in her of my
danger. This and the difficulty of waking her, without being perceived by you,
made me undergo as desperate a course, as that of the Biscayner: for without
better advice, or more delay, beginning at the dining rooms Tapistry, with a
Torch, I by chance found lighted, I set it all on fire, til it was almost
consumed; and hoping that with the uproar, (my Father and the whole house
raised) you would take no notice of ought but my cries, embracing you closely,
and crying, Fire, fire: you awoke, and frightfully leapt out of your bed and
the chamber; leaving me with Iulia, and so sensible of the mischief, that (by
her neglect) I was forced to, that I was ready to have run her through with
your sword. This just anger of mine was furthered with the remembrance of what
might hereafter ensue, to think I should have her a Corriual in my desires,
and (taking her to be too shallow a vessel for my secrets) the matter at least
was doubtful, and I like to become a slave to her little constancy, which
necessity had made me subject to. This sorrowful thought still pursued me,
whilst you and the rest of the Family were quenching the violent flames; and so
under color of helping, taking Iulia by the hand, we went down, where the
servants were hastily drawing water; and as they went and came, laying hold
upon a fit opportunity, to be free from the confusion I was in, bidding Iulia
draw me a little water; whilst she was performing it, with a small push I
toppled her into the deep Well; where giving her leave awhile to struggle with
her last agony, when I supposed her to be thoroughly dead, dissembling my
cruel ingratitude, crying out with fained tears, as well to my parents, as
your self and the rest, I made Iulia's misfortune as casual, and my sorrow to
be true, infallibly believed. This devilish act, this horrid sin, is that
which now lights to her shame, and heavy dishonor, on your unfortunate wife,
who has ever truly loved and obeyed you, as Heaven can witness. And
therefore with this last Adieu, dear Signior, live happy and assured, that by
me, your honor has no whit been blemished; rather, notwithstanding my
affront, I have given this latest testimony, desiring above all things, that
you should be fully satisfied: which if you be, (if in this grievous departure
there may be comfort) my sad soul shall have it; the care of which I recommend
to your love and Christian zeal, by giving the clearest satisfaction you can,
for the two former murders, as also for the last accident which not least
torments me.

Here ceased that happy soul, here it left the rare and beautiful Vrne her
Corpse: and here, noble Gentlemen, my patience quite spunne out, in this habit
you see, and this company, I left Seuil, determining in this peregrination to
end my loathed life; if, worthy Gerardo, you pretend not to revenge your dear
friends misfortunes on my head, that willingly lays it self at your feet.
With these words the griued Roberto ended his mournful tale, with such plenty
of tears, that the spectators could not but bear him a little company with
theirs; till awhile after, Gerardo, drying his eyes, uttered these words:

You have taken, Signior, so cruel a revenge upon your self, with so
lamentable success, that, had you been most faulty in Leriano's death, you
have left no one part about you whole, where a satisfaction may be had: For my
part rest secure, that though my friends sad fate have grieved my very soul,
yet your griefs are so great, that I had rather seek to assuage them, then
add more affliction to you: Heaven comfort you, and give you ease to your
woes: and so retiring heavily out of the room, he gave way to the rest, to
entertain and comfort the poor Pilgrim, who passed a good part of the night
with him in discourse, till it was time to betake them to their rest.

The next morning the two Pilgrims taking their leaves, went on, and Don Iayme
and Gerardo did the like, still wondering at the pitiful relation they had
heard. That day they came to a pleasant Village to pass the heat, where they
agreed to leave Iacinta (as being the just half way of their journey) in a
Monastery of Nuns, of which Don Iayme's Aunt was Abbess, till such time as
they had cleared a certain doubt; which was, that having met a servant sent to
Don Iayme purposely from his own town, they understood, that as that day, a
Commissioner arrived there, sent from the King, in great secrecy to perform
some piece of diligence: a thing that much perplexed these Gentlemen; the one,
in respect of the dangerous party that came with him; the other, for the
confusion he was in, ignorant of what that diligence might produce in his
Lordship. And though the occasion was after known to be little concerning
either of them, (for that the Judge was sent by the Supreme Council of Orders,
concerning a certain Order of Knighthood) yet they thought fit, till they were
fully satisfied, to leave Iacinta there: who when she heard it, suspecting some
other intent, grew to such extreme contradiction, and pitiful entreaties, that
her Lover seeing them accompanied with her tears, was ready to have returned
back with her, but that Don Iayme, somewhat discontented, dissuaded him: and so
being unable to reduce her to their advice with her good will, against it (Don
Iayme making known the reason to his Aunt at the Covent) they there left her;
so grieved, as were she to have taken her latest leave of her Gerardo, or had
seen him struck dead with wounds before her. This was the first breach that
dislink't these two affections: Iacinta persuaded that Gerardo had forsaken
her; a suspicion that (take it but once hold) can never be removed; as from
this instant, this Dames example will plainly demonstrate. The enamoured
Gentleman was no less troubled, till he came to the end of his journey, though
they were not slack to return, having been first surely informed of the
occasion of the Commissioner, which was the same formerly set down: so the
next morning by ten a clock, they were back, and alighted at the Monastery
door, with such fervent desire in Gerardo to see his Iacinta; that every
minute of deferring it, seemed an age of absence, and last, calling in the
Porch at the Grate, the Abbess hearing of their being there, came forth;
whom, when they had saluted, they requested, the fair Iacinta might be called;
which, when one of the Nuns went to perform, returning a pretty while after
back, and with the Abbesses leave, turning to Gerardo, she thus said:
Howsoever I being but a messenger and commanded, might be freed from any
distaste I am like to give, yet I beseech your pardon, Signior Gerardo, in
respect of the message I return you, which will necessarily offend you. The
fair Iacinta, whom I went to call, requested me on her behalf, to entreat
that you would be pleased to condescend to her will; which is, resoluedly to
remain in this Monastery, and with the habit of our sacred Order. She
likewise willed me to beseech you, to vouchsafe, since you have Gold and Jewels
of hers to good value, to supply with part of them her wants, and withal, to
pay a portion for her admittance into the holy House, that so she may be
quietly settled to her devotion and prayer for your souls health. This she
wished me to make known unto you; you, Signior, like a Christian, and a
Gentleman, may now determine on what this Dame demands, and so much concerns
her felicity. Here the religious Nun ceased, neither did Gerardo's sudden
passion allow her a further preamble: for his heart ready to burst within him,
and his very eyes sending forth sparkles of lively fire, turning to the
Abbess, he said, It is not possible, Lady, that such discourse could proceed
from my Iacinta, neither can I from so long, so true a friendship as has been
betwixt us, believe so slight, so forgetful a farewell; so assured am I of her
firmness, that though mine ears were witnesses to the sound of such words
from her self, I should hardly give credit unto them: I cannot but think her
too innocent of such a novelty, and therefore beseech you to resolve me in the
truth of this business, though indeed Iacinta's sight will be my hearts more
effectual satisfaction. Here Don Iayme taking his turn, (no less angry then
his friend) desired the same of his Aunt; who told them, that what they heard
of Iacinta, was infallibly true; and withal, how no longer ago then last
night, she received so much from her own mouth; and she requested her also,
not to suffer her to be taken out of the Covent, which in all religious and
Christian obligation she was tied not to consent to. But nevertheless
importuned by the two friends, she endeavored to have her appear; and so
leaving them in the porch, where at the door their ready horses awaited them,
she went to make good her promise, though it took no effect; or perhaps her
self was unwilling, that Iacinta should come to Gerardo, whom striving with
her best language to comfort, she endeavored withal to blot his Mistress out
of his remembrance.

But so forcible was this disdainefull blow in his sad and sick fancy, that
regardlesse of life's danger, heavens offense, and the hazard of his honor,
hurried on with furious rage, not once considering the sacrilegious act he
attempted, (turning to Don Iayme, his right foot clapped to the Monastery door)
he used this succinct Discourse:

Companion and friend, the fire that flames within me, is immense, my passion
terrible, Iacinta's wrong above both. I have often counseled her to this course,
when had she heretofore taken it, my weary life had been secured, and her
friends with the glad news comforted, but I could never get her consent; which
assures me, that her leaving me now, is other then Devotion: I must not
therefore give way to it: you are a Gentleman, and I am your friend, and such,
that upon any occasion of yours, would hazard a life at least once for you.
Let this engage you to make good the entrance at this door, whilst I enter in
and effect my purpose, or dye in the demand. Which said, not expecting any
answer, nor so much as harkening to the exclamations of the Nuns, taking her
in one hand that brought him the message, and his sword in the other, he cast
himself into the forbidden Covent; where quickly, with his Guides help,
coming into a spacious Cloister, he saw the occasion of his crime, set very
iocundly amongst some others of the Nuns. They that were with her, and she
that came with Gerardo, seeing him so outrageous, in a moment vanished: but
Iacinta had not the power to follow, not so much as to stir from her fear:
for Gerardo's sudden surprisall and sight had left her even now like a dead
body, who lifting her up by one arm from ground, his tongue unable to express
the least part of his mind, without speaking one word, the way he came, but
more speedily, he conveyed her out: for by this, the noise and clamor of the
Nuns increased so fearfully, as if the walls or whole building had been
ready to come upon them: whereupon the vproare of the neighborhood and Village
was no less, and in an instant, almost a hundredth persons were gotten to the
door that Don Iayme kept: though most, or all of them unarmed, with small
defense the two friends made shift to get to Horse: Gerardo setting Iacinta
(who was even in a dead trance) on the saddle Bow before him: and the valiant
Aragonian breaking through the press that hindered him, made way with his
sword, enlarging an open passage to his friend that came after, and none able
to stop or stay them, they galloped on; and seeing some follow, mended their
pace, and betook them to their full speed (Gerardo now got foremost) till such
time as they might be somewhat freer from the danger: but in this distracted
flight, as in all things else, Gerardo was infinitely unfortunate: for night
shutting in dark upon them, Don Iayme losing sight of him, and he his way,
they were both unluckily separated, neither could after, so much as by Letters
meet.

Gerardo, that had thus lost his friend, though not his journey (for now all
the world was his way) perceiving Iacinta's weakness, settled her as easily
as he could, and fair and softly, not knowing whether he went backward or
forward, rode on till the next morning, till such time as he found himself
enclosed in a rough and thick Mountain, in which having des-piteously wandered,
til toward noon, (Iacinta now extremely heavy with drowsinesse) at length as
good luck would, he came to a Shepherds cottage, where both being welcomed
by the owners, alighted, and Gerardo endeavored all he could, to give ease and
refreshment to his ungrateful Mistress; whose weariness as much afflicted the
poor Gentleman, as the apprehension of his danger; though from that, he were
secure enough, as well in respect of the desert Mountain, as for that he was
farther from the Monastery then he imagined: for in this yet he was happy, that
knowing no foot of the way, he was from thence, at least ten leagues distant:
and Iacinta that afternoon being somewhat more cheerfully revived, taking
direction for the nearest good town, they returned to their journey, and that
night arrived where they desired, where Gerardo took a private lodging, that
he might the better and more commodiously cure his Mistresses indisposition,
which was not so slight, but it kept them almost a month from a journey he
intended to the City of Valencia; at length they set forward again, and
traveled toward that pleasant and plentiful City. So when they were gotten
within a days journey, the two (as seemed to GERARDO, but not to the wary
Dame) as loving a couple as ever, (the morning being fresh) to prevent the
Suns heat, they were on horseback before day-breake. They treated of such
successes as came into their minds, and Gerardo thus diuerted in the sweet
(though dissembled) conversation of his Iacinta, looking about, saw he was out
of his way, got into a thick Grove of strong Oaks, from whence willing to get
out toward the lost path, he was more cunningly entangled in this other: so
that riding on, thus lost and melancholy, it was not long ere certain sad and
pitiful groans came to his ears, which by fits and short intermissions
struck him to the heart.

The further he went on, the nearer he grew to this moan; so supposing it
must needs not be far off, he hastened all he could, though now broad day was
come upon him; by whose splendor, he might plainly see all round about him;
as also a little brook, on whose Margent he traveled, part of which was
stained with some fresh drops of blood, the red framing in that green,
various, (though fearful) forms of enamelling: at which he and Iacinta were
not a little amazed: but calling to mind those former successes of his own
Tragical Story, constant to all danger, he kept on his way, led on by the
sound of the voice, even to the very source of the water; till being come
amongst certain thornie Briars (within which was a little Meddow) he might see
in midst of it a confused shape and Bulk, that only by the groans it sent
forth, he ghessed to be a humane creature. It lay there without motion in a
very Lake of blood, with which all the near grass was sprinkled, and the
River participated of the improper tribute.

The Noble Gerardo was so affected with the sight, that he threw himself in an
instant from the Saddle, and Iacinta also leaving hers, they made toward the
wounded corpse, which they found left naked, and saw that she was a woman,
which made their compassion the greater. She seemed to them (though now pale
and disfigured) young and handsome: though they were much troubled and
hopeless of her life's remedy: her body was full of wounds, (and which caused
most horror) left barbarously disrobed. The tender eyes of the two Lovers
could not but shead tears, and wound the air with their sighs. But since
grief was but a mean remedy to the present mischief; Gerardo, supposing they
were not far from some town, determined to convey the bloody creature to the
nearest place: and to this effect taking off his riding Coat) which he wore
over a strong Buffe Ierkin (and Belt of Pistols, together with some of her own
clothes laid by, lapped her in them, and as easily as he could, sat her upon
his Horse, on which he and Iacinta sustaining her on both sides up, they went
fair and softly, getting out of the thick Grove, Heaven ere long permitting
them to fall into the highway, from whence they might espy (to their seeming)
a good populous town, about some half a league from them. Gerardo was much
grieved to see the parties continuing loss of blood; and seeing how softly
they went, feared she might dye before they could get her a Confessor:
Whereupon he determined to leave her with Iacinta; to whom making known his
intent, and she approving it, leaping into the Saddle, and taking the nearest
way to the town, in all diligence he hastened toward it.

About this time (the Sun newly mounted (two Religious Ieronimite Friars came
riding toward him upon their strong and lusty Moyles, whom, when he saw, he
fancied them to be rather then humane souls, Cherubins; and so, with a joyful
countenance, stopping his Horse, he stayed till they approached: and having
courteously saluted them, entreated them to go with him not far off, where,
by their help, in a case of necessity, they might gain a Soul, whose
salvation consisted in their brief approach: but in stead of an answer, he
might see that both Masters and men, looking and staring upon each other, were
all dumb: which, being duly weighed, they were not to be blamed for their
slacknesse; for who would not (considering his Arms) but at the least have
suspected him to have been a Captain of some Thieves, frequent in that
Province, notwithstanding the care of our Viceroyes to scowre the coast?

But returning to my purpose, those Religious men did verily believe what is
rehearsed; and supposing his crew not to be far off, cried out for mercy, and
lifting their hands to Heaven, requested him that was far from a thought of
wronging them, to have pity upon them, laying before him their profession, and
how much he should offend God in iniuring them: and lastly taking their
wellstuffed purses out of their pockets, and some of their clothes to boot,
they offered them unto him, who was ashamed of their base fear; and yet on
the other side, not knowing how to persuade with them; and seeing the fellows
that came with them run speedily back toward the town, more fearful though
of the poor wounded creature, then his own danger, showing more fury and
indignation, then his pious mind was willing, he threatened to kill them, if
they performed not his request, and facing one of them with his Pistol; so
terrible were both their fears, that without a word answering they now
followed him; which they had done, even to Hell it self, could he have
conducted them, such was their miserable cowardice: soon were they come to
the place where Gerardo lest the bloudlesse Trunk, which they found as yet
struggling with Destiny. Here one of the Friars alighting began to speak to
her, when Gerardo's heart (who in all this while had not discovered Iacinta)
unable to be at quiet within him, thinking perhaps she had hidden her self
near thereabout, not willing to be seen by any passengers, without bidding
the Friars Adieu, he began to search her out, not leaving an inch of ground in
all those quarters unsought; so that after much time spent, and small hope of
recovery, the poor Gentleman ran up and down some two days, raging in the
Mountain like a madman, still crying and calling on Iacinta, whose
remembrance only was sufficient (as appeared by the following Stanzes) to keep
him so long fasting.

If the hard flint steele-st^ucken vomit fire,
(As if it life's blood were,
And wounded with complaints) those sparks express
In the blind body, eyes, red-swolne with ire,
Eyes, more of rage then fear;
Why then breathe not I flames? (my wound no less)
Since grief and black distress
(Steeles) strike my captive heart?
Grief, to be all forlorn in absence thus,
From whence, all sorts of mischiefs venomous,
Beyond the cure of Art,
Love to a powerful quint-essence has brought,
Either by fire of Hell, or absence wrought.
Go, spirits of fire and poison then, prepare
To mount with speedy flight
Some into Tongues, but most, to searching eyes.
Visit those winged dwellers in the Air
Over you fair Region quite;
And each wild Beast that in his dark den lies,
And those dumb sleepers (eyes:)
Lulled by the bubbling brook,
In Crystal Couches soft and natural:
Perceive the aquall sacrifice may all,
That he (whom Love forsook)
For Holacaust of blind affection,
Smoke offers in his sighs, flames in his moan.
Mount then, and scale that fourth last Element,
(But oh, thei'le be too slow!)
For having been the matter to my pain.
(I fear) back to my thoughts incontinent
They Will fly, whence now they flow;
And so convert themselves to blood again.
No: every my full vein
Runs in bad humors high,
From the continual current of my ill,
So that, for want of room let vm soar still
Up to the lofty sky.
Or, with their torrid heat (where they forsake
Their wings) a second fi'ry Region make.
If thus the wounded Air on a light blaze,
Some thunderbolt chance frame,
Vn-er^ieg let it strike (where ever fall)
Iacinta; Ah no: but may the noise amaze,
As if it spoke her name:
Or back again did warn, or lowdly call,
And flash on her withal.
Birds, change your warbling notes,
That, as my sighs oretake you in the air,
Leaving those chirping Songs: you may prepare*
Your more vn-tuned throats
With sadder accents, as you fly along,
To publish the cursed Author of my wrong.
You quiu'ring Leaves, that shaken with the wind,
Each other gently kiss,
While the Sun enu'ous to behold your shade,
Pries to and fro, till (for his beams) he find
Where freest entrance is:
Then, way from bough to bough his rays have made,
Though some boughs thicker, staid
And stopped his piercing eye:
Grieve with your murmr, at my wretched moan,
When with the frequent hoarcenesse of your tone,
(Best, less melodiously:)
You boughs; when Zephirus does make you meet,
And (twinde) each other, with your kisses greet.
You, little Peebles of the Fountain, late
Teeth, of Narcissus, white;
Then, Iuorie, but hardened now to stone,
Now are you no Tongue-helpers to relate,
Ought of that cruel sight:
How, by red veins turned to a spring, was shown
A fault, self-love to own.
(Beauty) short Tyranny;
Oh let the Eccho's of your Center cold
Repeat no stranger griefs, but mine unfold,
My lost felicity.
Without Iacinta, jealousy, disdain
My present ills, make all past goods seem pain.
Thus he lamented the absence of his fugitive Mistress, till seeing his folly,
and the impossibility of finding her there, he determined to go back to the
place where he missed her, where when he came, he was as far to seek: but at
last casting more temperately with himself, he supposed, that the morning he
left her, she seeing his long stay, her womanish fear in that dispeopled place
might cause her to retire to the town, there to expect her Gerardo, whither
with this new unprofitable guess of his, he resolved forthwith to go (and
putting it in practice) about Sunset arrived there, and in the distraction you
may imagine, left not a street or house unasked for his Love, till weary of
trudging, or rather of knowing no more then he did, his faint body forcing him
to desire some rest, he alighted at an Innedoore, within which, he was no
sooner entered, when suddenly at least twenty men grappled with him, and crying
out for more aid, without hearing him a word, dragged him along to a strong
Prison; where when he came, the cause of his apprehension was made known, and
imputed to him that he was not only a highway Robber, but particularly the
Author also of those cruel and barbarous wounds, given the poor woman, whom
he left in confession with the Friars: they, seeing he returned not, assured of
their suspicion, resolved to convey her to the town: and to give account to
the Justice of what happened: which they did, leaving all the people thereabouts
much scandalized with the terrible fact: though just Heaven permitted not that
the poor Wench should dye of her wounds, since they also of the town caused
her health to be carefully looked to. And so as Gerardo, less careful of his
present danger then his former afflictions, went to and fro, enquiring through
the vproar'd town for his Mistress, and many knew, by the Friars Relations, the
signs and habit he wore (his enquiry too being for a woman^) one suspicion
joined with another, gave them warrant enough to lay wait for, and, as you have
heard, apprehend him.

Gerardo was much troubled at his new imprisonment, not so much for his life's
danger, as being hindered from his search and inquiry. But since there was no
help for his misfortune, (a punishment he acknowledged due for his
sacrilege) he endeavored the best he could to give his discharge, and not to
suffer himself perish in that vvretched manner; but his endeavors had been
fruitless, had the wounded Maid dyed in this occasion of her misfortune: but
heaven giving her life, his trouble soon ended, and the cause was known by
her declaring two of her Brothers accessarie to the wounds, who angry that a
fellow of mean condition had enjoyed their Sister, and after, to their public
affront, demanded her to Wife, bent wholly to revenge, the better to effect
their purpose, drew their Sister from the City from Barcelona (of whence they
all were) to go with them toward Denia, to see (as they pretended) certain
kindred of theirs; and coming one night to that Mountain, stripping her there
naked, they performed that barbarous piece of cruelty related. For all this,
the Judges would not give Gerardo present liberty, rather (besides making him
purge himself clearly of the suspicions his habit and Pistols of being a
Thief brought against him) they to his cost enforced him (for the verifying
her confession) to send to Ca^aluni^, which being not long after confirmed for
certain, by the absence of her Brothers from Barcelona, they thought fit to
set him at liberty. Here he remained four months in this lingering, in which
time, all he had to any value, was consumed and spent: so that being to
depart, he could hardly make shift for so much money as might fit him with a
Moyle, which having at length even scarcely effected, proposing his journey to
some friends he knew, at a place not far off, called Denia, one morning he
forsook the town, sufficiently warned by the wrack of his fortunes there;
and though he were on his way, he could scarce think himself yet thoroughly
at liberty. All that day he went on with a Boy his Guide, till the next (that
near a lone Inn) he ouertooke one, who alone was traveling, his way; so
after they had dined, and passed the days heat together in that house, they
kept upon the way in good conversation, and hoped that night, by spurring a
little the harder, to arrive at their iourneyes end Denia.

In all that way (as being indeed no great Road) they met not a creature, till
toward four of Clock in the afternoon, in midst of certain thick Brambles
(as they carelessely rode on) two men stepped before them, who as well by their
persons, as fashion and Arms, soon made known what they were. One of the
two, that indeed seemed rather an infernal Minister, then a mortal man, bade
stand: and fastening on Gerardo's reins, with his Pistol clapped to his breast,
gave way to his companion to do the like to the other. When the foot-boyes saw
this, and perceived the danger of their Masters, not expecting the event, they
betook them to their flight. The good Gerardo, doubtless, (though in so
known a hazard) would have adventured his person, if at the very instant he
had not seen other six rise out of the thicket of those bushes; one of which,
as well by his difference of habit, as goodly presence, seemed to be the
Captain of the rest, who thinking the poor travelers were somewhat of the
slowest in forsaking their Saddles, with a hoarse and dismal voice, turning to
the two first, said, Raskals, what do you with those wretches? do you carry
your Pistols for show only? would you have me kill the poor snakes? And thus
saying, and advancing his Petronell in the same instant, the poor couple
tumbling at those speeches to the earth, gave way to those furious men to
disarme them, with such violent search also, as had they been their mortal
enemies: lastly, they stripped them even to their shirts. Yet this cruel
proceeding never so much as wrought the least impression of resentment in
Gerardo, who now as much desired to die, as to live in his miseries; and in
this hardy resolution, concealing his present hard usage, with a firm and
constant behavior, expected the issue of this sad accident: all which in his
companion was quiet contrary, who in a thousand woeful extremes (his eyes
flowing tears) sought to mollify the bloody flint-hearted Captain, who
looking somewhat wistly on his face, straight knew him; and seeing him
prostrate at his feet, with an arrogant and haughty license bade him rise,
saying: Art not thou happily Vincente Arbias? for if mine eyes do not deceive
me, I have here before me the party to whom I owe no less then life. To this
the quiuering Valencian, like one raised out of a trance, lifted up his eyes,
and hearing himself called by his name, somewhat more encouraged, with a
faint voice made answer, that he was that party, and by profession an Attorney
for Causes in Valencia; though in all this while it was not possible for him
to call to his remembrance him, that spoke thus to him: who observing his
fear, replied, Let not the seeing me affright thee, nor the beholding these my
companions, for thou may safely go thy ways: And know, that now thy friend
Pedrasa, has (for it is he that speaks to thee) complied with the
obligation he had, since by thy honest care he was freed from prison in
Valencia: take thy garments, and turning to his company, proceeded: And you,
return him the money taken from him to a denier, and accompanying him to his
safety, leave me to your recompense. These words were like Angelical
salutations, in the fearful Vincente's cares, and vvanting sufficient phrase
(as he thought) for his greatefulnesse, he recast himself again at the
Captains feet, and in a trice clothing himself, got afterward to his Moyle,
and returned to his journey, accompanied part of his way by those ministers of
Cacus.

Gerardo thought verily, that since thus they retained him, they meant to make
a bloody sacrifice of his youth, and in this imagination, lifting his eyes to
all-pittying Heaven, with his heart he begged mercy and releasement from
those present mischiefs: and hearing those men command him to follow them, he
began to go after, through the thicket, and roughest part of the Mountain,
just as the Sun was declining to the West. They had scarce gone half a
League in that Desert, when coming to a deep and hidden Brook, that on one
side served as a ditch to a cloven Rock thereby, and keeping their way on the
brinke of the same, within a while they entered into a Strait; from whence
crossing a little, they mounted the staring Rock, in midst whereof were
certain thatched Cottages, which served them as a harbor and bulwark against
all weathers. As Soon as their trampling and noise was heard by those within,
there issued out some doozen persons of the same hiew and profession with the
rest; and foremost among these, one of a brisk and lively presence, who with
his pleasing sight gave no small comfort to Gerardo, though as then he could
not well perceive whether his countenance were answerable to his presence;
for besides the broad brimme of a military Hat, that shadowed his face, the
being darkish too did hide it.

The party was clad in a rich cloth of silver doublet, and over it a Gaberdine
of green Velvet, set thick with Buttons and Loopes of silver, suitable,
having on the top of his right shoulder sloping, a fair Belt studded and
embroidered with Gold, two curiously wrought Petronels hanging at it, his
Breeches were suitable, Damask, his Stocking, shoe and garter, white, Plumes
of feathers white and green: all which so set out his graceful personage,
that, Gerardo, forgetting his troubles, was now wholly fixed upon the gallant
object. To whom the Captain with open arms directing himself, the pretty
Youth offering his hand, with a kind of neglect, at his breast, stopping his
proceeding, said, Why how now, Pedrasa, so empty, and crave an embrace?
Forbear: for since you return without a Prize, I am not indebted the least
favor. To this he smilingly replied: No more, my General, be not too
rigorous till you hear my discharge, and turn but your eyes to my company, in
their increase you shall see a spoil, from whose worth, I dedicate to those
fair fingers, a rich Ruby. At this, the comely Youth more heedily looking
back, might perceive the unfortunate Gentleman; who from the instant that he
heard that voice, supposing he knew it, his sorrowful heart was ready to leap
from his breast. But when he plainly saw, the disguized Youth was his Iacinta,
he had like to have fallen to the earth, where (as his courageous mind was
deeply struck) he but (faining weariness) sat down. The ungrateful cruel
woman had not forgotten the countenance and presence of him she once loved,
Lord of her affection: but she made no show of change at all, rather seeing him
thus disroabed, half naked, was not a io^ moved; but making as if she had
not known him, turning to her new Lover, said, I like him well, it is a good
handsome strippling; your gains will be the greater, and our friends that buy
him, will have no, bad penniwoorth; Away with him to the Cave, in the mean
time let us think of supping. And so taking the Captain by the hand, they
returned to Kennell together.

Oh, pass not on, compassionate Reader, but suspend a while thy grieved eyes;
and now that with thy presence it is impossible, supply yet with thy
imagination, so great woe, as at present, the sad and dis-consolate Gentleman
might feel. Think but how basely now, his once best treasure is imployd:
Behold him poor, disrobed, dejected, in the hands of homicides, bloud-suckers,
Land-Pyrats: apprehend but truly this, and each line, nay, each letter may
attract a tear.

Many a time was Gerardo ready to have flung himself amidst that brutish rowt,
and could have torn them peicemeale with his teeth for revenge, were it not
that despair, more then fear, stopped his resolution, prevented also by four
of those fellows, who raising him from the place where he sat, carried him
along with them, and descending toward the bottom of the Rock, one of them
disioyning a broad black Slate, which served as a stopple to the Caves mouth
(though so even set in, the cunning, could scarce be perceived) commanding him
to enter; they, without, shutting the door, returned from whence they came,
leaving Gerardo in that dark and dismal den, so straightned, and afflicted,
that he verily supposed they meant there to starve him to death: which made him
heartily repent he had not put his vengeance in execution. Thus he remained a
long hour at least without passing on, thinking there was no more danger save
where he was. But at the instant he might hear some speaking further in;
and vvithall, a voice fearfully resounding through the whole Cave, insomuch
that he verily believed himself to be at Hels mouth. The voice seemed to come
nearer, so that he might more distinctly hear these words:

To all this howling, Captive, miserable man, give thou no answer? why
come not down unto us, since thy unhappy stars directed thee to be our
woeful companion? what do thou, what can thou expect? has thy vital
breath failed thee? or beginnest thou to repine at the taste of such bitter
food, as is our best comfort in this black mansion? Wonder not, for this is
but a beginning of misery, yet thou shall have the chiefest comfort,
companions. These final accents of the voice came to Gerardo's ears, just as
a man appeared before him, with a lighted Brand of Rosind* Pine in his left
hand flaming, and a small-fruit Reed in his right, that served him for a Rest
and Guide, so lean, pale and altered, that the suddenness amazed him. He
thought verily the Ghost of his dead enemy Rodrigo was transformed into that
Goblin: for in such cases, fear does never present less horrid affrightments
to the imagination. He knew not what to answer, neither could he unfold his
lips; which he that rose from the Cave perceiving, and how much he was
astonished, beholding him with some pity, drew near, and taking him by the
hand, said; Let not my faint presence, unfortunate Young man, dismay you: for
how-euer you see me in this most miserable plight, not long since you might
have known me as strong, as able as your self: but the wretched Mansion where
we live, and the barbarous cruelty and scarsitie with which the cursed
Owners entreat us (who by ounces give us a miserable and nasty sustenance) does
cause in me, and twenty others that there below expect us, the same effect that
your eyes behold.

Blame me not (replide the unfortunate Gerardo) that your presence has so
daunted me, since the nouelty of this place may well excuse me: and therefore
pardon me I beseech you, the trouble I have put you to in calling me; and since
(as you say) I have so many companions in my misery: let us (on Gods name) go
where they expect us.

This said, they both began fair and softly to descend, passing at least
twenty winding stairs, ere they came to the Caves bottom: in which spacious
dungeon, Gerardo saw at least twenty persons of the same hiew, and in no better
plight then he that accompanied him: (all of them set about a poor, almost
extinguished fire) by whom (if any joy may be in such grief) he was joyfully
received. Every one particularly demanded his ill fortune, Gerardo satisfide
all: understanding from them likewise their unhappy successes, which had
brought them to so great extremity; he likewise knew of them how they came so
speedily to hear of his imprisonment: (being so far as he perceived from any
commerce) which was, that receiving at a small hole, from the top of the Cave,
their ordinary allowance of Ryebread for their sustenance, there being a
Loaf extraordinary, they knew they had some new companion; and now the time
of rest drawing near, all of them lay down on certain heaps of straw, that
served them in stead of daintier beds; only Gerardo, though he most needed,
yet slopt not, nor took any rest in all that night, the most tedious that ever
he passed.

There vvanted not one to accompany him in this waking, and in a manner with
equal sorrow, one of his most understanding companions; whom (as it often falls
out) by particular simpathy he did most affect. He then, that lay nearest our
poor Gentleman, seeing him much disquieted, moved to pity, and interrupting
his own calamities, said, 'Twere fondness, my new friend, and companion, to
demand the cause which keeps you thus waking: for where there are indeed so
many, evident it is, that, any one were sufficient to breed the greatest
discomfort. I am only desirous to know, if any particular accident do add to
this your known misfortune; if so, by communicating the same, the greatest
inconvenience, that can happen, is, to oblige me to your succor, as much as
lies in this poor and weak ability of mine: therefore let me request you in
some sort to grant my desire. With which the captive was silent: when Gerardo,
not a little admiring his piety and good language (with a low voice, not to
disturb such as took their re^^) thus answered, Discreet companion, though
our fortunes be equal in the present misery I bewail, yet assuredly, in the
circumstances that brought me to it, they are far different; these make me
mad, impatient, full of grief, soul and body, so increasing upon me, that
nothing but death may rid me of my pains. I give you all possible thanks
for your desires: God give you your merits, and so you shall be sure not to
want.

In him (said the Prisoner) I am only confident; though when I consider that
this punishment is justly for my sins inflicted, does cause in me a sad
discomfort, and persuades me that the quality of them being so odious, they
are past all help.

These last words he vttred so passionatly, that the curious Gerardo laying
hold on them (as thinking them to savor of despair) cut him off, saying, The
opinion of your wisdom yet wills me to desire you not so speedily to forfet
the same: and it is much more necessary for your souls health, not to be cast
headlong with such thoughts, for relying (as you first noted) on heavens mercy;
from that let me safely promise you (as a remedy to greater misfortunes) pardon
for very great sins: repent the committing them, that truly performed,
Heaven will dispose all for the best. Heaven comfort you, said the Prisoner, as
I am by you comforted. And Gerardo willing to know more of his griefs,
extended his comfort, by giving him a Summary Relation of his own, as thinking
by that means, diuerting and cheering him jointly, he might oblige him to make
known his life unto him, as indeed his discreet presumption succeeded right:
for having past some time in his own brief discourse; the afflicted Captive
wondering at such remarkable events, after he had with no small commiseration
endeared Gerardo's mishaps, invited by them, he could not but begin to set
forth his own, at such time as the calm night was in the midst of her sad
course; and so drawing nearer to Gerardo with his faint limbs, he began:

When it were not as congruous as usual for poor Prisoners in such occasions,
my good friend, as the present to give each other account of their misfortunes
in general (as by this means beguiling solitude, and diuerting the memory of
their griefs) the noble freeness you have showed in the disposing your Story,
might justly engage me to the like, to repay the debt I owe; and therefore if
you be pleased to supply my weak style in my life's delivery with your
attention, I shall venture to give it, beginning, where the Barbarian Moors of
our Spain had ending.

My Ancestors served our first (so styled, Catholic Princes) Founders of this
great Monarchy, so valiantly in their last conquests, that for a Noble
recompense, they bestowed an inheritance upon them, in the flourishing City of
Granada, where my house, or rather of my Parents at this day stands:
Gentlemen, (though for me in this misery to speak it, may seem vainglory)
as well known for nobleness of blood, as wealth, and charity to their poor
towne-borne neighbors: happy enough, though doubtless since this misfortune
of mine, that happiness is much diminished: for besides that, it has fallen
upon their heir, I am their only son and child, whom as the light of their
eyes, their sole darling, they brought up in all laudable qualities, as a son
of such Parents.

About twenty years was I of age, when the best part of Spaines Nobility,
moved to serve our Great Monarch in that first journey of Alarache (incited by
friends, and chiefly licenced by my vvilling Parents, to their great contents,
gallantly furnished with Arms, bravery and servants) I made one of the
Troops. The effect and taking that town, or rather buying of it, you well
know, and so the companies were dissolved; but before I would return home, I
spent a little time with some kindred of mine in the City of Cadiz, which was
then, as, plentiful in provisions and dainties, so populously furnished with
valiant Soldiers, and frequented by fair Dames; whereby (Mars taking truce)
Venus began her pleasing wars; at whose fire in part I vvarmed my self, for
one day some slight discourse passing betwixt me and a Dame of Seuill, the
flax taking hold so inflamed, that within a while I found my self all in a
light fire.

I considered not, that (as she was a Curtizan) I possessing her, in such a
concourse also others might do the like) but, watched and iealously hid her,
as warily as if we had long lived together man and wife. The Lady was not
used to such wakings, and therefore my girdle soon waxt too little for her
waste; she grew to a loathing, ate little, forbore her coming to my lodging,
in fine, purposed to give me the slip, as indeed she did, though left in my
custody two Trunkes of her apparel. I cannot express how much I was grieved:
for, these kind of creatures, besides their ordinary sweetness of Discourse,
have a strange kind of fascinating, that makes them to be affected: I sought
her, and so did some friends of mine, with no small diligence: but (for she
resolved not to appear) all was bootlesse. Howsoever, those pawnes I had,
gave me some hope to hear of her, as after it fell out; for the next day,
next my heart, in stead of breakfast, I received a Challenge, which, a certain
Gallant, upon whose account my woman was kept, sent me; in which he demanded
the Trunkes, or in case of rebellion, that we should meet, (the place
appointed) where he would expect me: whither, carried with desire and gladness
to hear of my Mistress, together with jealousy that fired me, rashly all alone
I went. And to it we went (our bodies the marks) each aiming at his contrary,
I quickly had the advantage: for mine enemy stumbling, fell flat along
backward; but two friends of his, sallying instantly out of certain near
Trenches, crying out to me to hold, I obeying he rising up in the Interim, and
violently flying at me, on the sudden reached me a cut upon one side of my
face. The haste that I made to be revenged upon such cowardice, was the same
that my Adversaries used for their safety; who thinking their friend had left
me for dead, soon vanished out of sight, and (I believe) out of the Island. I
afterward, to the general sorrow of my friends, caused my self to be cured,
and for the present dissembled the received injury; whose Author I knew to be a
Seuillian Gentleman, that had long kept my lascivious Curtizan, whose love I
quickly forgot, yet sent her, as soon as I knew where, for fear she had taken
Sanctuary, her Trunkes.

And now I returned toward Granada, where I was sometime before expected. Where
when I arrived, the first few days (with the license that the name of Soldier
gives to the variety of colors, Skarfe and Feather) I walked in some friends
companies, tacking and steering about the City; neither know I whether in this
time my military bravery, or perhaps contrary fortune inclined the eyes of a
certain Dame to look upon me, one, fair in extremity, and alike Noble, as I
soon learnt; but a stranger, that accompanied her Parents, who had an
important Law-suite in this Cities Chancerie. My new love took hold as did
the former, and as that increast, and my experience suting but with my years,
I inconsiderately cast my self after my blind affection; which though it
received not so soon, my pretended recompense, yet in less then months was
so cherished, that few nights I was absent from Felicianas street (such was my
Dames name) and at last I adventured to send her a Letter with the following
Sonnet:

Rash Phaeton, more bold then wise, or blessed;
Once longed the reins and Days bright Coach to guide:
But, for a punishment to empty pride
(Setting) he falls in his untimely East:
Young Icarus mounts to the burning Sphere,
Forced by the wind that his Art's wings death drive,
T^ll, when he once to the Suns height would strive;
(...), for his downe-fall melted were.
^oues Thunderbolt dashed Phaetons design
Which into nothing with the owner fell:
Blind Icarus the Sea Waves washed to death.
Aye me! even so, you lofty thoughts of mine
Like Phaetons, my loue-flames are your hell,
And like Icarian seas, grief stops my breath.
In stead of an answer, she willed me by word of mouth the night following,
to speak with her beneath a Bay window she appointed. This happy comfort
begot swift wings to my desires, which (contained in the limit of her promise)
the ensuing night, were accomplished: at which time I enjoyed my mistrisses
sweet conversation. I shall not need to relate what amorous fopperies I used,
and the forcible persuasions of my loves discourse, together with the return
of her favors: only let me tell you, my hopes had more encouragement from
her, then either I could expect, or she in honesty promise; telling me
withal, that the fear of her household spies, was the cause of her former
suspension and not speaking with me: so that now (wholly inflamed in her love)
I took leave, our conversation holding consta^tly many a night after in the
same place; til when I least suspected any such intent, in midst of our
greatest affection, not knowing the cause, (as not having on my part given any)
she wholly retired her self, from either seeing, or speaking with me.

What could you have thought, noble Sir, of this new disdain? or what shall I
tell you of my extremes? my anguish? my diligence? above all, the firmness
of my affection; which more violently increased then her unjust forgetfulness;
from whom I could not so much as understand the least occasion of my mishap:
though for all this, I forsook not the street, but the most nights with
music, and voices in some pretty sonnet, gave a touch upon her ingratitude:
for as my intent was directed to an honest end, which she had diverse times
formerly understood from me, I was not nice to conceal my priuatest thoughts:
but none of all these left the least impression in her ungrateful breast, which
made me not a little suspicious, that this sudden change might proceed from
some new affection; so like a second Argus watchfully waking, I played the
careful Sentinel, and one night among the rest, conforming my voice with a
viole, I took occasion to express the softness of my affection, and the
flintinesse of her rigor, in the following Sonnet, which you may not repent to
hear.

How art thou, Love, a child, if Giant tall?
How, watchful Lynceus, if still painted blind?
How, sometimes frozen, if, all fire by kind?
How, Wax, since hard as Diamond withal?
How, Atlas art thou, if of suffering small?
How, tyrannous, if of so soft a mind?
How, absent, if we still thee present find?
How, Mydas? Alexander liberal?
Love then, if Love thou be? why selfsame Love?
Loving and loue-lesse art thou? (contraries)
That one should hate, when the other does adore!
Dark thy Aenigma's are, Let none then prove,
What thy confused Babel mysteries
Be, since who knows thee most, needs know thee more.
But all my labor was vain, as being never able to find the least show of
dishonesty, or ought illicite throughout that so great family: and this the
more emboldened me, that sometimes I freely entered even to the secretst parts
of the house, and one night among others, that I inconsiderately desired to see
my Feliciana, I entered at a garden door, whither she used much to descend,
and whither I might soon approach, as being near the houses court: So when I
least dreamt of it, I might see, that in the midst of a great Parlor, she was
set upon the knee of a young gallant, and (to my seeming) lovingly courted by
him. This was an ouerture, that had I not spared to raise the whole house,
would have incited me to a violent course; and in my raging jealousy I drew
near to a grate, whereby I might the better hear their discourse: in which
(though confusedly) me thought the names of brother and sister passed betwixt
them: here my heart was a little more revived, and not long after I understood
the truth, that the Gentleman was newly arrived from Seuil, where before this
occasion, I knew he was, as receiving it from my Mistress her own mouth.

The house upon his arrival was less heeded, and with greater concourse
frequented, though I for my part, knowing how little security I had there,
would have slid fair and softly away: to which purpose I had scarce turned my
back, when, I might behold how two men crossing from the street door toward
me, came leading a woman betwixt them; so that shunning the being espied by
them, I was forced to get me on one side, shadowing my self in an entry, till
such time as they were past: one of them stepping before, went to the garden
window, and called (as I might plainly hear) my mistrisses brother, who
instantly came into the court, and with open arms received that woman, with
whom, (the whole family being retired to rest) he ascended into certain
higher rooms, in likelihood, his own lodgings: and I seeing all hushed and
quiet, meant to have returned unto mine, but being come to the street door,
to my grief I found it shut, which much troubled me; and ignorant what course
to take, at last I looked about me, and in a near entry might see a stable
door open: so without more delay I entered there, and kept company with three
or four horses, taking up my lodging betwixt one of them and the wall, where I
was no sooner laid down, and rested upon my buckler, when a fellow coming
with a light in his hand, the horsekeeper belike, without spying me, first
barring the door, began next to undress himself, and by virtue of the light
before me, I might see the party a lusty Barbarian Mu^atto, that was slave to
Felicianas father; for her sake I was forced to pass a hard night thus, as I
had often done. Whilst I was busied in my thoughts, the slave had got him to
his bed, a poor one (heaven knows) which standing against a lath-wall right
opposite to me, I might perceive him softly listen to hear what passed on the
other side thereof: and not long after, (being still attentive to his care,)
might see that leaving to hearken, rising hastily up, and kneeling upon his
bed, he began to take out some bricks which had been set into the wall, and
afterward, one within asking if there were room to enter at, and he answering
yes; by little and little, I saw him help in a woman, and (being entered)
claspe her fast in his arms. My joints began presently to tremble, and my
heart furiously leapt within me, as if it meant to have left my breast: and not
long after, my sad soul fully knew the cause of these effects; for the
lustful woman not contented with embraces, but longing to see her barbarous
leacher naked, taking the candle from whence it hung, she no sooner beheld her
tawnie sweetheart, but I in her, the fair foule-minded Feliciana (to my
sorrow,) the base subject of this slaves lust. But the home drawn arrow, flies
not so swift from crooked bow of the fierce Canibal, as powerless I with
fury started from up the horses feet, and setting upon the worthless couple
with my dagger, bent wholly on revenge, and blind with confirmed jealousy,
without resistance thrust the poniard four several times through the Moors
body: and seeing that in the interim, Feliciana strove to be gone, leaving him,
and thinking with my self, that the intent of making her my wife, obliged me
to as much as had she been so, catching hold of her arm, I stabbed her in as
many parts of her body as I could reach, and (doubtless) had there ended her
life, if the cries of both (for the slave by this time made shift to get into
the entry) had not prevented me: for instantly at the uproar all the servants
were gotten to the stable door, which I (to my ruin, quickly perceiving)
resisted and their entrance, having the slave now dead at my feet for a
bulwark.

In midst of this confusion came my mistrisses brother with lights before him,
whom I no sooner fully saw, but knew to be the author of my former wound: and
he likewise beholding, knew me, whereby suspecting that I (having notice of
his arrival) came to kill him, he began lowdly to make it manifest. No less
by this time was the noise and howling where Feliciana was: which, her brother
fearing would be a cause of raising the watch, in respect of the party in his
chamber, (for he was ignorant of his sisters mishap) he commanded his
servants to shift her away; but their luck was such, that at going out of the
street door, they met with the Constable, who drawn by the noise he heard,
was newly come thither; so that my self now (seeing my mistrisses brother for
his wenches danger gotten amongst the watch,) laying hold upon the opportunity,
with incredible haste mixing with the troop, freed my self from danger,
leaving the master and servants there to shift as well as they could for their
fair Lady, whom with sorrow (having once loved her) I beheld to be the
Seuillian Dame of Cadiz. But time hastening me on, in a trice I was got out of
the street, passing as I went under Feliciana's bay window, by whose groans,
accompanied with the noise and howling of her mother and maids, I might
plainly hear some crying for Phisicians, others a Confessor, which made me,
without more delays, get me out of the City, and before day-breake, advance
two leagues upon my way, to a town that belonged to an especial good friend
of my Father, from whom, receiving a horse and some moneies, (considering my
danger) I hasted speedily, and crossing the Alpujaran mountains, came to the
Kingdom of Murcia, and at last to the City of Valencia, where (my soul full
of bitter and intolerable sadness) without further consultations, I turned
Friar, and betook my self to one of the most retired orders of that City,
where having remained some nine months of my Probationership, time curing me
of my amorous sore, and weary of that strict life, with as easy a
determination as I undertook it, I quickly left it, and some month since,
returning tovvard Andaluzia, desirous to see in what state my affairs went,
when I least thought of it, by the way these Sbanditi fell upon me, and
taking my money and a Pilgrims vveede which I wore (for my more safety) from
me, brought me to this place, whose extremity makes me think this
vvretched misfortune has befalne me, not more for my former offenses, then
cutting the thread of the Religious profession I made choice of.

This was the end of the poor imprisoned Gentleman's sad story, which
accompanied with Gerardo's sorrow, to his sighs comforting each other, and
re-establing their commenced friendship the necessity of the time; made them
by mutual accord address themselves to some rest.

Some fifteen days remained these poor Gentlemen after in this place; in
which time Gerardo understood from his Camerada's, the intention of their
keeping in this dark Prison, which was, to sell them to the first Barbarian
Frigot that should arrive upon the Coast, with whose Owner Pedraca had made
agreement, and sold his Prisoners for some twenty, some thirty crowns a man.
This not a little comforted Gerardo, the sale assuring him of his liberty,
since he presumed his Brother or friends would ransom him; and with this new
hope, giving more alacrity to his late despised life, he disposed himself
with a manly and courageous heart, to expect the end and vpshot of his
misfortunes: seeking withal to rid and blot out of his mind, the loathed
remembrance of the vile Iacinta, who now knew how she came amongst those
Rogues: for one of his companions informed by one of the other, told him, that
four months since, they met her, lost or rather flying in a Mountain (as
she gave to understand) from a Brother of hers; and that their Captain
enamoured on her beauty, took her along with him, causing her to change her
woman's habit, and his followers to obey and respect her equally as him their
Master: and surely this was the Religious Order she so truly longed after. A
strange kind of change and variety in woman was this, a lightness beyond
belief, where my understanding has quite lost footing, and my judgment is
past wading. I think it needless to search curiously into the reason, why
this creature grew so prodigal of her honor: for since Gerardo, whom it most
concerned, could not understand it, it may well be let alone; yet it is not
amiss to set down his description of vvomans various condition in this brief
Sonnet.

He, in a Viol the Suns Atoms takes,
Retorting each raylingly offends,
To tame with flattering, high grown seas pretends,
Or nimbler wind with running swift oretakes,
Or whips, to scourge the flames, his hands he makes,
Clouds in a Net to catch, time precious spends,
Or in a circle looks (where none are) ends
In Aetna weeps and thinks that heat he slakes:
A mad-mans counsel, or a dumb to express
A smile from death, from fortune constancy,
Truth from a Poet, from a sick man taste,
Quiet from Prisons, troops from Wilderness,
From Angels tears, from dreams a certainty,
Asks he, Shat toils, to find a woman chaste.
To turn to the present: Some fifteen days after he had remained in this
Cauerne, himself and his enforced company, being one night fast asleep, with
a huge noise of people that seemed to descend the Cave, suddenly awoke, and
straight imagining their enormious sale was contrived with some Moorish Pyrate,
each man began to prepare himself. They were no whit deceived, as being soon
beset with Moorish cries, and Arabicke Soldiers, that with their drawn
Scimitars, together with a confused babbling, began to fast bind, and (turning
them out of their Dungeon) to guide them toward the Seaside, where they
imbarkt them in a well-man'd Frigot, that lay there hid in a close creek.

But scarce had Gerardo set foot a-boord, when he saw most of the Thieves,
and their Captain, together with the ungrateful Iacinta, well fettered and
manacled, whereat he was not a little astonished, though, to see her and that
base crew in such estate, tempered with some joy, his admiration assuring
himself that just Heaven had revenged him sufficiently on his enemies. For you
must know that Alibraem a famous Pyrat, and Pedraca's dissembled friend, having
that afternoon arrived on the coast, and landed on the nearest shore a
hundredth of his best Soldiers, he resolved like an Infidel as he was, to
break his word and promise; or happily, incited by the Divine Providence, that
his Infidelity might be a due punishment to theirs, that being Christians,
sold their dear Countrymen to the barbarous enemies of our Sacred Faith: and
so in the night stole upon their Cabbins, when they were most secure, and
seized on them and Pedraca in Iacinta's embraces; and notwithstanding their
complaints, and threats, leaving them well bound and sure in the Frigot, the
subtle Pyrat returned with one of them for his Guide, to show him the Cave
where the Prisoners were; and so clapping his whole booty a-boord, before day
he set sail, steering toward the clayie Wharse of Argiers; which course to
their great content, but our poor Christians their greater discomfort, with a
prosperous gale they held on, till toward nine of clock the next morning; at
what time a forcible Leuant increasing upon them, the sky was instantly covered
with black clouds, threatening those that cut the surging waves, with an
approaching storm: the angry vvinde still re-inforcing, and the pregnant
clouds, spowting out streams of water, the sky likewise with confused claps,
Thunder and Lightning appeared all on a light flame. Here, those that should
have governed the storme-drouen Frigot, seeing their danger, and wanting all
courage, clapping up their Oars, and turning the Sails to their Stead, they
yielded themselves to the fury of the merciless Winds.

Every minute the brackish waves, gaping to the Seas very center, seemed to
swallow the ungoverned Bark; in which, nothing was now heard, but moan, vows
and promises, as well from the Pagan Turks, as miserable Christians, increasing
with the night, that now with ominous darkness came upon them, together with a
terrible distrust in their afflicted hearts, especially in the fair Iacinta's,
who so took on (as might have provoked Marble to pity) and indeed all of us
pitied her, such exquisite force and virtue has beauty, that as well from
foes as friends, in the customary Laws of Nature, finds pity in extremities.
Gerardo's chief care in this confusion, was to quit himself of a great chain
which he was tied with, that if the worst should happen, whether being out of
their course they should split upon Rocks, or being near the Coast, run on
a Shelfe, he might freely shift for himself.

In this manner, and hurried on with the swift Leuant, with much danger they
sailed back again in the Straights (not being able to help it) till toward
day-breake; and so the storm a little ceasing, doubling a point and Cape
called Gata, upon a sudden they fell upon three Ships of the Armada Royal of
Spain, who tossed up and down in that storm, came also thither to take
shelter. But no sooner took the Frigot notice of the danger, when presently
with Oars in hand, they began to tugge amain from the enemy, who also began
to give them chase, the Admiral foremost which was one of them. But seeing the
Prize almost ready to outstrip them, giving them a Piece from her forecastle,
it lighted so happily upon the Frigot, that together with the Seas violence in
the storm, that made her in many parts leaky; in a trice the hurt she received
by the bullet was perceived: for the water entered her so fast, that for all the
pittious cries they within her made, and before the Ship could come to her
succor, in a moment she began to sink, and as many as were in her to perish;
at least all such as with the affrightment of the storm, had not the
happiness, to get into the Shallop; in which, some of the Captives, with the
Barbarians, escaped the ships danger, and present death.

Gerardo might also have ran the same hazard, had he not courageously foreseen
it; for wise men in neither fortune are deprived of provident foresight. But he
(as Heaven permitted) laying hold upon a Chest that was next him, kept himself
upon top of the salt waves, till such time as the Admiral drew near; and
casting out a Ropes end, he and the Granadinian Gentleman were saved.

Gerardo could no longer support the just anger of his wronged heart, but
suffered himself at last to be vanquished by his amorous resentment, by seeing
her, whom he once fervently affected, before his eyes (helpless) perish: and
though her hateful leuity worthily deserved a more rigorous punishment; yet
this last, which he thought heaven inflicted by the devouring waves, so
compassionately moved him, that he could easily have followed her fate, were it
not too great an ingratitude to his miraculous deliverance, from a sudden
death, or at least servile bondage. It was no small comfort to see himself now
safe amongst so many valiant Soldiers of his Nation; who, out of a Noble
generositie, seeing him as it were naked, taking some of their own clothes
from their backs (not knowing who or whence he was) clad and used him as a
Brother or particular friend: till arriving at the Port of Saint Lucar, taking
leave of the General and his Noble company, as also of the Granadinian
Gentleman, who traveled another way, he went on shore, as full of interior
sorrow, as void of comfortable relief.

The end of the second Discourse.
GERARDO: THE VNFORTVNATE SPANIARD.
The third Discourse.
THE Tragical end of Clara, and the lamentable success of Iacinta, had
brought the unfortunate Gentleman to such a miserable pass, that he was now
wholly determined to conclude the remainder of his vvearied life in the barren
solitude of those untilled fields, refusing for ever in his free choice, the
entising and dangerous aboade in great and populous Cities, shunning and
retiring himself from their very names, as the pestiferous occasion and
contagious venime, from which his mind and body both so worn escaped. And
certainly let this resolution of his be duly weighed, any one may easily
conceive how happily Gerardo fell into such consideration, since to avoid his
disastrous fortune, he could not choose a fitter remedy, nor on his own
behalf, take a course more worthy his manly resolution. But who can prevent
his own unhappy fate or fortune? who can resist what high Heaven has once
ordained? So that Gerardo, where he most forcibly strove to shun the Divine
Planets, there he grew nearest to their maleuolent influence, and his own
misfortunes.

He seemed to be transformed into another Epimetheus, or one that had tasted of
Pandoras box. Well, he had scarce imprinted his steps in the silver Sand and
Margent of that Port-inundation of the famous and swift Betis, when led by his
solitary cogitations, leaving the City on his left hand, he prosecuted a way,
in which his free will (an uncertain guide) co^ducted him over Valleys,
Pastures, uneven ways, Hills, and inaccessible high Mountains: till one
afternoon about Sunset (after he had spent some two days in this kind of
weariness) desirous to give a little refreshing to his tired Body, and prying
to and fro for a convenient shelter to pass the approaching night in,
(careless of any mortal encounter) it was his chance to espy a Shepherds
Cottage, which seated at the foot of a spreading Oak, made the place and
situation more delightful.

Gerardo was nothing sorry to have lighted on so good a harbor, rather out of
gladness, willing to draw near, he went on, but quickly made a mannerly
stand, fearing to interrupt the sweet Voice of a comely Swain, that sat upon
the euer-greene fruitful grass, was at this time singing, or rather closing
up of the Song, to the Music of an ill-shap't Rebecke.

When fixed Calisto gives up her clear light,
And Courtiers lie like Lead
In sinking Featherbed;
Then make I ready nets for my delight;
And with the smiling morn take glad some flight:
Setting each bait and ginne,
That Fish and Fowls does win,
To nibble (caught and coozen'd with my slight.
Then do I find and follow too,
Gray hound and flying Hare; Ho-loo
Greyhound) that scarce leau'st print in grass;
Let then the ambitious flatt'rer his time spend,
(Waiting) on foot: so (like a Taper) end.
He enuies me (I know) poor Ass.
The Song ended, had not our Gentleman been on his legs, his eyes
broad-waking, and his whole self leaning to the Bark of a green Willow,
doubtless his fancy might (as a fained dream) have shaped, the Cottage,
Shepherd, Voice, and Song, which suited well to his liking, as hearing it
conclude with the praise of a Country* life: but this was not the greatest
effect it wrought, for he, transported with the tones elevation, began to
fall back into the remembrance of his past misfortunes, and losing himself,
as being wholly entangled in them, without all help (vanquished by the
oppression of his woes) fetching a deep sigh, his senses forsaking him, he
fell down upon the springing Grass; causing no small alteration in the
careless Swain, with the sudden noise of his fall; who after some pawse, and
thinking on the cause of it, casting the shrill Instrument away, straight ran
to him that was fallen, and (settling his head on his knee) considering withal
his goodly presence, solitariness and dismaying, could not but much relent,
and desire to know the party, together with the cause of his malady: and so
leaving him a while upon the ground, entering his Cottage, and bringing out with
him, a neat cup of Red Tamari^ke, he filled it from the Cristalline Fountain,
which not far off sprung from the center of a stony Rock: and turning
speedily to the fainting Gentleman, sprinkling part of the water on his meager
cheeks, he brought him by degrees to himself, crying out with inward groans,
and this following, with a faint voice. How long, confused thoughts! will you
torment my sad soul, representing still her past griefs? More he would have
said, if, taking notice of the charitable company, and wondering at his own
success, he had not turned his commenced sorrow into gratitude for his
succor, giving the Swain due thanks, who with the following discourse, and a
smiling countenance, cut him off, saying: Truly, Gallant Youth, your sudden
distemper has caused such a resentment in my heart, that I could well bear a
part with you, so I thought it might any way ease you of the inward grief,
with which I see you afflicted: take courage, man, and (if possible) expel the
original of your sad complaints; for knowing how hurtful they are, you do
ill to admit of their unjust company: and (if you please) let us in, to my
Cottage; where, as well to me, as to the rest of my company (who will not be
long from us) with our homely plainness, you shall be heartily welcome, and
this I can freely promise.

Gerardo was not a little pleased with so loving an offer; and therefore
returning his best thanks, to so worthy a courtesy, he thus made answer:

Impute not (courteous Shepherd) my hearts weakness, any way to want of
courage in my mind; nor that my late accident grew from a corporal
necessity: for such (were they never so painful) my patience would wear
them out, or time might in time happily relieve them.

Only believe and pardon this as a passion and infirmity of my soul, in which
it is so anciently rooted, so entirely the very selfsame thing with it, that
it is past all remedy, even grown eternally incurable. But not all the grief
I feel, or sorrow I must lastingly endure, shall make me ever forget: how much
I owe to your favor done me; though my slender abilities must leave to the
Superior powers the due recompense and satisfaction for your good will, in
offering me your company, or rather accepting mine; which since you please to
esteem of, my faithful protestation shall be to serve you as long as you like
to admit me. The ouer-ioy'd Shepherd would have replide, when not far from
the Cottage, five men appeared, who drawing nearer, all gave a kind of
reverence to him that was with Gerardo, which made him perceive he was their
chief (as true it was) for he had many great flocks, to which those five
looked too; and many Herds of Cattle, that grazed up and down in the Forest
where they were. Now all of them being set at the door of the thatcht
Cottage, having the natural pleasant green, in stead of more olorous Diaper,
they fell cheerfully to Supper, so merrily welcoming their new ghest, as, his
fare had been less contentfull at a great man's Table.

Celio (for so hight the worthy Shepherd) could not suppose, that such a
subject as Gerardo (being adorned with so good parts of humanity) could want
the knowledge of delightful Music: and therefore offering, when Supper was
ended, the Rebecke to his hand, said, It is not possible, good Sir, that he who
is so complete, should be defective in this worthy quality; and therefore let
me request you on the behalf of these present, that you be pleased to give us
a touch of your Musical skill and Voice, since you have heard mine already,
and remain my debtor.

Here Gerardo seeing himself so reasonably obliged, returned to Celio this
answer: How-euer my fresh affairs rather provoke my mind to dolorous sighs,
then to suspend them with sweet accents; yet the desire my heart has to be
confirmed in your friendship, shall win something from my griefs to obey
you with, confident that your love will make up what wants in skill; and so
tuning first the Instrument, and after his Voice, he sung this Dittie,
including something to the company, and the rest to his own mishaps.

The rugged Mountain from a friendly vein,
yields to the greedy Merchant, plenteous store,
(Even till his bags be full) of prec'ous Ore,
Or the Red blood he drinks till burst again.
The knottie-footed corn of golden grain
From yellow neck, and pregnant ear, yields more
To the glad husbandman, then fills his floor:
(Reward to former pains in plowing taken.)
Yet does not gold, the craving appetite
Of Merchant cram, nor wheat of grumbling clown:
For these, the more they have, more covet still.
Like such, am I: their steps I tread a-right.
For though I reap desires fruit, yet (cast down)
My good is lessened with increase of ill.
The Song ended, and the short mention of his griefs so begat true ones in
him, that, though he meant to have gone on with some other more pleasing
Ditty, for his new friends, it was not possible for him, (besides) that they
also much taken with his sweet voice, desired to re-enioy it. But seeing the
justness of his cause, they would not ouer-presse him; so that growing now
somewhat late, they betook them to their rest; and the next morning, the
Shepherds rose early, each one to his several charge, save Gerardo and Celio,
who preparing Nets for fishing, Dogs and Ferrets for hunting, in such
delightful exercises spent this day, and also many more.

Gerardo had caused to be made for him, a curious field-garment of painted
wilde-beasts skins, and now to Celio's infinite content, lived in those Deserts
as happily, as vvilling never to forget them; till one evening toward night,
leaving Celio toward the highest of the Mountain, driving his flocks to
shade; himself hot and weary, returned all alone back to the Cottage: at
which time, amongst the thick spreading Trees, there appeared a Woman, who
coming nearer to him, made him not a little wonder at her sight, as well in
respect of her tender age and beauty, as to see her all blubbered, sad and
afflicted, which made him suspect, that something (ordinary to women that
frequent Woods) had happened unto her, though her true signs of grief made him
think it might be against her consent: which egged him on the more to know
the occasion that brought her thus solitarily, on foot and full of sorrow: and
so coming nearer, before he could speak, she first saluted him; and Gerardo
returning, with his accustomed courtesy, desired her to sit down, and grieved
to see her so disquieted, sitting by her, with gentle speech he began thus to
accost her:

I should be glad (fair Gentlewoman) that vnlading some part of the sorrows
that overflow your breast, you would give me an account of them, and the cause
that makes you wander in these remote deserts, so, without company, though
accompanied with such sad signs, as by their shows make your griefs most
important.

Whilst the good Gerardo uttered this to the afflicted Dame, her clear eyes
ceased not to shead frequent tears, and her panting heart to send forth some
groans, till at length, willing to yield an answer to him that so willingly
expected it, drying the drops from those cristall streams, and getting some
short leave from her afflictions, with a sigh sent from her hearts bottom, and
mournful tone, she began.

If the immense sorrow that even bereaues me of my senses, would give way to
my tongue, to express the cause of it, sure I am, courteous friend, that your
compassionate heart, would with a new and equal feeling, bear a part in the
present pain, with which my soul is tormented; and therefore let me request
you, for your own sake, not to importune me to the narration; for where all
humane relief fails, that can be but fruitless; only let me entreat you at
the present to let me know how near I am to any habitations, and how far it
may be from this shady Valley to the town of Cesarina, where it is fit (for
the restoring of my sad life, if it be possible) that I this night arrive. To
which Gerardo, somewhat abashed at her distrust, replied: Most beautiful
Mistress, 'twere easy to all-pitying Heaven to effect, that under this course
Weed, and rusticke Skins you see, some noble blood might be enclosed; and a
heart, not only longing to receive the demanded favor, but prompt and
prepared to hazard a life upon any occasion, in which you shall employ it; and
persuade not your self, neither so much as imagine, that the ill you speak of,
is ir-remediable; since, living, though it were in the highest extremity,
there is hope of comfort and relief; nor misprize not him that thus unknown
shows you so mean an outside, since many times there is found in the forsaken
and wild herb of the field, that true and healthful antidote, that often in
the precious Treacle is vvanting: touching the places distance you ask for,
you are much vvide of it; for besides the not being able to get, till dark
night, into the high way, you have from thence a long League and more to
Cesarina: your best course therefore, (if you please) is, to be my ghest till
morning, and in yonder thatcht Cottage, you shall be as, well entertained;
honestly welcome. The afflicted Dame could not suppose such Phrase did proceed
from less then a well disposed person; and in this thought casting her fair
eyes upon him, considering well of his shape and modest countenance, she gave
credit to her supposition, and not disliking his offer, determined to accept
it; and so her bitter moan somewhat qualified, she used these amorous
speeches: Your discreet language has wrought so notable an effect in my
heart, that, with it you have not only given me encouragement, but vvithall
obliged me to what is so convenient, and (night approaching) would have enforced
me to beg, which I shall be glad to receive, upon the assurance of the
inviolable good usage you promise me: and in lieu thereof, that you may not
think me some straggling house-wife, I shall known make unto you, the
occasion of my lost peregrination through these wild deserts: for though the
principal motive admits no earthly comfort, yet sure I am the rest, as
accessaries, shall find it in your just commiseration.

The noble City divided from her Suburbs by the swift Stream of the renowned
Guadalquibir, is my native soil; where, to my own proper and others
misaduentures, I was borne: in my tender infancy. I was bereaved of both my
Parents, yet not wholly an Orphan, having in stead of a Father, his Brother (to
whom I was left) my loving Uncle, married at this present to a Dame of the
Province; one, that as she is well descended, and endowed with the best
natural gifts, so, ambitious of her infamy and loose condition; a very
idolatresse of her own lust, inclined to that only and her wanton freedom:
her disorderly courses came to that scandalous pass, as gave sufficient matter
and beginning to the affliction you now behold in me: for the prosecution of
her lascivious appetite, could not so secretly be handled, but that the
lustful and raging love, she bore a handsome young Gentleman our neighbor,
came to my Uncle his notice, and no longer ago then yesterday, I being all
alone in my chamber, not dreaming of the ielous rage that possessed him, (it
growing now toward night) I might see him in a strange distraction entered
where I was, so enraged, that as well by his fiery eyes, as bloodlesse visage,
he made known something had bred him much distaste; and I rising in no less
fear to salute him, (having shut my chamber door too) and vnsheath'd a sharp
Poniard he had on, laying next fast hold upon me; now almost dead in his
arms, setting the point of it to my throat, he proceeded to this frightfull
discourse: Were it not for a more urgent revenge I have in hand, doubt not,
ungrateful Clori, (for this, gentle Shepherd, is my name) but this Dagger
should let out thy accursed life; and with it that base and counterfeit blood of
mine, which lurkes in thy ignoble breast: but be assured of a present dispatch,
if instantly thou reveal not, what thou have long concealed, the being a
worthless witness of my dishonor and affront. There is no faining of
excuses, or pleading ignorance can serve turn; suffice it, I know the truth,
and not any thy discharge can prevail, nor will I ever believe thee to be
ignorant of the base wrong, thy Aunt, my treacherous wife has done me; dispatch
therefore and lose no more time, then what may be spent in my just satisfaction;
telling me truly who is the bold adulterer, that spotting the purity of mine
honor, has robbed me of my fame, disgraced my house, ruined my reputation,
and bereaved me of my best life, by inflicting an euer-lasting living death of
dishonor. My soul hearing this, was so amazed, that unable to reply, or to
unfold my lips, or move my tongue-tyed Palate, I stood a good while in this
astonishment, till hearing my Uncle began with new fury to threaten me,
casting my self at his feet, and craving pardon for my slacknesse, (the pale
aspect of my inexorable Fate blinding mine eyes, and clouding my understanding)
without more delays I at length revealed, what my heart so long before had
laid up in silence, by satisfying his most certain suspicions, not hiding the
least circumstance, as well touching who the Gallant was, as also his egresse,
and the lascivious conversation in their dishonest loves. Having attentively
heard me out, without so much as a words reply, going out by the way he came,
and shutting my door on the other side after him, he left me so confusedly
pensatiue, that, fearing some woeful end, (for by what I had discovered, I
could expect no less) overcome with this fear, I resolved not to expect the
event; and therefore taking the richest of my Jewels, by a window, which
(without Grates) looked to the street, (the sheets of my bed serving me in
stead of a Ladder) without being seen by any, I got out of the house and City
likewise in this manner you behold, with a purpose not to have rested, till I
came to the desired Gates of Cesarina; a town which belonged to my deceased
Fathers elder brother, where I had often been in the company of a
Cousin-Germane of mine, sole daughter and inheretrix to the Owner, whose
beauty, (thus little to digress from my Story) has the just title of most
exquisite in all this Province, fertilized by the ouerflowing Betis. But my
cruel Fates would not that this boldness should remain unpunished; and so
having some half a League from the City, met with a man that was going
thitherward, wondering to see me alone, and at such a time of night in the wild
high way, and coming near unto me, (representing then, me thought, my fear
of the angry arm and Poniard anew) asked, which way I traveled without
company, and in a Country so dangerous; and other matters, that neither my
fear suffered me to take notice of, or make answer; till such time as he
perceiving my alteration, comforting me the best he could, understood of me
which way I was to go; to which purpose most honestly he offered me his
company and service: so bent upon it, that notwithstanding all my refusals and
entreaties, he would needs turn back with me: and so going on, began to
beguile the way and tedious night, with merry tales so proper, that I was then
glad of his soon unlucky company: for my content was quickly turned into such
a grief, as will never, as long as life lasts, forsake me. Here the wretched
Clori more outragiously falling back into her former moan, breaking off
(without hearing or admitting the least comfort) she began to weep and sigh
afresh; her tears in Gerardo bred the like effect, and unable to abstain, he
accompanied her in the same passion. But seeing with the nights approach, the
coming home of the Shepherds might interrupt her discourse, he more earnestly
importuned her to the conclusion: so perceiving the obligation she had to her
voluntary promise, with fresh tears, she entered where she left.

Scarce had we gone two leagues, (as said my treacherous guide) when finding by
my weariness the necessity I had of sleep, or perhaps the better to put his
damnable purpose in execution, taking me by the hand, under color of having
me rest my self, and bidding me follow him, we struck out of the way: I
(not knowing whither he would carry me, nor having so much courage as to give
him the slip) walked on a good way, till at last coming to certain breaches
of earth, and deep pits, I might hear the melancholy noise of a Brook
running amongst the craggie Rocks, which so afflicted my disconsolate mind,
that I forthwith presaged to my self the lamentable success that did attend
me; and in the sudden apprehension of my fear, turning to my companion, I
entreated him, we might pass no further; which indeed suited better for his
purpose then her ignorance, that so foolishly trusted her self with one she
knew not. And this plainly appeared; for as soon as ever he saw me laid down
on the sandy ground to take some refreshing, without being able, with all my
weak woman's defense to help my self, or to prevail, with noise, tears and
entreaties, at last (the reuengefull sword of just Heaven all the while (I know
not for what secret cause) sheathed against so great an offense, and deaf to
my hoarse cries) I was by him ravished. Neither ceased the barbarous
executioner of mine honor so, but having disrobed me of some of my best
apparel, and robbed me of the Jewels I inconsiderately carried about me,
leaving me as it were at the last gasp of my wearied life, he fled, and left
me also to my fresh complaints, to demand just vengeance of heaven and earth
for my wrong. But woe is me, my griefs were scattered in the Air, or like
Characters written on those Sands, since he was gone without punishment, and I
remained lost in this wilderness to bewail my misfortunes; which shall ever be
before mine eyes* to cry for revenge, and my death to give them end. And ending
her story, she began again to solemnize it with her tears, Gerardo's discreet
persuasions not able to dry them; who sensible of her grief, endeavored all he
might to give her comfort.

By this time with dark cold night, the gentle Celio and his Shepherds
approached to the pleasing shelter of their thatched Cottage; whom, when our
Gerardo heard, with a cheerful heart he went out to meet them; and giving
them notice of the new-come Ghest, they all went with him to salute and welcome
her, with no small admiration at her beauty and attire, and (to say true) none
of them gave any great credit to Gerardo touching the cause of her arrival:
rather taking Clori for his Paramour, dissembling the business, after supper
they left the Cottage free to them both. But Gerardo perceiving this their
knauish courtesy, began with deep protestations to satisfy them to the
contrary; but none of all could once prevail with Celio and the rest, to make
them in any wise return again to the Cottage: so Gerardo seeing no remedy,
making (as well as he could) a hard Bed, entreated the grieved Clori, to lie
down and give her wearied body some rest. But his entreaties could do no good
upon the woeful Dame, which much troubled him; so that hopeless of her
receiving comfort by his means, night growing further on, and his eyes
somewhat drowsy, he fell fast asleep by her; but had not taken a full hours
rest, when (the lively image of Iacinta represented to his dreaming fancy,
just as he saw her struggling with the furious waves:) the heavy slumber so
wrought upon his senses, and his disquietnesse was such, that it awoke him,
with the horror and affright that such a sad remembrance might produce; in
which anguish sitting bolt up in his bed, and looking about him for the
passionate Clori, he found her wanting, which not a little affected his mind,
doubtful whether (belike careful of her honesty, as misdoubting his promise)
she might chance to have hid her self amongst the neighboring trees, he ran
hastily out of the Cottage to seek her, carrying only with him a strong
sheep-hooke for his Arms and defense. But no sooner got he out of the strawie
Lodging, when he heard the trampling of footsteps, guided (as he supposed)
toward the high Rocks and Springhead of a neere-running Fountain: Gerardo
hastening thither, a pretty way from him, espied a Bulk going apace down
toward a Brook; to which all those running Springs of the hills pay their
tribute, giving it the name of a goodly River, and withal, looking more
warily, as having the bright shining Moon to help him, he might plainly
behold by her woman's Garments, that it was Clori, who made so fast away; and
that though he lowdly called on her, she still held on her course, without
affoording an answer: which made him (not a little amazed) mend his pace; and
so breaking through the intricate boughs, and rough thicket, in a trice he
ouertooke her, but so out of breath, that unable to stay himself, overthrowing
her, they both came tumbling down together; neither had they so stopped from
falling into the Brook, but that Gerardo, seeing himself almost lost, with
incredible celeritie maruellously recovered himself: yet seeing Clori stirred
neither hand nor foot, fearing the suddenness of the fall might cause this
trance, taking her in his arms, he returned to the Cottage; where laying her
on bed, and kindling some dry sticks, before the rest of the company might be
raised with the accident, he brought her again to her senses; but opening her
eyes, it was with such grievous sighs, and extraordinary affrightment, that
the poor Gentleman himself even suffered with her: and thinking verily, that
all this in Clori, proceeded from some despairefull imaginations, with the best
language that his wisdom could present to memory, he indeauoured to cheer
her, till at length her body wearied, with the continual toil of her minds
burdensome sorrow, her delicate neck subject to the pillow, and her self to
soft rest, she gave way to Gerardo (though with more warines then formerly) to
do the like.

Toward morning they awoke, and being day, rose; at what time the fair Clori
desirous to return to her way, and taking thankful leave of Celio and his
shepherds, accompanied only by the solitary Gentleman, till such time as he
might set her directly for Cesarina; they both left the Cottage, and being not
long after arrived at the parting place, Clori would let him go no farther, to
the no little coffeehouse of his noble heart: and seeing him still obstinate
to go with her, she aduertized him of the danger; which, by being seen with
her, might happen to him, if so be by those (that in all likelihood were sent
after her from Seuil) he should be found in her company. Wherefore Gerardo
acknowledging her good advice (though much against his will) followed it, taking
leave with tears; but first thoroughly instructing her, that she might not miss
her way; and returning with a slow march to his own, ere long they lost each
others sight. Gerardo having his mind still busied in the poor Dames wracked
fortunes, could willingly have wished them (if possible) added to his own,
rather then have heard them as he did, to be hers, or now, seen her again
all alone, perhaps, subject to the like mishap. And in the midst of these pious
considerations, upon a sudden, her last nights fearful flight came to his
remembrance, and her ouer-earnestnesse, to have him at present leave her
company, (all this resolved in his noble breast; besides, condemning his
vn-manly cowardice, that for a little fear or respect of his own safety, he
should leave her thus desperately to her self) his resentment was such, that
(setting all inconveniences aside) he resolved to follow, till he might see
her safe at her iourneys end: and with this deliberate purpose turning back,
in a moment he got to the place where they took leave; and passing a pretty
way further, seeing that (as far as ever he might discern) he could get no
sight of her, being much troubled, and thinking it impossible, she should be
gotten so far of her way in so short space; so blaming his own slownesse;
and looking more narrowly upon the trodden path, he might see the print of
Clori's little foot; which having traced, as a Guide to his journey, he soon
perceived by the Tracke, that she had turned out of the right way, to a
thicket of tall Oaks, near certain old and ruinous walls: wherefore, he
falling likewise into the same path, had not gone far in it, when the sky
beginning to wax cloudie, there arose a sudden and furious gust of wind, which
blew so forcibly toward him, that he was scarce able to keep on his way. But
he more courageously animated by such violence, without resistance went on, and
quickly got to the decayed building; where, by one of the lowermost walls, he
found some of Clori's apparel; and passing further, more, even all, to her very
Smock: which he no sooner beheld, when his grieved eyes began to run
streams of tears, his heart presaging some disaster, and looking toward
heaven, he might see before him the wretched naked body of the mournful Dame,
that as then newly had desperately cast her self from a spreading Oak, hung
in the air, by means of a strong nooze made by a scarlet Swath-band, that
girded her tender Waste, which performed the stead of a halter.

Blessed heaven! cride Gerardo, with a fearful voice, Let not thy clemency
permit such a loss of this fair Soul: and in so saying, he instantly got to
the trees top, where unsheathing a short wood-knife he had on, he cut the
mortal knot, and Clori now in her last agony fell to the earth, whither, her
fortunate restorer coming soon after to her, found that her breath was quite
departed, the white and red of her cheeks turned into muddy, green, pale and
bloody, and her goodly eyes, even started out of the Crystal frame of the
smooth snowie Forehead; the soft skeines of her flaming hair entangled and
promiscously disordred, and the pure Alablaster of her yuory neck, breast, and
hands, vn-naturally enamelled with her big blewe swollen veins; in fine, so sad
and horrid a spectacle, as might have moved even those guilty Rocks, and the
wild Beasts whose prey she might have been: how much more then, the amorous
heart of Gerardo, who like a Lioness that would roar life into a dead whelpe,
with tears and mourning sought to restore the desperate Clori to her self,
Long he strove with her, but (in vain) as he thought, since he saw little
hope or possibility of fetching her, and so willing to celebrate her funeral
obsequies with his last farewell, he came somewhat nearer with his tears unto
her, which (as Heaven ordained) were turned into tears of joy, for Clori now
opened her eyes and (wholly her self) with a weak voice craved pardon of her
Maker, with evident signs of a true sorrowful repentance: which the more
increased, when she might behold the Instrument of her remedy, who fetching
her Garments to her, and helping her to put them on, she casting her self at
his feet, ashamed of the dismal accident, without daring once to look up,
remained thus kneeling, forcing Gerardo to the like, who seeing her now in
perfect memory, with a cheerful countenance entered into this pious discourse.

The present success, fair Clori, has so amazed me, that I know not what to
conceive of your desperate boldness, which, when I consider, I cannot but
think, that, either you are no Christian, or not the child of Noble Parents;
for the horror which yet affrights me, gives contradiction to both: and
certainly it can not be, but your judgment is quite lost, for had it not
been plain distraction in you, you could not have changed a momentarie
dishonor, for an everlasting immortal infamy, a slight distaste, for an
eternal mischief, and your own weak passion, for an insupportable
punishment. For tell me, pray* had you thus died? was your honor one jot the
more restored, or the loss of your chastity at all soldred? the stain, you
so much deplore, fetched out? rather contrary, and with your worthless dying,
your own honor, and of your whole stock and lineage, had been irreparably
forfeited: and which should make you most sensible, is, the danger to which you
exposed your self, even to the very brinke of eternal banishment from the
divine presence, to a fearful Abyssus, where in immortal flames, you must
have paid the price of your desperate attempt; from which compassionate Heaven
has been pleased to free you; look up then, with grieved eyes, and your
hearts inward humility, return your devout thanks for so eminent a benefit,
such true Devotion may give an end to your miseries, which has often comforted
those, that in others have been more lamentable and grievous.

And finishing his Discourse, perceiving that Clori remitted her answer to
tears and silence, he thought best, not to give way to any new accident; and
therefore entreating her to take comfort, cheering her up all he might, and
giving her his arm for a rest, they fair and softly walked on toward
Cesarina, where, by that time the morning was well spent, with greater joy in
Clori then might have been expected, they arrived; and so, having not hitherto
so much as spoken a word to Gerardo, most glad to see her self in her Uncles
town, she requested him to leave her in some (the nearest) house; and withal
to give him notice of her arrival; which Gerardo hearing, not thinking that to
be so fitting for him; considering in what manner Clori came, he only obeyed
her in the former, leaving her where she desired; and so taking his leave,
without further stay in Cesarina, by the way he came, he went back to the
Cottage.

This fear of his, not to see Don Antonio (so was her Uncle called) was not
vain; for though his accompanying her (considering all circumstances) were
worthy of perpetual thanks; yet to any that were at first sight ignorant, it
might breed suspicion, that it were not to any good intent; and her Uncle in
likelihood giving no credit to Gerardo, some great disaster happily might have
ensued, though no small one it was he suffered in recompense of the service
done the fair Dame; who, having caused speedy notice to be given to the Lord
of the place; and he having understood (as you shall quickly hear) of her
being absent from Seuill, immediately with some of his servants, came where his
fair Niece expected him: and having embraced her (dissembling his sorrow to
see her thus alone) he took her into his Coach, and together they went to the
Castle of Cesarina, where, his sprightly Daughter Nise joyfully vvelcomed her
lost Cousin, renewing with this meeting their tears for long absence, which the
suspicious Uncle thought were shead for some other occasion then what was
commonly known (though not to Clori) but unwilling at present more to afflict
the sorrowful Dame, he forbore to give her any account, of the disastrous
success of things in Seuill: that night she fled from thence, where (if you
remember) we left the jealous and choleric Don Henrique, who having shut up
Clori in her Chamber, fearing least his dishonor by losing time, should
remain unrevenged, determining in his violent thoughts a quick dispatch of
his adultrous wife; and finding her carelessely sleeping on her couch, being
all alone with her, first, he stopped her mouth with a Handkerchiefe, and next,
with two penetrating stabs left her breathless. So secretly laying her on bed,
and drawing the Curtains close, he went down and commanded his servants to
their beds: and himself faining to do the like, accompanied with a valiant
trusty Slave, he got him into the street, leaving first a little window in his
own chamber open, the sign which as Clori informed him, the deceased Dame used
to her careless Lover, when she meant to have him come to her by a certain
trap door; to which he had also now gotten a false Key: not long after the
lucklesse Youth, by the sign of his own mishap was brought to the secure
trap, and (ignorant of his Mistress and her Fate) was no sooner entered, when
surprised by the wronged Don Henrique and his servant, whom till then lying
close he saw not, unable (for they gave him no time) for his defense; the
strong Slave laying fast hold on him, his Master might at pleasure take his
revenge, who quickly left him in such estate as his Wife, and speedily fetching
a turn or two in the street to dissemble the matter, as they were coming in
again, they saw sheets hung at the window, by which Clori had slipped down:
vvhereupon hastening to her Chamber, missing her, her Uncles heart was
wonderfully afflicted, as thinking that her flight must of necessity discover
the fact; so, having secretly sent out diverse ways in her search, and taken
some of his best Jewels and store of money, he and his Slave upon several
Horses took their way toward the Kingdom of Portugal; and with such speed,
that though next morning as much was used for their apprehension, 'twas
bootlesse, as also that of the servants in Cloris search, by whom Don Antonio
was advertised of the success; who at this time leaving her in his fair
Daughters company, going back to the house where she first entered, was
informed in what manner Gerardo came with her, and of his garment of painted
skins: Nise at this time as earnestly sought to know from her Cousin the manner
of her unfortunate journey, who largely satisfied her, not so much as
concealing her dishonor, only kept secret her desperate attempt you before
heard of.

The two cousins were not so private in their Discourse, but that a little Page
of the house, was not far off from them; who, when Don Antonio returned,
told him their whole conference, so that his exorbitant grief and passion,
transporting him beyond all just reason, without expecting to be confirmed by
Clori, he was fully persuaded, that he, which brought her to Cesarina, was
Author of the Rape; wherefore blinded with rage, accompanied by some of his
servants lightly mounted, he went out after him, and all of them taking
different ways, they scowred the whole country, bearing perfectly in memory
those signs that were given them of Gerardo, whom some of them ouertooke not
far from the Cottage, and having seen him, were ready to have trod him to
pieces with their horses (such was their indignation) but desirous to bring him
alive to their Mr they only seized upon him, and bound him fast with strong
cords: neither could the poor Gentleman by entreaties learn the cause of this
their anger, which yet his mind even presaged unto him, as soon as he had
parted from Cesarina; where (being now carried by these men) when he arrived,
he might see the whole town in an vproare, as if an enemy were near, and
passing through, they reviled him as he went by to the Castle, where Don
Antonio, without giving ear to his discharge, or to what Clori would allege
to free him, (as thinking it was her goodness to save his life) in spite of
her and the fair Nise, that knew well enough his innocence; he commanded him
to be fast shut in a strong Tower, in the greatest extremity that might be.
Here he remained all the next day, and part of the darkesome night, as sad and
mournful as in any his former misfortunes; yet the sorrow of the two
kinswomen was not inferior; and Clori seeing that for her sake Gerardo was in
so much danger, could not abstain from weeping, in lieu of that gratitude in
which she stood engaged; neither could the lovely Nise afford her the least
comfort: but she her self, governed by a more particular accident, was not
altogether a stranger to Gerardo's misery; rather (making it partly her own)
and affectionate to that noble and generous proceeding of his toward her
cousin, more then any the good parts of his person, whom as yet she had not
seen or known, accompanied her in her dolorous resentment, and with a mind
as compassionate, as a heart resolute, not to let him perish, bidding Clori
follow her (having signified her intent) she went into the room where her
father lay, and stealing the Keys of the Prison from his beds head, provided
also with some Viands, to refresh the captive Gentleman, they ascended to the
Tower; and having softly opened the door, perceiving their forgetfulness to
come without lights, Clori was forced to go down for some; and in the mean
time, Nise sitting down to expect her, might hear Gerardo with a sweet voice,
and distinct notes, tune this Dittie to the sound of a great chain to which he
was tied, in which he clearly chanted the tenor of his misfortunes.

When young April once a year
does with Em'rald face appear*
Then gives he to each River he can see,
By Winters frost imprisoned, liberty*
White and yellow flowers are seen,
Trees and Fields are clad in green:
The wild beast leaves his den,
And Snakes grow young again.
Then the mournful Nightingale
Sings, or sweetly seems to rail
On him that basely in a Brothers shape,
Transformed her by his well-reuenged Rape.
Thus Beasts, Birds, and every thing,
Joys upon the approaching Spring:
But, I, the more relief
I seek, the more's my grief.
To which, and his sad complaints, she gave an amorous listening: and as his
Song ended, Clori was come back, with a white Wax Light in her hand, and so
shutting the door to them, they both entered in where our passionate Gentleman
had newly made an end of his singing lamentation; who when he saw such
comfortable company approach, rising up with all respect, wondering at Nise's
extreme beauty, but more at her boldness, (yet suspecting Clori to be the
cause of her coming thither) turning first to her, he thus began: Never, O
gracious Clori, could my mind think, that in the troubled Sea of my present
misfortunes (you living) my latest should arrive: especially, having such a
Protectresse, as she that accompanies you, in whose blessed appearance, I am
confident, my life shall have a secure Haven: Only at present, I beseech you,
let me know what has caused my imprisonment: for if it be (as I may guess)
for having done you service (though perpetual) I shall hold it welcomely
imploide.

The most beautiful Nise, all the while Gerardo used these speeches to Clori,
stirred not her fair eyes a minute from looking on him; and now felt her self
so wholly his, that (fearelesse of the inco^ueniencies that might happen, as
the not knowing what he was, and then the uncertainty of his liberty) losing
all respect of honor or reputation, she determined with her self to hazard
life a thousand times for him: and with this amorousnesse, preventing Clori,
she first made answer:

The noble and courteous disposing of your good works has so much engaged us;
as I on my behalf, and so likewise on my Cousins do assure you, that did not
your innocence make us doubtless of your good success of liberty, this very
night it should be bestowed on you, though some one perhaps might smart for
giving it; but you must perforce have patience, till such time as my Father,
her Uncle (less passionate) allow of your discharge, and be thoroughly informed
in the infallible truth; for the suspicion only, that you are the Author of my
Cousins wrong, has moved him to this hard usage toward you: wherefore I most
earnestly entreat you, that you be not troubled in any wise; for your grief
(as long as you remain in this estate) will be as much ours as your own: to
which purpose, the gentle Clori, using also her best Rhetoric, desired him to
fall to and eat some of those iuncats they brought him, and so leaving him the
light, something to lessen the places discomfort; fearing to be missed, they
returned, (Gerardo remaining most thankful for the pleasing visitation, which
he also had two other nights ensuing) there happening after betwixt him and the
divine Nise, most amorous and witty passages.

But neither of the gentle Dames could be so gracious with the incensed Don
Antonio, as to persuade in the truth of the Prisoners innocence; rather, he
was provoked to more choler and fury, by seeing in Clori so earnest a desire
of his freedom; and therefore purposing to make short work, conferring with a
Judge, whom he had appointed for the business in Cesarina, by his advice (by
reason there came no proofs against him) they resolved he should be racked;
and so the fourth day of his imprisonment he was brought out; and having first
caused the frightfull engine to be set before him, and the accustomed
Interrogatories to be read, notifying withal that he should (if he meant to
escape the torment) plainly confess the truth of what he was charged
vvithall seeing their intent failed them, and that he professed innocence, they
began to have him stripped out of his clothes: but when the news was brought
to the Gentlewomen, their grief was such, especially Nises, that she could
willingly have inflicted a desperate punishment upon her self, as thinking
she was the cause of Gerardo's, for not giving him his liberty when she
might; so inward was the pain they both felt for him, that his feeling of
what was threatened by the pitiless Executioner, could not exceed it. But
that was prevented, by the opportune and unexpected arrival of Don Henrique;
who having, as he entered the town, informed himself of what passed at the
Castle, desirous to stop the injustice, (since by what follows, you shall know
Gerardo's innocence) and coming to his Brothers presence, (with his Slave
that had a man with him fast bound and manicled) having lovingly embraced one
another, without proceeding further, he desired that his Niece Clori might be
brought unto him; who fearfully trembling, though encouraged by Nise, came
and threw her self at his feet.

I omit for breuity the resentment on both sides; so Clori looking about her
toward the Slave, and the forementioned party brought Prisoner, as soon as
she viewed, knew him to be the Author of her dishonor: whereupon unable to
reserve, till some fitter occasion, the expression of her strong passion, with
a loud and fearful shrieke she would have flowne at the Rascals face, had
not her loving Uncle kept her in, and deferred her weak revenge, till by
Justice it might be inflicted on him, that for so detestable an act thoroughly
deserved it; to which, just heaven and his offense brought him, by the way that
he thought best to have escaped; which was, by going toward Portugal, whither
(if you remember) the wronged well-satisfied Don Henrique held also his course;
whom this wretched Villain meeting near the River that diuides the two
Kingdoms; and Don Henrique appearing to him to be a person of worth and
quality, that in such an occasion might best supply his wants, without more
ado, he resolved to sell him some of the Jewels he had taken from the abused
Clori; and in this thought stepping forward, he proposed his intent to Don
Henrique, telling him, that want of money forced him to sell some things of
good value, if he pleased to buy them: to which, he, as attentive as vvilling
to have a good bargain, which as well in respect of his Merchant, as the
occasion he might expect, in such manner answered, That the traitor satisfied,
first showed him an enamelled neck-Lace of Gold and Pearls, and next, two
curious eare-Rings, set and bordered with rich Emeralds and precious Rubies,
with other pieces neatly wrought; all which, without further witness or
information, Don Henrique much amazed, instantly called to mind, to have
sometime belonged to his loved Clori: and the suddenness of the matter did so
perplexe him, that supposing her untimely end for certain, which that fellow,
after he had abused and robbed, might have brought her to; without enquiring
a word more of him, crying furiously out, and setting spurs to his swift
horses flank, (the Villain unable to avoid him) he ran him over and over;
and turning the reins, with the same speed the second time trampled on him;
leaving him so bruised and vvounded, that he was not able to stir hand or
foot: and seeing him in this taking, unwilling, till he knew whether he had
left Clori alive or dead, to make an end of him, commanded his faithful slave
(who astonished, beheld what passed) to alight and bind him strongly; and so
leaving the maine rode-way, and shadowing themselves amongst certain spreading
Oaks, Don Henrique threatening the fellow to kill him, if he confessed not the
truth, demanded of him, what became of the Owner of those Jewels; which the
fearful wretch satisfying, telling him all that passed, and how Clori
purposed to go toward Cesarina, without staying a minute longer; the valiant
slave by his Masters command, setting the fellow athwart the Sad^le before him,
they returned in all haste thitherward, and in three days came to have a sight
of Clori. And now Don Antonio's cruelty was well assuaged, and knowing the
original of the offense, he thought fit to absolve the poor prisoner of his
unjust accusation: so Gerardo (after he was free) giving due thanks to Heaven
for the favor done him, making first his excuse to Clori, taking both her
Uncles aside in private, he gave them, without any reservation, entire notice,
of the horrid and strange success of her desperate resolution in the solitary
Forest, desiring them in fine, that out of the care of their pure affections,
they would take some course for their Neeces important remedy, from her self
he understood, that she would be willing to end her days in some religious
Monastery.

When the two loving brothers heard this, acknowledging how much they stood
indebted to Gerardo, and the harsh recompense he had received, with noble and
compassionate tears, striving who might first embrace him, they heartily
craved pardon: the like also did Clori, as having most reason to be sensible of
his misfortunes: in the mean time they commanded, that the wretch should be
put in Gerardo's Tower, from whence he was not many days after brought out,
and dispatched to his Grave. And dinner being now ready, with equal joy on all
sides, especially of the peerless Nise, they sat down to the Table, giving
the best place to the unknown Gentleman, ouerruling his refusal with their
courtesy; which the thankful Brothers in such manner expressed, that both at
dinner time and afterward, they extraordinarily importuned him to remain in
their company, and to leave the rusticke Shepherds, and rural life: the
graceful Nise too, adding her entreaties, wrought so effectually, that with
the sweetness of her earnest courtesy, she brought him from his solitary
resolution: and therefore, obliged as well by those several inuitements, as
supposing also, that as much in Country as City, his misfortunes were every
where the same; he accepted the favorable offer, giving from this instant, new
beginning, to his third last Tragical Discourse, of his Histories first Part.

To the several joy and applause of Don Antonio, his Brother, Clori and Nise,
was the pleasing intertainment of their new Ghest admitted, who to give full
content to those Gentlemen, (that though they knew him not, ghessed at his
worth) must needs now change his pastoral Weeds, and suit himself to the
fashion of the present times; with which sudden, and wel-shap't bravery, he
increased in the gallant Nise her pre-inflam'd affection; whose Father with all
possible demonstrations of love, wished him to make use of him, his house, and
all his as his own; but the pre-eminence in this particular belonged more to
the affectionate gentlewoman, which Gerardo perceived well in her continual
care of him, though he thought best not to take any notice to her of her
kindness, and his own obligation, as long as the just estimation of both
lived thankfully within him, and so outwardly (yet unwillingly) preferred Don
Antonio's offers: which fashion of his, by her that so much affected him, was
held but for a cold, if not ungrateful, correspondence.

This honest wary proceeding of Gerardo's, stirred up in the blind enamoured
Nise, a vehement suspicion, that (doubtless) the unfortunate Clori, being her
Lovers hearts treasure, was also the occasion of his dissembling, or (which she
no better esteemed) despising contempt; which ielous thought, without further
ground, engendered in her unquiet bosom, finding the flame to increase, and
wholly confirming her opinion, she determined to make known her beguiled
imagination to Gerardo, who (as you heard) sought by all means to banish his
mind from any such employment, disposed rather to his own death, then to prove
the executioner of his reputation; and therefore forbore all he might all
incounters with Nise, but so many were presented by her, that in the end her
importunate desire vanquished him in a place and occasion as forcible, as
necessary, to declare himself in. Nise helping on with her discretion, by the
means of a witty invention of passe-time, which we call Purposes: as
ordinary, as general, especially in such frollicke and mirthfull assemblies,
as that which was at length gotten together, in a fair clear night, about
some two months after Gerardo had passed part of the tedious cold Winter, in
such like amorous passages at Cesarina: about which time Don Henrique with good
advice, having taken a Journey, and presented himself at Court, (which not
long since, by his Majesty's resolution, was resettled in the more ancient and
better seat Madrid) Gerardo thought fit, making him acquainted with his loved
brother Leoncio, to write also by so sure a messenger, and give him notice of
many troubles and misfortunes; which news was no less welcome to him, then
that, of finding him alive in the first Discourse at Segouia; of whose
brotherly gladness Don Henrique reaped the best fruit: for Leoncio, willing as
well for his own deserts, as his brothers sake, to show him courtesy,
undertook his business, which he pursued with such care and diligence, that in
a short time (though not without great opposition) he absolutely got him freed:
where leave we them, and in the interim, prosecute the mentioned intent of our
sport, in which the waggish Lover cunningly kindles the soft fire, that at last
scorched the melting Nise's heart; who having (as is said) on Purpose formed
the Play so called, setting Gerardo betwixt Clori and her, and other three
Damsels her maids in the like rank, the ioyfulst that might be, to see her
self so near her souls Owner, turning to him, and telling the Purpose softly
in his ear, she gave beginning to the sport, Gerardo and Clori seconding, and
so the rest of the company, till (having gone round) it came to the gracious
Nise's turn; who revealing alowd the Purpose, disposed it thus:

If ever I my Purpose firm
Change, may Love of life bereave me.
And Gerardo with a wel-becomming neglect, in like manner alowd made answer:

His fierce torments never leave me,
If that opinion I confirm.
And the iocund Clori, with a countenance (differing from her usual look)
smilingly uttered the two ensuing verses:

Those persons that ungrateful be,
What punishment have they deserved?
To which, the first Damsel thus:

Such as a cursed frown has reserved,
Forgetfulness and Jealousy.
And the second more pitiful, smilingly said:

Grievously has he offended
Against Love, whom you sentence thus.
And the third replying, concluded the Purpose:

Nay, never be propitious
Unto them, will not be mended.
Gerardo well perceived, how for the nonce they had contrived the artificial
sport; but seeing the passionate Gentlewoman, prepared to a second bout, giving
his ear to her, his thoughts left roaming for the present; so the second
Purpose began, which passing round as the former, the careful Nise declared
alowd, saying:

With Love, Faith, Hope, shall you obtain
Soon, a glorious victory.
To which, the pre-experienced Gerardo, thus:

I, but with in my memory,
A bloody change does yet remain.
And Clori that smelt their drift, went on:

Harbors are not every one
Unto storms subject: some are blessed.
And the first Damsel seconding her, said:

Those that I esteem the best,
Are Good Will, and Occasion.
And the second thus prosecuted:

I know who by the lock of hair,
Captive comes to set her free.
To which, the third replying, concluded (as formerly) the sport:

Let such a one seek death for me,
Like Absalon hang in the air.
And prolonging the sport yet a little more, she that began the Purpose, having
passed it round, spoke out:

Desire in me a Martyr is,
Love, the Executioner.
And Gerardo answered with his wonted carelessness:

Let me die, if I once auerre,
What the most constant ^old in this.
Then the sprightly Clori:

In the selfsame opinion,
Men's reputations still shall live.
The first, next answered in her rank:

But we are faultee, since we give
Them hopes by fond affection.
To which, the second satisfied with her own opinion, with a pleasant smile
thus replied:

The remedy for this is plain;
Let us our passions not reveal.
And the third pursuing, thus clozed up the whole sport:

Ah, but, a Loue-thought to conceal,
Nothing will serve, no help humane.
In this manner they spent the greatest part of the night; in which, and the
artificial veil of the Play, there happened betwixt Gerardo and Nise
remarkable passages, she continuing her affections more securely, less ielous
of her Cousin, and he his wary behavior, to Nise's no less torment, to see
her self treated with so free a neglect, without receiving in a long time, the
least show of comfort, or any occasion to make her think Gerardo awhit
sensible of her passion for him: and at this time the devoted Clori, pressing
her Uncle Don Antonio to the accomplishment of her religious desire, to her
Cousin Nise's exceeding sorrow, (in respect of the solitude she should by her
absence suffer) was carried to a Monastery of Nuns in Seuil, in which journey
our Gerardo was to accompany her, together with her loved Uncle; and before his
return from thence, the desired, and no less grateful news of Don Henrique
his liberty came to his notice, written by the noble Leoncio, who also prepared
himself, to return with him to Andaluzia; invited, not only by the
gladsomenesse of seeing his Brother, but also to render his due thanks to the
noble Don Antonio, for his free entertainment; who now having seen his Niece
placed, made no longer stay in Seuil, but returned to his Castle, to make
preparation to receive the new-expected Ghests: and Gerardo also (by mutual
consent) meant to remain awhile after him in the City, to provide himself of
some necessaries for certain festival Triumphs they ordained: which
effected, and summoning some kinsmen and friends of Don Antonio's, that upon
notice given them of the time, they might repair to Cesarina; one afternoon
about Sunset, he began his journey thitherward; but had scarce traveled a
flight-shoot from the City Gates, when, four men crossing his way, and one
of them clapping fast hold on the reins of his Nagges bridle, bade him alight;
letting him know, that they were Searchers belonging to his Majesty's Customs
in that place, and that they were to perform their Office; which he hearing,
presently forsook his Saddle, giving them leave to view his Port-manteau; but
they demanded to have it opened, and consequently the key; which he (ignorant
of the Custom) was somewhat slack in delivering. But considering there was a
necessity of so doing, and loath to resist their Authority, (though he might
think it to be ouer-rigorous) he began to vnbutton his Doublet, discovering
a fair Chain of Gold; at one of whose Linkes the key was fastened, which
caused no small covetousness in the promoting beholders, that straight willed
him also to take that off too, and this with such haughty language, and
imperious proceeding, as the insufferable molestation caused the good
Gentleman, careless of the advantage of their odds and Office, retiring two
or three steps back, to remit to his hand and Sword, the correction of their
insolent behavior. But they being four, and (as such knaves use to be,
strongly armed) Gerardo's life underwent some hazard. All that from the
beginning passed, a young Gentleman, no less in wardly courageous, then
outwardly to see to, not far off beheld: who, seeing the equity and justice
of Gerardo's cause, withal, his danger, instantly made up close to him; and
nimbly folding his Cloak over his left arm, with his Sword in the other
hand, so animated Gerardo with his assistance, that he, with new and fresh
Valor (though wounded) seeing his friend like a second Alcides bestir himself
among the Searchers, recovering his lost ground, and sticking close unto him
(they quickly put my Gentlemen to flight:) and having hurt three of them
shrewdly, the rest showed them a fair pair of heels. So for fear of the
worst, the unknown friend causing Gerardo to sheathe his Sword, taking his
Horse by the reins bade him follow him (which he did, and so speedily) that,
though the field was soon full of people got together in an uproar, they were
in safety, by crossing the River in one of the many passage Boats, that
ordinarily attend thereabouts.

Gerardo was not a little satisfide; for though he had lost what he carried
about him, yet it could nothing have grieved him, in respect of having gained
such a friend as was with him: and by this time seeing themselves a good
distance from the famous Sub-vrbs of Triana, and free from all danger, he
clasped his thankful Arms about his friends neck, and with a gladsome
countenance thus (proceeding) said, Trust me, Valiant Sir, I may well presume,
to have in mine arms at this instant, the greatest courage that mine eyes have
beheld; and to which, with just reason, I must acknowledge my service and self
perpetually bound; and therefore I beseech you, that to deliver me of my
ignorance, I may know, by knowing you, to whom I must owe the life I at present
enjoy. So slight a courtesy (replide the valiant Gentleman) deserves not so
high an extolling: it is so ordinary and natural to my condition, to take
part with the weaker party (chiefly where there is right) that had you known
me longer, you might before now have believed it; neither need you therefore
be now curious of thanks, for what is no novelty, but customarie; rather
omitting this, I shall esteem as a favor, that reckoning this unlucky day,
for no beginning of your journey, you will defer it, and return with me,
where at a poor lodging of mine in this City you shall be (howeuer
entertained) faithfully welcomed. And so perceiving Gerardo's face all bloody,
thinking him to be much vvounded, he pressed him with his entreaty more
earnestly; and he was no whit mistaken, for the other had in the late
skirmish, received a cut in his head, at which he voided so much blood, that
he began to find himself somewhat ill at ease with it, which enforced him to
accept of his new friend his noble and courteous offer; with whom (after
thanks given) he returned to his friendly mansion, where by a dainty Dame
(whom he after understood to be his friends Mistress) he was lovingly
welcomed, softly lodged, and his wound cured as carefully, as had he been with
his absent Mother.

Here Gerardo rested fifteen days; in which time having sufficiently
discerned the good parts of his new friend, and satisfide with them, discoured
his past disasters, and being more importuned, gave him a strict account of all
the particulars, inuiting with this freeness Arcenio (so was the noble
Gentleman styled) to the like, and to muster up the successes of his life, so
many, so miraculous, that were they proper to this Tragical History, would
prove no less pleasing, then pitiful.

But, my principal scope of brevity being to go on with our maine Subject,
the Reader may dispense with my slacknesse: only be pleased to know, that the
being a branch of one of our Spaines Noblest Families, was the least of
Arsenio's excellencies: for his person, he was valiant, wise, quick of wit
and apprehension; one, that by reason of many notable misaduentures, and
thwarts of Fortune, had ever lived from his native Country, and as concealedly
as in the same kind our Gerardo. The two having now settled a straight League
of friendship, Gerardo making known his abode in Cesarina, and the future
triumphs that were there preparing; together, how ill his absence would be
taken by Don Antonio (though he had sent him word of the past accident) sorry
to leave his friend, taking first leave of the discreet Amaranta (so was
Arsenio's Mistress called) he was by him accompanied a long mile out of the
City; who after several protestations for their due correspondence, returned
thither; and Gerardo, where he was justly expected, especially, by the fair
disdained Nise.

Some three days after, he arrived at Cesarina, vvhither also came just at the
time Don Henrique and Leoncio, with whose joyful meeting the true brotherly
affection of the four Gentlemen was really deciphred; but more exquisitely in
Leoncio and Gerardo, who now wholly bent upon the approaching Shows and
Triumphs, to the general mirth and gladness of all, accompanied by Leoncio,
the two affectionate brothers, and many other Gentlemen their friends, that at
such solemnities use to resort from the remotest parts, he rode out of the
Castle one fair clear night amongst others, he and the rest in an Encamisada
or Night-Maske, attended with many shrill-sounding Instruments; to whose sound
(after the Troop had each past his Carreere) a Page that went before him in
the fittest and most eminent part of the great Marketplace of Cesarina, set up
a bright shield, at which the ensuing Challenge was fixed.

THE CHALLENGE.
The unfortunate Knight, alias, Spanish Gerardo, to all Knights to whose notice
the present Challenge shall arrive, makes known, that, within twenty days,
from this present, he will in this place, and in public Carreere with three
courses at the Ring, maintain; that the frail change and inconstancy of
women past and present, has been, and is, greater then their firmness, and
that this he will make good with the conditions following, (viz.) That the
Knight, who by sentence of the Judges shall lose, be bound to subscribe to this
his Tenet: and that the Knight likewise, or Aduenturer, to whose good fortune
the Prize and Victory may happen, shall receive from him, as a due reward for
his merit, a rich Diamond.

(This done) in the manner they came, with great solemnity they returned;
accompanying the Challenger to his lodging; where leaving him, all of them went
severally to their own, to provide themselves against the prefixed time, being
the first of the flourishing month of May; till when the careful Nise spent
the short hours in works and imbroideries, enriching with her own nimble
hand, diverse conceited pieces of bravery for her squeamish Lover; who having
also near the time caused the Lists to be set up in the place; (and all
things necessary performed) he spent the most part of the days in practicing
to make himself cunning, and assure the honor of the triumphs to his
victorious Arm, which being at length at hand, there wanted no concourse of
the better sort, and infinite numbers of others, as had they been in some great
and populous City, even in the Court it self of our most Catholic Monarch.

'Twas toward the midst of day, when from the high Castle of Cesarina, a peale
of great Ordnance began to let fly, with such a frightfull thundering noise,
that a lesser made in the sightly place by two hundredth Harquebuziers could not
be heard, nor the cheerful Volley, that after a well ordered skirmish, they
bestowed upon the lusty Challenger: who attended with the sound of diverse loud
Instruments, was now making his approach and entrance.

There passed before him in comely array an hundredth Ginitiers of the brauest
on all that Coast, armed in their Steele-coates, white Shields, smooth Taffata
Skarfes, listed with silver, and their Lances with little streamers of the
same; all which, the Infanterie having cleared the Place, began another no
less well-performed skirmish, and concluding it, with a winding wheele-about,
divided in two squadrons and several Ranks, they gave way to twelve huge
Sumpter-Moyles to come in, which were laden with curious Lances, their
clothes which covered them, being Russet Velvet, embroidred with silver, with
Gerardo's Arms in the midst: and having paced about, they made a stand just
before a Tent of Russet Damask, near which the Lances were taken, and
reared up, and so the beasts making room by their absence, the place was taken
up by twelve well-shap't light Horse, that with their sumptuous furniture had
each a Lackey to attend them; whose Liueries were Russet Satin, Pane-hose with
white Leather, sleeuelesse Ierkins, and doublets of the same colored Satin,
Russet Hats, feathers white, after whom came in four and twenty Gentlemen
extremely Gallant that accompanied the Challenger: before him (as Sticklers)
went his brother Leoncio and Don Henrique, both clad in rich Tissue, the ground
Russet, Plain Caps, and Plumes white and Russet, in such state, as seemed to
obscure the courageous Challenger, who came in upon a Damson black Steed, like
another Caesar, clad in the Roman habit like one of them, his color Russet,
Satin richly embroidered with silver, so curiously interlaced and wouen, as
more could not from Art be expected: in his right hand he bore a short
Truncheon studded with silver, and on his lofty uncovered browe, wore a Crown
of mournful Cypress, his Horse Trappings were also Russet, imbroidered as
aforesaid, his bitt Massy silver: no less, his head Armor: Plumes russet and
white, with a praunce so light and so lofty, that he seemed to be rather all
Air, then to give the least touch to the earth. Then followed six other
cole-blacke Horses, that drew after them a glorious Triumphant Chariot, behind
which came ten or twelve Gentlemen, that in equal bravery, being the Rere-ward
of the Stately Troop, ended that show. The Chariot was black, diapred with
Stars (as bright as the mornings) silver both within and without; in midst of
which, on a high Throne that took up the whole Chariots breadth, and within
that, under a Triumphant artificial Arch, was a goodly Statue of a most
beautiful woman, clad in a long Egyptian Robe, set and garnished with a world
of Crowns, Scepters, Myters, and Persian Tiaras, so linked and wouen together,
that framing a most curious piece to the eye, plainly appeared to be the
feared and adored Deity, which the Idolatrous Gentiles call Fortune, as her
Motto gave to understand, which she held in her left hand, written in a Red and
silver Streamer, as thus:

I, unconstant Fortune am
Changeable, because a Woman,
Ever false, but true to no man.
Her right hand was fixed; and hanging at it a Silver Wheel, she seemed to
raise up toward her, a dead Knight, clad in the same colors that Gerardo; the
Motto or Epitaph, which in a thin parchment he carried in his right hand,
was such:

Of my fall I rest assured,
And had therefore rather dye,
Then, to fall again, mount high.
This Motto was thrown in several Parchments up and down the place, though
none so well understood the meaning, as the apprehensiue Nise, who betwixt
Celia and Leonora, two of her kinswomen of wonderful beauty, together with
many stranger Dames, and of Cesarina, sat in a costly hung room; and (though
the weather were parching hot) of it self shadie, or as if whilst Nise was
there, Sol were not willing to approach, lest from an eye of hers, his splendor
might receive a taint. Clad she was in russet Satin cut; but so, that through
each of the slashes, the inside and lining showing to be rich Cloth of Silver,
made them seem Artificial flowers, whose midst of each was as it were budded
with a fine Pearl; the lacing and Borders were subtly inter-wreathed with
silver Purle, and the Pearls in convenient spaces set between. Her head^yre
no less curious then costly, discovered the most, and hinder part of her
hair, kept smooth, in stead of a Hairelace, with a rich border of precious
Stones; and those golden skeines, supplied the want of a Caul, which had she
worn, Phoebus might have missed those Locks of hers to envy at.

The dejected Nise was so melancholy, distasted with her cruel Lovers opinion,
that the brave Challenger, in her sorrowful countenance might easily read the
Story of her woe: and so (though he knew not how any more to love) yet as often
as he looked upon her sadness; his heart would prompt him to some new way of
resentment: he could not but inwardly accuse himself of some cruelty, in
which new entertained thought, passing round about the place; and having
performed the accustomed salutations to the Ladies, he made a stand at his
fair Tent; directly opposite to which, on a large Scaffold, covered with rich
pieces of Tapistry and Damask, of several colors, sat the Judges, to wit,
Don Antonio and two other Gentlemen of his kindred; and somewhat beneath them,
under a State of Cloth of Gold, ground Russet, stood a goodly Cup-board, beset
with many rich Jewels, and on the upper part, a garnish of Silver and gilt
Plate, and above that uppermost of all, the rich Diamond set in a joint Ring of
Gold, as the Victorious Adventurers known reward. And in the mean time, till
some one might approach, Gerardo, alighting, sat him down in an embroidered
Chair, which was placed ready for him at his Tent door, to the no small
blithesomenesse of those that beheld his stately entrance.

The four and twenty Gentlemen, and twelve last, that accompanied him, settled
themselves in order by the Tent side, forming a beautiful and goodly squadron,
having behind them the Music and lowd-sounding Instruments, which came in
with the Challenger.

And not long after a noise of Drum and Trumpets, they might behold a troop
of Gallants entering at one side of the place, all well mounted, but with their
stirrops at length contrary to the Ginetiers, and armed like men at Arms,
their armor so bright-carued and cunningly wrought, that each appeared a most
clear Cristall looking-glass: Their Standerd was carried before them, whose
color and stuff was blue Damask, the fringe Gold, with a small Scutcheon in
the midst, and in that, embroidered, the known Arms of Cesarina's Lords,
being two Castles in a field Azure, a strong chain of Gold, hanging from each,
to which a Lion Rampant crowned, was fastened by the gorge. Next, followed a
triumphant Chariot, so wrought, that it seemed to be really pure gold, in whose
corners and quadrangle were lively set out the metaphorical loves of the nice
Daphne, and god Apollo: within the Chariots self was heard a sweet consort of
well-tuned Instruments, whose pleasing shrilnesse much gladded the hearers; and
on the top of a middle Arch, was placed a Globe or world of Gold, and upon it
the feared little-Wagge Cupid, just as the Ancients paint him, naked,
blindfold, in his hand a Turkish Bow with a sharp Arrow, that drawn to the
head, seemed to aim at the breast of a Knight, that came after the Chariot,
mustring out the several braueries of his gallant personage, upon a swift
Dapple-grey. He was cladde in a strait Cote of Cloth of Gold azur'd, set thick
with Buttons and Loopes of Gold, a Walloon Hat of blew Taffata, covered with
Gold-Twist, and high blew Martinet feathers; with which, and other Plumes the
Horse had his proud forehead neatly tricked up, his Trappings being suitable in
stuff and color with his Owner: who was soon known to be the valiant Lauro,
Nephew to Don Antonio, designed by him to be his daughters Bridegroom, though
she at present were far enough from such a thought. Lauro presumed upon
being her true Lover, and his own affection; and the more, by how much he
perceived Nise sought to blot him out of her remembrance, whose contemptfull
neglect, wrought matter sufficient of raging jealousy in his inflamed breast,
which was now grown to a height, by seeing her wear the same colors with
Gerardo. Lauro was accompanied by twelve other Seuillian Gentlemen, that rode
upon their dapple Ginets, with Trappings and Plumes suitable to those of their
Aduenturer; and they in their paned Hose of blew Satin, the ground, Cloth of
Gold; Ierkins, Clokes, and Cappes, of the same colored Velvet, laced, and
fringed with Gold; who as they passed up and down the place, cast this Motto
from them, being the same that Lauro wore on the midst of his breast, set in a
little Plate of Gold:

This day, the firmness I defend
Of my fair Mistress, though she be
Firmer to kill, then pity me.
With great acclamation the giddie Multitude celebrated the gallant Lauro's
solemn entrance; who after performance of Ceremonies, leaving the golden
Chariot on one side of the place, came where the Challenger was, and having
courteously saluted him, thus proceeded: You already know, Sir Knight, the
intent of my coming, and I promise you, this very minute of time, that (the
not putting it in execution, slips from me, seems a lasting Age: (assured)
that the vvrongfull cause you maintain, will afford me the Prize, and
desired Victory; and if I prove so unfortunate, as to be forced to subscribe
to your opinion, I will lose this Chain to boot, which comes not short in
value of your Diamond. And (this said) he took from off his own neck, a
massy enamelled Chain of extraordinary vvorkemanship, and giving it to the
Judges, the Challenger, who was now mounted and heard him, replied, That he
was well contented; and in so saying, took a big Lance, which seemed to be in
color of varnished Ebonie, and straight ran his Carreere, with such
courage, and so comely a pleasing air, as caused a general longing in the
Spectators for his Victory. And being come to the limited place, taking his
Arm and Lance out of his rest, he carried it so steadfast and even, that
without the least touch of the Ring, he took it away with him upon his point:
and stopping his horse, encouraged by the confused shoutes sent out in his
favor, he began to expect the fortune of his contrary; who, more confident
then cunning, taking his Lance, began, and ran his Carreere with such
furious speed, that he was scarce heard or seen; but stretching out his
Lance, 'twas not with that certainty that he could take the Ring, though he
touched upon the Circle of it. Gerardo was as glad and satisfied, as the
Aduenturer sad and passionate; yet he dissembled his grief, and prepared
himself to the second course, which the Challenger now began unto him; in
which when he came near the Ring with his Lance, he bore it sheere away,
giving a greater motive to the loud cries in the spacious place. Lauro passed
his Carreere very gracefully, and more wary then before, took the Ring this
bout as well as Gerardo; who now changing both Horse and Lance, ran the last
course, and touched the Ring, in midst of the upper part of it, almost in the
same place that Lauro first did: who, thinking the Victory now would not be
very doubtful, mounted upon a well rein'd Corduba browne-Bay, passed (like
Lightning) the Carreere, but missed quite the Ring; at which he was angry, and
out of countenance, as the Challenger pleased and contented, on whose part the
Judges declared the Victory, sending him the vvaighty Chain, and commanding
Lauro also to set his name under Gerardo's Challenge, which grieved him far
more then his loss. But of necessity he must approach the great Tent; out of
which the Shield was brought him, and the opinion of him, in whose hands, he
firmed to it; who seeing Lauro so passionate, casting his arms about him,
said: Let not Fortunes various events, divide, friend Lauro, our affections,
and deprive me of the favors I have still received from you, and from which I
acknowledge the present Victory proceeds: and to confirm you in this truth,
behold here the reward, appointed by your self, to whom, it is fitter to
return it: and so taking the Chain out of a great silver Basin, he put it
about his neck, Lauro unable to resist his noble courtesy. To which,
(thankful, as he had reason) the other answered, Certainly, Signior Gerardo,
you have this day gained on my thankful mind a greater victory, then that
which should have redounded by this only exercise of Just, by your courteous
proceeding: and so from henceforth in all occasions, I profess my self,
Yours by Conquest: and since, touching the Chain you have won, you will
(without being one) make your self a loser; less reason it were, I being
really so, should possess it; if therefore you please to give me leave, my
opinion is, that it be bestowed upon the Dame that best deserves it. It shall
infinitely content me, replied Gerardo, that you please so well to employ it;
at what time, the passionate Lauro leaving him, directed his way toward the
lovely Nise, that now expected what would be the issue of the two Knights their
Complements: and coming near, with a low obeisance, as well to her, as the
rest of the Ladies and Dames also, he took the Chain, (first kissing it) and
putting it on the point of his Lance, and lifting it up toward his fair
Cousin, used the ensuing Phrase: Though the having so meanly defended your
cause, may make me so great an vn-deseruer, that you (to favor me) might
refuse this small trifle from me; yet that pure affection of mine, and the
desire I know, he that gained it, has to serve you, may happily supply my
defects, if you will vouchsafe to honor the poor pledge with your fair
neck. Here he ceased, expecting Nise's answer; who, dissembling the more
suspicious point of his speech, yet cheereful, made him understand his bold
excess, saying: Truly, Cousin, if our firmness be but all this day, as well
defended, as hitherto, the Challenger may rue his boldness, and his rash
opinion will be sufficiently punished: and therefore in satisfaction of the
service you have done all these Ladies and Dames present, I will receive from
you the Chain, but so, that when you shall think fit to adventure it again,
you may know where to find it. Here, a fire of passion breaking out of his
countenance, Lauro had not the heart to reply a word, but got him shamefully
out of the place, just as from another street there entered in the lofty and
flaming mount Aetna of Sicily, vomiting at a huge mouth or breathing place made
at the top of it, so many several flashes and flames, together with such
hideous noise, as if all Hell had been within it: the rest of the Mount was
all of an adust burnt brown; the whole, moving most slowly on with notable
artifice, not leaving so much as the least sign or tracke of it on the ground
on which it went; till coming near the vvindowes, where the Judges and
Ladies sat, the Engine stood still, and the flames increased so violently,
that the air condensed all on a thick smoke, the people could hardly see one
another; till the cloud and whole Aetna vanishing together, in the stead,
there appeared two Gentle and gallant youths, differently mounted, who enclosed
in midst of twelve fierce Saluages; their brave and sightly colors caused
great content in as many, as admiring also their invention, pleasingly beheld
them. They were Moore-like clad, in Cloth of Silver Cassocks wrought with
crimson flowers, and long Robes of red Satin, with white flowers both so
artificially drawn, as if the flowers had been natural and only strewed on
them: their bonnets were red Velvet, and Hat-bands twisted silver, their high
Plumes of feathers in color suitable, and their sleeves of delicate transparent
Sendall, embroidered and set with rich stones, their horses Swan, or
snow-white, with clothes and Caparisons of Crimson Satin, with all their
embroidery of Silver, Scarfes, and Feathers suitable to those of their Owners,
who just then moved on, most artificially encompassed by their twelve
Saluages, who cast round about the several papers, and this ^ame-following
Motto:

If, as equal we appear
In our valor, in our blood,
Love would work us equal good,
Then, we both immortal were.
He who seemed elder of the two, (though both young enough) carried at the
end of a big Lance, a small red and white Streamer; in midst of which was
this Motto embroidered:

If death must be my remedy:
If love that must procure me her:
Long he, her coming does defer.
The second also had in the little Streamer of his Lance this engraven Motto:

From Love, my life beginning takes:
Therefore to Love my life I give,
Since without Love I cannot live.
Forthwith the lusty Saluages began to play upon diverse Instruments, which
they carried in stead of their heavy Clubbes, whose sound and harmony gave
motion to the Knights. But no sooner were they gotten to the Lists, when by all
that beheld them, they were known to be the two renowned and valiant
Sayavedra's, brothers and branches of that illustrious Stock, which has many
Ages given Owners to the Town of Castellar; who willing with their presence to
honor Cesarina, thus expressed their valor and themselves; whom when our
Challenger saw, he was not a little doubtful of his Victory: and so having
done the accustomed reverence to the Judges and Ladies, the elder Brother
taking the first occasion, began in this manner to him: The opinion, Sir
Knight, you hold, I might perhaps with as much justice on my part maintain:
the forfeit therefore, if I for want of skill chance to lose, shall not only
be barely firming to a Tenet I already approve, but you shall also gain this
precious Emerald. Though this (replied Gerardo) might have been excused, yet
to animate me to gain the pledge of such a Knight, I accept willigly the
condition; and so the Aduenturer having delivered the rich Emerald in a little
Ring to the Judges, they returned back, each of them choosing the best Lance
he could light on: and Gerardo coming to begin the Carreere, parted like
wind, running the point of his Lance, upon the upper part of the Ring; that
though he took it not, it was even as well; for nothing but taking it could
win from him: and so turning to his Tent, from thence he expected the success
of his Contrary, who courageously spurred on, but missed his mark; for he
struck so bunglingly upon the sides of the Ring, that it was as much as
nothing. The Conqueror Gerardo was nothing sorry for his misfortune, who
turning to the Carreere, passed on so happily, that he fairly took the Ring,
(which hung again in its place) he returned again to his, giving leave to
the angry Aduenturer (not a little distasted) with new courage to begin the
known Carreere; in which, he also bore the Ring, and passed on most iocund
with his good fortune: and perceiving the Challenger prepare himself for the
last Course, himself did the like, changing both horse and Lance, just as the
skillful Challenger with his in his third Carreere had re-taken the Ring, the
people with confused cries extolling his good fortune: whereupon the other
carefully passing his Carreere, saw the Ring also upon the point of his Lance.
The difficulty was, and they were all in an uproar about deciding the Victory:
Gerardo and his Sticklers alleged, and that justly, that the first touch
(ground of their difference) was not equalled, so long as the Ring remained
firm; to which, the two brothers Adventurers replied: That (howsoever (the
Ring being untaken) there could be no loss, and so the victory was
indifferent on both sides, or to make it otherwise, they must at least run
another Course: this and much more was added, but the Judges unwilling to have
them grow to further contestation, commanded the Aduenturer to retire, since
indeed he had lost: wherefore the Seuillian Knight obeyed, confident, that his
brother might redeem his ill fortune, who as angry as a trodden Viper, thus
said to the Challenger: Believe me, Sir Knight, I know not how heaven grants
you so great a victory, defending so unjust a cause, whose unreasonableness
mooues me to request you, that we limit the future success, to one only
brief Course, and the reward on my part, if I be persecuted with my Brothers
ill fortune, shall be this swift horse and furniture upon him: and if victory
be declared on my behalf, you shall forthwith depart the Lists, forbearing
for ever to maintain so vn-aduised an opinion. Without prejudice to mine
honor (said Gerardo) I might well deny your demand: but because your
confidence shall not escape without due punishment, I confirm your
proposition: and so their Discourse ended, Gerardo more warily then before,
made choice of a straight smooth Lance; with which, and on a well-shap't
Roane, he ran his Course, setting forward so gracefully, that the general
wishes bespoke him good success, which by taking the desired Ring, he had. The
Aduenturer also performed his Carreere with a good grace, but his ill luck
made him only touch upon the upper part of the Iron less cunningly, then his
presumption promised, which caused in both the Brothers an equal despite,
though they were forced to dissemble it, and the Aduenturer not so much as
expecting to be bid alight, of his own voluntary motion did it, delivering his
brave horse to Gerardo, who with a smiling look, said: That the loss of so
fair a beast, may make you know in what error you have hitherto lived, he
shall now be mine; only, you shall please to accept of this other, which I
think comes not short in goodness: which words, and the forsaking his Saddle,
made but an instant, to the great admiration of the Spectators, especially the
two Brothers, who with joyful acknowledgement accepted the noble offer, and
jointly subscribed to the Challengers opinion. By and by, at the broadest part
of the place, there entered, discharging of Artillery, a great Castle, founded
upon a high Rock, it was foure-square, with many sightly Turrets, and goodly
Barricado's: in the Homage Tower, for a Pinnacle and extreme part of
Architecture stood the winged Fame, with a Trumpet in her left hand, and in the
right, a large Flagge of Cloth of Gold, Tawnie and Carnation, in which were
ten small embroidered Scutcheons, only one higher and bigger then the rest,
with a great Key hanging at it in a golden String, the known Arms to the
loyal City of Gibraltar: the other nine belonged to the following Restorers
of the said City. The first on the right hand, was, of the Mendoza's, and the
next consequently, the Luduenia's, Busto's, Castillo's, Pinia's, Natera's,
Mesa's, Caluo's, Benites. All the Battlements, Turrets, Walls, and Pinnacles,
were set and beautified with painted Flagges, and Streamers wauing with the
aforesaid Arms, and those of the Crown likewise, in an embroidered Standered
of Cloth of Gold, and Yellow: some likewise were placed upon the Frame and
Mason-worke of the Castles iron Gates. And now the whole Frame by an ingenious
Device and help of those within, began to move, and the Artillery ceasing, a
bastard Trumpet was heard; at which shrill signal, the Castle and Rock being
now gotten under the Judges window, stayed: and the Artillery beginning to
discharge afresh, at the sound, after i, tof some wel-tuned Instruments, the
shut-Gates flew suddenly open, from whence a Drawbridge was cast, all covered
with Tawnie Damask, and presently after, a proper comely Youth came marching
over it in Cuerpo, clad in the military Fashion of Spain: his Doublet and
Breeches, cloth of Silver were cut upon Orenge-color'd Taffeta, with a strong
Ierkin of impenetrable Buffe, trimmed with Parchment Gold-lace, Loopes, and
Buttons answerable, Stockens, Orenge-colour, Shoes and Garters, white; falling
Band, French; and a Bone-lace edging, Flemish: his plume of Feathers, Gold and
white, and his Hat Ermines, to suit in color with them: his sword hatched, and
Hangers, Silver: in his right hand he bore a Leading-staffe, representing the
military Office of a Commander. Thus attended by eight Pages in their glorious
Livery also, he came to the Challengers prefence, and after usual Ceremonies
of courtesy performed, with an audible voice, that the Judges, and all present
might hear, he uttered the following words: In that famous castle of Gibraltar
before you, there are nine Knights, descended from her most noble Conquerours,
from whom I am sent, to entreat you to be pleased, that upon the conditions you
maintain, each of them, may run one only Course with you; which they have
desired, to excuse you from the trouble; not that otherwise running the three
would be any at all to them. Here Gerardo, when the gallant Captain had
ended, with no less gracefulness made answer: Considering, worthy Captain,
that I am here to no other intent then what you mention, the famous Adventurers
might well have excused their sending, and your pains, to whom I request you
make known, that I most willingly obey their commands: and so with a low
Reverence to the Challenger, Judges, and Ladies, the brave Soldier returned
into the Castle, leaving all the Spectators, well pleased with the courtly
delivery of his Message: and not long after, (the Artillery discharging afresh)
to the sound of Trumpets, and Moorish Hau-bois, a comely Knight came marching
over the same Bridge, and at the instant, a second Gate opening at the lower
part of the Rock, there sallied out two lusty bigbon'd Slaves, handsomely clad,
one of them leading a leere goodly Chest-nut Horse; which the Aduenturer nimbly
mounted, without setting foot to stirrup. His garment was a long coat, jagged
with yellow and Rose-colour'd cloth of Gold, the yellow embroidered with
siluer-Twist, and the Rose-colour with Gold: his horse Trappings and Caparisons
were the same, and a great Plume of Martinets decked as well the Adventurers
Hat, as the Horses proud head, (a gentle wind curling as it were their tips
into knots:) upon his Breast he bore a Scutcheon or golden Plate, in which were
carved the ancient Arms of the Bustos, by which he was known to descend from
that Noble house, and this Motto served for the Scutcheons Border.

My valiant Ancestor,
By conquering Gibraltar, renown
Gave it, to him, Victory a Crown.
He no sooner approached the Lists, when the Noble Challenger, thinking there
needed no further conditions, addressed himself to the course, and setting
Spurs to the free Beast, drove on like a tempest, and in the midst of the
Carreere (to prevent men's wishes) bore away the easy Ring; and returning
contentedly to his Tent, stayed to expect the issue of his contraries success,
which, no less lucky then his, not a little troubled him; but the next second
Aduenturer eased him of his distaste, who having the same Colors and Motto,
but not the same fortune, only touched part of the hoope, and in this manner
they all ran to the ninth and last Aduenturer, whom I would not pass over in
silence, as well in respect of his difference of colors, as the Motto cast
about the place. He was mounted upon a Swartie Bay, himself clad in Cloth of
gold, ground white, cut, and the slashes edged about with gold Lace, set with
buttons of fine Rubies in the midst: his Hat was of Taffata pleited and
white, with a curious band of Gold Purle embroidered, and in the Rose of it he
wore a precious Brooch, bordered with small Rubies, his Plumes were Martinets,
as also the Horses, whose trappings and Caparisons were suitable of Cloth of
Gold and white, variously embroidered with Gold, which showed most richly upon
the white; but indeed a color more proper to such as are affected to stern
Mars, then the tender Infant, Love. By his Arms he was known to be the
Heroicke Mendosa, and his Motto thus:

My affections are so free,
That, whilst thus I live alone,
None shall me (but my self) own.
He made show by his Robustious presence, of a vvonderfull strength, which
appeared by pressing the faint Beast that seemed to yield under the Burden, so
he passed through the spacious place; whose Spectators (having given a turn
about it) he left most gladsomely full of expectation, and drawing near to the
Challengers Tent, who attended him, he began the ensuing Discourse:

All my friends and companions (as I understand) have run, each, a Lance
with you: but for my satisfaction, and that none may think my coming has
been to contradict your just and true opinion, which against the constancy of
women you maintain; I shall (and if you please) freely subscribe to it before
there be a necessity, that (you remaining conqueror) I be compelled: for let
me say that not in jesting pastime as the present, but with single Valor, I
will ever make good and maintain this wholesome vn-erring opinion.

Gerardo with notable content, gave ear to the determination of the resolute
Knight, and with a cheerful aspect, returned him this answ^re: Securely may
you, Sir Knight, this day allow your self a promise of Victory, which cannot
be wanting any way to him, that abounds as you do in the knowledge of the
certain truth I sustain. I am content to run a course with you, and to give
you the Conquerors reward. (Which said) bowing his head to him in token of
courtesy, he passed on to the accustomed Carreere, and quickly took the
Ring; and putting it in the usual place, the Aduenturer came on, with such
speed and comely grace (as none before him had done the like) and with his
Lances point fetch off the Ring as Gerardo had done, whom, in his joy, for the
good success, he came to embrace, desiring, that they would fetch him out the
Shield, that he might subscribe to the Challenge; for though he needed not so
to have done, yet Gerardo importuned by his entreaties, commanded it to be
brought forth, but would not suffer him to firm his name, amongst the rest; so
he wrote it close by the Challengers.

Four of the nine Knights had Prizes, (viz.) Jewels, which they bestowed upon
the Dames they there liked best: only the last Adventurers was the richest,
which, thinking by reason of his cruel opinion, no Dame would receive from
his hand, he desired the Challenger to give it as from himself to the fair
Celia; who, to satisfy Gerardo, accepted of it, at such time, as to the sound
of Drum and Trumpets sempiternall Fame, that appeared from top of the Homage
Tower, vnwrapping the flagges golden folds, waued by her powerful right hand,
displaide in the inside these four Verses set out in golden Letters.

This day with voice of metal Fame shall enter,
These hon'ring Spaines illustrious Families,
Their names and glorious Acts t'^eternalize,
From the clear Zenith, to the obscurer Center.
And thus the gallant Aduenturer withdrawing himself into the Castle, with a
terrible thunder of great shot, it voided the place: and in the room twelve
goodly Sumpter-Moyles entered, all laden with straight green Reeds, and
covered with rich Sumpter Clothes, which were followed by two and thirty
Knights, with their Shields and Lances fitted to them, and in the midst, a
stately Triumphant Chariot, drawn by six spotted Pye-bals, with an Arch in
the midst of it of most curious Architecture, whereon were artificially set out
and carved, the memorable exploits, which at the siege of the famous City and
frontier of Xeres by her Noble conquerours were performed. Amongst which, the
no less feared then bold enterprise of the courageous Herrera, was most
eminent, who in one of the rich Arches squares, with a manly presence, stretched
forth his Arm and Dagger, dyed in the Royal blood of the Barbarian enemy
King, slain in his own Tent by that invincible hand. On top and uppermost
part of the Arch, hung wauing to the Air a great Ensign of blue Damask,
embroidered with Gold and Pearl, and in the midst a fair Royal Scutcheon,
whose Arms in a field white, were the waves of the stormy Sea, anciently
proper to the City of Xeres: and for Border it had twelve other small
Scutcheons, with the famous Arms of the following Gentlemen Inhabitants of the
City: (viz.) Herreras, Villa vicencios, Camachos, Ponces de Leon, Varga,
Rendones, Gallegcs, Cueuas, Auilas, Morales, Valdespinos, and Espindolas. Under
the Arch, but immediately joined to it, there hung a most beautiful white
Cloud, which took up in Ouall circle the whole breadth of it; from whence a
most delightful sweet Music of Sac-buts, Cornets, Viols, Lutes and Harpes,
was heard, so acceptable and pleasing to the hearers, as formerly the
frightfull noise of the Castle was troublesome; behind the Chariot came
twelve Moors of equal stature and proportion; marked and branded in their
faces for Slaves, all clad after the Barbarian manner, in long Mantles of white
Cotton, Caps of Scarlet, with their crooked Semitars, and Date-colour'd Corduba
Buskins, each of which had in his left hand a little silver Scutchcon with his
Masters Arms, and led leere also his swift Horse by him, whose Caparisons and
Trappings were Damask, but by reason of the thick embroiderie of Gold, the
ground was scarce discerned to be blue: their Plumes and Skarfes were blue and
yellow, which colors were likewise worn by the two and thirty Knights. Being
all entered into the place: and having by two and two in payres most gracefully
passed their Carreeres, forgoing their sharp Lances, and dividing themselves
into two Squadrons, they began face to face, and according to their custom, a
wel-ordered skirmish with their Reeds, which lasted all the time that the
Chariot took up in passing about the place, so that they of the skirmish having
also taken a turn and view of the Spectators, returned near the Chariot to
their Stand, where the Music again sent forth a most melodious sound, at
which the white Cloud began to open and spread in twelve different parts,
discovering within, a most clear Turquesse sky, enameled with bright radiant
Stars, all which shaddowed a rich Throne of five degrees, adorned with
straw-coloured Cloth of Gold, and at the Basis that seemed to be massy on the
last degree, were set two goodly Images in Bult, curiously framed hand in hand:
the one held in her left, a bough of spredding Oak, and on her lofty front,
she wore a Tyara or Coyfe, on which this Motto was written:

Without me there is no Victory,
Since that in my performance lies
All honor, and each glorious Prize.
This Valorous robustious Dame sufficiently expressed her renowned name, as
also she that accompanied her, with a fair Lawrell-wreathe represented
Victory, gilding her happy Temples, with a precious Imperial Crown, and about
it these ingraued Verses:

I equally do favor still,
(As the bold aduent'rous Spirit)
Wisdom for her chiefest merit.
In the fourth, third, second and first degree, were seated by three and three
the twelve Knights, all richly set out in their colors of Damask, blue and
yellow, imbroidered with Silver, Gold, and stones of good value (their plumes
suitable) and each had in his left hand a little streamer of Cloth of Gold with
blue, with the Arms of his House, and blazoned with the ensuing Motto:

Victory certain and secure,
I promise, we propitious
Shall have, since her we bring with us.
The three of the first degree, after the sound of Trumpets, Shalmes, and
diverse other Instruments, descended from the Chariot (their tall Slaves
expecting them with their ready Horses) on which most gracefully mounted, they
advanced toward the Challenger; to whom one of them thus said: On the behalf
of these Knights, and others in the Chariot, as also on mine own, I request
you, Sir Knight; Be pleased, that each Aduenturer may run but his sole course
with you: for (besides that the limiting thus the hazard of victory, which
will make your honor, obtaining it, the greater) we shall receive particular
favor in the courtesy demanded.

With a very good will (said Gerardo) I accept it, and the demand indeed is
wholly in my favor, and since you will ease me of so much pains, let us lose
no time. Content, said the Aduenturer: when Gerardo (leaving him, and passing
his Carreere) so happily guided the point of his Lance, that he took the
Ring: and the Aduenturer too performing the like: seven of the twelve gained
Prizes, which they bestowed upon the fair Dames there present, returning after
to the Chariot, vvhither they were welcomed with Music, and so they all
voided the place.

And as the Chariot went out, there entered in at the same gate, a little ugly
Dwarf Post-like, winding a Horn, upon a pretty Nagge, with false gallop,
which raised a general laughter in the Spectators, as well in respect (as of
his ill-fauourednesse) his worse suited bravery, which made him show much more
monstrous. In this manner, he rode on to the Challengers Tent, before whom
(nimbly alighting) he drew out of a Cloth of gold Purse, a Letter, which
(having kissed it) he presented with a low obeisance to Gerardo; but first in
the delivery used this speech:

Sir Knight, My Master (whom you shall better know by the Contents of this
Letter) willed me (besides the delivery of it) to solicit mine own quick
dispatch, which I earnestly on my behalf too request of you. You shall have
it, said Gerardo, and an answer also if the Letter do require it; and in so
saying, he broke it open, and passing his eyes slightly over it, read alowd,
that al might hear the Dwarfe's Knight's demand.

The Castillian Knight, alias fortunate, to thee, Noble: but, unfortunate
Gerardo, sends greeting and health, such as thou need to make good the
error thou maintainest: Know, that (having notice of the strange opinion thou
hold; and confident that it is unjust) I have taken a long journey in thy
search, and am (as just now) newly alighted at this Towns gates, and desire to
weane thee from so desperate a Tenet; and considering that I am for my person
disappointed, as well of Invention, as the Ostentation befitting these
Triumphs; I have thought good to make it my request, that (admitting my
forcible excuse, which may serve a stranger) thou be pleased also, that whether
I win or lose, I may freely depart the Lists, without making my self known,
since being but an obscure person, it were more fit to depart with silence,
then subscribe a name, whose Owner is of so mean quality.

And having read the Letter, not so much as expecting a consent from the
Judges, turning to the Dwarf, he thus said, Get you to horse, and tell the
Knight your Master, that upon my word and assurance, he may enter when he
pleases, with all the conditions of his Letter observed, to which I send no
written answer, in respect of the more speedy dispatching of your little
self. The Dwarf most iocundly spurred on where his Master expected him; and
not long after, entered in four Dwarfes with Trumpets (the Messenger making up
the fourth, and of equal low presence with the rest) and after him eight
masked Knights, whose Robes were long Coats of Tawny Velvet, curiously
wrought, and set out with little bright Looking-glasses, whose Ouall frames
were of massy Silver, their horses trappings and furniture of the same Velvet,
with their little Glasses likewise: the Knights Hattes were garnished with
suitable colored Bugles, their own Plumes, and their horses Tops, were tawny,
white, and Carnation. Their Lances had a certain bright Varnish that made
them show like Ieat. Behind them came nine Dames upon their white-spotted
Palfrcies, close masked, and clad in the ancient Roman manner, so rich in
different colors, gold and precious stones, that (though that Mountain of
Gold, which the unhappy, yet renowned Ingan Atabalina offered for his vngranted
ransom, had been disbursed to array them) it must have come far short of
their excessive cost. These Nymphs brows were girt with Diamonds, Rubies, and
Emeralds, and their heads stuck with an infinity of different colored
Plumes: each of them bare in her hand a neat-wrought, vvell-tuned Instrument,
with which (as Viols, Violins, Theorbo, Lute and the like) they accorded in a
celestial harmony.

Behind these nine (the Muses) came a Knight and Lady, both masked, she, as
brave and comely, as he gallant and sprightly. Himself was mounted upon a
goodly white Steed in vvell-placed distances spotted with black: The
trappings and other furniture, were Cloth of Gold Tawnie, imbroidered with
Silver in equal spaces from the Looking-glasses, which were somewhat less,
more cutious then the forementioned. The Knight his garment was a close Coat,
(but for length exceeding the Challengers:) of the said tawny, embossed with
knots and flowers of Silver wire; in midst of which the little Glasses were
set, sending forth a most radiant brightness: that (as the Sun now near his
iourneyes end reflected on them) the vvearer by their dazzling seemed another
second Phaeton. The Plumes that adorned his Hat, imbroidered with silver Purle,
were white, red, and Tawny, as also the Horses. The gentle Dame had on her a
gown of white Satin, so thick and curiously imbroidered, that the white was
scarce discerned, and the discovered spaces were almost covered with gold
Buttons, whose Pyramicall ends were tipped with admirably cut Diamonds, which,
in lieu of the Looking-glasses, sent forth a purer sparkling then their
Cristall. Her hair was caught and shut up in a Net of Gold, a Cawle, fastened
on her head with a Fillet of the richest Stones. From that well-dressed head
too there seemed to grow, some white, green and blue Feathers, which gave the
more luster to her smooth and rising forehead. She was mounted upon a
white-pyed flea-bitten Mare; which, as neatly paced under her, as the
Adventurers lusty Courser proudly praunced under him, whose breast wore on a
golden Scutcheon, the ensuing Motto:

If with the faith of my Mistress
My love may be equalized,
It Is the greatest to be prized.
And the fair Dame cast from her the following Verses:

If his firm love, whom I adore,
Admit may a comparison,
I love with like affection.
With this grave as glorious Company, they both together gave a turn about the
place: after which, the Aduenturer taking a short leave of his Mistress, (the
Trumpets and Music ceasing) went toward the Challenger, and courteously
saluting him, thus said: By the many Jewels on that Cup-board, I well
perceive, how few the several Adventurers have from your valor gained,
notwithstanding so good a cause as they had in hand (The constancy of Ladies.)
This acknowledgement, I suppose, is only awanting to your self, to make you
consummately deserve the name of a Victorious Knight; for, otherwise, I repute
you worthy all honor and estimation: and therefore let me request you,
(setting your Tenet aside) you would be pleased, that we may run our three
Courses wholly for the honor of Knighthood, without any further Prize.
Gerardo, whilst the Aduenturer was speaking, stood (as attentive) so,
suspicious, that this was not the first time he had been acquainted with that
voice: and in this anxietie he replied, how happy he should be to receive his
commands; though, if the Adventurers good luck would make him Victor, he
must not but receive the appointed Prize. And in so saying, he first ran the
Course, and in it took the Ring; and falling off, left the Carreere to the
unknown Aduenturer, who passing on like a Flight, roundly took the Ring also:
and their second lottes in like manner were both alike equal. But the ouere
confident Challenger addressing himself to the last Course, was not in that
so fortunate; for, he only touched upon the Circle, and passing on, with no
small distaste, afterward viewed how his Contrary, like another vvatchfull
wary Argus, in midst of his Course took the Ring upon his Lances point,
with such acclamations and noise from the whole multitude, that nothing else
was to be heard; till such time as Drum and Trumpets, together with the
Artillery out of the Castle, with hideous thunder declared the Victory of the
brave Aduenturer; (whom the Judges summoning to them) delivered him with
exquisite ceremonies the Ring and rich Diamond, as the just reward of his
dexterity; which, he no sooner received, but (accompanied by his own Knights,
and diverse others enamoured, as it were, on his strange virtue) came where his
dainty Mistress expected him, and taking the Ring from off his finger, thus
proceeded. You might justly (fair Owner) rest assured, that to do you service,
I should gain the honor and Prize of these Triumphs: so that, your self now
being the most loyal and constant of the Dames and Ladies present, is best
worthy to honor the value of it with your Lilly-hand. The graceful Dame was
ready with an answer; when by mischance the strings of her Mask slipping
loose, made it fall to the ground, and Gerardo discovering the fair face
before him, might behold no less then the lively Original of the most
beautiful Amaranta. It is not possible to express his inward joy, confirming
his minds suspicion, that the Victor was her dear Lover, his worthiest
friend, the most valiant Arsenio, (which being a sufficient comfort to his
loss) he went toward him, and taking off the Mask from his face, closely
embracing him, said: Why (famous Arsenio) and would you be so cruel to me, as
to return without making your self known, to leave me by your victory in so
great a confusion? Believe me, Sir, were it not for the honor I receive, in
having been foiled by you, (which does temper my distaste) it were
impossible for you to obtain a pardon. Marvel not, friend Gerardo, said
Arsenio, at my slacknesse: for still me thinks as I behold you, I cannot
persuade my self you should be the same Gerardo, that took leave of me at
Seuil; nor dare I presume, that he would maintain so rigorous a Theme
against Ladies, as you here have done. It Is very well (quoth Gerardo) you
speak with the freedom, your fortunate style gives you; all men are not borne
under your happy Constellation, neither do all live so secure, as you in the
loyalty of the fair Amaranta: to whom turning, he kissed her snowie hand,
rendering courtly thanks for the honor she had done those Festiuals by her
arrival; and being by her discreet language, paid in the same coin, all
three of them entered the sumptuous Tent, just as the Sun began now to decline
to the West. And the Judges (knowing all was ended) commanded Gerardo to
retire, (allowing him the glory of the day) and ordering, that the Plate and
Jewels should be taken down, left their standings, and (mounted on
horseback) placed Gerardo, and his Victor friend in the midst of them: and
in this manner, together with all the Knights and Gallants, they gave a
sightly turn about the Place, accompanied with an infinite diversity of
musical Instruments, that had formerly entered. The Challenger too (though a
loser) might hear a thousand joyful congratulations, from the confused rumor
of the Spectators, and coming to the Standing where the Ladies and Dames
were, himself with the rest, accompanied them to their Carroches, and so to
the Castle: the fair Nise carrying with her the beautiful Amaranta; each of
the two equally emulating the others matchless perfections. All the
Adventurers were invited by Don Antonio to supper: (which ended) the rewards
were to be distributed for the best Invention, Lance, Motto, and Bravery: so
that (all the Ghests assembled together at the Castle) four magnificent Tables
were spread with great joy and mirth, in the large spacious Hall, where to
the sound of loud Music, at the first and chiefest Table sat the Judges,
Stickler, Challenger, and victorious Arsenio: at an opposite Table the Ladies
and Dames; on the right hand the Adventurers, and at the left, the last, the
rest of the Knights and Gentlemen that had been only Spectators. And, having
all plentifully supped, the clothes were taken away, and the Revels began; in
which, many of the Ladies danced with the Knights of the Ring. Lauro with his
Cousin daunced the Torch-daunce, not without some distaste to the offended
Challenger. A strange force it is of that execrable tormentour, Jealousy:
Nise's most tender expressing her affections, could stir up none at all in
his ungrateful heart; yet the but seeing her now move in a ceremonious
Dance, and only ciuilly served by her affectionate kinsman, makes Gerardo
sensible of distaste, which kindling some little Ielousies, by little and
little raised such a blaze in his intrals, that the ruins of his former
flames, were quite consumed with these latter. In such ielous fancies Gerardo
passed a good part of this night; in which (when the Revels had end) by mutual
consent of the Judges, two rich Emeralds were bestowed upon the two gallant
Seuilian Sayauedra's brothers, as a reward for the best Invention. On Arsenio,
for Bravery, was bestowed a wel-wrought Chain of Gold, with a curious
enameled Harpy hanging thereat. Lauro for the best Motto, had a golden
Gilly-flower, whose red, for enamel, was Rubies: which (though he would gladly
they had been set in his Cousins divine forehead) he durst not offer, for
fear of a repulse; in which he was not deceived, considering her dislike of
his former boldness. Lastly, to the Challenger, as to the best, and
gracefullest Lance, was allotted by general approbation, an equal reward. So
that the just uprightness of the Judges flying amongst the people, the
Artillery from the Towers, Battlements, and Rauelins began to thunder; and
from the Windows a pleasing sound of Music was heard. And so for this night
the Knights returned to their Lodgings. Next day new Solemnities began, by the
letting loose some twelve fierce Tarifa Bulls; to which many terrible wounds
were given by the horsemen; some particularly, by the valorous Leoncio, whose
strong arm proved the fatal executioner to two of them, by striking the one
(a furious beast) into the neck, and so to the fore-legge of his monstrous
body. With which, and other successes the Triumphs ended, to Don Antonio's,
and all the rest of the Gentlemen's extraordinary content; who together with the
Ladies and Gentlewomen retired home, to their several dwellings and houses;
all, but the valiant Arsenio, and his best-beloued Amaranta; who, importuned by
Lauro, Leoncio, and Gerardo, were forced to some longer stay, which time they
spent in the chase of wild Beasts, with which, the vast Forest near Cesarina
does plentifully abound. And now those favors which the tender Nise expressed
to her Gerardo, more evidently increasing, and her love acknowledging some
acceptance from his thankful breast, to the same height kindled a fire of
envious raging jealousy in Lauro's heart. But Nise without wrong to her hearts
Owner, could take no notice of his griefs, much less apply her Cousins
remedy; (who all on fire) seldom could the two Lovers, so much as exchange a
look, but his eyes would stand Sentinels; which in so tender a subject as
Nise's passionate heart, caused no small disquiet, neither had she concealed
it, or her distaste from Lauro, had not the prudent, Amaranta persuaded,
prevailed with her: for she was her only comfortresse in her torment, to whom
she would discover her secrets, her whole self. And that they might at present
more freely converse and communicate their thoughts, (having in a clear calm
Evening joined hands) they descended to a pleasant Garden; which, beautified
with the variety of Trees, Flowers, and fruitful Plants, served as a comely
ornament to certain grated chambers of the Castle, where Arsenio, Leoncio, and
Gerardo were lodged, who from those fair Barre-gilded windows, (for at that
time they were taking (...) ^^ghts fresh air) might perceive how the two
sprightly Dames, securely careless of a discovery, were bathing their
Alablaster feet in the bubbling Currents of a perpetual Fountain, that paid
tribute to the neighboring river Betis, which Gerardo took for a subject of
the following Verses and Sonnet, he sung to his Viole, to the great content of
his friends, but most, of the surprised Dames.

Betis! whilst pretty Philomel does sing,
And to thy silver noise her treble raise:
Whilst gentle Zephyrus his wings displayes,
Amongst well-tuned leaves with whistling murmuring,
Comb smooth thy Sedge, thy red sands freely sting
On the green bank, that thy o'reflowing stays
Cast them in golden knots, through all the ways
My Nise treades: when she does nearer bring
Her clearer (then thy Cristall) limbs: chastize
Thy swifter course, and may no mutinous air
Then blow, but let the stream glide gently by.
But, draw that Yu'rie Curtain from mine eyes:
Vn-vaile thy Alablaster (Goddess fair,)
Though I Actaeon, thou, Diana be.
Scarce had Nise heard the accents of her Lovers voice, when with admiration in
her self, and pleasure in Amaranta, they suspended their present discourse,
diuerted with the amorous notes, which when Nise more distinctly heard, she
thought (such was her passion) that she had been in a dream; yet little
dreamed, that she was become the subject of Gerardo's affection; who sung not
so low, neither so warily, but that the Echo of his voice reached the
listening Lauro's ears: to whom a very small matter was sufficient to raise
him from his bed; and getting to one of his chambers Grates, which directly
under Gerardo's Bay-window, looked into the Garden, he might plainly hear
those amorous expressions: and hereupon, confirmed in his suspicions, he fell
into such a furious passion, that had not the violence of it broke into some
short-winded sighs, he might have happily been stifled in his own sorrow.
His tender groans being (as so near them) by Gerardo heard, his old
experience of such Corrosiues made him guess at the cause of them; and
therefore he retired, together with his brother and friend to bed, fearing,
lest if the gracious Nise should by mis-chance, use the least speech to them,
some inconvenience might ensue, in respect of the ielous Lauro, who seeing the
two Dames, that had also espied him, retire, did the like, but both parties
with different effects: for he, out of the distraction of his thoughts, could
take no rest; but the other two well satisfied in their loves, slept quietly
all the rest of that night. And not many after, Nise and her Lover obtained a
private meeting; which well they might, whilst Lauro was in bed, and then (no
doubt) these two affections mutually disposed, the blind-god would produce his
usual effects: encouraging the one, and cowardizing the other: so that Nise
became subject to her Lover, who with his new and momentarie delight, esteemed
himself possessed of a Treasure of more value then the double Indies.

But, Lauro, how have thou been to thy dear prejudice so careless? how have
thou laid up this inestimable Jewel, reserved for thee only? who durst bear
the sad tidings to thy soul? None, but thine own heart; nor could that heart
but mis-giuingly presage: for, doubtless considering the two Lovers wariness,
impossible it was to be certain of their amorous stolen meetings, more then by
the presumptions of a ielous breast. And now to Lauro's eyes his cousins fair
face was become ugly and monstrous, his love turned strangely to strong hate,
and his former good will into reuengefull wishes; the success of which he
forthwith began to contriue, and thinking that the bloodiest revenge he could
take of the abhorred Nise, was to remove Gerardo from her sight, he began
instantly to devise how he might compass his death.

'Twas now some time, that Arsenio and Amaranta had bin absent from their city
and home, and some friends of theirs earnestly solicited their return, which
made them careful (though sorry) to take leave of those Gentlemen. Gerardo
with Nise's consent, (much to her souls sorrow) in respect of his obligation to
the departing couple, was necessarily to accompany them, and Leoncio in that
respect could do no less. The noble Cesarinian (...) others would willingly
have pleaded the stay of the other two; but considering their resolution, were
forced to give way, only enjoined them to a speedy return. To express Nise's
sorrow were needless, or rather ouer-difficult, since neither her Gerardo's
loyal promises, nor the fair Amaranta's vows to her to hasten him, could
afford her the least comfort or content: besides, his passing afterward the
limited time of return, bredde no small torment in her; so that her tender
grief unable to support this excess of her Lover, and withal fearing lest
some disaster might have befalne him, she resolved (treading down all
inconueniencies of honor) to declare her grief to a Barbarian, a Slave, in
whom (as having had his breeding in her Fathers house) she had good confidence;
and withal giving him some rewards in present, and promising him for his
secrecy, more; she dispatched him to Gerardo with a Letter. The Slave willing
to obey his young Mistress, made good speed, arriving at Seuill and Arsenio's
house in few hours, where he found Gerardo in his Amaranta's pleasing
company, to whom he delivered the Letter, which Gerardo received with inward
joy, though (happily) his Mistresses hazzarding business of so great
consequence, did somewhat lessen that (which might have otherwise been
excessive) content. But seeing there was no remedy, he must set a good face
upon the matter; so, commanding the Messenger to rest himself, opening the
Letter, he might view the ensuing Lines.

Not the fear that your promise can ever be defective, is the cause that
thus, to mine honors hazard, I commit this Letters important secrecy to so
mean a bearer: only I have hereunto been moved, by the infinite desire I
have that these weary eyes may see you, which shall never yet be weary of
shedding tears for your absence, till your return dry them (my life's sole
remedy) to keep it from sad torment. NISE,

A thousand times over, kissed Gerardo the passionate Paper, and as often had he
read it, had not the sighs which love made him offer as a sacrifice for his
delay, kept him in some suspense: and so, loath (by further stay to add new
difficulties,) he briefly dispatched the Messenger, telling him by word of
mouth (besides a short Letter he gave him for Nise) that himself would that
following night be upon his way.

At this time the offended Lauro slept not, whose angry and reuengefull
thoughts increased more and more still fiercely upon him: so that his mind
brooking no longer delays, he resolved to put a bloody purpose in execution:
which was, To kill Gerardo ere he departed Seuill, (the fittest place for the
accomplishing such a design.)

And so taking a lusty tall servant (on whom he much relied) along with him,
without making either of his Uncles privy to their journey, they took their
way toward the mentioned City; whither Lauro's auerse Fate permitted him not
to arrive; for that very night as he rode on (careless of the mortal
disaster) discoursing with his servant, touching the vehement suspicions he had
of his Cousin) and also their bloody purpose upon Gerardo; before they had
passed on half their way, the Slave that io^und and merry, was returning with
Nise's Letter met them* (who known by Lauro, but Lauro knowing nothing of his
short absence) somewhat troubled at it, began to demand angrily of him the
cause of his journey; which bred no small amazement in the quaking Slave (as
being so suddenly surprised.)

But another more desperate accident interrupted the present Inquisition; for
they were set upon by four fugitive Soldiers, who (stolen from their Regiment,
bound with the West-Iudian fleet) with their charged Muskets robbed all
Passengers they met with; which clapping now to Lauro and his Companies breasts,
they demanded withal their Purses. The unfortunate Lauro fared worst of the
three, for standing to his defense, they shot him through the body with a brace
of Bullets; and falling from his Horse, in great fury, they dispatched him with
their Swords, to the servant and Slaves no small sorrow, though seeing their
own danger, and how unable they were to revenge his death, they thought best
to shift for their own lives, (that the bloody Thieves might not overtake
them) neither durst they return to Cesarina with the news, each of them
justly fearing his own danger, for having so coward-like forsaken their slain
Master: wherefore they thought it safest to get up into the Country, as far
from Cesarina, as possibly they could: whither (as now) Gerard^ was upon his
way, neither could he at this time have thought that he was ever unfortunate,
since Heaven so miraculously pleased to free him from a twofold danger: for
he had been sure (coming alone as he did without his brothers company, who
for some private respects stayed behind him) either to have perished by the
jealous Lauro's hand, or been murdered by those bloody Homicides, who busy
about the wretched Lauro's spoils (having retired his body out of the highway
into the Thicket) gave means to Gerardo that night to conclude his short
journey, and arrive by Sunne-rising at Cesarina, where (alighted) he was told,
that not three hours before, the two Brothers were ridden abroad, to kill a
huge wild Boar, that was said to have been seen grazing not far off to
the Countries great detriment.

This news much gladded him, that he might now with the more freedom enjoy
the company of his soft Mistress: and so he went toward her Chamber, where
(though it were but early) he found her not: and asking more carefully of her,
one of her Maids told him she was in the Garden, to which way he instantly
hasting, might see how amongst the Flowers, she was with her white hand framing
a pretty painted wouen garland of Myrtles, Gilly-flowers, and different
Violets, and in the interim he might hear some Contents of her solitary
thoughts, expressed by her melodious Voice, in this short Ode:

Thou Russet and knot-wreathing Snake,
Nature allows,
Thy barren Spouse,
And both, embraces close to take.
And thou, high Elm; thou and the Vine,
In Hymen's rite,
Joy day and night,
And inter-lacing kisses join.
So may you live, and flourish still,
Free from cursed Hynde,
From fiercest wind,
Thou, on the grass; Thou, on the Hill.
As you by such sweet sympathies,
Examples prove,
For him to love,
That (thankelesse) my embraces flies.
The Ditty ended, Heaven forbid (suddenly surprising her, said Gerardo) that my
firm affection receive so hard an attribute. What Art-full Pensill could here
set out to the life the countenance of the ouer-ioyed Nise, expressing a world
of gladsomenesse, when the wished accents of her Lovers voice, touched in her
ravished ears (so that fearelesse of all danger to be espied) she ran, and
with open Arms threw her self upon his neck, crying out, If for so tedious
and grievous a neglect, I should take the revenge on thee that thou deseruest,
these Arms, (that as bonds) now enfold thee, might justly retire from so close
an embrace: but so fearful am I of thy crying quits in another kind, that,
to give thee less freedom, (then I fear in this absence thou have had) I am
forced to lock thee in with these Arms.

Trust me, dear Owner of my life, said Gerardo, I had rather be still so
imprisoned, then by loosing of those Arms, enjoy my less esteemed liberty:
and since from my neglect so great a glory proceeds, what justice have you to
call me yet neglectfull? This only was wanting to my misfortune (said Nise)
that from my favors thou take occasion to torment me. Gerardo, at this and
other amorous discourses smiling, led her by the hand, and going to the
priuatest part of the Castle, after they had discussed together (not without
some misdoubt) of the Slaves long stay, as well as of Lauro's unexpected
absence, (taking leave of her ruddy lips) he betook himself to his Chamber,
where resting after his weary journey the greatest part of that day, the two
following nights he passed in the embraces of his ^ole loved Mistress; till such
time as her Father and Uncle were returned, for then their delights were less
secure.

The two Noble Brothers were much gladded with Gerardo's return, though
Leoncio's stay behind did something lessen that joy in Don Henrique's breast,
which was still grateful, so long as Lauro's death was concealed. But not
passing ten days after, a Messenger was purposely dispatched from the Governor
of Corduba, to Don Antonio, to let him know, that a Slave of his was there in
hold, flying (as seemed) hs Masters anger, and that for the suspicion they had
of him in respect of the iron marks in his face, they thought fit to stay him.
The news much pleased the Brothers, though Gerardo and Nise, for the secrecy
of their affairs, would rather he had never bin heard off. Don Antonio
(sensible of his Slaves loss) instantly sent one for him; and the very same
day came the news of his Nephews death, which (to his souls grief) made him
extremely passionate. It was known, by a Letter brought him from Lauro's
servant, who remained in a Village of Portugal, called Mora, the sad Contents
were these:

Though the sad and certain sorrow you shall receive, might have excused these
Lines, yet the love of a dutiful servant to his deceased Master, has more
preu^iled with me; so far, as to give you an account of your dear Lauro,
whose revenge has mou^d me to let you know the vehement suspicion I have of
his Murderers, in this Village of Mora in Portugal, from whence I write, and
whither I addressed my self the same night that my Master and I were absent
from Cesarina, having left him slain in the crosse-way near the Pits by
Mare-Woods, where four men set upon us, and so, distressed, I and your Slave
were forced to save our selves by flying; your Slave, who was happily then
present, that so bloody a crime might not escape without punishment. You shall
understand, Sir, that the intent of our journey (though the success were
contrary) was, to have slain Gerardo, the cause sufficient to engage my
Master, your daughters honor: which, the said Gerardo sought by illicite
affection to deprive her of; from whence and undoubtedly I collect, that, he,
ghessing at my Masters thoughts, by way of anticipation meant to strike first.
And this does the more confirm my suspicion; for that the next morning, at
Seuill, I understood from Leoncio, that ouer-night this Brother had departed
toward Cesarina, where, if at present he be; you may by legal inquisition
sift out these, more certain then fained probabilities.

Scarce had Don Ant^nio read these last lines, when, his courageous breast
unable to support such a weight of sorrow, he remained senseless, and letting
the Paper drop, fixed his sad eyes upon it, with such shows and signs of
inward Torment, as caused no less in the pitiful Don Henrique (none else by)
who, fearing his Brother might fall into some helpless agony, stepping to him,
and taking him by the hand, so dealt with him, that he called back his
remembrance (though the woeful accident made him speak nothing but groans:)
(which perceived by Don Henrique) himself was almost brought to that heavy
pass. For besides that the deceased Lauro was esteemed as sole son, and
wholly heir of both, the suspicion of Nise's dishonor, did more aggrauate the
ones rage, and increase the others sorrow. But the latter (accustomed to such
brunts, and, reason mitigating his passion) began more temperately to treat
with his Brother, touching these affairs (which carried with all secrecy) they
mutually agreed, that Gerardo should be apprehended, and that, speedily, before
he might have notice of their purpose: which, to the poor Gentleman's
admiration, was suddenly effected, by taking him at unawares in his Chamber;
and from thence he was conveyed to the strong Tower, with which he had been
formerly acquainted; and (leaving two trusty servants for his Iaylors) with
three or four others, they rode to Mare-Woods, where near the forementioned
Pits, they found the unhappy Lauro's body; but, so swollen, dis-figured and
putrified; that as well in this respect, as also that (the flesh being naked,
it was in many parts eaten and devoured by vvilde beasts) they doubted whether
it were the same they looked for: till looking more narrowly upon the corpse, it
was known to those that passionately bewailed the Owner, by a certain mark
it had, which parted the left side of the beard. So, without more ado,
wrapping the body in a black Hearse, they returned back to Cesarina, where,
when Gerardo's secret imprisonment was known, the whole town was in an
vproare, especially the grieved Nise's trouble was incomparably the greatest;
when, coming to the Tower to speak with him, the careful Warders hindered
her, and withal said, they were chiefly charged to deny her entrance: which
made her think all was betrayed unto her Father and Uncle; whose rigor, for
her offense, she began not without cause to fear: yet, love to Gerardo
animating her tender heart, gave her valor to expect for his sake a thousand
deaths, resolved to die rather with him for company, then for any living
respect to forsake him. (a determination in woman bravely Masculine, if in the
performance the usual variable condition of her sex had not intermeddled.)

Gerardo in this extremity stood undaunted, for (innocent of Lauro's death)
for any other ground of his imprisonment he rejoiced; that, by his danger Nise
might know his affection, and at how low a rate in respect of that he valewed
life. (The two Uncles arriving about midnight with their Nephews body) the
two sad Lovers with the frightfull news, gave respite to their wandering
imaginations, and Gerardo was now openly pronounced the bloody homicide, who
(innocent) seemed not to be much sensible of his imprisonment, save, of the
vvrong those Gentlemen did him, to diuulge him the Murderer throughout all
Andaluzia, vvanting proofs for it; whereas, indeed, in all equity
(considering the Laws of friendship, and his former wrongful imprisonment)
they ought now to have proceeded with more real justification. This not a
little troubled him, though, neither from Don Antonio, or his Brother, he could
receive the least satisfaction, who only sought to satisfy themselves with
his blood; and, so, having speedily caused Lauro's body to be interred, they
dispatched a Messenger to the Village of Mora, for the servant that wrote the
Letter; and another to Corduba, for the Slave (deferring in the mean time a
more important diligence.) These things were not so severely carried, but that
within three days Leoncio had notice of his Brothers danger: whereupon,
accompanied with some of his kinsmen and friends, he took Posts for Cesarina;
Arsenio only, absent then from Seuill, came not; or rather an unlucky chance,
as disastrous as the present of Gerardo, kept him behind; the which, before
the end of this first parts last Tragical discourse, we shall only, to avoid
prolixi^^e touch at.

Leoncio and his friends as soon as they came to Cesarina, alighted at the
first Inn they met with not holding it safe to accept of the Castle offered by
the two Brothers unto them: from whom Leonci^ understood the cause of his
Brothers imprisonment, without any mention of Nise, which more for infamy then
uncertainty was pretermitted.

Leoncio was inwardly glad to consider how weak proofs they had against his
brother: but this he kept secret; and rather, in words and gesture expressed
great shows of grieuance, urging how ill they had complied with their loves to
his Brother and him, since, so slightly, only with a Letter and bare
presumption from one that in more likelihood might be guilty, they had moved
the poise of their judgment. To this he added more reasons, so bitter and full
of indignation (as made Don Antonio ready to have clapped him up with his
Brother) which had they done, all had been marred, considering how well
Leoncio and his friends came provided; so, Don Antonio coming near unto him,
said; Look you, Signior Leoncio, if your Brothers imprisonment so much
distaste you: think you my Nephews bloody murder as much grieves not us? The
truth ought to be sifted out; neither take I your self to be so clear, as to
speak so freely in so weighty a cause. Gerardo is your Brother, and who
knows whether his intents were made known or not to you? and therefore rest
contented; for hitherto there has been no indirect proceeding: and perhaps
what may seem but slight and triuiall to you, may er^ long put you to your
Pecke of Troubles.

More would the passionate Gentleman have said, and worse had he been
answered, but that Don Henrique, less blinded with choler, and that more
esteemed of Leoncio for his friend, prevented them by stepping between.

And Leoncio, without further stay, went to his lodging, (where thoroughly
conferring touching the business with his friends) the vpshot was, that
according to custom in matters of consequence, they should petition to the
great and feared Tribunal of Iliberis, to have the cause and trial removed
thither, (assured that if the justice of it were left to Don Antonio's
arbitrament, it would have but a disastrous issue) since he being absolute Lord
over such as he might name for Judges in Cesarina, they would do nothing but
what he should direct them in. The advice seemed good to all, and was quickly
put in execution (Gerardo first appealing from his unjust imprisonment, and
some necessary diligences used after in that High Court of Chancerie) he was
by order of those supreme Judges sent for thither. In the mean while, he that
went for the Slave was returned; and having brought him in sure hold, as soon
as he was come into Don Antonio's presence, not once expecting to be demanded
the cause of his flight, falling prostrate at his Masters feet, and desiring
his ear in private, he plainly delivered as much as he knew of Nise's secret
affection, and of the Letter committed to his trust for Gerardo: (an Act fit
for so base a creature, and worthy to light heavy on her, that would commit so
important a secret to a Slaves breast.)

Here Don Antonio seeing how impossible it was that his dishonor should now
any longer be concealed, like a Tormented Bull toared out alowde his hard
misfortunes: his Brother also suspecting the worst, grew almost to as badde
plight: and Nise no sooner heard of the Slaves arrival, but, fearful of the
danger, and forgetting her amorous resolution suddenly fled from her Fathers
house, taking Sanctuary at a Nunnery (which had in former times been founded
by her Ancestors) from whence she gave notice to the angry old man, of the
Change; who, now with extremity of sadness had no sense of feeling left of
his disgraceful troubles. But since their Causer was in his power, the
certainty of his Revenge did a little reui^e him, which was also increased by
the coming of Lauro's servant, whose declaration taken, agreed just with the
presumptions of his former Letter: and though by the Slaves deposition there
were a plain difference and contradiction between them (since the one said he
left Gerardo in Seuil; and the other, that he appeared to have been one of
the Homicides) yet the business had danger enough to have daunted the most
courageous heart.

On the other side, Gerardo's ill success in his love quite stained his
reputation, branding him with the breach of faith and friendship: yet such
errors, not utterly unpardonable, might have admitted some discharge. Many
ways our unfortunate Prisoner assayed to know Nise's determinate will, in
whom, as his life's comfortresse, he had fixed the remedy of his present
misfortunes, thinking the vpshot of all must be, to take her as his own and
happy conjugal companion. But his enemies looked so narrowly to him, that it
was not possible for any Letter of his to this effect to come to Nise's hands:
for Don Antonio aimed wholly at his life; so that, as well himself in person,
as also, by his means, the Nuns labored his daughter, that in any case, she
should deny to have had other then a lawful acquaintance with Gerardo,
aduertizing her, that he was infallibly to die; so that should she say
otherwise (besides loosing him) her honor would be ruinously lost; and other
matters to this purpose; which (sometimes gently, other-whiles rigorously
proposed) were sufficient to reduce her mind to her stern Fathers will, and
to make her forget that immense affection, with which of late she had resolved
to dye for her Gerardo. But Nise made no new book of her variable inconstancy,
which incident to the whole sex, little needs he to wonder at these changes
that shall mark their end. Thus Nise, before, determined to suffer thousands
of deaths for her Lover (cutting now the thread of her firm intent) ten only
days absence of imprisonment, and a few poor threats, alter her mind,
conforming it (against Gerardo) to her Father and Uncles pleasure.

This new and sudden change (as bad news is wont) came last of all to
Gerardo's ear, causing within him so raw an operation, that the past Tragedies
of his former dead Loves, were nothing in respect of this, and but as small
additions to this last great Torment. In the heat of these affairs, the
valiant Leoncio returned again to Cesarina, and his Brothers presence; whom,
by his afflictions strangely metamorphosed, he scarce knew: but having in fine
given him the best comfort he might, on the other side he required Don Antonio
by virtue of a Scedule Royal, that his Brother might be delivered up for the
famous City of Iliberis, which (to his grief) he was forced to obey, and the
Prisoner was with a strong Guard conveyed as the business and Gerardo's person
well needed, who now somewhat well cheered with his Brothers presence, provided
himself for Iliberis; and straight he was upon his way, turning for ever (in
his determined thoughts) his back to Casarina.

About midday (growing too extreme hot to pass further to any Town) coming
to a pleasant flowery Valley (that lying under certain huge Rocks, made the
green seat more delightful) by general consent they chose that fresh cool
place to give their wearied bodies some refreshment: and so alighting, whilst
their Horses grazed, caused their dinner provisions to be taken from off a
great Sumpter-Moyles back, that was their Cup-boord, and having also the
flower-enamelled field for their Table-Cloth, and the transparent streams of
the near running Brook for their Basin (down they sat, and with much
content fell to their victuals:) which also was so much the more by the
addition of a clear Voices sweet accents, which in midst of Dinner they might
distinctly hear to the sound of a Rebecke in the following Song.

At the foot of a Mountain white
Clad all in snow,
That does melt with the Sunne-beames bright,
Celio as in a Dream,
Beholds how the stream,
Drives to and fro.
Little Pibbles, white, red and blue,
then does he see,
And presented are to his view,
Sands like Arabian Gold,
Near which he may behold,
Apollo's Tree.
Instead of Fishes, Nayades
In Cristall vailes,
Lift up their heads from those fresh Seas,
with different garlands crowned,
Sad Cygnus swimming round,
His loss bewayles.
Young Hyacinthus grows near:
Adonis too,
Acanthus the Boy does appear,
In a flower of his name,
Narcissus lost his fame,
That scorned to woo.
The Thracian Minstrell rises then,
His Harp he brings,
That attracts birds, beasts, fishes, men:
With the sweet sound he cheares,
The listening Shepherds ears,
And thus he sings:
Fenissa the fair now is come,
(Swain) weep no more:
With little foot of Snow,
She trips it to and fro
On grassie shore.
Come then Fenissa, fair Fenissa come,
Come to the shade,
By cool leaves made.
Sing, Celio: Valley, make Fenissa room,
And let Echo ring,
She Is the Valleys Spring:
Fenissa come.
With this Song all were struck silent, and leaving both victuals and
discourse, gave vvilling attention. And Gerardo, who in the midst of his
troubles kept ever a good memory, forgot not his old friend Celio, as soon as
he might know him by his voice, yet, see him he could not, by reason of a
winding thicket, through which his eye could hardly reach to the gentle
Shepherd: so, one of the company, to do Gerardo service, rose up and meant to
seek and bring Celio to him; when by chance having heard Gerardo name him, he
soon came out of the thicket, vvhither, to enjoy the cool shade, he was
gotten, and leading a Nymph as beautiful of face, as himself comely of
person; drawing now near, and to his no small admiration, knowing the Prisoner
Gerardo, he ran to him, and with open arms (his eyes shedding tears for so
long absence) embraced him, that with no less passion vvelcommed the others
approach; and forcing the good Shepherd to sit next unto him, recounted the
whole Story of his late last misfortunes; which he closed up with some sighs;
to which Celio and his Shepherdess proved the Eccho's in their answer. To
her, Gerardo applying himself, thus said, By your lovely presence and some
part of my friends Ditty, I suppose, fair Mistress, you are the shrine, to
whose Deity Celio has devoted all his affections; the which (time was) I
knew to be otherwise employed, when his thoughts and mine were then equal: but
as the vvitchcraft of a pair of black quick eyes, wrought a change in me,
that ought by sad experience to have been more wary; what vvonder, if my
friend, taught by no experience nor rigor of Fortune, should suffer
vanquishment from so rare a subject? That only, noble Gerardo, (said Celio,
before the willing Shepherdess could reply) excuses me, and satisfies for the
breach of single life. I am only sorry, that I had not long since bestowed my
whole life upon Fenissa's service; whose sweet presence (after a tedious
absence) has, as this day descended hither, to give new life, shadow, color,
to these Plants, Valley, and Flowers. Shall I still be angry, my Celio, replied
the smiling Shepherdess, at your offending flattery? For, there being so many
witnesses here present of my mean parts, how dare you extol them so, or
rather, mock me with such fawning attributes? Rather, said Gerardo, with all
Celio can say, he must come short: in which, and other pleasing discourse,
(time drawing near, and the Suns heat slackning) they made ready to take
horse: so all took leave, and Gerardo was very much pleased with Celio's happy
encounter, taking it as a presage of good success, though a tragical accident
that befell the valiant Arsenio, changed this mirth into a mournfulnesse,
equal to that for his own misfortunes: for as soon as he was entered into the
Iliberian prison, he found Arsenio there for his companion. The cause of his
apprehension was not much different (as being bloody) from his, yet the effects
were quite contrary: since, to the charge of our unhappy Gerardo, the death of
one only person was wrongfully laid, but the killing of three in single
combat were sufficiently proved against the other. Acts (had they been in
war) worthy Laurel, as now like to produce some exemplary punishment: such
acts, as were they not somewhat too aberring from the promised brevity of our
near ending Histories first Part, might afford a curious eye no less
pleasing then profitable entertainment. With Arsenio's discreet loved company,
Gerardo was by little and little diuerted from his sorrowful fancies, and
began to think upon some needful course for his liberty; though had not high
Heaven now (as at other times) moved with his innocence, delivered him from
danger, his life had been utterly lost: for, some five months after Gerardo
had thus been Prisoner, by a secret and vn-expected chance, Lauro's murderers
were in fine happily discovered.

So it was, that the forementioned Soldiers you read of, roaming up and down
in their bloody exercise, were, upon some slight presumptions, laid hold of in
a certain little Town of the Duke of Medina Sidonia's, where (being put to
the Rack) they not only confessed the fact, for which they stood accused, but
diverse thefts, robberies, and murders, as amongst others, Lauro's death; and
another equal in execution, though in the manner and performance more
hainously beast-like, the father having proved the Filicide of his own son;
the father, who was named Don John Ponce, a Tartesian Gentleman; in my
opinion, one of the most barbarously cruel acts it was, that either in
Spain, or elsewhere in any Age ever truly happened, as well in respect of the
beginning and motive, as that the principal author and actor in it, was (as
is said) the father: and the rarity of it will not let me pass it over in
silence, but set it down as succinctly as I can to a tittle, according to the
true Relation given; which, to ensuing times, and perpetual memory, shall be
imprinted in these last Leaves of my black Lines, as follows:

There lives in the City of Tartesia a widow Dame, called Fabia, whom, Heaven
in her younger years, endued with more beauty, virtue, and goodness, then
goods of fortune, or nobleness of blood and birth. To her, one of the prime
Gallants of that City made court; whose amorous thoughts were soon by her
perceived, and so discreetly avoided, that she never so much as took the least
notice of them; till time and his importuning presents, which by unexpected
vvayes still came to her hands, made her show her self somewhat less coy,
though never the more coming; yet he obtained with much ado, some speech with
her from a vvindow, but far off, and small hopes of enjoying his ends and
her; only a little to dis-oblige her self, she afforded him that poor content
of speech, which nevertheless was not carried with the secrecy it ought:
for, coming to an Aunts notice of hers, she was by her Aunt so roughly
reprehended, that having out of her anger learned a warning, she from that
time forward shut her Window against her burning Lover. But his flame the more
increased, by how much his desire to see her, and her vigilancie not to see
him, was augmented. Loves eyes are like piercing Lynceus; and so, Fabia's care
was lost, since her Lover would not lose his seeing her, but like a diligent
Sentinel, was always waking: and one time amongst others, viewing, how his
fair Mistress, careless of a surprizall, was set at the street door, laying
hold on the blessed opportunity, he came near, and began to lay such
effectual amorous reasons before her, that she had neither the power to turn
her back, nor obstinacy to stop her cares; and so gave a way to his Loves
enchantment, to undermine her constant purpose. But hearing his discourse tend
wholly to complaints of her unkindness, not willing that he should proceed,
she abruptly thus cuts him off: The favor, Signior, you do me, extending
beyond the limits of ordinary courtesy, enforces me to desire your
forbearance; and (for I have often told you my will cannot conform it self
with yours) me thinks it might satisfy you: since it so much concerns my
honor, and no reason is it, that he, who pretends he loves me, should strive
to bereave me of that, which (once lost) is never to be restored. My Parents
are about to bestow me, and I am willing to obey them, by undergoing that
estate which they hold sitting for me. And since my birth has made me too
unequally mean for your deserts, that in this respect I can be no lawful
recompense to your desires, I most humbly beseech you to forget me, and cast
your eyes upon some nobler subject, that for blood may deserve that, of which
my lowness has made me an vndeseruer. Here, inflamed with jealousy, the
resolved Gentleman replied: So cruel a Treaty, to me so prejudicial, loved
Fabia, shall not proceed, if I can help it, neither will I longer defer the
remedy that lies in mine own hand, which I forthwith give, and a firm
promise to be your husband; and that you may be the better assured, these four
servants, with Heaven and me, shall be your witnesses: and this said, without
expecting the least answer from her, that, overcome with sudden joy, could
hardly have given it, he gave a call to his servants; and before them, turning
to his Fabia, (whom he saw with the vnlook't-for accident, turned into blushing
crimson) prosecuting his intent, he said, Dear Mistress, why are you thus
silent, or defer that I, which I expect from your sweet lips? I say once
more, nay, a thousand times, but, a short once for all, I am your Husband: of
which, Heaven and these shall be my witnesses; give me then that white hand,
with which, and in it, I shall enjoy more happiness then in the worlds
Treasure. And so ceasing, he gave way, that the modest Fabia might with less
trouble frame this joyful answer: Wonder not, dear Signior, that a favor so
above my dastard thoughts, should thus amaze me; your offer I most truly
esteem of, and must, by being your Spouse, receive with you my sole happiness:
and so, joining hands they embraced, remaining alike linked in the union of
their affections, whose effects were that very night accomplished, to the no
small content of Don John, that only at parting desired Fabia to conceal and
content her self with his promise, till such time as their marriage might be
effected without distaste to his friends and kindred: to which she easily
condescended, as willing in all things to satisfy him like an obedient wife.
With this wary secrecy the Lovers held on in their private meetings, till
such time as Fabia grew to be with child, and her Gallant (without all fear of
heaven) to a treaty of marriage with a dainty Dame and near Kinswoman of his,
which in short time without Fabia's notice was effected. But what hand may rule
my weary Pen, if I should go about to set down the mocked Fabia's grief?
What tongue would without faltring express her souls immense sorrow, as soon
as she heard the bitter news of his faiths breach, that was her only Owner?
'Twere to take fresh breath, to begin a new Tragedy: may her tears and sighs
then rest in the Readers consideration; which, as abundant and continual, so,
hard they were to be concealed from her parents; to whom, as her womanish fear
would permit her, she discovered the state she was in, of being two months
pregnant; they accompanying in her mournful discomfort, sought rather wisely
to marry her, then by impossible pleas more to defame her: And therefore
without many delays married her to a person of their rank, but one that had
good means: with whom (her defect one way, and excess another, vn-noted) she
passed for a maid; and some eight months after, was delivered (as legitimate)
of a lusty Boy; and so quickly with the Infants pleasing company, she blotted
out of her mind the abhorred remembrance of the true perjured Father.

Some ten years were expired after the child's birth, in all which time, just
Heaven blessed not the ungrateful Don John with any issue, to his no small
grief: for that one of his brothers, whom he deadly hated, was necessarily to
succeed him in the Estate. And now quite desperate of any fruit by his wife,
he proposed to himself the Boy he had by Fabia for his heir: and hereupon
not content to have most trecherously wronged her, but trusting to wealth and
friends, insensible of the poor Fabia's disgrace, he sought by Law to recover
his son; and to this purpose petitioned to an ordinary Judge; who, for
admitting so scandalous a demand, deserved an extraordinary punishment. And so,
his servants bringing in witness of the close meetings that were between
them, as also of the just computation and time of her delivery, by sentence of
Law the Judge dispossessed him that loved the Boy as his own, and adjudged him
to be restored to the perjured, false, yet true Father. With the affront done
him, Fabia's poor husband and fell into a desperate sickness, and soon after
died: so she, poor soul, remained without honor, son or husband, such are
the cruel effects of an unrelenting proceeding.

The wicked Sire was now most iocund in his new son, called likewise Don
John, and causing him to be most tenderly cockered and brought up: but the
Boys own good inclination to all virtuous qualities, made him in few years
grow to that towardliness, that he was generally beloved, and so highly
commended, that even in his own father it begat envy. For the step-Dame there
needs naught be said, since their hatred and malice is their general
inheritance: yet the prudent Don John as discreetly boar his mother-in-lawes
ill will, as from so tender years might be expected; neither did he in all
the plenty and fortune of his new Estate, show the least forgetfulness of his
old habitation, where every day once at least, his own poor Mother was by him
seen and served; but his father and stepmother so much stomacked this, that
they wholly repented them of claiming him; and next, making little or no
reckening of him, withdrew all manner of allowance either to sustain, or
clothe him: whereupon the young Gentleman was forced to sue them (according to
Spaines custom) for means; which, by sentence were allotted him, to the value
of seven hundred Crowns to be annually paid him. But, the virtuous youth
considering his mothers wants needed more relief then his own, was content to
part with his annuity to her; which done, he went with a kinsman of his
fathers, that dearly loved him, to the City of Lisborne, where that party was
provided of a place of good credit in the Kings Galleys. There Don John in his
kinsmans company lived happily enough, till, understanding by Letters from his
mother, how hardly his cruel father proceeded in the payment of her moneys,
his duty hastening him, he returned thither. Well knew he that begat him, the
cause of his so sudden arrival, neither did his wife ignore it; who, like a
cursed step-Dame, desired nothing more then the poor young man's ruin, which
was soon after effected: for her devilish intent finding sufficient
admittance to her husbands dis-affection, was made known, and finding in him
no less desire of his sons riddance, they both resolved, and the future
Filicide, parted with this bloody purpose toward the great City of Seuil, where
he might without any difficulty, find choice of murderers to dispatch his
only son. And so having by chance lighted on the four forementioned
Rogues, agreeing with them to kill him for two hundred Crowns; of which,
fifty were to be paid in earnest: they returned back together, and entered
that night Tartesia, where the devilish father, informed of the sons being
in his mothers house, instructed them for the manner of his dispatch; and so,
leading them on to the unfitting sacrifice and house, thus said, That before is
the door, there is no more to be done, but one of you knock, ask for Don
John; and as he comes out, the rest may so deal with him, that he may save
himself a revenge, and give me satisfaction. There wanted not, by Heavens
providence, some one to ouer-heare these last words, and witness against this
accursed Judge, that pronounced so sharp a decree upon his own blood: and
this was a poor old woman, who, not dreaming of any such accident, stood as
then at a close Lattice-window, from whence she might also view, how, that
having (as they were instructed) asked for the innocent Youth, just as he came
out of his mothers house, they gave him his deaths wound. But he died not very
soon after, which bred no small distemper in his treacherous father, as fearing,
his wound was not mortal enough, or belike, his pleasure done, he repented him
of the fact; but from hence he took occasion to pay with some twenty Crowns
ouer-plus, the inhumane murderers; telling them, he agreed for his sons
death, which they had not effected, but only given him some slight hurts, for
which they had already received sufficient recompense. There wanted no replies
from the impatient men, who now repented them they had not first ^laine him by
the way. But seeing how much it concerned them all to be secret, cursing his
base proceeding, the next day they left Tartesia. The woeful Fabia even
distracted with her sons danger, informed by the said old woman, of the truth
of what she before more then half suspected, accompanied with some of her
neighbors, (a raging mother) she ran and cast her self at the Governors
feet, (a noble and upright Gentleman) calling out for vengeance, requiring with
her dolorous clamours, Justice; and with her tears and wringing, provoking
Heaven it self to pity. Scarce had the cruel father notice of her sorrow,
the peoples curses, and his sons danger, when, all in a cold sweat and
frighting fear, the offense gnawing his conscience, without more adoo he
withdrew himself to a Monastery, whereby without further proofs, himself
declared himself to be the guilty actor. And therefore the severe Governor
caused him to be taken forcibly out, and consulted earnestly with the Judge his
Assistant, for the manner of his punishment. About this time Don John ended his
unhappy life. Now the father being wondrous rich, and powerfully allied, was
able to stop and cool a little the Governors fervent proceeding. For by Order
from the Inquisition, (by reason of the cessation from divine Service, till the
Sanctuary man were brought back again to the Monastery) it was commanded he
should be restored.

In the beginning of this business, he thought fit for some respects, to
conceal a certain quantity of Moneys and Jewels he had to the value of
thirty thousand Crowns, which he committed (as to safe custody) to his
Brothers: but the present trouble having consumed most of his means, made him
rely now upon the rest of that wealth, and to this purpose demanded his own of
his Brothers: by whom (as Heaven justly ordained) he was not only forsaken,
but laughed to scorn for so ridiculous a demand, they utterly denying to have
received so much as a denier from him; which, in the weary worn Gentleman,
bred such a sudden passion of choler and disdain, that his vital spirits
stifled with the venime of his rage, made him fall flat dead before the
Spectators; astonished with the fearful accident, which is ever incident to
those that give so bad an account of their lives. And with his death I think
it fit, clozing up this bloody Story, to return toward the end of our present
Narration.

I told you, how upon the Rack the Soldiers confessed Lauro's death, which
computed with the time, place, and occasion, was true, and Gerardo falsely
accused: so that, the business thoroughly sifted by the Court of Justice, to the
singular content of his brother and friends, Gerardo was to be freed. His
enemies no less took on, who on one side were ashamed of their blind
proceeding; yet on the other, sensible that the honor of a daughter and Niece,
was now left to the wide worlds arbitrament, they resolved, that Don Antonio,
contrary to his former purpose, should demand Justice for the wrong done to
his house, and that the forgotten Nise should require performance of marriage,
which, indeed Gerardo never so much as promised, though she affirmed, that upon
such security, she had delivered up her person unto him. Leoncio was much
troubled with this new demand against his Brother; who, determining to die a
thousand deaths, rather then admit of Nise's loathed embraces, resolved with
himself to remain a perpetual prisoner, before he would be chained, and
indissolubly tied to the irksome captivity of an unconstant woman; and his
unmoved purpose known to her father and friends, he was by them strangely
persecuted, though in all his troubles, his valor no one jot declined from his
first settled resolution.

But it is now high time to give some rest to the continual labor of my pen
and spirits, till other successes in Gerardo, for a second Part of this Work,
may give a lofty subject to my quill, and new matter to the world, for example
and instruction from Gerardo's misfortunes. Amongst which, those of his friends
Fernando and Don Iayme, shall be of no little variety to the Reader, nor of
less admiration, the recovery of one of the most essential Actors in this
great Tragedy, whose sad Obsequies (though erroneously) Gerardo in the end of
this first Parts second Discourse, bedewed with mournful tears.

The end of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART OF GERARDO, THE VNFORTVNATE SPANIARD:
The first Discourse.
As a poor Bark distressed by Waves and Wind,
When this grows angry, and the Sea^ go high,
No ease, nor safety, (rudely tossed) can find
(By Compass steer she never so cunningly)
But needs must suffer in a double kind
By Air, if she the help of sails apply
By raking Seas, if up those helps she bind:
So (an vnheedy Vessel) do I live
Restless, n^ere shipwreck, since, I never was well,
Till I (a-fresh) had launch't into the Ma^^e,
Where, what soever resistance my Bark give,
From the white froth I mount, then fall again;
Then rise, then tumble down as low as Hell.
TO the Viols sound, and his own harmonious Voice, the Spanish Gerardo
diuerted the memory of his past misfortunes, and the affliction of his present
imprisonment. And at this present, the Sun newly peeping into those close
dungeons, a man long tossed as it were in the Gulf of his liberty, by each
unfortunate wave, was now at length cast upon the prison of Iliberis. The echo
of his clinking shackles (the first step ever into that miserable Mansion)
drew Gerardo to a window; from whence beholding the new-come Ghest, and well
pleased with his manly presence (which is still a strangers best Letter of
re-commendation) he cursed in his mind the Tyrannous Officers that brought him
within the Gates. From thence he was led farther on, to a little Wicket, where
the Hammer striking there, signified by that ^range custom, that their
Prisoner was apprehended for resisting the Constable. I shall not need to
de-cypher this kind of dumb Language frequent in Prisons, since being so, no
man may wonder at the same. Many who now went by the names of old soakers were
now gotten round about the new Prisoner, from whom Gerardo had no smaladoo to
get him out of their fingers; yet at length they gave way, and respected him
as their Ancient: who took the party by the hand, and led him aside with him
to certain spacious entries, where, perceiving he was quite dis-heartened,
encouraging him the best he could, he used this Phrase unto him:

All these fellows you see here, about, and in yonder little Court, not far
from us, lie in Prison for far greater offenses then yours, and yet make no
difficulty of favor from the Judges; Be of good cheer then, and assured, that
if the matter of your imprisonment be of no greater importance then a
resistance, your delivery may be speedier then you are aware of. Somewhat less
afflicted, though still pensatiue, the sorrowful young man interrupted
Gerardo, saying, If that were only the occasion which has brought me now to
your acquaintance, I acknowledge (and thankfully) I should have been most
happy in such company, (happen what might.) But woe is me, Noble Sir, that now
lose my liberty, when I most need it: would Heaven had pleased, that my base
enemies weapons had first ended my abhorred life. More had he said, and more
amazed Gerardo, had he not been prevented then, by one that clapping him with
his hand upon the shoulder, as if they had been old acquaintance, said, What,
are you here Sir? astonishing the poor Prisoner with this kind of demand:
who with some admiration, yet answered him in his own strain, You may be sure
I am here, if you see me; though the question had been more proper, if I had
voluntarily come hither. To this, without more pawse, the party added, I know
indeed you are here for a resistance, and therefore might have saved a labor
of asking: but if that be all, Laugh at it, Peace, Give me money and I Will free
you instantly: The Notary is my Friend, and the Judge my Gossip, we are all in
all.

No sooner had he ended, when another Youth of his own rank and profession
cut him off from further speaking; who without any respect to the by-s^anders,
looking scuruily upon the the other, and plucking him by the Cloak, proceeded;
'Twere fitter, Goodman you --: you would let alone my Prisoners, and meddle
with your own, since you know (according to our agreement) this Gallant
belongs to me. I marry (quoth his opposite) if it were matter of accident, but
the case is altered here, for this Gentleman is an especial friend of mine, and
no man ought to have interest in him but my self. So they grew (to the
Prisoners no small admiration) to some words, and from thence to blows, biting
and banging each other in such pitiful sort, that in a trice, there was
neither Hat, Cloak, nor Ruff, that (partly trod underfoot, or wholly rent to
fitters) acted not a part in the Tragi-Comedy.

The noise, Peacemakers, and skirmish, as pleasant as well performed, might
have ouer-madded a modest man, and burst him with as outrageous a laughter as
it drew from Gerardo; which would have been far greater, had not his long
being used to these kind of bickerings, deprived him of the nouelty. He had
seen a hundredth of them, and now thought best to retire with the innocent
party, which they did into his Chamber: leaving the others and their own
weariness to be their best Vmpires; yet there were some Prisoners who took
no little pains to part them (each threatening with a criminal accusation his
Contrary) and so after the short spurt of passe-time they departed. I shall
only (touching these fellows) give the Reader a brief Item, as first; That
their style is no other then, Prison Droanes, their practice merely to cheat,
in which they are so cunning, that no sooner is a poor Prisoner entered, but
they have his name, his Birth, Offense, Notary, Judge, and what not? Whereupon,
with this strange phrase of, Are ye here? Laugh at it, Give me money, I Will free
you: by little and little they suck the poor Nouices dry with such their
sweet and sauourie language: and then vanishing out of sight, they see them no
more, till (happily) their friends or kindred, effecting their liberties, they
then draw near, and tell them that by their care and diligence they have been
freed; but, if they chance to lie longer, they straight allege, that the
Notary was not well pleased, or the Judge ill informed, still, by one means or
other, wringing juice out of very Rocks, and so, escape and laugh at the
wretches they have thus betrayed. They deserve not so much as the names of
Sollicitors, but merely the former title; and may this suffice, to see the
extremity to which poor Prisoners many ways are subject.

The desire Gerardo had to cheer up his new Ghest, made him prevent dinner
time, by providing it the sooner; to which (together with part of his lodging)
having invited him, and he with more acknowledgement of gratitude then
presumption, accepted the courteous offer, they satisfied their hungry
necessity: and afterward Gerardo, having as well by entreaties, as gifts,
prevailed with the Iaylor, that they might remain together, divided with him
his own Bed, and affoorded him all his best comfort. In this manner they
remained some days, in one of which, as their priuacy gave fittest occasion,
Gerardo desiring to know the cause of his Camerad's imprisonment, earnestly
entreated him to communicate it to him, furthering his wish, by giving the
other, first a Summary Relation of his own mishaps, and for vpshot of all,
making known his name and quality unto him: but without these respects, his
own merit had won so much from the Prisoners affection, that less
entreaties might have sufficed to grant so friendly a request; and therefore
without more adoo gladly condiscending to his friends will, a gentle sigh only
(the Auant-courrier to his truth) he began:

It Is now just six months since I left the City of Corduba, my native soil,
where, by the name of Leandro, I am known, as by a reasonable good Estate the
Inheritance my Father there left me: the forsaking my Country was caused
thus: The Young fry and Gallants of our Cities quarter where I lived, did
usually after Mass resort to certain Portals and Seats in our Parish, to
discourse; in which we most commonly limited the power and actions of the
Great Turk, the Forces of the Hungarian, with the several states of Italy
and Low Countries: nothing was amiss, wherein we might censure and govern
the whole World according to our fancies. But one time amongst others, a
different Card proved Trumpe, and (obuious enough to our youthful conditions)
the conversation grew hot, about the chiefest beauties of our Spanish Dames,
each usurping to himself the priority of place, which might most suite to his
own advantage. Some said, the Granadinians were extraordinary fair, but
these were by others contradicted, who to the Toledanians gave the Superlatiue,
as well for beauty and feature, as sharpness of wit and discretion; others
there wanted not, that, to make good a party, would prefer the careless
quick sprightfulnesse of our Court Dames before all. This was the more
general opinion, and yet another not much inferior, of the Seuilians, whose
natural and sweet brown complexions, set out by their curious neatness, made
no small ado for absolute deciding of the Controversy; which was ended by
one, that in all our opinions, was thought to have the best Judgment, most
modesty, and stayed aduisednesse in his conversation, who offering to speak,
forced us all to silence, with the following Discourse.

What need you weary your selves with vain contradictions, or me, who know,
that all the perfection and beauty in the world lives within twelve Leagues of
this place not in any great City, but in a small Village of Andaluzia, called
Osuna. There lives the rarest Creature this day in Spain, in which happy
situation (not so much as known to the towne-dwellers, her wariness with her
Husbands jealousy, equal to her beauty) this miracle is enclosed. He that
will satisfy his own mind, let him see her, and then he shall perceive
withal, how short my tongue comes of her praise, and then my truth shall
prevail, to bring him out of a former error.

The Speaker, had he not been in so good a Predicament amongst us, we should
(doubtless) all have contradicted, and laughed at his exorbitancy: but the
credit he had gotten, and his seldom growing to such height of exaggeration,
sufficiently vnder-propped his reputation. Wherefore, some, bending their
brows, others, re-questioning him touching the rare Piece, we made it
partingtime, cutting the thread of our pleasing conversation. My self went to
dinner, and after would have lain down to sleep away some part of that
afternoon, when unexpectedly to keep me waking, my memory suggested to me the
aforesaid Controversy (a desire stealingly diuing into my heart to see that
woman;) and this in such extremity, that, though I purposely diuerted my
self; yet, as often as I went about to do so, so often the nouelty of the
matter, and my friends endeerement set upon me. But not willing to be thus
vanquished (though all wavering and pensatiue) I curbed my desires, and struck
the sails of their unbridled course: which resistance yet spurred me so much
the faster, so that in fine now wholly impatient, and fully resolved and bent
upon the mad enterprise, I first settled my house, and being thoroughly informed
of this Dame, and her parts, putting two thousand Crowns in Gold in my Purse,
betook my self to a lone journey: for though I had servants at command, the
secrecy with which I disposed my affairs, would not admit of any.

That night I arrived at the place, and having taken a Chamber, after I had a
while rested, I called the Oast of the house to me, and warily endeavored to
know from him, who, in all the Town, was of greatest Authority, best Life,
and most Reputation; which (first reckoning up diverse persons) at last he
resolved to bestow upon the Vicar, and all the Attributes that might be
proposed; insomuch, that the election falling out pat for my purpose, and the
tedious night ouer-past, taking a seasonable time, I departed from my lodging
to the aforesaid parties house, where I found Master Vicar in his black
Damask Gown, with an Indian Cane, that served him for a Walking-staffe,
passing to and fro in the Court before his door. As he saw me come near, he
began to make a Stand, and I, not once asking whether he were the party I
sought (in respect of the Relation and signs given) courteously saluted him,
and drawing a Letter out of my Pocket, framed for the purpose, with the outside
all collied, delivered it to him, the superscription directed to himself, he
desired me to be covered, and withal demanded from whence the Letter was. I
told him from Noua Hispania: so, he, without mo^e ado opened it, that, I might
hear him read these Contents:

Since my arrival from Seuill to these parts, I have written diverse Letters
unto you, but as yet received no answer of any; and although so great
forgetfulness might cause a want in my due correspondence, yet the desire I
have still to serve you, must more prevail with me: and therefore with the
present occasion offered, I am willing to crave a continuance of the favors
which I have heretofore received from you, and do recommend my son Leandro
the bearer to you; with request, that he may be admitted in that University,
till such time as I shall arrive at home, which shall be (God willing) with the
next Fleet: This sole kindness shall supply the want and your slacknesse in
not answering my Letters: and so God keep you.

Yours, DIEGO TAVIRIA.

In reading these short Lines, he could not but (with the doubtful admiration
of what he beheld) show some change of countenance and behavior; sometimes
writhing his mouth, then vvrinkling his forehead, now putting his finger to his
nose, straight clapping himself upon the pate, and scratching his noddle, till
finally shrinking up his shoulders, and goggling his eyes, he concluded,
saying, Doubtless, Signior, you are mistaken; for though this Letter be
directed in the superscription to me, and that there be no other of my name in
the town, I must freely confess, that I neither have now, nor ever had, any
correspondence from those remote parts, much less any the least acquaintance
with your father: but setting this aside, if in any thing I may stead you, I
shall be most willing to do it, out of the desire I have to perform all good
offices to strangers. With this, my honest Priest was silent, and I falling now
into my Stratageme, made answer: Troth, Signior, it is strange, my father should
be so mistaken, I was in good hope you had been the party. The truth is, my
father for some particular motives, pleased to send me before his own
departure for Spain, and (knowing, as he said, of your abode in this Village)
with order to be wholly directed by you, delivered me two thousand Crowns in
Gold, which I have here: now though your self be not the party to whom I was
recommended, the satisfaction I have of your worth, does oblige me to request
you, to take the money into your custody, only delivering me at times what I
shall stand in need of for my occasions: for out of the desire I have to obey
my father, I am resolved howsoever, to expect him in this place. Scarce had I
made an end of these last words, when my Vicar falling into a suddenness of
admiring clamor, and giving himself a good thumpe on the breast, said to me, I
cry thee mercy, good Youth, and pray thee pardon my forgetfulness; for now
(with the reflection of my memory) I fall into thy fathers remembrance: He? why,
he was one of the only most intimate friends I had, and sole companion in my
youthful days. Tell me, Lad, is he not very old now? who did he marry? how
many brothers are there of you? Honest, honest Tauiria! who would have thought,
to see a son of thine so tall and well grown? Truly, Leandro, thou may
think thy self happy, in that Heaven was pleased to give thee so worthy a
father; as, to me, the best friend that ever I had. Well, till he come, here
you shall be, and have such lodgng and respect as befits our friendship: let me
otherwise know, what manner of admission is desired in the Letter, that
accordingly, his will and your conuenience may be effected. Observe here, noble
Gerardo, what doubts and difficulties this golden bait in an instant removed
from the old Vicar. Well did I guess beforehand what my intent would come to,
and therefore the novelty, which to another might have seemed strange, bred no
admiration at all in me. I went on with my plot then, and courteously thankful
to his kind offer, delivered him (taking first a Bill of his hand for the
receipt, to secure me from his covetousness) the two thousand Crowns; and
reserving only such a quantity as I thought fit, aduertized him also, that
having been reasonably trained up in the Civil and Canon Laws, I desired
much to better my knowledge, by being Clerk to some Lawyer in that Town, till
such time as my father should arrive. My purpose much pleased him, and with his
approbation, I went to hearken after some one whom I might best like, and with
him to make my agreement. You must suppose, Signior, this Machine wanted not
foundation, and no less then fully suting to my purpose: for the Dames husband
that brought me to Osu^a, (though none of the best or richest) was one of the
Lawyers that lived there, newly married, and having a fair wife, extremely
wary and ielous of her honesty; so that quickly you shall perceive, the
planting my self by any kind of means there, was not the least important
step to my enterprise, which was well furthered, by some little learning I
had of both Laws, which to my parents their great rejoicing, in my younger
days I studied; who purposed to have directed my life to such Courses, as by
their death and my new inheritance proved frustrate. At length (informed
thoroughly of my Lawyers house) thither went I, where I found him busily turning
over Bartolus and Baldus, drawing and framing certain Petitions: I saluted
him: he willed me to sit down, taking me (it should seem) for some Client
that needed his advice: so he demanded what my business was; to which, I,
with a well-premeditated discourse, made him this answer: Signior, I was borne
(so please you) in Noua Hispania, though my parents were of these parts, and
this Andaluzia, by whom I am particularly sent to this University, till such
time as they shall land in Spain, to exercise my self in the Study of the
Laws, which course I began not long ago in the city of Mexico. And that this
their desire might obtain some reasonable effect, they thought fit to remit
it, and me withal, to Master Vicar of this Place, with whom they profess so
strict a league of ancient friendship, that I may indeed better give it the
title of alliance. He knowing their pleasure, and my purpose, has made
particular election of your self, your virtue, learning, and house for the
accomplishment; so great is his satisfaction of you, neither were not I (as I
say) limited to his opinion in this point, should I for my part seek any
further for my own benefit. (This presupposed) I shall esteem my self most
happy, to be not only instructed, but much profited also by you. And if there
be no precise cause to hinder it, I beseech you, let me be admitted into your
Company, till such time as my father arrive; in which, I will not only
endeavor to undergo some part of the burden of your continual business, but
will also obey you as a servant, without any recompense more then your good
instruction; rather, you shall have monthly of me thirty Crowns, to further
your pains in the performance: for which, I will give such satisfaction and
security as you shall please to demand. All this I huddled up as speedily as I
could deliver, unto him; not willing to give him the least time of pause to
consider of it, for fear of the worst. To which (after some little suspense,
turning his eyes to me, and doubtless the profit considered which came in so
easily to him) he thus answered: Though (forewarned by many unlucky
accidents) I have a long time made choice rather of living alone, (though
discommodiously) then ill-accompanied* yet your honest presence, and mine own
wish, that Master Vicar should prove no liar in my commendation, do level
all difficulties with me: and therefore you may presently settle your self in
my house, giving first security (as is fitting) for the promise and offer you
have made. You shall have (quoth I) the best you can desire; and so without
more words (very iocund) he took his Cloak, and (heaven knows if fearful
to lose the good bargain) hand in hand we went to the Vicars house; who
spying me, came out to welcome us, saying, To know your sure election, it is
sufficient, that I behold the person who accompanies you, on whom you may
safely rely for your best advancement, which exceedingly glads me, on your
father my best friend his behalf. To this we both returned our thanks, only
my Lawyer proposed the security for my person, which was yet wanting. To
which, the good Priest replied what I could wish, extolling my fathers
ability, and my means; so much, as if we had been all days of our lives
familiarly acquainted; and clozed up his speech with this: That he would trust
me with all his wealth, and if need were, instantly deposite a thousand or two
of Crowns for me.

Much less would have secured the hungry Lawyer, who thinking he had now
discovered the riches of Peru (the ioyfullest man alive) taking our leaves, he
brought me home to his house with him; and there he caused to be chalked
out, as it were, for me, a certain miserable Cabin on top of the Staire-case
going toward his own Chamber, and causing as wretched a Bed to be brought
in, I placed it to mine own best liking, contented with any thing, in hope of
effecting my desire. I cannot describe to you, how joyful a man now I was,
thinking that the greatest part of my journey was past: for certainly it may
well be thought, that had not hope of gain vanquished mine Oast, it were
impossible for me to have gotten so much as over his threshold.

And now for my diet, faring as I would have done at mine own home, I
endeavored all I could, to make much of my Lawyer, not eating a bitte, of which
he had not (in a manner) the one half: our meat was dressed by a wench of some
doozen years of age, the only creature his jealousy would allow him for a
servant. For other things, in my apparel, as in my behavior, I was mean and
simple, and always most of all wary in my looks or questions: with these, I
by little and little gained upon my Masters affection and austere condition,
and so lived many days most conformably with him. In all the time, I was so
far from seeing her that had thus transformed me, that I could not so much as
hear the least treading or motion, to make me think there was a creature more
then the two-mentioned in that enchanted house. Oh, how often (full of
confusion) doubted I of the credit of my absent friends relation! how often
with a scalding sigh my heart resolved to break that silence, by mounting the
few Stairs, when suddenly an amorous fear of marring the whole enterprise,
turned me back again like a Coward to my Chamber; where framing complaints
against her I knew not, and loving one, whom mine eyes never saw, sometimes I
grew into deep Melancholy; otherwhiles better pleased, I expected the Sundaies
approach, by which time my Mistress being necessarily to go to Mass, could
no longer be concealed? But the expected day, as it came, so it vanished,
leaving me no more comfort, then sight of her; and to remain still in my doubt
with greater torment: so to frame new fancies and Chymaera's to my thoughts.
Yet the next Holy Day before Sunrising, being vvatchful, (mine ears spurred,
as it were, and my senses broad waking) I might hear some persons stalking
before my Chamber door; which paces, seeming to me by the sound and noise to
be of Chapins, so altered me, that naked as I was, I leap't out of my bed, and
opened the door, but so unluckily, that I could but only get a sight of my
Mistress, with her back turned as she went past me. Here I was quite
transported, and had (doubtless) laid hold on her Mantle, had not her husband
accompanied her: what, I could then make guess at, was, a gallant and
sprightly personage, whereby somewhat more heartened and warned to be more
watchful against another opportunity, I began to dress me, (my comfort now
more and more increasing from that happy minute) I began to promise my self
some good effect out of the increase of his love to me, which was still fed and
augmented by my continual presents: which proved so happy and seasonable,
that when (unexpectedly) I least dreamed of any such matter, my services
obtained their desired acceptance: for one day after dinner he came into my
Chamber, where sitting him down by me, he fell abruptly into this discourse:
My Leandro, when good deeds receive not an equal guerdon, (according as the
Master of the Sentences in our Civil Law does tell us) fit it is, that our
good will at least express a thankfulness in words; to which, Leandro, I am
so much an enemy, (following in that the opinion of our Bartolus) that, I had
rather by silence confess wherein I stand obliged, and how much thou have
engaged me. This I had sooner made known, had not the nice condition, and
retiredness of my wife Violante been a bar unto it; otherwise, I might
offer you henceforward my Table, that so you might be eased of so much care and
expense as you are at: but she is so loath and unwilling, that any but my self
should be seen in our private room, that I have not been able once to induce
her to accept of thy quiet modest company. Accept therefore my good wishes,
and as thou love me, hence-forward limit thy excessefull prodigality toward
us, since what has hitherto been received, obliges me whilst I live, to a
thankful acknowledgement. These formal speeches with all plainness and
sincerity my Mistrisses husband used to me, to which I (quite contrary, much
ouer-ioyed) returned others, best suting to my cautelous intention; giving him
to understand, that those poor trifles he pleased to accept of, proceeded from
my natural condition, and that he needed not express the least thanks for
such slender toys: this, sent him away much more obliged then he came (my
hopes beginning now to bud some good success:) howsoever yet I vvanted the
sight and maine mark I aimed at; though, some six days after these Clouds
were dispersed from mine eyes: for as I still continued my presents, one (as
good luck would) fell out pat for me, since being so acceptable and welcome to
my Master, it made him (ouer-ruling his wives niceness, and dispensing with
his own jealousy) send for me to his Table, where they both sat together at
dinner, and this in such haste, that I had scarce leisure to settle my
countenance, so frighted, as if I were to expect a sentence of death, which
made me come even trembling into his presence.

Without Hyperbole may I tell you, mine eyes till that instant never beheld
such beauty, neither could fancies self frame a more absolute feature to my
desires. I know not how to paint her out, but my tongue must fall short, and
the rare Original complain of my defect herein. To make Simile's, or rackt
Allusions, of Emeralds, Diamonds,, skeines of Gold, flakes of Snow, Corrall,
Cristall, Alabaster; these (besides mean and base to equal her perfections)
might rather make the Author in your Judgment poetical, then truly express
her peerless Image; and therefore you may only thus far believe and credit
me, that the least I could discern, was under a white smooth front, crowned
with the tresses of her neat and well-growne Chesse-nut hair, two Saphires,
two Morning-Starres, two Suns, two, but why use I such strange Comparisons? A
pair of Azure, cheerful, honest eyes; in whose midst a wel-proportioned
Nose, served as a border to the lilly rosiate cheeks, and as a silver
threshold to to the ruddy gates, her lips: as, they, for Iaylors to the
treasure of her thicke-set, white, small teeth. Briefly, the least of those
parts, whose all were then lively represented to my imagination, were worthy
more then humane love or regard. I was strooken Dumb as a Statue, insomuch,
that (had I been so happy as to have deserved but a glance of her bright eyes)
she might have seen how I was troubled, and consequently some part of my
affection: but, they stirred not: for in all the time of my stay there, I could
not collect, that she so much as once lifted her sight from her Husbands
bosom; who turning to me, thus began:

First and foremost, Leandro, you are to take it for an especial favor, that
I so freely give you access hither, where, (I may truly profess) no living
man but my self since our marriage has entered: And next, that is,
henceforward you must eat with me adays, for I am resolved not to let you
waste your money so exorbitantly: and therefore without reply, you shall do as
I would have you in a matter that is so fitting and reasonable: besides, I
shall be the more beholding to you, that, so, we may live together like Father
and Son: for such is my estimation now of you. I knew not how to meet him
with a fitting reply, my powers and senses were so confounded: but fearing to
incur his suspicion, re-collecting my self as well as I could, I thus made
answer: Sir, the selfsame reason you have to command me for the obeying your
will, enforces me to contradict it: for, it were no part of manners, much
less thankfulness, in me; if knowing the quietness of your disposition,
and the priuacie, with which my Mistress Violante delights to live, I should for
my benefit interrupt it: the favor you would herein do me, I shall esteem
whilst I have life, and therefore humbly beseech you to mention this particular
no further; for this I tell you, not to obey, is my utmost determination: My
pretense was with this dissembled backwardnes, to lay up a good opinion in his
suspicious breast, and with it to wear out all tracks of distrust, and so to
assure my self against a fit opportunity: this it was made me refuse my kind
Lawyers offer.

Gerardo so much longed for the end of this strange Story, that I dare affirm,
he was sorry Leandro embraced not the offer, as thinking it the best way to
make short work; and though he were willing to have let him known so much,
yet fearful to interrupt, he forbore: especially hearing the discreet
Leandro thus proceed:

My Master wanted no replies, and stiff entreaties, but all were vain,
considering, that in my modest wariness, all the hopes and good success of my
Love consisted: and yet from that time forward, I had courage enough to
continue my seeing the fair Violante, always taking my times when both of
them were together; for, indeed, I durst do no otherwise, neither gave me my
Master other opportunity, and his dainty, too-honest Wife less; from whom, in
all this time, I never so much as heard, not only the least word proceed from
her, that might open a way for any discourse of mine unto her, but never beheld
her so much as cast up her eyes from work: whereby you may conceive what a
confused, watchful life I had, since that, and my want of conversation with
any living Soul, must needs keep me in a restless torment.

But the accomplishment of my desire was not long deferred, though it might
well have cost me my life, since by it I was in hazard to have lost it: for,
as my fortune would, one afternoon amongst others, my Master and his Wife were
passing the time at Chesse, and I only present, that (sometimes setting up the
men, otherwhiles, seeing my Mistress with her fair hands nimbly remoouing them
up and down) was better diuerted. Her Husband being at last called to a Client
that was come to him, and necessarily to spend some time in his study, was
forced to leave the game, saying to me very iocundly before his going down,
Leandro, thou see how near losing Violante is; Prithee, look she stir
not the men, for I had rather then any thing beat her this time. I promised I
would; whereupon he, as joyful as I ouer-ioyed, went his way and left us. But
now, dear friend, began the timorous panting of my heart, and my tongue to be
tied with the sudden amazement of my senses; and indeed, I was not able (though
I firmly resolved it) to form in my brain the least Introduction to my
amorous purpose, though the opportunity were marvelous, till the fair
Violante ri^^ling me of this confusion (though to a different purpose) with a
smiling countenance thus demanded of me: Do you know this play, Leandro? for
if (as I think) you do, you may do me a good turn with your help, and on my
word I should be much beholding to you, if you could teach me how to save the
Checke-Mate my Husband thinks to give me.

No words could here express my hearts joy, which had now an open vent made
to let out my amorous resentment, and thus I made answer: I have long known
this game, which has cost me much moneys loss and labor; and though want of
skill might make me distrustful, yet at present, I believe I can show you so
cunning a trick, that you (pleasing to make use of it) shall not only save
the Checke-Mate, but in stead of receiving from my Master, you shall put it
upon him. Violante was the most ravished creature alive, to hear this; and
thinking it long to be satisfide, replide, My Husband will be here presently,
and therefore, good sweet Leandro, tell me as soon as you can, or else we
shall want opportunity.

These last words gave fire to my boldness; wherefore laying hold upon her,
and no longer deferring my intent, with a new faltring I began thus to accost
her: The same fear, my dearest Mistress, which in so small a matter you
express, enforces me (desirous not to lose the coniuncture) that, without
expecting a further occasion, I lay hold on the present: and therefore I
beseech you know, that your self only, Dear sweet, has been powerful to
reduce me (being one of greater quality then you take me for at present) to
this meandness and low Estate, into which I have put my self to see and serve
you (the Relation a near friend of mine made of your rare parts, drawing me
from my Country and home) and so without ceasing, even so that very time* from
the instant that I had first notice of it in Corduba, held on my Discourse with
such painful sighs, as might have melted flint or Adamant. But what think
you was the answer to my tenderness? the very renewing it does affright me;
for I no sooner made an end of declaring my passion to her, when the blood in
her fair cheeks turned to yellow palenesse, full of sudden fury, her lips
unfolded me this answer. It is not possible, false hearted Leandro, that thy
breast can nourish better blood, then what thy base purpose has discovered,
since, were thou (as thou say) nobly borne, thou would rather seek to
honor one that so well deserves it of thee as my Husband; then deprive him of
it, by attempting his dishonor. And her choler here boiling up, she
concluded the rest, with the Chesse-Boord, discharging with both hands that
and her anger to boot on my head.

The sudden accident quite bereaved me of my understanding, so that now I was
utterly lost, and the rather, when I might hear her Husband come up stairs,
and see his alteration at his entrance, caused with the noise, which the blow
and rattling of the men had made.

My Master looked blanke, when he saw the fashion of his game marred; and
turning smilingly to me, willed me to resolve him of his doubt.

But Violante, who perceived by my troubled countenance, the poor satisfaction
I was then likely to have given, taking upon her my part, delivered this
harmless answer:

You need not be troubled to see the Games thus turned Topsie-turvy, for I
have the worst of it, I am sure, and yours was in a great deal of likelihood
to be lost; since, being desirous to stead my self from Leandro's skill, he
had taught me so subtle and cunning a trick, as, that I might not only have
saved the Mate, but put it upon you also; though my gown and carelessness
together (as I was remoouing) ended our strife, throwing down the
Chesse-boord, under which (at our first sitting down) a piece of it
neglectfully was left.

With this admirable evasion, ierking as it were at my intent and weak
confidence, and withal dissembling no part of the truth, she ended the
confusion, and her Husband was well satisfied, who loving her most tenderly,
and that being an occasion of pastime, attributing all to jest and sport, he
himself grew very pleasant.

When the heart, Gerardo, is full of passion, ill can the ears hearken to
reason; my soul was all now on a light flame, and it had been impossible for
any counsel or advice to have diuerted me, much less could I be blamed for
my perseverance in love, since I had not any friend to weane me from my
headlong desires, so that I could not give them nor my affection over. After
this happened, I was no sooner gotten from my Mistresses sight to my Chamber, and
laid down on my bed to take some little rest, when, after a terrible pain
within me, and a cold sweat all without, instantly a raging fit of a Calentur^
seized me, which holding on me a good space, bereaved me of all appetite, and
in four days brought me to extreme danger, and the fifth, being given over by
Physicians, I began to think my fatal hour was at hand: My Masters grief
was far greater then the cause of my infirmity deserved, in all the time of
sickness he did not once stir from me, rather (neglecting all his affairs,
he was only careful of cherishing me, and applying the best helps for my
recovery: but (both he and the Doctors ignorant of my malady) the remedies they
used put me into more danger: for no drugs are able to restore Love (an ill
incurable, that only wants an Auicen.)

In fine toward night (which proved to me the saddest, gladdest that hitherto
I enjoyed) the Lawyer having most urgent occasion to be from home, because he
would not leave me all alone, as fearing the swift approach of my fit, calling
his Wife most lovingly to him, he entreated her to keep me company till his
return.

With much persuasion, she grew (as I might hear) at last contented; for even
in occasions of charity, she loved to show a nice-rigorous disposition. Though
my sickness were terrible, yet had it not captiued my senses; for they still
free, might now perceive, how near they were to their cruel Owner, who at
length (Heaven willing to preserve my life) either pitying to see me brought
to this low weakness, and my frollicke youth turned to a sad picture of death;
or, belike acknowledging the pureness of my loyal affection, or for both:
(for indeed, no woman loathes to be loved, and few or none there are which at
last yield not) sending forth most tender sighs, and sitting her down upon
my bed, taking in her fair hands, mine; she began to power this balm into
my wounded heart: Is it possible, discreet Leandro, that he, who for an
uncertain Relation of my poor beauty, took on him the hardiness of hoping
to possess it, should in the first onset fail, and show such weakness in
the first resistance? Believe me, Sir, did not your generous proceeding lowdly
publish your nobleness, this present cowardice would make me much doubt it.
Take courage, Leandro; for, if when first you declared your amorous intent to
me, I should have been won, or should my words or countenance have given the
least strength to your imagination; she that is now affected by such a
facility and lightness, might have been justly rejected: for that Fort which
with valor and perseverance suffers one and many assaults by an enemy, ought
to be more prized then that which yields upon a bare Parley: neither could you
have made a conquest, where you should have found no painful resistance to
make your glory the greater. For the Torments you have undergone in my
affection, I am as well satisfide, as a grateful acknowledger of the debt, for
whose payment, I desire no longer forbearance, then the time of your healths
recovery. More would my fair Mistress have said, but that she was cut off by
the unexpected return of her Husband (an occasion that turned my ready answer
into weeping eyes.) He found me (notwithstanding, contrary to what he looked
for) much revived since the little time he left me, perceiving my weak color
strangely bettered, which, I suppose, he attributed to some more miraculous
cause. But what wonder? if to my poisonous infirmity, that Superior Antidote
were opposed as a wholesome remedy, which might only prevent it.

Now, friend Gerardo, my happy life, or fatal destiny was subject to the
fair Violante's absolute command: and her cruelty, that brought me almost
to deaths door, at this time with her compassionate discourse (so far beyond
expectation) not only restored my waste body to health; but left also my
mind full of unspeakable content: whereby within a few days, though faintly,
I was able to rise out of my bed, my desired and deserved reward adding courage
to my feeble spirits. This inward amorous desire of mine, often drew me from my
Chamber, and sent me, not without my accustomed fear, into my Mistrisses
presence to enjoy her pleasing sight; yet never had I the heart to put her in
mind of her promise: for still the awful respect she had gotten from me,
seized on my tongue, causing (as since I have found) the same trouble and
bashfulnesse in my Violante: but my passion making me conceive, it was the
usual punishment of her rigorous disdain, was like to have driven me into a
relapse of losing, by such coldness, the little health I had gotten from the
comfort of her promised recompense. In this time of my conualescencie, it grew
to be Sunday; when, by reason of some indisposition of body, or other important
occasion, my Lawyer could not stir from home, nor Violante consequently go
to Mass at her early accustomed hour: wherefore the Morning being somewhat
spent, it seemed good to her husband to bestow for once his own Office of
Squiring her, upon me; and willing to make known his intent, said: Friend
Leandro, my not being well all this night has kept me within doors, and
Violante too, from going to Church, which troubles her; and I cannot help it,
except thou will do so much as supply my want, by vshering her: Prithee take
so much pains, and, giving her thy hand, she may also serve for a stay and
proppe to thy weakness.

It was scarce possible for me here to dissemble my excess of joy: well, I
obeyed, and with unspeakable content, took my Mistress by the hand, and now
promised full liberty to my cares. By the way I resolved to signify the just
complaints that my soul might form for her neglect; to which purpose (me
thought) I was rarely provided to make her relent. But scarce durst my dastard
breast send forth a sigh; fearing more to anger her with my speech, then to see
my self by her coldness irremediably perish. With this grievous reservedness
I accompanied her to Church, and in the same manner had returned home, if an
unexpected favor of hers had not emboldened me the more; that as we came
back, my Mistress looking now more comfortably, and faining an occasion of
taking off her Glove, without it, returned me her beautiful white hand: the
sudden (but joyful) astonishment I esteemed a sufficient recompense for all my
former distastes. I was now so heartened, with seeing my self Owner of that
cristall piece, that I could not choose but wring her hand with mine, (the
amorous act answering so happily to my intents) that I no sooner put it in
execution, when my Mistress paying me in the same coin, said: How long, loved
Leandro, shall your slacknesse and my modesty be thus at odds? or do you
expect with dumb silence, and frostie proceeding, that my person should first
carouse to you? this is more proper to men, then practiced amongst us. I know
you will excuse your fault, by laying it upon my rigorous condition; and
though not long since your seeing me less cruel, might preserve me in your
better opinion, yet in respect of the first occasion you had, I admit for once
of the excuse; but do henceforward aduertize you, that, secure of my
correspondence, you may go on in your love: so that (understanding our selves
better for the time to come) there may want no opportunities for the effecting
our vvishes; and that you may be sure, my promises are not only verbal, I
will this night so contriue and handle the matter, that you may enter my
Chamber.

Thus far held on Leandro's amorous story, to Gerardo's no small amazement,
when suddenly it was interrupted, by the sudden approach of a troop of
Officers, who (accompanied by the Iailour) broke in upon the two imprisoned
friends, ere they were aware. The novelty something troubled them; Gerardo
especially, when he understood, they came with order to remove him from the
prison where he was, to one of the strong Towers of Alhambra: a Fort somewhat
distant from the famous City: and though this had been often before
solicited by his enemies, yet could it not till now be effected. Their
principal scope was, to overcome with such kind of vexations his resolution;
a remedy which the severe Judges in two occasions still lay hold on, either,
when the quality of the prisoner, and nature of the offense, admit no stricter
punishment then close imprisonment; or when with the discommodities of that, or
depriving him from his friends and kindreds conuersations, they would feign
reduce him to their purpose, which still falls out to be the surest. This last
conclusion they tried in our afflicted Gentleman, which was not by him held for
one of the lightest misfortunes in his Captivity: but resolving to fear no
colors, he prepared himself with a cheerful countenance for his departure;
taking leave of his noble and ancient friend Arsenio, who with incredible
resentment wept, (his manly heart not able to keep in his tears) the new
Leandro too accompanied them with no less lamentation; whose pleasing story
(though he came not to the end of it) left Gerardo passionately full of
admiration.

The famous City of Graenada is ouer-topped by a high Mountain, whose
superior height shows on Cock-horse to the same: part of which is clothed
with shadie Elmes, and another part girt and encompassed with sharp rocks,
and smoothe Cliffes, whose clayie bottom the river Dauro bathes, famous for
his golden streams; in which (to the emulation of no few maine Rivers) he
paies a tribute to the cristall current of Genil. In the highest part of this
Mount, appears a goodly spacious piece of ground, in which, on certain former
ruins, the petty Moorish Kings, (and heretofore for our sins, the rigorous
Scourges of our Kingdom) founded their lofty Palaces, which they enuiro^ned
with strongest Walls, high Towers, Barricada's, Ditches and Bulwarks,
leaving the eminent seat equally provided both for safety and habitation: and
so they bestowed on the whole Edifice the name of Alhambra, that to this day is
still so called, and conserues the ancient Splendor: for our Kings and
powerful Monarkes, do not only cause the old Arabicke Structures to be kept
up, but with others more stately and magnificent Fabrickes, daily add to, and
ennoble them; having likewise for perpetuity, a continual Garrison, and all
things necessary (as in a town of Strength) to defend the same: In the
circuit of it there are Churches and Monasteries, and neere-vpon two hundred
houses, in which the Kings Officers, Soldiers, and others dwell, that hold it
for a more healthy Seat then the City; from whence it is, not passing a
quarter of a Mile in distance. Hither then (when his imprisonment might rather
have ended) was Gerardo brought, and committed to one of those many Towers,
that look toward the spacious Plains, whose delightful Prospect, in any
other less unfortunate* might have caused great content: but such occasions
work a contrary effect in the party, that is denied the full enjoying them;
for converting into Tantalus his fruit, (as it were) the pleasing object, it
rather torments, then any way comfort; and just so it happened with
Gerardo, who clogged with Yrons and sure Bolts, could but only stretch his
vvearied eyes to those large Walks, (envying the free steps of the most
miserable day-labourer) and at this time he would have been most happy in
the mean conversation of some rusticke Shepherd. The wished sight of a friend
or kinsman has the same operation with a prisoner, that the Phisicians
presence in a fainting Patient; but (Gerardo barred of this comfort) well may
it be thought, how hardly he might suffer his torment; yet his wisdom
predominating, made his constant spirits patiently bear up, (Fortune still
with fresh varieties strengthening his undaunted determination.)

Some two months after this remoouall, and one night, being the first of
April, after he was a-bed, something late in the night, a pleasing Consort of
different Instruments of Music, not far from his Tower, cunningly played on,
awoke him; and so, invited, as well by the nouelty, as desirous also of some
more pleasing harmony then the noise of his shackles, he went to his window,
from whence (the night pretty clear) he might discern five or six persons,
who (leaning to the Towers foundation) two of them accompanying the sweetness,
gravity, and consonancie of a Cornet, Harp, and Lute, began to sing this
ensuing Dialogue.

1. Fair Enemy! once, ere I go,
Yet curse, or kill me, with a No:
To this say, I,
Then, then I die.
Then having stopped my latest breath,
No more thy rigor after death,
Or sadder ill,
Shall haunt me still.
2. No. 1. Is it she that mockes me? 2. Try.
1. Shall I awhile be absent? 2. I:
1. 'Twould double woe
(Made greater,) 2. No:
Take heart; resolve to live again:
Absence best cures a Lovers pain.
1. Her cruelty
Help absence? 2. I.
1. But absence (as most Lovers know)
Forgetfulness begets. 2. No:
It Is present sight,
Gluts the delight,
And thence oblivion rises; where,
Desires, in Absence best appear:
As want of meat
Does stomach get.
Then bid Adieu to thy Unkind,
Since Absence most does ease the mind.
1. But shall I fly
2. To Absence? I.
The sweet Music bred in Gerardo no small admiration, and though in part it
diuerted his sorrowful remembrance, yet his curiosity to know the cause of
it, not a little troubled him, musing extremely, that in those solitary
fields, no nearer the Cities concourse, and in the height and ruggedness of
those Towers and Walls, there should be any occasion of such obseruant
watchfulness; as also, the preparation of the Company, Voices, and Instruments
seemed to him to be more then ordinary. Each particular was a novelty to him,
and the whole duly waighed and considered, a particular adventure. In these
and the like imaginations was he busied, all the while that the Musicians
ceased, till (having new Order) tuning afresh, they played diverse Lessons, and
sung several Ditties of pretty Inventions: but at length Gerardo might
perceive one of the Squadron, (leaving them) draw near to a neighboring Wall.
He could not view the end of his intent and voyage, in respect of a small
Skonce of the Tower which hindered him, which forced him to leave the Window
where he was, and go to another, in the next open room to him, which was
directly opposite; from whence he might more plainly perceive, that the party
made a stand at the foot of the other Tower; which being nothing near so high
or strong as his, yet (adorned with many fair Bay-windowes, Grates, and
Galleries) was near enough to the room where he was imprisoned; insomuch
that speaking but indifferently loud, the voice might reasonably well be
heard. There (as soon as Gerardo looked) he might see the liddes of a lower
Window set open, and a woman also appearing at it: but his eyes were no
Lynxes, nor the distance of places so very short, that he could guess at
features, and therefore his sole care was, to hearken to the end of their
intentions; which he did, and their discourse, (the surest Clue to guide him
out of the Maze and Labyrinth he now remained in.) At first, a few sighs and
groans, which the unknown Amourist sent forth, held the hearers in suspense,
till breaking out from the midst of them, with an afflicted, changed Tone, he
fell into these words: In fine, discreet Aminta, your Sister, or (to speak
more properly) my cruel Lisis, gives you leave to come hither all alone; a
sure sign, that her rigorous and rough condition is still the same: an unjust
punishment to one that so firmly loves her, and in lieu of reward, an unequal
recompense to my ancient affection. Here, Gerardo might perceive that he was
interrupted by her, whom he called Aminta, that thus replied: I must not permit
you, worthy Liseno, with so little reason to complain of Lisis or her
coldness, since you never at any time, found her more tractable, nor my sister
less wary of her honor: so that, having given you no encouragement, you
neither justly can tax her of cruelty, nor may she unjustly be offended with
you, that by this means give the world to think, there has been something
more then ordinary betwixt you. Suffice it, Liseno, I am come to you, without
any distaste to her, and though she give not that entertainment which your
affections desire, yet (which might be to her reputations cost) she forbids
not your care, nor these your several loving demonstrations. That is it (quoth
he) that augmenteth my torments, and whereon the Justice of my complaints and
resentment is grounded, to have so long served and obeyed, is that which maddes
me, to consider how vn-pittifull Lisis has been to my sighs, how silent to
my papers, flinty to my tears, scoffing at my love, and angry that I am
sensible of it; these do quite confound me in my best of judgment. This kind
of desperation, Liseno, (said she) is like to profit you little; for, in
matters of this difficulty, wisdom should rule our actions, which are then
best governed, when by skill and industry, not outrage and violence. Suffer,
Liseno, bear, and yet forbear not your amorous purfuite; follow the path you
have begun, and be not wearied; nor cloudie, when her frowns do raise a
strome: for let me tell you, (that better know then you, our general natural
conditions) long perseverance in the end vanquisheth: but if your impatience be
such, as not to withstand a little cross fortune, the fittest advice I can
give you, is, to make to the wholesome Port of Absence, (the best Letter of
credit to a Lover) as sure to be paid at home: some few months, and a
mountain or two put betwixt you and Lisis, may chance to effect more then many
days, many years presence would bring to pass. Here Liseno more greedily
answered, Sure, fair Aminta, your eyes have penetrated my hearts intent, if so
be the counsel you give me, proceed not from the subject of those Verses you
heard the Musicians sing; for know, that I am now resolved, no longer with my
wearied voice to torment these fields, nor with the venime of my enflamed
sighs to parch their plants and flowers. I will not only leave these Walls
in quiet peace, but get me far off from this Kingdom; that, so dividing the
causes, that (united) torment me, their effects may in part or wholly cease,
diminishing the fire that consumes my soul. I should be happy, if Lisis by her
presence would animate me to this last sad farewell, but my hardiness is not
so presumptuous, as to think, that either your entreaties, or my importunity,
may obtain that of her, neither from my impatience can I promise any
toleration that may secure my tongues silence; for I should sure speak to her,
that so unjustly inforceth me to leave the quiet of my native Country, and
therefore I had rather desist from my-vaine purpose. Adieu, Aminta, Heaven give
you better success in your affections, and temper the sad influence of my
unhappy Stars. These last words were accompanied (as I might guess) by
some tears and sighs, and so not so much as expecting a reply from Aminta, he
turned his back, and came where the rest of the Company with the Music
expected him; and commanding them to follow, they went toward the City: but
passing under Lisis her Tower, ere they sheathed up their Instruments, they
jointly sung the following Sonnet.

The Sun is set, gone down to the cold shade,
(The mis^ed brightness of his piercing eye,
Covered with black Clouds the red Eastern sky:)
My cruel fair, to restfull sleep has laid.
Now murd'rers walk, and such as are afraid
Of days clear light: now chanteth mournefully
The Turtle chaste, complaints to multiply,
'Gi^s she, whom crafty Tereus once betrayed.
O night! thou Image of sad absence, tell
My Lisis, her two Suns are set from me
For ever: If it chance, that she do sleep,
(May Morpheus wake her with a dream from Hell)
Tell her, of her disdain, my Jealousy;
That though I present am, I (absent) weep.
Gerardo rejoicing much at this unexpected passage, returned to his bed; there
forming to himself notable digressions, touching Liseno's strange love,
Amyntas wise discourse, and the severe condition of Lisis, from whence, all he
collected (after an hours watchfulness) was; an extraordinary, and more then
curious desire, to see and know the well-painted cruel picture of Lisis, and
the pleasing personage of Aminta, thinking, that if his good fortune might make
him gracious with either of the two, (the neighborhood being so commodious)
they could not but exceedingly divert his cares, which thing in this wretched
imprisonment he much needed; for that which does most disquiet and dis-harten a
poor Prisoner, is, his own solitariness, and the barrenness of occasions to
divert his grief. With this new hope Gerardo slept out that nights remainder,
so soundly, that, till the Iaylor came in the morning to see how he did, he had
no more to do with his wandering imaginations. As soon as the Iaylor had
bidden him, Good morrow; the first question he asked was, if he had heard the
last nights Music; which wonderfully rejoiced Gerardo, (as being now
resolved, cunningly to inform himself of the two Sisters; and so, seeing
occasion offered, and making somewhat strange of the matter, he replide,
asking, whether he mocked him, or dreamt of some such thing in his fancy?
Rather, Sir, said the Iaylor, because you have slept so soundly, you attribute
to me the effects of drowsinesse: but this which I tell you has really passed:
though indeed I cannot be persuaded, that so many Instruments and Voices could
otherwise choose then come to your ears.

Gerardo seemed much more to wonder at this second reply; and so faining a
greater earnestness, proceeded; Prithee Keeper; who in these fields can your
Cities Gallants make court to, but their Elmes or other Trees? Except happily
such be my happiness, that the Nymphs and Goddesses of the neighboring
Mountains, or some enchanting Siren of the famous Dauro, left the wild
Cliffes and Cristalline Vrnes, to offer up to me this their solemnity. Then
said the Iaylor, smiling, I vvonder not, Signior, that (unacquainted with the
fair Dames your opposite neighbors) you think I jest with you; or imagine,
this place can produce no occasion for such, as the passed accident: let me
therefore tell you, that you are not (as being the only Non-Pareils of these
parts) far from the fair Lisis, and discreet Aminta, Dames, whose beauties,
together with their good names, long since famous in this City, are now
celebrated through the whole Kingdom.

These and the like extolling speeches used the earnest Iaylor, giving Gerardo
also strict account of many other particulars: as, not only telling him who
their Parents, were but withal he made known Liseno's cares, shutting up his
Discourse with this, that the cause of them proceeded from having once seen
Lisis in a Monastery, where her Parents in her younger years had placed her,
and where Liseno then enamoured on her, (she being now come home) prosecuted
his suite night and day upon all occasions: and yet though he be a Gentleman
of very good quality, and every way meriting, he is by her but coldly
respected.

Gerardo having now enough, would be no farther curiously inquisitiue; and so
(the conversation dissolved) the Iaylor went his way, giving the Prisoner
opportunity to go to the window, that from his Tower was just opposite to his
fair neighbors. His beginning was so successful, that he had no sooner
opened his Window, when the two Sisters were gotten to a Bay-window of theirs
near the Tower, where they sat them down to their work, but little dreaming
they were so carefully espied.

Never saw Gerardo's eyes a Flanders Picture or Roman Piece with such curious
Art, and goodly perspectiues, as was the linen of that lovely Tower set out
with. The Bay was of white and black Marble, divided by two small Arches, and
a Pillar of painted Jasper, whose smooth stones also served as a Carpet to
fair Lisis and her Sisters Cushions. Aminta, that seemed somewhat the younger of
the two, with her twinkling eyes, gave the more cheerfulness to her pleasing
countenance, whose complexion was nearer brown then white; her mouth and
Nose most perfectly proportioned, with two black burnisht Arches, that (being
the Diadems of her eyes) made up together an absolutely round Ebon Circle.
Lisis, who differed but a very little in years from Aminta (for from both,
time might scarce challenge a Tribute of thirty) was somewhat of a more awful
maiesticall aspect, but cleerer countenance; exceeding fair, that, the threads
of her smooth-combed hair, falling with a kind of graceful neglect upon the
Margent of her snowie forehead, showed like the strokes of a Pen made in the
finest Paper; so perfectly white was she, so inco^parably black the resplendent
Tresses of her well-ordered hair, from which her eyes were no whit differing
in Color, in Proportion, neither near great, nor any way yet too small (no
expression able to paint out the quickness of their alluring motion.) Her lip
and cheek were of equal tincture, such, as (they present) Vermillion were but
muddy. Her hands, which, embroidering upon a green Satin frame, danced to and
fro, showed like Snow, melted by the Suns of her eyes, which (though black)
more inflamed me then the tothers yellow beams. In fine, the whole, and all
of her was a miraculous draught of her divine Painter, whom Gerardo in his
perfect works, with all reverence could not but adore.

A while he remained somewhat doubt-strucken, but most joyful with the
gracious sight before him, till the two Sisters, aware of his careful eying
them, he bestowing a low salutation on them first, returned him an equal
courtesy; yet, he durst not so much as offer the least speech, as fearing
their vvarinesse would afford him but a slender warrant. He supposed, the
nouelty of his presence would cause them to retire: and therefore loath to be
troublesome, shutting the vvindow close to, as he found it, he got him back to
his Chamber, yet from the same place many a time after he participated of that
content (the two Sisters growing every day more free, less strangers on his
behalf.)

'Twas not bashfulnesse in Gerardo made him forbear to speak to them, for he
wanted not language, nor courtly boldness, and above both, experience, to make
good his Discourse: but, to speak somewhat louder then ordinary, by reason of
distance of places a little troubled him, fearing, that (howsoever they in
courtesy might make him answer) yet, the raritie might raise some needless
curiosity in the neighbors, or an angry diffidence in his own house.

And therefore purposing to attain by some other means to his purpose, he
resolved to write to them, and so steaded himself with the careful diligence
of a shee-Slaue that belonged to the Iaylor, whom, by gifts and larger
promises, he made sure to him for that, or, a greater enterprise. Having first
therefore instructed her what she should do, bidding her deliver the Letter to
Lisis or Aminta's own hands, with no small care of the success, he dispatched
her with it, whose Contents were these:

If, fair Ladies, you shall blame this presumption and boldness, sure I am, I
shall want it to return any excuse; for, to rely upon mine own forces
(utterly unequal) to resist your beauties, were rather a rash folly, then
sufficient discharge: since, the selfsame cause ought to strike dumb my
senses, respecting your fairness as a Deity; and therefore I resolve to use
no stronger shield for my defense then your discretion: to which with a
prostrate affection, I consecrate a firm heart, a loyal and noble mind,
which shall ever acknowledge the being your creature; if raising it from so
miserable a being, you shall receive it as a vanquished spoil of him, that
adores your miraculous parts and virtue: Heaven protect you.

GERARDO.

From the time of delivering of this Letter, and the Slaves leaving him, he
ghessed every minute an Age, that passed: but for all his watching, he
remained three days in this confusion; in all which time his shee-Messenger
could find no opportunity, to put her matter in execution. At length she got
means to speak to Aminta, who, being strangely importuned by her, at last
took the Letter. This success was presently made known to Gerardo; who now
confidently promising great matters to his hopes, expected the resolution of
the two Dames; whom, neither in all that day, nor the next following, he could
so much as once espy at their window; whereupon (what you have heard, being all
that passed) his solitariness did more (then might well be imagined) afflict
him, as thinking this their absence and retiring, was a kind of giving him to
understand, how much they were offended with his boldness.

But the true cause of it was, that they had occasion to accompany some
kinswomen and friends of theirs to certain shows and solemnities in the City,
which seemed so much the likelier; when, presently in the Evening, after they
were returned home, they appeared both together at their window, more frollicke
and lively then they ever hitherto used to do, all the while that Gerardo
stood at his: which made him sleep peaceably that night, expecting Morning; at
which time going very early to the grate of his Window, he might pereiue Aminta
at the usual Stand; from whence, when she saw Gerardo drawing a Paper out of
her bosom, and making signs to him, to send some servant for it, she let it
fall into certain high grass that grew at the foot of the Tower, and without
expecting farther, only shutting to the leaves of her Bay-window, she went in.

Gerardo was much astonished at the accident, imagining by the manner of
Amyntas action and retirement, that the Paper she cast down, was the same
that he had sent; and therefore in marvelous anguish for the contempt, longing
to be resolved, and calling a servant that was there ready to attend him, he
bade him go down and look for the Letter, which he speedily did, and
delivered it unto him; but opening, he knew it to be none of his own hand,
which made him with less fear venture upon the Contents.

If the commiserating your painful imprisonment, did not give a sufficient
discharge for our facilenesse of answering you; believe it, Gerardo, these
lines had been excused, though we might have been held disdainful: but our
breasts are so open to honest pity, and your self so well deserve it, that
when the heavy occasion of your thraldom, might not induce us; your own
discreet carriage, would lay a tie upon us to alter our determination. And that
you may rest fully assured, that our conditions are not so rigorously cruel,
as (happily) there they may have informed you; Know, that Lisis and I, are
resolved, (not to let you pass your imprisonment so solitarily) to give you
all the comfort we are able, to divert your sorrows. And though (I presume)
you may equally dispose of our affections; yet, least you may think we both
join in bare complement, we from this instant resign our good wills to your
liking, that is, that she, whom of us two you shall make choice of, will most
accompany you in your misfortunes.

LISIS, AMINTA.

More comfort then this was not possible to have befalne our Gerardo, and
therefore extraordinarily gladded, taking Pen, Ink and Paper, in prosecution
of his happy pretension, thus he sent his reply to the gracious Dames:

I know not how to extol sufficiently in these lines my great good fortune, by
showing in them, the least shadow of my true thankfulness, with which my
mind is wholly yielded and rendered up to your mild and pitying dispositions.
The best way (not to come short) is to be altogether silent; only this I must
acknowledge, that the favor you offer, is more to be esteemed then my liberty:
the which I shall hence-forward leave to hope for; or if I at all desire it, it
shall be little for mine own sake, more then to employ both that and my life
in your service. The way you have given to my happiness, has brought me into
such a confused Labyrinth, that it will be impossible for me get out, if you
please not to change your intents, by reuoking the election you remit to my
opinion, which may unwittingly hurt me (as ignorant) which of you is freest to
favor me. This inconvenience may easily be removed, by your own consents in
appointing which shall be the Owner I must obey, since, in the rest of your
parts and perfections, there is no known advantage in either, but a most
harmonious simphonie worthy eternal estimation.

Gerardo was not a little in the right, with this discreet reply; since, so, he
not only aimed at the absent Liseno, but resigning up also the election to
them, secured his fear from any other powerful emulator; and besides, she
that had been left out, must needs have been much distasted: for even in
matters of jest, the imperious (though weak condition of females) loves no
declared neglect. And so to give order for the delivery of his Letter, he got
him to his window, from whence he might also see Lisis at hers, as if her
thoughts had promised to her, his coming thither.

Gerardo had not, till this present, seen the fair Dame alone, whom
cheerfully saluting, by some amorous signs he sent her thanks for the
singular favor she showed him: At which, Lisis smiling, gave him in the same
dumb language to understand, that it was not her self, but her Sister Aminta
he meant, showing in her clouded eyes a kind of irksome jealousy, that
Gerardo made more court to Aminta then her; a suspicion that he (like an old
weather-beaten soldier) soon perceived; and willing to have fully expressed
himself) the approach of Aminta hindered it; so, drawing only a Paper out of
his bosom, and (they who understood his meaning, casting down a long String,
the Counter-signe) it was his part to send one to tie his Letter to the same,
which speedily done, Aminta hoissed it up, and both taking leave of Gerardo,
left him more perplexed then ever: for now new cares began to keep him
vvakefull, and one of the lovely Dames, by a particular sympathy of stars, had
absolute power and dominion over him, in whose pleasing remembrance he waste
the tedious darkness, and by morning early he received this ensuing answer to
his second Lines.

Lisis and my self, Gerardo, with notable content read your Letter, which
would have been greater, if (taking the freedom we gave you) you had not with
so unnecessary circumstances refused it, but now (such is our determination)
you must not deny: and therefore, let not the doubt of our freedoms trouble
you, since assuredly neither of us that were pre-ingaged, would be so light, as
to seek a new Owner: wherefore there needs no more* but to end the strife,
and to make choice of Aminta -- or Lisis; for (secure) that your discretion
will make a fitting election, we have jointly wagered; and it now rests in your
power to make either a winner, or unhappy loser.

AMINTA.

Gerardo well perceived by this Letters short Contents, how the world went:
fearful therefore to offend by choosing, and yet more fearful of an offense
to both in not obeying, he made choice of the former; but as warily as he
could, that one of them might not have too just a cause of resentment. With
this good forecast, (though she, whose secret influence attracted him, was
already set down in his heart) he sent these last Lines to the fair Dames,
who with much joy gave them welcome and a view, as follows:

Heaven knows, fair Lisis and Aminta, I had rather divide my heart, and lay
it at both your feet, then see my self in this confusion I now am in: but the
necessity of obeying you, beats down all difficulties of fear, obliging me
to the performance of your forcible commands. My affections (I know not by what
happy Star conducted) are particularly inclining to the miraculous subject
of -- But pass not on, my Quill: how my hand shakes, and my heart trembles,
timorous of the incertaintie of this matter! Pardon me, sweet Pledges, that I
suspend my cowardly determination in a business, whose important well-speeding
does so much afflict me: let me only first persuade you, that you both being
every way equal and conformable, as well in the marvelous parts of mind, is
rare and excellent features of body, no singularity that way has moved me,
to make choice of one more then the other, but only the performance of your
wills: and believe therefore, I beseech you, that as it happens when we see
Gamesters, we desire some one, whom we know not, or (happily) never so much as
saw before, should win; so, my soul and all her faculties are strongly
inclined, and wholly yielded up to -- The divine Lisis. And thus have I,
desiring to appear worthy of her noble thoughts, declared mine, and complied
with your commands. I begin then from this instant, fair Lisis, to serve you,
protesting on my part, a most humble permanent slavery, a singularly inviolable
faith, and a mind ever subject to Loves laws, whilst life shall last most
thankful.

Aminta was she of the two, whose hard fortune it was to read the Paper, but
so lothly, that as soon as she came to Gerardo's declaration, unable to
dissemble longer, her trickling tears made known the inward sorrows of her
heart; wherewith retiring to her Chamber, she left her Sister alone; but so
glad and ouer-ioyed a creature, as if Gerardo had obtained her some famous
victory, whom she determined to reward with the glory of her
conquest-expressing thankfulness, by instant vvriting how pleased she was
with his election; enlarging her Lines with frequent iterations of gratitude,
in such discreet Phrase, as made Gerardo rest most confident of his happiness.
A success, that amongst all those which I have set down of this Unfortunate
Gentleman's, seems to me worthy of the greatest admiration: for though the
inconstancy of his prosperous and adverse fortunes, with their incredible
events, do often amaze me, yet this easiness in Lisis, and her facile
inclination does stupefie my consideration; there being no reason to proppe
with reason so inordinate an affection. Lisis was courted, long served, loved
by Liseno, yet she could never afford him (though a deserving Gentleman) the
least look of acknowledgement; this day, satisfied with two or three smooth
papers, her open mind is wholy given up to a man encompassed with chains
and bonds, whose liberty is as uncertain, as his conversation vnsecure; from
which conversation, they that are best acquainted with love, say, the firmest
love is engendered: but alas! what conversation have they had? what acts,
either to oblige or to persuade? from whence shall we conclude this affection
to proceed, or whereon happened this Love, the firmest that has been known,
as will appear in this Discourse? There is no way to know, no way to search
or penetrate the cause of women's wild and violent affections. In fine, from
this moment, (the happiest for Gerardo that might be) in stead of darkness
that obscured his sad Prison, Lisis her two Suns, with their powerful rays
enlightened it, turning his night also into brightest day: and now with his
present glory, he forgot all his former miseries; and this fortunate employing
his affections, not only bettered his Estate, but totally (as you shall hear)
occasioned his desired freedom and liberty.

Thus diuerting himself with the sight of Lisis, he past the greatest part of
the days; and Time, which before in every minute of his seemed too prolixely
tedious, was now in-sufficient with his short hours, for answering his
Mistrisses amorous Tickets; with which (though they wanted means of nearer
discourse) his affection most pleasingly increased; and, howsoever the
limitation and curb of his imprisonment, kept him from expressing the great
services he desired to perform, yet he laid hold upon all good occasions to
express his love and gratitude: and to this purpose, understanding that Lisis
was exceedingly affected to the sweet delightfulness of Music, many a night
paying from his Window, the humble tribute (as it were) of his voice, he sought
to increase it: though the vnsauourinesse of the matter was such, that he must
not express the least part of his affection in Poetical amorous Conceits, in
respect of the wariness it behooued him to have in his proceedings; and so he
durst not once offer at a Loue-straine, for fear of giving any motive of
suspicion to some ouer-curious listeners, which made him for the most part sing
some short Satyricall toys: and one night amongst others, for want of better
matter, (having first tuned his Violl) he sung these ensuing Couplets, whose
contents were to dissuade an old Dotard from marriage.

Wool't, old Colt? what, all this while
Single, now at length beguile
Age, and after Sixty odd,
Serve the little blindfold god?
Well, since trust thou will no friend,
No sharp knife, or strong ropes end,
Go, for once, be youthful; Woo
Speedily, and marry too.
But thy fortune, truth must tell;
She Is no Gypsy, listen well.
Is the party fair and young,
From a noble Kindred sprung?
Beauty much may comfort thee.
I, but youth will never agree
Long with Age, to whose cold room,
Quickly she will prefer the Groom.
Birth, to thy posterity,
Luster adds, and dignity.
I, but break her of her will,
Powerful friends she will mention still.
Or, when thou to sleep art laid,
Thee with fortunes she will vpbraid.
Is she one of tougher years,
Thirty upward that appeeres,
One, (since first she new was named)
Frequent child-beds well have tamed?
Or withal, the neighbors knew,
She to first good man was true?
Is she loyal, is she chaste,
(Never so) too much embraced?
I, but silence go along
Must: for chaste with too much tongue,
That Is as thou should in thy meat
Three parts Gall, one, Sugar eat.
Still she wrangles, still she will scould,
Brawle, and word it (vncontroul'd.)
Nay, when thou the Act have done,
There Is a quarrel new begun.
Sweet-hearts keep she two or three,
Know not thou the mystery:
Be she any thing allowd,
Whore, so still; not honest loud.
Is she one called doubly good.
Chaste and silent understood:
More then birth, or to be fair,
Merely toys, and terms of air?
I, but though her tongue lie still,
She has hum'rous tricks at will,
Which will vex thee more, then flowers
Often wet by April showers.
Is she widow that is known,
Ioyntures two or three to own,
Old and rich? (good signs of health)
Soul be merry, thou have wealth.
I, but hard it is to sift
Her Estate; who, Deed of gift
Made before to kindred; they
Carry coin and mirth away.
Say, thou die first, (no such art)
She will of thy goods have part;
And out-liue she must, to bring
Every joint a wedding Ring.
Go, be youthful then, and woo
Speedily, and marry too.
As well had Lisis, her Lovers presence imprinted in her heart, as the
pleasing sound of his voice engraued (as it were) in her ears; and therefore
though she were asleep, (awaked by the Ecchos of that) she would instantly
get to her Window, accompanied by Aminta; who, now less passionate, was well
enough satisfied with her ill fortune. Gerardo well perceived the favor she
did him, and would willingly have expressed his thankfulness, but fearing
lest some ouer-busied ear might hearken, he refrained; the like also happened
in the beautiful Sisters, in respect of their parents and family, by whom
they were not causelessly observed, and the more at this time, by reason of the
ensuing accident.

Liseno, who grieved with the rigor of Lisis, (as you heard) left his home
and Country, some four months after (the time that Gerardo spent in his
amorous conquest, with the ancient infirmity renewed by his absence) returned
again to Granada, and consequently to his pre-accustomed watchfulness, and so
continuing his night-walks about Lisis her wales, and Gerardo's Tower, his
care was by Gerardo soon discovered, and himself also and his pretension
quickly known, which made the imprisoned Lover not a little suspect and
fear; and the more distastfully, when his reason represented to him, the
advantage Liseno might have over him for a Corriuall, (he free to prosecute his
suit, and himself with his hands bound, without freedom to make his party
good with him.) Besides, it did not a little torment him, to think, that Lisis
in honesty and loyal affection, had precise obligation, to make the relapse
of Liseno's affection known unto him, (in which having failed) his scrupulous
thoughts formed no small exceptions: which Lisis understood by a Letter from
him, though being (as indeed she was) faultlesse, she easily satisfied with
her innocence: the assurance of which so long rested with Gerardo, as the
passionate Liseno appeared not: but he once returning to his old haunt, the
suspicions increased, and she was still put to a fresh purgation. So that in
short time, Gerardo had many distastes against the poor harmless Dame,
thinking it impossible for Liseno (without some encouragement from Lisis) so
long to continue his suit. Hereupon it happened, that as the two Lovers were
after this both at their windows now better reconciled, (for the cause of
Gerardo's distaste had been some time absent) upon the sudden they might see
Liseno mounted upon a lusty dapple Courser, so gallant, as might well have
bred strong jealousy in the brauest Competitor. Gerardo was somewhat astonished
with the unexpected sight: which when Lisis perceived and his trouble, she grew
to such an outrageous distemper, that hurried on with the blindness of
passion, not once considering, how much she might prejudice her self and her
poor prisoner, minding nothing though but his satisfaction, and beholding
Liseno with the terriblest aspect that Disdain could frame, she thus sets upon
him: How long, foole-hardy Liseno, shall this unmannerly presumption last? how
long shall my fond silence suffer your infamous pretension to be the motive to
my dishonor? Betake your self the sooner to some other course, or (believe it)
I shall not want some that will revenge the injury you go about to do me:
And so, furiously clapping too the leaves of her Window, in she went, leaving
the good Gerardo all hush't, confusedly timorous, and the unfortunate Liseno
quite bereaved of his senses: and the poor beast his horse too, it should
seem, was charmed, when she began to speak, never so much as stirring all the
while the storm lasted. But when the forsaken Lover perceived, that as well at
his Mistrisses Window, as many others of the neighbors, there appeared diverse
persons incited by the loudness and noise, unwilling to prove a spectacle to
the street, all bashful and ashamed, he returned back again toward the
City; leaving now his amorous suit behind him in the hands of her cruelty and
contempt, so that, within awhile after (an effect ever incident to such cases)
Love, which brought him to these hard extremities, was turned to mortal hatred
and deep desire of revenge; and therefore supsecting the good parts and
neighborhood of our Prisoner, as also having at times seen him narrowly
prying at Lysis her window, and having found them (surprised unawares that very
day in the stealth of some amorous signs) made him rest fully assured, that,
her desire only, the more to oblige her Lover, and no other cause had incited
his Mistress to her heavy rigor and disdain.

This and his jealous rage together blinding him, he was now resolved to
vn-piece the amorous engine, and to sever the couple, choosing (as the surest
means thereunto) to make known to her Parents what passed, by the stratagem of
a fained Letter, in which, setting down the whole state of the business as
dangerously and bloudily as he could, he caused it to be delivered, but
without setting any name unto it; so that this and some other suspicions of the
Parents of Lisis conferred together, they made means to have Gerardo's
recourse to those windows hindered, which, accordingly, when he least
suspected any such matter, were dammed up; which was to him so strange a
nouelty, as (besides his fear that their other conueyances of Letters were
made known) bereaved him almost of his understanding.

Touching Lisis, no more needs be said, but that poor she, like one
vn-accustomed to these brunts, grew to such extremes, that had not Gerardo
plied her with fained hopes of his liberty, she had quickly made an end of her
self. There is nothing more cheeres a passionate soul, then the diuerting her
restless unsettled faculties; for, with the variety of several
entertainments, she is much dis-burdened, and miseries make no settled
impression in her: all which, to one deprived of these, succeed quite contrary;
as appeared in Gerardo, whose blind love had turned his heart wholly into
Lisis; that, forgetting with strange neglect, the importance of his liberty,
all he spoke or thought, was no other thing but his Lisis, finding no content
at all in any thing, now he was deprived of her dear and precious sight. The
desire of which, (hoping it might attain to some good effect, though he was
far from dreaming a more happy one drew near) made him one day descend into
certain lower rooms, that (in the midst of the Tower) served to keep filth
and rubbage which was cast into them, ghessing that some of the lights through
those Chambers, might happily look toward his Mistresses window: and so,
fitting some stones together, that he might the better clime up to them, being
mounted, seeing there was little hope of his purpose that way, going angrily
down, as he laid hold upon one of the iron grates bars, to keep himself
from falling, the one half of it slipped from him: at which strange accident
something troubled, yet looking more narrowly upon the broken bar, he might
see that it was cunningly filed, and as it seemed, to dissemble the matter,
neatly giued together with soft Wax, and some other bituminous matter, that
the filing might not be perceived.

Whereupon leaving it joined as he found it, without being by any body
espied, he went up again to his Chamber, but not so satisfied with the matter,
and ignorant of the Author, made him think it miraculous; though considering
his own loose life, he thought himself altogether unworthy of so celestial a
favor. But (as afterward he came to know) not Angels, but me^ were the
Authors of the same; for, there having been not long before, two Gentlemen
Prisoners in that Tower, and in some danger of their lives, they tried that
remedy: and the very same day they thought to have effected their liberties,
they were unexpectedly (as was Gerardo) removed to another less close Prison,
whereby defrauded of their hope, the fruit of their unperceived handy-worke
remained to the good fortune of our Prisoner, to which he speedily prepared
his nimble apprehension, as also his bold courage (all little enough in an
occasion so desperately hazardous:) and taking with a little clue of thread
(that served him for making up his Letters) the depth from the light to the
square of the Towers foundation, he found some ten fathom, but from the square
to the ground he could not measure, by reason of the maine stones that ietted
out: yet his principal intent, being but to quit the Tower, made him to take
no care for a second leap; and so, without more adoo, tying the sheets of his
bed and a thin Quilt he had together, which might make in all some six or
seven fathom, remitting the rest to the nimblenesse and actiuitie of his body,
and taking away (when it grew toward night) the bar, sure that the Iaylor
was abroad, before it might grow darker, and he return, he recommended
himself to heavens protection, and so determined his sally, though, seeing the
depth he had to pass, wrought no small fear in him, howsoever the hope of his
liberty and his love more then life (making him boldly wink against all
danger) he instantly began to let himself down, crossing his legs and arms
strongly in the sheets, from the end of which, fetching a sudden friske, he
alighted without any danger upon the Square; and from thence by certain old
ruinous walls scrambled to the ground, giving Heaven infinite thanks, that
with so little labor, and without making any humane creature privy to his
purpose, he had so unexpectedly escaped.

Gerardo knew not his Brother Leoncio's lodging, nor where any the rest of his
friends lay, ignorant of the Iliberian streets, as having never been there
before the time of his imprisonment. And therefore not to hazard his good
beginning, by giving cause of suspicion to any that should meet him he got him
the surest way as he thought, by fetching a tedious compass about) into the
City: when he supposed himself at the farther end of it, he enquired after a
certain Friarie in the Sub-vrbs, in which, a near friend of his, one of the
Religious Order at that time lived; where he arrived, but by reason it was now
waxed somewhat late (though he knocked and called loud in the Porch) yet no
body came, as (belike) not willing to hear, at least not to open to any that
knocked at that time of night, which made him (not daring to return again
into the City, or pass further on) resolve to climb the Garden wall; and as
he proposed to himself, he forthwith put it in execution: but this boldness
might very well have cost him his life, for he was no sooner gotten upon his
feet on the other side, when suddenly, with the noise his fall made, two
fierce Mastiues, the Gardens keepers, so unexpectedly clozed with him, that
without giving him leave or leisure to help himself, they tumbled him flat
upon his back.

Gerardo had about him a knife of about his hands length, (the only weapon
allowed him in the Prison:) and so seeing himself half woorried, he
courageously drew it out, and instantly thrust one of them into the short ribs,
who, with the pain he felt, leaving him, he might the better grapple with his
companion, that having but only fastened upon the folds of his Cloak, gave
Gerardo leave to get up, and with incredible nimblenesse to skippe into the
nearest tree, but so bitten and wounded, that he verily thought the anguish
and cold air would kill him before morning; but by that time it began to be
light, his comfort was to see one of the fierce Curres weltring in his own
blood: but, sorry though, and unwilling to make himself Owner of the distaste,
which the good Friars were like to receive with this accident, especially in
such an occasion when he came to be protected by them; he thought fit to get
him from thence; and so, hoping the fore-gates might be open, going out the
same way he came, he came without being by any seen, to the Porch, where
asking for his friend, the party was quickly brought unto him: who not only
joyfully and charitably welcomed him; but seeing how the Dogs had in several
places of his body bitten him, he was very careful to get his wounds healed.
Some few days after, by advice of both, the good Friar with another his
companion, was to go into the City, where (instructed well what he should
do) he discreetly learnt the whole state of Gerardo's business; being
informed, that, at the instant when he was in the Tower missing, there were
several searches made for him, and the Judges also caused his Brother Leoncio
to be apprehended together with his servants, suspecting that by his means
his brother had escaped: so they went very cunningly to work to sift out the
truth; but the new Prisoners being found innocent enough of the matter,
Leoncio took no great care of it, only that which troubled him most; was the
uncertainty of his brothers welfare, touching which, the Friar soon satisfied
him, by letting him know (though not where) that his Brother was very well and
in safety, so that having left him much contented, within a few days after,
(himself with his servants at liberty) he might see his loved Brother, and
with his comforting wisdom give him the surest advice for the dispatch of his
affairs. That which most of all afflicted our Gentleman, was, absence, and
the remembrance of his gracious Lisis; for the gladsomenesse of his liberty
made not him a whit forgetful, neither could the fear of her dangerous
conversation one jot awaken his stupid senses, rather, he desired nothing more
eagerly, without all apprehension of misfortunes to succeed. And surely in
these amorous cares, he had not the advantage over Lisis, who that very night
of his fortunate escape (uncertain whether she might rejoice, or be
sorrowful) endured a kind of living death, most irresoluedly perplexed, as
altogether ignorant what was become of her Lover; or if he were in safety,
whether he would still love her. She knew of Leoncio and his servants their
imprisonment, and therefore considering that amongst them, there was one that
had been often the bearer of their amorous Letters, she could not, nor durst
she blame Gerardo's loyalty, from whom, the same day that Leoncio and his
servants were at liberty (the occasion serving, and the Messenger too free) she
received a large Ticket from him, wherein he promised her, that when the heat
of his enemies and troublesome affairs might be a little ouerblowne, he
would see her: but her Posting desires could brook no delays; and therefore
contriuing that an Aunt of hers might send for her out of the City, (it being
effected) she persuaded her also for particular Devotion to hear Mass one
morning at the Monastery, where Gerardo had taken Sanctuary: and giving notice
of it beforehand to him, without her Aunts suspicion who knew not him, they had
some short conference together, and the tender Lover seeing himself so near
that mirror of beauty, holding himself too unworthy so rare a piece, grew
more and more enflamed.

Lisis (no less satisfied) took leave, and from hence (I suppose) the force
of their loves grew to a further height, so that she returning now with her
Aunt, and shortly after, to her own home, began to think upon some possible
means, that her Gerardo and she might have a private meeting: and by him,
(strange rashness!) she was many nights after visited, he being only
accompanied with one trusty servant, and in that manner he resorted to that
side of the Tower where her window looked to the fields. But so troublesome it
was to them, to understand each other, being so far distant, that (encouraged
by the conformity of their own willing minds, that equally met in their
desires) they at last resolved, that Gerardo causing an artificial
thred-Ladder to be made) Lisis should on the night of their agreement cast
down a Rope from her window, which fastened to the bars above, and the
Ladder tied to that beneath, he might without any difficulty get up into her
Chamber. All this so happily resolved on, and the prefixed time set down
against the second ensuing night, Gerardo returned to his Sanctuary, and Lisis
to her bed.

It was not for naught, that the two enamoured Lovers, in all their proceedings
were so wary; for you shall know, that the night, when their agreement was made
about the Ladder, the Father of Lisis (to her ill fortune) lying awake, and
hearing, (if not dreaming he heard) some noise and sound of Voices very softly,
not once making his Wife privy to his purpose, stealing out of his bed and
Chamber, and drawing near to the window where she was, he might distinctly
hear all that passed betwixt them, and their settled agreement: wherefore
returning from whence he came, and craftily concealing his intent, he
determined against the time to take Gerardo in the manner, and before the
matter should be spread abroad, either to kill him, or, cause him in the
occasion to be apprehended. He knew well enough of our Gentleman's suites, and
the cause of his imprisonment; and thinking it bootelesse to treat with him in
the way of marriage, in his blind passion, careless of his own and his
daughters infamy, incited only to revenge, he would not, or could not lay
hold upon some more convenient remedy. Whereupon giving notice to some kinsmen
of his, that they should against such an hour be in a readiness, making
known no further his intent, nor they curious to enquire more, but vvilling to
obey him, all of them in expectation of the business were well provided. Now
the danger thus surely carried, much threatened the life of our secure Lover,
who wholly ignorant of any such preparation, only minded the accomplishment of
his loves design, and in the interim, took order, to have the Ladder made
every way fitting for his purpose.

The wished for night approached, in which (that his feruant might more securely
cross through the City) he sent him before with the Ladder, vvilling him to
expect him at the Orchard gate, which belongs to a Religious Order of the
Monastery of the Holy Martyrs: (which done) not long after, himself took the
same way, coming to the Mountains top about eleven of the clock, and to the
gate where he bade his man to expect him, but found him not there, neither,
looking all round about him, could he get so much as a sight of him. The
raritie much troubled him, and made him suspect some mischance had happened to
his servant; yet, thinking with himself, that happily the fellow might have
mistaken him, and understood (in stead of the Orchard) the Church door made
him without delay go thitherward, and look round about him as he went.

In this manner he drew near the Monastery, whose high walls he no sooner
touched, when without seeing or hearing any thing that might affright him, upon
the sudden, his heart began to tremble, and his eyes to dazzle, that (his
hair standing on end, and his courage and strength utterly failing him) he
fell down in the field; from whence (taking heart to have risen) a black and
dismal apparition kept him back. Here his horror increased, and in stead of
calling on Heavens aid he was quite tongue-tyed; but, at last his manly
resolution expelling and getting the masterie over his fear (groping on
forward) he found a rest for his body and hands; and his amazement now prettily
well over, opening his eyes, which with the ghastly affrightment of the shadow
he saw, were before closed, he perceived he was now at the Church door: so
that, leaning upon the iron railes before it, and afterward sitting him quietly
down in the Porch, he might hear a hushed, and confused sound of Voices, and
frequent blows by intermissions, to which somewhat more listningly hearkening,
he might plainly know that all of it was caused by the Religious men of that
Order, who at those hours certain nights of the week used to scourge and
discipline themselves; which in this occasion, served as an alarm to Gerardo,
to rowze up his drowzy spirits, and work a feeling compunction in his
hardened heart, as from his eyes it drew compassionate tears.

And instantly the prodigious passages of his life were represented unto him,
his disordinate affections likewise, and the danger into which by Nise and her
friends he was drawn; together with his no less happy escape from
imprisonment. After this, he began to consider the sinful course he was now
in, which he ought rather to leave, or indeed convert his life into a devout
and Christian profession. Lastly (weighing with himself) that happily all those
Religious souls were not indebted to such bitter sacrifices, nor worthy for
their crimes of the torments they put themselves to, that his justly might
merit; yet notwithstanding, they (poor men) tearing their macerated flesh,
held on that strict course; his contrition was such, that without further
expectation shutting the doors of his desires, and retiring his vvearied
remembrance from the intimate affection of Lisis, he resolved to leave her and
it in the state it now was: and with this happy determination, about to
return, he stumbled and had like to have fallen upon his man, who careless
enough of any such accident, lay fast asleep upon the cold earth, not having
in all this while once perceived his Master, which made him not a little
vvonder, but awaking him, he bade him follow; and so they held on their way,
fair and softly to the City. So far back on his way was he gotten, as to
come just even with Lisis her Tower and Bay-window; who no sooner saw one
pass by (as being sure it could be no other then her Lover) but with a tender
and pitiful voice she began to call him; which notes, touching Gerardo's
ears, (like Sirens accents) worked in him the effects, that they in the
heedlesse Mariner, depriving him so strangely of his remembrance, as if there
never had been any such things as what formerly befell him: so, unable to go
further on (the strong Remora of his disordinate lust seizing his ill-gouern'd
Bark) he returned back where his Mistress expected him: excusing as well as
he could, his stay; but she (desiring more nearly to be satisfied) cast down
the Rope, to which as he would have tied the Ladder, four men rose hastily
up, out of those ouer-growne weeds that encompassed the walls, and with
drawn swords set upon him and his servant. It may well be supposed how much
the accident amazed him, but perceiving the certainty of his danger, he fell
as speedily to his defense. Gerardo (by reason of the Ropes shortness to
fasten the Ladder to it) had gotten upon a little dunghill, which stood to
more advantage then the rest of the ground, so raised by some trash that was
ordinarily thrown out of the windows, whereby his enemies (not able to
incompasse him round) were forced to come all before, which made his resistance
somewhat the less difficult; though all had been insufficient, if at the same
instant, with the noise and clashing of weapons, some other company had not
issued out of the house, who came in to the hottest of the skirmish. These were
the Father of Lisis and his Kinsmen, who lying in close ambush to effect their
purpose, and seeing by the other unlooked for occasion their revenge was
prevented; yet thinking that now with less danger they might apprehend or kill
the party, they made forward to the event: but heaven was pleased to free
Gerardo from that extremity, and to permit, that they, who fought with him,
supposing these new comers were of his party, began to retire, so that he
encouraged too by the approach of the latter, (presuming upon what his
Contraries imagined) began now with his servant to let fly at them amain,
laying manfully about him, as they in like manner sent their return of blows;
till at length the one party pressing forward, and the other, flying backward,
they were gotten as low as certain Elmes that adorn the Valley, where
(environed with darkness) one of those that first set upon Gerardo fell down,
crying out for confession; which Gerardo no sooner heard, but calling to his
man to make away, they both by help of the thicke-growing trees hid
themselves, and fetching a wide compass, returned to the City, and himself
to Sanctuary.

At this time Lisis, (who seeing the mortal danger her Lover was in, was fallen
into a faint swoune, and new come out of it) no sooner took notice of her
father and kindred, when, persuaded verily that they knowing of her affection,
meant by that cruel means to prevent her, and overcome with this miserable
imagination, fearing the like sacrifice should be made of her; and at last
hearing that pitiful voice from amidst the armed troop call for confession:
withal, that her father and friends returned hastily into the Fort, her
amorous passion suggesting to her, it was her Gerardo, surprised with her
sudden grief, and none near to comfort or hinder her, (having the Ladder in
her hand) without farther delay she stepped upon it; but had scarce gone four
steps down, when entangled in her coats, and weakened by the sudden
affrightment, or the secret judgment of high Heaven so disposing it, she
tumbled down to the ground, at the instant that her father arriving in the
height of his reuengeful fury, to his sad grief and souls torment, became a
witness of the lamentable disaster; the bitterness of which bereauing him of
judgment, he was even ready to have accompanied his unfortunate child: they
that accompanied him too, came out with Torch-light; but going to the place
where Lisis fell, found her not, for (by reason of the hills slopenesse
thereabouts, and the force of her fall with her own forgetfulness) she was
sent as far as the thick Elmes, where the party fell, that the wretched Dame
took for her Lover; and (though pitifully bruised with her fall) it seemed she
would be a sharer with him in his mortal agony. Here then with extremity of
anguish, the discomfortable father found her, and though the vital breath had
not quite left the pale disfigured Trunk, she was as good as dead; whose
miserable body the father taking in his arms, and sprinkling her wanne face
with his tears, acknowledging (too late his rash proceeding) such and so great
were his woeful lamentations, as might have turned as Niobe to softness: but
his griefs did not so end, for his kinsmen going to see the dead Gerardo that
lay in those gloomie shades, (resolved of their doubts) to their strange
admiration, might perceive the death-strucke body of the gallant Liseno, whose
reuengefull mind had hurried him to that end, he (you may remember) offended
with Lisis, and envying the happiness of her new Lover, not only contrived
the Letter, and advice given to her father, but as soon also as he had notice
of the Prisoners escape, suspecting, and not without likelihood, that at one
time or other he would not fail shortly to see his Mistress, (his opinion not
deceiving him) he purposed so to handle the matter, that Gerardo might no
longer follow his pretension; and thinking that to take revenge cruel enough
of Lisis, was, to remove from her the cause of her affection: with this
intent having several nights vvatched Gerardo, this (his own last) he took
three of his friends with him, (sure friends indeed, that so basely forsook
him when he had his deaths wound) that hiding themselves in the ouer-growne
Weeds, set upon Gerardo, with the success here set down. Now Lisis her
father and his kindred fearing the general danger, that might befall them,
returning to the sad Mansion, they endeavored all they could for some time, to
conceal the woeful Tragedy; but it was not possible for them to do so, in
respect of the noise and shriekes of the mother and her maids, together with
the loud exclamations of the pitiful Aminta, that breaking through the air,
made known the whole proceeding: so that now every man began to shift for
himself the best he could. All the rest of the night, and part of the next
day, was the unfortunate Lisis dying, and at last in the morning, in the East
of her age, her life was set, and she expiring, gave up her noble spirit to
her pious Maker.

Far from the least thought of his Mistrisses sudden end, (whilst these
things passed) was Gerardo secure in his Covent, now in contemplation of his
incredible accidents, and rendering high Heaven condign thanks, that pleased
to free him from the danger. In fine (his night passing on in such profitable
watchfulness) day approached, by what time Liseno's bloody end was diuulged
through the whole City, and consequently the untimely death of the fair Lisis
came to her Lovers ears. At first the unlikelihood banished all credit from
Gerardo's breast, but being visited by his brother Leoncio, he not only told
him the certainty of that, but vvithall, that Gerardo was made a principal
actor in the business; which at first so dismayed, and next, cast him into
such an outrage, that had not his brother more by plain force, then forcible
reasons, detained him, he had (doubtless) crying out like a mad man, ran into
the City, and committed himself into the hands of the Judges; who, now
extremely incensed at the hapless accident, (and as if the poor Gentleman had
been guilty of all) they caused extraordinary search to be made for him, as
well in particular houses, as Churches and Monasteries, (which known to the
discreet Leoncio, and vvisely apprehended by Gerardo) the danger forced him to
shift for himself; and so to his grief he disposed of his flight, and within
two days in an Evening, he left the famous Iliberis, resolved to bid his
native Country Spain Adieu for ever; with which purpose embracing his
brother, and unwilling (for the secrecy of his affairs) to make use of any
servant, he took his way toward the next fitting Seaport: but yet before
he went, he left and performed the last funeral Obsequies, due to the sacred
Memory of his lucklesse Lisis, in these Elegiacall Verses:

Pure spirit! that leau'st thy body to our moan,
From whence, now dis-imprison'd, thou art gone
To thy more happy Region; where, each Field,
Eternal April of fair flowers does yield.
Look, if the Soul can downward look, and see
A Soul (once thine) all tears, for want of thee:
When I was doubly prisoner by thine eyes,
How little dreamed I of, Here Lisis lies?
Or, when a smile would her Gerardo bless,
Little, that earth, thus early should possess
So fair a Casket. Little thought indeed,
Base worms on sixteen years sweet flesh should feed.
So, fruits are in their blossoms nip't by frost:
So, a tall ship, that often the Seas has crossed,
At last, when gladsome Port she leaves behind,
How the smooth waters court her, and false wind,
Till, when a sudden gust and storm does rise,
Rocke-dashed, she becomes the Oceans prize.
Live (yet) my Lisis, on thy Marble Tomb,
Whilst Time bears date, free from Obliuions doom.
That, when the world's last passenger draws near,
In in-corrupted letters may appear:
Here Lisis lies, that leap't from vital breath,
To meet a Lover in embrace of death.
Having traveled all night, day came on, with whose approach and
cleerenesse, he was a little revived; yet holding the light less secure for
the safety of his travel, without delay, (to avoid the danger of such as
might follow him, leaving the road) he got into the thickest and vvildest
parts of the famous Alpuxarran Mountains. His nights waking and weariness
made him drowzie, so that looking about him for a fit place to give his body
some rest in, upon the sudden a noise and hollow murmr of some persons near
hand diuerted him from his purpose. Many times the very shaking of leaves
causes suspicion in those that are (like Gerardo) flying; and so a slighter
cause might have troubled him. He was even about to have turned back again,
but (ere aware) he was too far engaged, and gotten so near, that stirring
either forward or backward, he must needs be discovered; wherefore
confirming his wavering resolution, he determined to go on; and so tying his
horse to a Masticke tree, he alighted, and taking his Petronell, that hung at
the Saddle-bow, in his hand, the better (if need should be) to defend himself,
he went very gingerly on, toward the place, from whence he heard the noise:
and vvilling to approach as near as was possible, by and by a lamentable voice
increasing by degrees upon him, made him at length take stand, and give ear to
the ensuing doleful expressions.

Is it possible, Don Diego, that so beastly and lustful a passion should thus
brutishly deprive thee of all humanity? and if for thine own sake thou be
not at all moved, yet, can the blood of thy noble Kinsman, and the knowing me
to be his, prevail no more to stay thee from thy barbarous attempt? To these
complaints, he might also by the changing of the voice, hear this reply: It Is
vain (fair and cruel Owner mine) with loud words to hinder my pleasure,
there being nothing to keep me from the satisfying that, from which (had my
Cousin, as thou deniest, enjoyed thee) 'twere impossible to dissuade me; and
therefore protract not, Sweet, my glory, by enforcing me to lose all pity.
Ay me! what shall I do? replied the other, with a mournful groan: Cannot my
tears, Don Diego, make thee relent? nor the forced pleasure of a rauish't
creature? well, since my cursed fortune has brought me to this sad pass, be
assured, that before thou execute thy lustful purpose, it shall be first with
my death. Here the afflicted voice gave over, leaving Gerardo in deep suspense
with her woeful complaints: who perceiving that they began to grow now to
extremity, determined rather to lose his life, then not relieve the distressed
party; and thinking it to be the act of Heaven, to guide him to so necessary a
remedy, rushing forward with his Petronel advanced, he came to the place,
where he might see two men struggling on the grass, (one of them (as it
seemed) the party, that vanquished, sent out those groans) which spectacle so
moved Gerardo, that extremely enraged, clapping his Pistol to his girdle, and
drawing his sword, he made to the Couple: but no sooner got the guilty party a
sight of him, when letting loose the other, that lay quite breathless under
him, he avoided the first blow; but running to lay hold on his weapon that lay
by the rest of his Clothes, he was prevented by a second from Gerardo, who
(reaching him with a terrible slash in the head) made him tumble senseless to
the ground; where he had presently dispatched him, (so much had his baseness
incensed him) had not the other stepping between with tears begged his life.
Gerardo till then had not seen that face, nor the entangled tresses of hair,
which were loosened in the aforesaid contention; and therefore perceiving his
mistake, and that the party (though disguized) was a woman, he granted her
request, and time to him that lay on the ground, to rise; but so shrewdly hurt,
and dis-heartened with the loss of much blood, that minding no other revenge
then the saving his life, he asked leave of Gerardo to depart; who (reuiling
him a little for his vn-worthinesse) soon condescended, and courteously first
helped him to mount upon one of the two horses that stood tied up to the hedge.

Gerardo was not so heedlesse, but that (seeing in what manner this man parted)
he sought to prevent all danger, and making known so much to his new
companion, helping her withal to horse, and mounting his own, they hasted to
the highway, riding speedily on, till such time, as (supposing they were far
enough from the former place) they alighted to pass the heat of the day, each
of them choosing in the pleasant solitude of those Mountains a convenient
shelter.

The earnest desire Gerardo had to have full notice of this past Adventure,
bred no small care in him, maruelling as well at the unexpected chance, as the
singular beauty and good parts of the afflicted Dame; who, considering, in what
hazard she had been, and the danger from which Gerardo freed her, extremely
thankful to his Noble proceeding, was led on with the same thoughts
touching him, desiring by all means to know, who it was to whom she was so
much obliged: wherefore, unable to resist longer her affectionate longing, she
first of the two, with this speech to Gerardo, broke silence.

When your generous proceeding, worthy Sir, might not warrant my curiosity,
your undaunted valor showed in hazzarding your life, to repair my honor,
would tie me to request your name; since, knowing that, together with the noble
parts wherewith Heaven has blessed you, I shall at least acknowledge with them
the Owner of my life, to whom, for the restoring of mine honor it is indebted.

Less earnest entreaties would have served Gerardo, and made him pass by all
difficulties or dangers to obey her; and therefore (loath) to lose advantages,
even in courtesies, with a pleasing countenance he thus answered; Omitting,
fair Gentlewoman, the small service I have done you (which deserves not to
call you a Debtor) the merit of so great beauty, and the dis-agreeing habit you
wear, together with the late accident, make me so desirous to know their
Original, that I should be most willing to obey your command, if in exchange,
I might understand it: and, confident, that you will herein favor me,
referring my self to your courtesy; you shall know, that my Country is
Castile, my birthplace Madrid, and my name (the first time happily you will
have heard it) Gerardo, Gerardo (said she) if that be so (with a blustering
alteration she interrupted him) either you are he, whom of all the men in the
world, I most desire to see, or there be more of the name: yet, to resolve my
doubt, be pleased, I beseech you, to let me know, if you have at any time been
a Prisoner, in the famous City of Iliberis. Well might Gerardo have feared no
few inconveniences by confessing this truth, but his free condition neither
could nor would dissemble it; which the fair Dame no sooner understood; when
(her eyes swimming in tears of joy) she ran hastily to embrace him, saying,
'Twas not possible for my remedy to proceed from any other hand: and certainly
to yours, Heaven has reserved the cheering and ease of afflicted hearts: for,
first you were not only a comfort to my beloved Leandro, in that miserable
estate of his imprisonment, but also, in these deserts, by your inestimable
valor, you have succored me his woeful Pledge. Heaven that reserved you in
both occasions for a remedy to our misfortunes, recompense what you deserve
from Violante and Leandro, and so leaving her words, she began greedily
again to cast her arms about Gerardo, whose admiration I can hardly describe.
When he heard this, and knew that she before his eyes was the discreet Dame
that cost his friend Leandro so many watchful moments (as in the History so
strange and notable you heard, which was interrupted by Gerardo's remoouall
to new imprisonment, that broke off the Tragical Narration: and therefore
maruellously rejoicing now with so admitable a success) he began with more
lively affection, and courtesy, to offer his service, telling her, how much
he esteemed Leandro, and how glad he was at present (had the danger been
far greater) to have adventured himself for one that so nearly concerned
his friend: but withal his curiosity a-fresh inciting him (for Violantes
strange disguize, and the unexpected knowing her, equally moved him) he could
not but request her to lead him out of that Labyrinth, by letting him know how
she came to her extremity.

The fair Dame willing to express her gratitude, and hearing likewise from
Gerardo's mouth, the most essential part of that pleasing Story of their
loves, was glad (though to her honors cost) to afford him that small content;
and therefore taking her beginning, where Leandro ended, (not without a few
tears, effects of a bitter remembrance) she began the rest of the History in
this manner: There has never been enterprise so difficult, but perseverance
has attained unto it; whether Leandro's then were worthy a more glorious
conquest, your self, Best Gerardo, shall be Judge, determining in your
honored breast, whether my resistance could have been greater, since it
proceeded so far, as to make me almost deserve the rigorous style of a cruel
Anaxarete.

Indeed (vanquished at last) I resolved to equal his love with like affection;
and (to this purpose) instructing him what he should do, that we might as
that night enjoy our selves; the greatest part of the afternoon being spent,
Leandro (for so we agreed) faining himself ill at ease, and telling my Husband
he would go to bed, made as if he went to his Chamber for that purpose; but
from thence (my good man yielding a fit opportunity) he went out, leaving his
own door but pulled too, and so came to my Chamber, where, for more
assurance, I made him get between the bed-Curtaines and the wall.

This diligence was of necessity to be used beforehand, for my wary Owner at
night used to lock our Chamber door, and that which was nearest Leandro's who
(by the way) had also desired my Husband, that he should by no means awake
him, because (as he said) his want of rest was the cause of his indisposition:
but this was to prevent any longing desire to see him: my heart was at this
time in a strange distraction of joy and fear; for, unaccustomed to such
cares, the expectation of my pleasure was much lessened, and happily this
unquiet alteration in me, might be the forerunner of the sad success you
shall straight hear.

I know not how it came to pass, but from the first day of my Leandro's being
with us, there was a great league of friendship, between him and the Vicar of
our town, by whom he was for his wants supplied with moneys, and now and
then visited.

This Vicar having been absent from him all the time of his sickness, coming
home as that night from a journey, and understanding by his people in how great
danger Leandro had been, supposing he performed not the part of a good friend,
if he did not (as soon as he had knowledge of his sickness, see him) leaving
his own house, immediately he came to ours, where (though the door was shut)
he called out, and my Husband hearing his Voice, presently rose and opened
unto him. I could not in any time know who it was; for careless too of any
danger, the desire only of seeing my good man laid to rest, kept me awake, and
thus I wanted means to shift Leandro away; for whom the Vicar asked, and for
all his sickness and desire of rest was made known unto him, yet he would
not be satisfide nor away, without seeing him: whereupon my Husband not
vvilling to gainesay his will, was glad to obey him; when (calling at the
Chamber) he no sooner touched the door, but he might see it open, and Leandro
missing, so that with no small alteration he went down and told the Vicar so
much, and assuring himself he must needs be within doors, besides, his
jealous condition easily egging and persuading him on, at last he traced out
the truth, and our hard fortune; and so hastily dispatching away the Vicar,
unable longer to keep in his torment, he instantly came running into our
Chamber; where finding me at my wits end, and my color quite lost (for the
discovered business had left me like a dead body) confirming his suspicion, he
began to pry up and down the room. Imagine, good Gerardo, to what extremity
I was brought, that though my imminent danger was so near, I had not the power
or strength to run into some place of safety. My husband having espied
Leandro, ran at him with his sword: but he perceiving beforehand his
danger, had presently gotten to the light; and (putting it out) had means to
slip by the thrust; but his persecutor running blindly on, stopped not, till
he had clozed with him, so that I might now perceive they were both grappled
together, though my faint heart durst now no longer stay to expect the issue;
and supposing the worst, running suddenly down to the street door, I left my
house, and stopped not, till I was gotten into the fields (fortune being in
this more favorable to me, then my misfortunes could expect) for falling
accidentally upon the highway to Ilberis, a Coach passed by thitherward with
passengers, who (when I had recommended my miseries with a world of sighs and
tears to their pitties) were so compassionately charitable, as to take me
along with them to the aforesaid City; whither as soon as I arrived, making
sale of those few Jewels I wore at my ears, neck and hands, with the moneys,
I might for some time relieve my necessities. Heaven likewise was pleased to
afford me the happiness and company of certain virtuous Gentlewomen, with
whom after I had some few days remained, I dispatched a secret Messenger to
Osuna, charging him, strictly to inform himself of my unfortunate affairs,
and giving him likewise a Letter for my Leandro, if (to my grief and
suspicion) he had bin that night taken Prisoner, which indeed could not
otherwise be, considering how subject I left him to my Husbands clutches and
cries. (All which effected, and the Messenger returned) I understood by
Leandro's lines, what had passed from the very instant, that my fright sent me
packing: at which time, as my husband and he were stuggling together, Leandro
perceiving, that if either he got the advantage, himself was sure to be slain,
or, that the other with his noise might call up the watch, so that his danger
was every way equal, relying wholly upon his natural defense of life, and
forced as it were to a desperate course, he stabbed my Husband with a Poniard
he had on, whereof within few hours he dyed. Leandro took Sanctuary in the
first Church he could find open: where being by diverse persons laid vvait for,
as a stranger they persecuted him, and the Justice of the place taking notice
of the business, causing a strong Guard to watch about the Church, hindered his
sally: yet his friend the Vicar stuck close to him, as had the case been his
own, resisting their going about to take him from the holy refuge, which,
indeed at first they sought to have done de facto. My soul even melted when I
read these woeful passages, as well for having lived so long in my Husbands
company, as in respect also of the tender affection he always bore me: and
lastly, considering him by my light proceeding, so unhappily made away, could
not but in a breast of Marble have caused a lamentable effect.

But my passion shall not prolong my Story, which (not longer to trouble you,
or afflict my self) I much desire to end. And therefore, Noble Sir,
considering my being alone for want of my Lover, and the impossibility of
souldring my error, determining to seek his protection that was the cause of
it, I vvrote to him a second Letter, desiring him by all means to leave the
place where he was, and come to me, making known unto him (the better to
dispose him to the journey) my great affliction; which he no sooner received,
when, not without great danger, furthered by his friend the Vicar, he
accomplished my desire. But Heaven or my adverse fortune permitted not that it
should take effect: for Leandro had no sooner set footing on the threshold of
my door, when, encompassed by officers (though he did all he might to defend
himself) he was seized on and carried to Prison: so far prevailed the
vigilant sagacitie of my Husbands kindred, who following him that night he
left Osuna,; and keeping aloof till he was alighted, had leisure to prepare
Officers, that, following him to my lodging, he was no sooner come thither (I
hearing his voice, and rising to let me in) but he was beset with clamor and
noise. Wherefore seeing my new danger, instantly crossing our Turrets and Tyles
of houses, I got me into safety, in which I was not a little happy, for they
left no place in my house unsearched, induced by their suspicions of Leandro's
coming thither.

To declare the torment this second disaster bred in me, were to begin a new
Tragedy; and therefore leaving it as superfluous, you shall hear the rest of
our success. My courage was not lost, rather, after some few considerations,
began more to increase, since, now in person I might see my Leandro, and by
coming disguized, and at unseasonable times to one of the Prison gates, speak
to him; where I had full notice of all these particulars: withal he told me
how contentedly he lived, and was lodged with you in your Chamber, till such
time as your remoouall from Prison, made us both (without flattery) less happy.

With this poor comfort at the aforesaid place, we gave some little ease to
our griefs, though fortune, not satisfide with what we had already suffered,
so disposed our affairs, that our enemies had notice of our private
conference, yet there wanted not some friends, who, by way of anticipation did
let Leandro know, how fit it was for him not to let me perish, but provide for
my safety: which he presently put in practice, taking order to send me as
secretly as might be with this Letter of his to the City of Almeria, with
which (re-commending me to the care and company of certain Gentlewomen his
kindred) he committed me to a Cousin-germanes of his to accompany me in the
journey, and serve me in any occasions by the way; who performed the trust
given to his charge so faithfully, that, had I not, by Heavens good providence,
and your noble courage bin relieved, I had either by this time been by him
slain, or deprived of mine honor by his barbarous lust.

Here the distressed Violante ended her so long-wisht-for Story by Gerardo,
which made present way to his thanks, who, as full of admiration, as the
strangeness of those accidents required, perceiving the graceful Dame begin
to sigh a-fresh, commiserating her solitude, and the being by her ba^e
companion left, his noble heart not suffering him to do less, regardlesse of
life's hazard, he resolved to accompany her, till such time as she might
safely arrive at her wished iourneys end. Within a day or two they came to the
City of Almeria, where, Violante, delivering the Letter of her imprisoned
Lover to his Kinswomen, was by them joyfully received: and Gerardo thinking now
he had fully complide with all humanity, (not without tears and a loving
embrace from the sad Dame) took leave, and parted: And hearing that in the
next Port-Towne a Ship was ready to set sail for Genoa, glad of his passage,
agreeing with the Master, he purposed with the next days fair wind, to leave
Spain, and begin his Voyage.

The end of the first Discourse of the second Part.
THE SECOND PART OF GERARDO, THE VNFORTVNATE SPANIARD.
The second Discourse.
GERARDO with the nights approach withdrew to his Chamber, where his memory
renewing past disasters, and wandering in their vvretched contemplation, with
this vvatchfulnesse he stole some hours (before it was due) upon soft rest:
and so, vanquished with leaden slumber, he committed his weary eyes to
sleep. But not long had he been settled to this slumbring, bring, when his
fancy falling to work, made him dream, that his Lodging was beset with
Officers, who coming to apprehend him, had broken the door upon him. This
fright tossing him to and fro, soon awoke him, so that opening his eyes, and
looking about him, he might by the snuff of a candle left burning by him, see
a white Bulk rushing in at a window, that not far from his beds head was
violently pushed open, which caused such a sudden alteration in him, that
though he had it fast in his arms, he could hardly believe it was a naked
man, that in one hand carried a small fardle, and in the other his sword; on
whose Hilts the wary Gerardo caught hold, and was about to have raised the
house, had not the unexpected Chest with gentle entreaties, and this ensuing
discourse kept him from it: For Heavens sake, noble Signior, discover me not,
since my coming hither was no way to wrong you, but only (to my grief) to
fly a most unlucky danger: and having climbed from house to house, I could
not till this time find a door or window open, whereby I might escape those
that I supposed followed me. Pardon, dear Signior, my forced rudeness, and
give me your succor, since Heaven and my good fortune have imposed a
necessary obligation on you. The courteous Gerardo was struck dumb with this
language, though re-collecting himself, not any way doubting the party, he
gave him full credit, and (more compassionate) his arms to boot: whereby the
other now somewhat secure, unloosing presently his fardle, began to clothe
himself, and soon appeared as gallant to Gerardo's sight, as he had (but
even now) ghastly; who fell into a new admiration also by the following event.
The equal fright that possessed both, had hitherto robbed them of their better
heed; but being each now more quieted, they no sooner took a fresh view of
one another, when Gerardo was known by his new companion, and he also by
Gerardo; who with no small amazement, first breaking silence, said, If I dream
not, and my eyes be not enchanted, this is not the first time they have seen
you. You are in the right, worthy Gerardo, said the other; for, time was, when
we were companions in miserable imprisonment, from whence I by a heavy
sentence was freed, the same day that your self was removed to the strong Fort
of Alhambra; from thence (as since also I heard) you fortunately escaped.
Gladder would Gerardo have been that his misfortunes had been less public;
but making no show of distrust in his friend, he rose up, and cheerfully
embracing, thoroughly knew him to be Claudio Alcino, a Gentleman of good
quality of Almeria; who from thence, after long imprisonment, upon some
offenses was removed to Granada: he returning the like courtesy, and
enfolding Gerardo in his clasped arms, said, In these arms I may rest well
assured of my safety, which are sufficient to free me from a greater danger
then the present, though this be not so small, but it might much trouble some
other, destitute of your valorous company. Your courtesy preuents the phrase
that I ought rather to use, quoth Gerardo, but our danger is equal, and
therefore let us equally comply upon all occasions with our obligation. From
this they passed on to other discourse, till by little and little they fell
upon the occasion that brought Claudio to the narrow strait. Gerardo desired to
know it, not so much out of any curiosity, as to give his friend the best
advice he could, for preventing growing inconveniences; who ghessing at
Gerardo's intent, though the night invited them to a more quiet diuersion,
engaged in the business (the other attentively listening) he thus began:
Though you may have heretofore known the cause of my imprisonment, as being
the original of this present success, it shall be necessary, that I refresh
it here again, but with all the succinctnesse that may be. Some six years
since, from the City of Murcia, to this place where now we are, to discharge
an Office which the King had conferred upon him, there came a Gentleman with
his house and family; and amongst them a fair daughter, whose rare personage
has been and is, the chief subject of my misfortunes: her name, for some
respects, I conceal, though to make good the Story, we will supply it with
Siluia, to whom my cruel lot so violently destined me, that from the very
first moment in which I beheld her, neither tedious absence, nor infinite
troubles, have once been able to temper the heat of my burning affection;
which from the very first instant increasing, continuing more and more, grew to
be a flame. The first time I saw her was at a Bull-running, where having upon a
goodly Ginet performed several luckie exploites, I began to be grateful to
her eyes; and upon a second encounter, as she was coming from Church, more
gracious; at which time I was bold to speak to her, and finding encouragement
not long after, I vvrote, and to her liking prosecuted my love, with such
continuance, but wariness withal, as that, obliged by my frequent
importunity, she came many nights to her Window to discourse with me; these
treaties gave stronger nourishment to my wishes, which by my faithful
perseverance also were maturely seasoned: In so much that when nothing (not
Siluia's affection) but the manner was to my happy possession wanting, my
unfortunate stars provoked the forwardness of a proper Gentleman of Genoa,
one of the best qualified persons naturalized amongst us in this City, to be
my Rival: and when I doubted no such matter, he began to court my Mistress, who
gave me present notice of it, unwilling to incur my suspicion, rather so
prevented it: well might this faithful proof of her love excuse her; but
unsatisfied, opened the gates to infernal Jealousy, which even scorched my
very soul. Oh, how oftentimes, friend Gerardo, in this hard plight, would I
contemn and slight my opposite? how often, confident of my Siluia's loyalty, was
I comforted in my pain? which instantly (fearing the remembrance of woman's
frailty) was increasing: thus fell I from one thought to another; and then
refusing all, ran blindly on in the confused maze of my cares, driven on by
differing gales of wind; for, miserable is the navigations of a ielous Lover.
Long suffered I in this infirmity, which is scarce yet removed, but cleaves
to my very intrailes: and though the remedy lay as then, in mine own hands,
yet my love to Siluia, and the respect to her reputation, held me back; (the
vnwiser I) for had I happily taken that course, my affairs not once coming to
this pass, might have had better success. Every day my love produced new
changes: for with Ascanio's continual walks and watchfulness (for this is,
if not the right name, that which at present only I must declare) I neither
could speak to Siluia, nor she see me, with the priuacie we were wont; and
so, many a night his importunate care broke off our discourse in the midst of
our most pleasing conversation; whereupon, my despite increasing, and my
patience by little and little wholly diminished, being one day in conversation
amongst friends, I grew, for a very slight matter, in choler with him, and so
from words to blows, we fell to, and I on a sudden raught him a cut upon the
head. The Spectators (ignorant of the mystery) some of them accused me of
Hare-brain'd rashness, but others less passionate, who affoorded me their
better censures, sounding the matter, found the full depth of it: and as in
these less populous places, such circumstances are hardly concealed, there
wanted not some, who made relation of what happened, to Siluia's parents and
mine, and gave notice likewise to Ascanio of their doubts, though I presume for
him the labor might well have been spared; for sure he could not be ignorant
of what he had deserved. My parents hereupon thought best to secure their
fears; for seeing me so engaged in Siluia's affection, they were afraid lest
I would marry her, for their minds were much against it; as being now also in
treaty with the friends of a Kinswoman of ours for me: and therefore they sent
me away cunningly to Seuil, telling me, that it was for my safety; which I
believed, and ignorant of their purpose, easily condescended, taking first
leave of my Siluia, who, though she much grieved, yet assured of my love,
preferred my good, before her own content.

In this absence, by means of a servant, I received my Mistrisses Letters, and
sent their Answers; which being faithfully put into the Post House, came
safely to each of our hands; yet, one amongst the rest I received, turned my
joy into mournful tears. About a month after I had been absent, Siluia
vvrote to me, that her parents, after long deliberation, at the entreaties of
some principal intercessors, had promised her to my enemy Ascanio in
marriage; and that though she refused it by might and maine, (knowing the
cause of her contradiction) they kept her so close and afflicted, that she was
almost become desperate, and resolutely determined rather to lose her life,
then me, pleased I to accept of her as a wife; and so accordingly she
expected my answer, and with her amorous conclusion, left me on such terms,
that without any delay, baited by my terrible fears, I got me a good Mule for
my journey, as thinking, the surest answer would be my self in person. But my
contrary fortune disposed more crossely of my happiness, then I expected; for
having made what speed I could, passing near the City of Antequera, and
crossing over a Foord careless, that by the extraordinary showers that had
fallen, was risen, my beast at her very first step tumbled over head and ears,
and caught by the Current, was after drowned, having left me cruelly wounded,
by a blow she lent me, for a farewell, with her heels: in which mortal
danger I had there suddenly perished, had I not been drawn out by certain
men that issued out of a Water-mill hard by, though in so bad plight, that
having quite lost my senses, after I had remained some two days in this
manner, awaking out of the drowzie astonishment, I might perceive my self in
bed at an Inn of Antequera; where, after many fittes and changes, now in
health, and then without it, I was even given over for a dead man, till at
last within some forty days I recovered; in which time, though I vvrote to
Siluia and my friends, yet, what by carelessness of messengers, or my ill
luck (the more likely) would so have it, not a Letter came safe unto them,
neither, with the forgetfulness my hurt caused in me, had I the brain to
send them by an express bearer. At length making use of a Chain of God I had,
which my disaster yet had left me, I paid for my Cure and other charges, and
so held on my voyage, coming (as ill luck would have it) to this City, the
very same day, that my Mistress, overcome by the persuasions or her friends
threats, but most of all by the neglect and small estimation, which I (in her
opinion) made of her Letters, and suspecting (more then she needed) that I had
forgotten her, she gave her hand to my Contrary; who, not able to defer
his happiness, would needs the very same day to Church; and so, about ten of
Clock in the morning, as I entered the high street of the City, passing
before the Church door, I became a miserable witness of the present
solemnity; seeing my beloved Mistress, in the midst of a great troop, hand in
hand with her new Spouse.

Here, friend Gerardo, as if heaven and earth should come together, I forsook
the Reins, and (a spectacle of misery) was with the unexpected accident,
transformed (as it were) into an vn-mooued Image: but calling presently again
to mind my former love, past pleasures, and my pains taken, to see another now
Owner of the fruit, so horrible was my souls anguish, that (void of all
consideration) my judgment quite gone, and nothing left, but a desire to
satisfy my griefs, from the Saddle flue I, and with my drawn sword, in
midst of the press, set upon him; who, in all probability, to be revenged on
me, had demanded Siluia to wife, and crying out like a mad man, before he
could defend himself, or any other assist him, he received (if not so many as
I could have wished) wounds sufficient to lay him along; where I had also
dispatched him, had it not been more needful for me, to look to mine own
life. And though I was hard beset by some Kinsmen and friends of his, yet some
acquaintances of mine running in to the noise, by their help I escaped the
danger: but not so surely every way, since before I could get the Church for my
Sanctuary, some Officers ouertooke me at the very door. They presently
conveyed me to strong hold, and the success diuulged, that Ascanio was dying;
his kindred fearing my friends would be too powerful for them in this place,
repaired to the Royal Chancerie, by which means (though the wounded party
were out of danger) I was removed to the Prison of Granada, where your self
and I grew first acquainted: in which City, not long after, Ascanio
perfectly recovered, pursued the matter so eagerly against me, that had I not
found especial friends, it might have gone but ill with me: but he at last
was forced to rest satisfied, only with my banishment from this Kingdom, not
to return again on pain of death* Siluia, whilst I remained thus Prisoner,
still continued her affection, and (by means of the aforesaid servant) to
write to me; discharging her self from all blame, by alleging the violence
of Parents, but chiefly my neglect: so that, considering she had reason, I,
without it, began again to plunge my self as deep as ever, (her Letters
being the principal comforts to my fetters.) So blinded was I with this
woman's affection, that (though any man's else, as having lost her, might have
been cooled) I quite contrary, for the same reason Ascanio enjoyed her, more
violently loved her then ever; and was now ielous of another man's wife. And
not passing six days since, I received this Letter, which Claudio drawing
out of his Pocket, Gerardo approaching nearer to the dim light, might view the
following Contents:

Our sad fortune, my Claudio, does n^w abate her rigor, since at this time
she offers us a so long wished opportunity: my husband is absent, and will
be yet some days from home; see, whether the occasion would be lost, or if
Siluia deserve to see those eyes. Omit not then the fair coniuncture, and
coming warily: on Thursday at midnight I will expect you at my door. When
these Lines shall come to you, you will not fail. Farewell, dear Owner mine:
Heaven send you safely hither.

This Letter (proceeded the tender Lover) I received in Granada at a Friery,
where I had taken Sanctuary, and instantly, with what content you may imagine,
I fulfilled her desire: arriving punctually as yesterday in the evening at a
Village, some half a League short of this place* where leaving my horse, I
came on foot, unknown, and vn-accompanied, save by mine own rashness, and
quickly touched my Mistresses happy threshold, who there expected me. But the
joy my heart was possessed with in seeing her, was quickly dashed by a lucklesse
accident, which as then happened; for, after a noise and clashing of swords, just
as the door opened to let me in, one of the parties of the fray, flying
back, fell at my feet, crying faintly out he was killed. I perceived my
danger, if I stayed longer there; and therefore quickly got me in with Siluia,
where (that having been the first time we ever met so nearly) I was so out of
countenance, that I knew not which way to begin to speak to her: (experience
then teaching me how much, ouer-ioyed passion does tongue-tye our expressions:)
but at last with a tender sigh, forcing a way from my silence, I thus began:

What greater proof of my affection and fidelity could I render, since
forgetting my just exceptions, I come thus dangerously to your presence? where
though death should seize me in midst of my effected desires, I should not
think my self at all unhappy.

To this, Siluia with tears replied, To such loyalty, all that my affection
can answer, is; To run through all the hazzards that may befall a woman (to
her misfortune) in another power, to be ever truly yours: and thus both our
affections shall still be equal: but (leaving this) my present grief is,
that, our content is like to last less time then I supposed, since, this day I
received a Letter from my Husband, in which he writes, his return is like to
be very speedy; though for the time of his absence, nevertheless (besides
that I have always been yours) I shall more freely now be so.

These last words and her news, were like crosse-barres in my soul; yet,
(making a virtue of necessity) hand in hand, we walked toward her Chamber,
where I no sooner offered to take possession of what I longed for, when
prevented from the sweet occasion, we both were equally affrighted with a
terrible noise and knocking at the houses fore-doore and backe-gate.

At first I could not but think it was Ascanio; and, so, whilst my Siluia
ran fearfully to the window, I was about to have dressed me: but, the sudden
surprisall never gave me the least aim; only my memory served me to make my
clothes up in a bundle, and being ready to run out of the room where I was,
Siluia laying hold on me, began to cry out more cheerfully then I could
expect: Whither are you going, Sir? will you undo your self and me? It Is the
Round that thus knockes in several places, whom (doubtless) either your small
heed, or my misfortune have brought hither. In hearing this, I was quite out of
my vvittes, and in two so imminent dangers wholy vn-determinable, considering
the breach of my banishment, and Siluia's infamy; who, bidding me follow her,
hearing louder knocking, with her Maids help and hers, I got up into the
Chimney stock, in midst whereof, finding an iron bar athwart that served to
the Pot-hooks, I stood upon it, whilst Siluia getting on her Gown, bade open:
so that instantly, they of the Round were come up, where I might hear what
they would have. The chief of them very ciuilly desired my Mistress to pardon
their unmannerliness; for though her Husband was absent, yet they vn-willingly
were forced to this diligence, by reason there was a man slain at her door;
and, as some of the neighbors declared, the murderer at the instant when he
fell, ran in there.

My heart with this was not a little revived, but still some fear of my
misfortune remained: and that, I hold to be the seuerest, when upon mistake,
worse faults are discovered. My Mistress with more confidence bade them search
all the Chambers: for (besides that she was ignorant of the party) she assured
her self he durst not abide in her house, and therefore she willed them to
look into all the Rooms, and not to leave the least moate unsearched. I, in
the mean while, like a forlorn Sentinel, pierst through with the nights
sharp air, and my feet galled with the narrow bar in extremity of
torment, knew not how longer to endure it: but perceiving now by the hurry and
shuffling of legs, weary of farther search, they took their leaves, I began to
take heart, and fair and softly to descend; which, that I might (wanting
help) the better be able to perform, I sought to quit my sword; willing to
fasten: it some-where by the Hilt, and groping in the wall, I found a hole
about the opening of the Plaistred-worke and the Brickes, into which I thrust
one of the crosse-barres, and so, less cumbred, returned to my intent: but my
hard fortune not content with the former surprisall prepared for me, brought
on a second incomparably far more frightfull: for no sooner was the Round got
out of the street, when her Husband newly arrived from Seuill, and wondering
to see his house at such an unreasonable hour beset with troops, entered.

Consider, friend Gerardo, my fear as soon as I began to hear his voice;
yet Siluia (though the suddenness amazed her) cunningly dissembling her
distaste, and giving him notice of what passed, brought him leisurely on into
the room, where I was, not dreaming till then of this second trance. And
certainly, had not she by her purposed discourse given me a loud warning, I
had been discovered, and both of us ruined: for (ignorant of what passed) I
was gotten more then half way down, when, taking notice of the present
danger, not without infinite pain I turned back again; and had much adoo
(considering my fright) to keep my self from falling. Her Husband with much
persuasion satisfied (for the rudeness of the Officers much troubled him) by
reason of his weary journey, would needs go to bed; but the servants that came
with him, called for their Supper. Siluia, though she were with Ascanio,
hearing them, fearing (as I suppose) least they would make fire to dress some
victuals, commanded that they should have only cold meat to stay their
stomakes till morning; but they grumbled in that sort, that, her Husband
hearing the noise, gave new order, that (considering their weariness) they
might have something hot; so that clapping wood to the chimney, I was instantly
nothing but sparks and smoke. This danger being almost helpless, made me
mad, and therefore I resolved upon a desperate course, rather to cast my
self into mine enemies hands, then to be stifled in the vn-mercifull smoke and
flames; and (ready to effect it) heaven that had not utterly forsaken me,
permitted, that, drawing out my sword where I had fastened it, using with the
suddenness more strength then needed, there dropped out a huge square Brick,
insomuch, that discovering now goodly broad Moone-light (a new remedy offered)
I changed my purpose; and, for all the servants below were in an vproare with
the Brick that fell; I began notwithstanding to undo some more, and to make
way in the wall: from whence skipping upon the Tyles, for their noise below
hastened me (crying out, Here Is the Murderer the Round sought for) I crossed
from house to house, till at last, finding this window open, I cast my self
(as you see) into your protection.

Here, Gerardo hearing the end of this desperate story, with admiration and new
embraces gave thanks to the Reator; and encouraging his friend withal wisely
(for his more conueniencie, and less danger) dissuaded him from an enterprise,
which, it seemed, Heaven it self so manifestly contradicted. And continuing in
their Discourse til day-breake, Claudio, with good advice, determined to
return; and so having escaped the danger, with Gerardo in his company, they
passed on to the first Village, and there friendly parted. He went toward
Granada, and the same day in the afternoon, our Gerardo being imbarkt with
favorable wind set sail for the Straits. Much ioyed he was, to see himself,
after so stupendous miseries, now free and secured from his powerful enemies,
though the remembrance of Lisis and her disastrous end, did something sour his
contentedness. The pitiful success indeed deserved a far greater
resentment, and therefore (no marvel) if his joy and griefs were thus
intermingled.

In this manner, sometimes reuoluing in his sad mind an infinity of
misfortunes, and then again, hoping that thus leaving his native soil, their
woeful remembrance would leave him, Gerardo strove to beguile the prolixe
weariness of his Voyage, and the discommodities of being at Sea: and thus they
launcht (being gotten from sight of their Port) into the maine, steering their
course directly for Italy.

The Master Mariners and Passengers were all generally filled with joy, for
the smooth calmnesse of the weather did almost assure them a happy passage: and
so by Sunne-rise, they were gotten above threescore miles from the Coast.

The affairs of humane frailetie have their ends as uncertain, as their
stablenesse unsure (a good fore-warning to our vain confidence, and a true
expression of the poor validity and weak strength of men's designs.)

Gerardo well perceived this truth, and his companions with him tasted of
fortunes heavy indignation, feeling the power of her inconstancy: for before
it was fully four of the clock, the ship-Boy with an outcry from the
Maine-Top had discovered five Sails, and not long after, to the terrible
affrightment of the hearers, he replide they were Vessels of Barbary, Frigots
of that Coast. The poor Passengers grew straight into a cold sweat, which,
changing their bloudlesse colors into pale white, left them all equally
amazed: but forewarned by the certainty of the danger, encouraging one
another, and trusting to the Ships swiftness, with the fair wind they hoped
to escape, and yet made ready for their defense.

Gerardo in this distress made known to the whole company the nobleness of
his courage, by his resolute alacrity. By this time the Frigots that had a
pretty while given the Ship chase, seeing her with the winds help gain of
them, mad to loose their booty, and scourging the waves, with the violence and
fury of their Oars, they strove to equal their speed; but they had infallibly
lost their labor, had not the wind scanted upon the poor Ship, leaving her
by that means quite distressed, which the others perceiving, soon fetched her
up, incompassing her now with shoutes and noise. They within her, changed
their first resolution; for, seeing themselves so suddenly becalmed, and
considering the advantage of their enemies, and that, though they never so well
defended themselves, they could not avoid either being taken or sunk, to
Gerardo's great grief, who would rather have dyed then yielded, they struck
sail, without expecting so much as a shot from the Enemy: which as soon as
the Pirates perceived, they boorded her, and dis-arming them that were a-boord,
(who with Mariners and others might be some forty persons) they also
distributed them to their several Vessels, and now, wonderfully gladded with
their prize, towing her on with two of their Frigots they made for Barbary. The
five Vessels had each of them four and twenty Oars on a side: two of them
belonged to one Ferru a Turk by Nation, and the rest to Ali Mami a Renegate
Greek: who (besides the present booty) had in this Voyage met with many more
of goods and Prisoners on the coast of Spain, whom, in respect there wanted
room under hatches, some of them they kept chained on one side of the stern:
these were Gerardo and some five or six more, to whose lots it fell, to be in
the selfsame Frigot where Ferru went, who, seeing Gerardo's goodly presence,
(besides his being well clad) questioned much with him, till such time as he
was interrupted by a sudden balling noise which the Turks and Moors made,
crying out that the Christian Rowers were up in Arms, and meant to force away
the Frigot. Ferru himself all in a fright, presently sought to appease the
tumult, from whose beginning resulted the pitiful success you straight shall
hear: which (the better to express, and the barbarous cruelty of those
impious Infidels, because it is the first torment that in this captivity
afflicted the good Gerardo's heart) I will particularly set down the beginning
and motive of it. The Barbarians for joy of their Prize, had licensed the poor
Christian Slaves to rest, as having been wearied with their continual former
rowing; especially, with the last spell to overtake the Ship: and being in this
quietness, a Christian found, that one of two Turbants was missing, which
amongst other things were committed to his charge (as the manner is) that the
Turks ever use to commit their things to the custody of such Christians as row
at the Oar^ where they sit:) wherefore the poor man much troubled, for fear
lest the Turk would baste him, sought up and down every where to find it, but
all in vain: his fear increasing, he desired some fellows of his, that rowed
near him at the same Oar, that giving the word, they would also pass from
one to another the Turbant that remained, to see if any had found the other
which was lost; and doing this simply without any ill intent, one of the
Renegates noted it, and giving notice to the Turks and Moors, with the
suspicion and doubt it caused, they began to cry out. The Christians rose,
and that the Turbant which passed from hand to hand, was the counter-signe of
their intent: the rest were in such an vproare, that they forced Ferr^ in a
hurrie, without expecting any further discharge which the Christians offered
to give, to have them punished; and therefore like so many ravenous Woolues,
they set upon him that sought for the Turbant, stripping him, and binding his
hands, and tying a huge stone at his feet, and him at the Maine-yard, snatched
up by a Pully, they so cruelly racked him, that his very sinews were plucked
from his limbs, and his bones broken, and the poor soul left even for dead:
though in all his pain the Christian was so honest and constant, that for all
the demands they made touching the Authors or Conspiracy, they never could
get other from him then the truth, rather faithfully calling on Heavens favor,
he freely and boldly said, they were basely and maliciously accused: yet all
would not serve to mollify the obdurate hearts of these bloody miscreants; and
so they caused the rest of the captive slaves to be stripped, and stretched from
Poope to Prow, cruelly whipped; but when fresh Executioners were ready to have
renewed the fearful sacrifice, a Turk looking by chance into his bundle of
Clothes, found the Turbant which the miserable Captive sought for: whereupon
perceiving the innocence of the Christians, crying out to loose them, he
stepped in, and told the occasion; declaring, that neither he whom they had first
racked, nor any of the rest were in any fault at all: and so with much adoo, by
these and the like reasons, which made ignorance appear in the one, and no
purpose of commotion in the other, he appeased his angry companions, who had
well-nigh with stripes and lashes torn the miserable Christians.

A sad and horrid spectacle indeed, worthy of more then humane commiseration,
which wrought in Gerardo's tender heart so sad an effect, that unable to
refrain, the trickling tears dropped down his manly cheeks, his courageous
spirits drooping, to see himself in the power of such barbarous enemies. The
ship was towed still on by the Frigots, that were garnisht and set out with
their Banners, Flags, and little Streamers; and so they steered toward the
City of Argiers, where the next day they easily arrived; and scarce had
their cutting Prowes touched in the quiet harbor, when opening, and lifting up
their hatches, they began to discover a great number of captives taken from
sundry Parts and Provinces, of both Sexes, all ages. Our sorrowful Gerardo was
with the discomfortable sight strangely daunted, and the more, when he might
see the poor creatures run to embrace each other with weeping eyes; for
having been under Deck, and in several Vessels, they had not, since the time
of their being taken till now, spoken to one another; and now astonished and
bereaved of their senses, to see such multitudes of Turks, and Moors, as
ran to the Wharfe to view them, their groans began afresh, and Gerardo's
doleful resentment to increase, by seeing the division that was made in the
midst of the harbor, separating children from parents, parents from their
children; brothers and sisters rent from each others embraces. Here, the
afflicted wife sends forth a sigh parted from her unfortunate husband; there,
the disconsolate mother, embracing her little chickes; (so much the more
vvretched, by not apprehending their own vvretchednesse) some hanging at her
amorous breasts, others at her arms, the rest (poor fools) tied to her
coats, who lowdly crying out, and bestowing her last farewell-kisses upon
those dear pledges of her intrails, beholds them, without all pity, less
hope of remedy, snatched from her eyes, she remaining like a senseless Statue,
condemned as it were, for ever seeing, never to enjoy again those sweet
comforts of her life. Amongst the rest, Gerardo expected when his turn would
come to be disposed of: but not long after in the division, he fell to Ferru
his share; so to his great grief and discomfort, he was conveyed, with
others that fell to the Turks lot, home to his house.

His manly presence had much pleased his barbarous Owner, who promising to
himself, that Gerardo must needs be some person of quality, he made sure
also of a large Ransom, at least a good Composition; for the best part of
their gain consisting in Prisoners, the Turks of small matters make
mountains, boasting (though they know the contrary) that their Prisoner is
some Prince or Lord: so, they that buy a Slave of them, first inform
themselves what he is; and though some pre instructed, conceal their
condition, yet it little auailes them: for inquiring, if the day they were
taken, they were well clad, let them be otherwise never so truly informed,
they straight baptize them for Titular persons: and the ill luck is, that so a
poor Cobbler, if he were but indifferently clothed at his being taken, passes
for such: and straightway they call him, tell him, they are well enough
informed of his quality, and know him to be Brother or Kinsman to such a Duke,
Marquess or Earl, (which comes first into their heads) and that therefore
it is bootlesse to deny it; which done, they presently clappe a strong Chain,
or Shackles upon him, in such manner that he can scarce stir. And if, seeing
himself in this extremity, the poor slave make answer, protesting they are
deceived or misinformed, it nothing helps; for they, still obstinate, will
have them to be such as they fancy them, whereby many are for ever deprived
of liberty, wanting means or ability to pay the price of the others vain
estimation: in which these Barbarians many times settled, are not ashamed also
to send young Youths to Constantinople, presenting such to the Grand Signior
and his Basha's, or other Viceroys, and great Potentates in those remote parts,
giving out, that they are the children of great Personages, and such as will
bring huge Ransomes. Thus it happened in the time of Gerardo's C^ptiuity with
three poor Soldiers, who taken prisoners in certain Vessels of Ragusa, and
coming into the Viceroy of Argiers his hands, the one a Spaniard, and the
other two Flemmings, he sent them to the Turks General his Patron, with the
titles of great Personages: but the jest being by him discovered, he caused
them to be sent back again to Argiers, writing jointly to the Viceroy, that
since those Gentlemen were so noble, and their Ransomes like to be so great,
he should suffer them to be redeemed, and send him the money; (a trick, that
for a long time after much disgraced and shamed the poor Viceroy:) but with
many other Captives it falls out less happily, since with this tyrannous
vanity, they are oftentimes perpetually banished from their native Countries:
for having once such titles bestowed on them, they are kept up close in their
Bathes, Prisons, or Towers of the Blacke-Sea, from whence they never come out
again; rather, baited with the intolerable weight of their Chains, hunger,
misery, and deadly stench, and where none can know or relieve them, they end
their sad and loathed lives.

Gerardo passed not this ill fortune yet, though in part, he had some taste of
the unsavory afflictions, that in such occasions often torment a noble and
generous spirit: for in the night of that bitter day, he was equally shut up
with his other companions in a dismal obscure Dungeon, in which, he till next
morning remained, accompanied as well by unclean and nastie creatures, as sad
and lamentable cares: now considering with what barbarous rigor he began to
to be treated, and then acknowledging, that if he should make known what he
was, the price of his Ransom would be so enhaunced, as should be impossible
for him ever to procure it: so that determining till some happier time, to
dissemble and conceal what he was, in the midst of these afflicting
cogitations, the Dungeon was opened, and he (removed) carried to the presence
of his new Master; whom he found dressing himself, in certain spacious upper
Rooms, but void of any furniture or household stuff; for even the best and
richest of those Barbarians never use any; all their mooueables and ornaments,
consisting only in a Bed, with two or three hard Quilts, four Sheets, two
Blankets, two or three Cushions, and three or four Shirts a man, with as many
paires of linen Breeches, a couple of Towels, three Handkerchiefes, a Carpet
or two, and as many Mattes to sit down, lie or eat on; a couple of Turbants
the men, and as many Coyfes after their fashion the women: and with some
scrappes and pieces of different colored Silks, the Rooms are hanged, where
they ordinarily sit upon two Cushions. This (as I say) belongs only to the best
and richest of them; for, for the rest, there needs no longer description,
then, that most penuriously base, they live promiscuously like beasts.

Gerardo here making a low obeisance to his Master, standing aloof, expected
his pleasure, by whom he was presently in reasonable good Spanish demanded,
who and whence he was, adding vvithall this following speech: Christian,
from the very hour that thou wast taken, I had a purpose (thy presence liking
me) to have thee for my Slave, though (for the effecting my desire) I was, in
exchange, forced to forgo two others for thee; in which, I suppose, I have
not done amiss; for if thy gentle presence, and good Clothes deceive me not,
thou art (doubtless) a Gentleman of vvoorth: if so, it is in vain to deny it,
for besides the incurring my just displeasure, thou vvilt also be the cause of
thine own ruin, by being either bound at an Oar, or put to some other most
laborious toil. This I am willing to make known unto thee, because, knowing
my mind, thou may also procure thine own good and Ransom accordingly: I say
accordingly, for I am not ignorant of thy quality, and the Maile that was
found with thee in the ship, as the Master of her, and some of thine own
company confessed, was of good value in Jewels and Apparel, which clearly
testify the truth. Besides, diverse letters and papers found in the same, not
only declare thee to be a Gentleman well descended, but likewise thy name,
calling thee, The Spanish Gerardo.

Here Ferru ceased, and our sad Gentleman much wondered at his strange and
crafty diligence, and therefore seeing how bootlesse it was to deny himself,
he neither would, nor durst conceal the truth, though (disguizing it all he
might) informing his Owner largely of his life, and long imprisonment, he told
him also, that by means of that, he and his kindred were utterly impouerished;
but in conclusion, put him in hope, that if he would be pleased to come to
reasonable agreement, he could make means in Spain for his ransom; at which
the Turk much pleased, looking more cheerfully upon him, replied, that he
was glad of his resolution, and that they would not disagree of price; and so
causing a great white loaf to be brought out, with some fruits, and honey
cakes, he bad him fall to: and commanded also, that two of the oldest Captives
should go abroad with him into the City, to see it and recreate himself.
Gerardo vvondred not a little at his new entertainment, which seeming to him
(by what he had heard) very unusual amongst those Infidels, he could not but
in his mind render thanks to high Heaven: and much more might he have wondered
at this singular proceeding, had he known by what means the higher Powers
guided his affairs, and the manner how his Owners brutish and cruel mind,
with such contrary testimonies of his bloody nature, was made thus tractably
propitious. The barbarous Pirate had, in diverse Dungeons, Bathes, and places of
Tillage, above three hundred Christians, and within the house where he lived,
almost an hundred more; who hearing of Gerardo's courteous usage, incompassing
him round, thought they could never have sight enough of him, nor time to
demand the cause of this novelty. For they who had a long time been subject
to his more tyrannous condition, could not but think in what he now did, there
was some particular mystery.

These and other extremes pondered those poor souls, as they gazed upon the
afflicted Gentleman, and not without cause; for none of them (doubtless) had
received, not only no such favors, but, not a word that sauoured of the least
humanity from his unhallowed lips: nor was he accustomed to make known at
all, to the party he would have ransomed, his pleasure: they rather seem to
feign an unwillingness, to the intent there may be intercession made, and so
they more largely enhaunce the price; which if the parties accept not, or fly
back from their promise, they double their Chains and Yrons, increasing more
and more their torments and miseries.

So that, they thought this proceeding quite contrary to their Masters fell
disposition, and therefore their admiration was not to be wondered at, which
might very well too, be so much the more, when they understood, he had a
reasonable handsome Chamber furnished to his mind, appointed for his Lodging.

The next day after dinner, Ferru commanded two Christians to go out with
Gerardo, and show him the most remarkable things of the City, and causing
likewise his Bolts to be knocked off, he made him put on some of the Clothes
which had been formerly taken from him; this, increasing in his poor
companions their former astonishment, the least they could conjecture, was,
that the Turk enamored on his goodly presence, would with that gentle usage
dissuade him from the Christian Faith, that so he might turn Infidel: but
others of more settlednesse, remitted all to the success of Time. Gerardo, not
a little comforted with these favors, went joyfully out with his two new
companions to see the City; of which (having precisely viewed and observed
it) he might easily in his remembrance set down a brief and exact
description, as well of the form, situation, and edifices, as Inhabitants,
their habits, and the Strangers of different Nations; which for the Readers
more delightful variety, I have thought fit, not to pass over in silence.

The City of Argiers being the chiefest, and of most fame in all Barbary, has
in it some thirteen thousand houses, enclosed with a strong wall, and is in
manner of a strung Crosbow. The Forefront, Harbor, Turrets, and Galleries
stand exposed to the North Wind. The hinder-parts (which make the aforesaid
Bow) join to a huge hill, partly steep, part otherwise; in such sort, that,
as the houses are built in ascents, they stand so one above the other, that the
first, though spacious and high, hinders not the prospect of the rest, the
latter.

The lowermost part of the City becomes the String of this Bow, which stands
so near to the Sea, that the waves furiously beat against the Walls.

There reaches naturally from thence a long neck of Land into the Sea, which
invited Cairadin Barbarossa, to build a Harbor there, to make the haven more
secure, and join to it a little Island near the City, with a goodly
Rampire.

The whole Circuit is of most strong Lime and Stone, and (after the ancient
manner) battlemented, and in height it has some thirty handfuls, yet toward
the Sea (as being founded upon high Rocks) it is much higher. In thickenesse
it may be some three yards and a half; and besides, upon the Rampire, that
cuttes off the distance from the City to the Island, there is another strong
Curtain of a Wall about some three hundred paces in length. This
Counter-circuit was built, to resist the swelling fury of the devouring waves,
which beat terribly on that side, when the West, and North-west winds do
blow: to the intent also, that they hinder not those passengers that walk upon
the secure Wharfe.

The City has nine goodly Gates to it, and upon them and the rest of the
Wall, Watch-towers and Bulwarks, in which there is usually great Artillery,
though the chief defense relies not on them, but consists most in three
Fortresses, which the Turks have made: the first, near the Gate called
Babaluete, founded by Vthali: the second, upon a little raised Mount near the
Castle, made by Mahamet Basha: and the third and last, near the very self-same
place, where that renowned Prince and Emperor Charles the fifth in his unlucky
enterprise, pitched his Royal Pauillion, at what time he laid siege to that
den of Rascals; a siege (though memorable) unfortunate for the success.

Within the City, all the houses, poor and rich, one with another, may
contain upon the aforesaid number: for, though the circuit be not very
spacious, and that no house has passing one court to it, yet the streets are
so straight and narrow, that a man on horseback can hardly pass them, or for
two a-breadth on foot it is impossible: except in the Marketplace, the
principal street called the Coco, that thwarts the whole City.

In fine, the whole and all of it lies so compactly close, and in-wouen
together, that it rather appears a confused Maze, then humane habitation. They
have neither Baywindow, or any other that looks into the street: for their
jealousy over their wives and daughters permit not the use of such.

The Inhabitants are Turks, Moors, Renegates, Jews, besides the greatest
part, Christian captives, which are sometimes (a strange number) near five and
twenty thousand persons.

The natural Inhabitants, are, some of a reasonable good complexion, but the
most swartie, all passing well favored. The women are generally white, and
many of them brave and very handsome; all of them clothing themselves
(according to their calling, or indeed rather, their abilities) sometimes in
died Linen, cloth of several colors, Silks and Taffeta's, and otherwhiles
in Damask or Veluets. All which, when Gerardo saw, together with an
innumerable number of poor Christian slaves, that dragging their long Chains
after them, and busied in base drudgeries, covered the very streets and Gates,
his heart could not but yerne, considering how God, for our sins, had so long
permitted that Nest and Sanctuary for Pirates, from whom Christendom has, and
daily does receive so continual damages.

In all former Ages, Africa, the Worlds third part, where this barbarous place
lies, has been (as all Writers testify) taxed of perjury and baseness. And
the reason is, because the property of the Climate, and native condition of the
Soil is such, that it seems to have no other virtue more essential, then to
produce wild Beasts, frightfull Monsters, pestilentiall Serpents, deadly and
effectual poisons; and by reason the Air here was so unwholesome, Lucan
counsels men to live far enough from such a Country, where the drowzie
Aspis, the inconstant Chersidros, the spotted Cenchris, the sandy Amodites,
the dis-ioynted Cerastes, the dry Dipsas, the Scitalis that casts her skin
in Winter, the heavy double-headed Amphisbaena, the great and venomous
Dragons; and lastly, the murdering Basilisk, King and Monarch of those
fearful and frightfull Goblins, were not engendered, but to the destruction of
mankind.

So that, of necessity, men borne under such a Constellation, and
participating of the qualities, must needs be barbarous, rude, discourteous,
inhumane, and consequently, they who have to do with them, miserable and
wretched; and not such alone, but their servants and poor slaves, above all
others most unfortunate. Wherefore, no resentment might seem exorbitant in our
sad Gentleman, considering himself now gotten into their clutches. The two
captives his Guides, were in some comfort, and Gerardo, to suit with their good
courage, dissembled all he could his own sad disquietnesse, by diuerting
himself with the different fashions, shapes and several complexions, that, at
each step of his, were to his eyes presented: till coming to the
Marketplace (the Cities chief street) in midst of it, he might see certain
smooth stones, all covered and spotted with fresh blood; at which, amazed, he
asked one of his companions if* he knew the reason: who, not without abundance
of tears, made answer; That, not passing three days since, the Viceroy of
Arg^ers had commanded a valiant Christian, by Nation a Spaniard, by Country and
Birth of Castile, and Toledo, to be dragged at a wild Horses tail, and
afterward put to the horriblest death, that barbarous fury could invent; such,
as his inhumanitie will never be forgotten, as long as there is an eyewitness,
or an ear to hear it left.

The compassionate Gerardo was struck dumb with this doleful Preface; and at
last infinitely desired to hear the whole Story; and (if it might not be too
troublesome to them) the Original occasion of this bloody spectacle. Al which,
both his Companions equally willing to satisfy, that it might the safelier be
done, they thought good to retire themselves into the fields, which they soon
did; and sitting them down upon a hard Rock, he that first gave notice of
the Tragedy, began thus to make his Relation.

I would not, worthy Countri-man, that your self or any other that shall hear
this woeful Story from my mouth, should owe the least thanks to my slender
pains in reciting it; since the cause and motive of recounting, must be to me
sufficient satisfaction; which is, the exalting Gods glory, and his inscrutable
Judgments, which, in the deeds and actions of this most happy, most excellent
Martyr, seem with particular admiration to shine bright: whom, having first, by
incredible means delivered from many mortal dangers, in which he might have
been irremediably ruined, at last he brought him to this happy end, and to the
greater advancement of our faith, and reproach of Moorisme, his divine Majesty
permitted, that in this rare man should be jointly seen the Constancy and
Valor of all the ancient Martyrs, the contempt of temporal riches, of life,
which naturally we so much desire to nourish and conserve.

In the year six hundredth and three, this valiant famous Toledanian was taken
Prisoner by Iafer Basha, Viceroy of this City, his name was Fernando
Palomeque, who came to his slavery in this ensuing manner.

To begin first necessarily with his life, he was, in his younger days, guilty
of the death of a certain Officer of Justice in Toledo, that for some
disorderous riot would have apprehended him and others: but himself, knowing
his companions were taken, and willing to escape the danger, retired secretly
into the Kingdom of Valencia, where, having lived some years (age and change
of manners coming upon him) an occasion offered, he married near the Sea
side, and with some small wealth he had in portion with his Wife shortly
after, set out a Brigantine Vessel with fourteen Oars to a side, to Sea,
which (manned with tall fellows that had long been used to Roue upon several
Coasts) held her course for Barbary, and all that Coast over he used to do
notable hurt to the Moors, bringing home with him diverse booties and
Prisoners, so that in time, the valorous Palomeque grew to be so courageously
hazardous, that landing often at this Port, he would march up to the very
gates: and from thence carry away the Moorish Pesants, that (as their manner
is) draw thither to rest more securely under shelter of the Courts of Guard,
and sometimes he would leave his Dagger sticking in the gate, called Babaluete
(which looked toward the Harbor) and the Turks in the morning finding it
without farther inquiry, soon presumed whose doing it was: such was the
opinion they had of his valiant courage, which made his name terrible over all
that Coast; insomuch that the Moorish women, when they would still and quiet
their little ones, used in their language to cry out unto them, Accute, caychi
Palomeque, that is, Peace, or Palomeque will come.

Proceeding thus in this Rouing Trade in the beginning of the aforesaid year
(being winter time) he left the Wharfe of Valencia, having now also another
Brigantine, which, by means of his gains by several booties gotten, he had
with valiant Soldiers manned out; and now he began to plot and lay about with
himself, how he might perform in this Voyage some notable stratagem: and
with that intent lanching into the deep, and (supposing, like one cunning in
the Trade, that Winter being now so far entered, all the shipping of Argiers
would be in close Harbor) having the wind favorable, and not passing two
hundredth and fifty miles from Valencia hither, in less then two days he got
sight of Barbary, where one night about a League to the westward of this City,
he took a Moore, who told him, that most of the Pirates Vessels were in the
Harbor vnrigged, as well of their Frigots, as Brigantines; wherefore,
Palomeque, thinking it very facile for him to effect his design (which was, to
enter the Port and fire the secure Vessels) without more delay, taking his
trusty companions aside, he made known unto them his intent, and finding their
willingness answerable, by midnight (that being the fittest season) he set the
Prowes of his Vessels to Argires, and vn-perceiued, boldly entered the Port,
insomuch, that he presently grappled with the enemies Frigots, amongst a world
of Turkish Ships hard by at Anchor: And (his companions instructed) their
order was this:

Pernando had charged all his Soldiers, that they should be very circumspect
in casting fire into all the Shipping; to which purpose, he delivered them
store of wilde-fire balls, and other such materials, of which he was
plentifully provided; and himself, whilst this was effecting, leaping on
shore, would go to the Bulwark or Cities Gate toward the Seaside, on which
(as a token of his valor) he would (according to his custom) fasten his
Poniard, but not without much hazard, in respect, that the Turks kept Watch
and Ward all night long, as well in the Harbor which he was to cross over, as
at the Bulwark and Gate, whither he meant to go.

With this resolution, the valiant Toledanian got on shore, and marching boldly
on to the place, struck his Dagger in three several times, leaving it at last
fastened in the nailed Boords. In the mean time his companions with all the
speed and cunning they could, cast their wilde-fire into the Turkish Ships; but
such was their ill luck, that (do what they could) the fire would never once
take hold: which when the enraged Christians saw, some of them leapt aboard
the Frigots, doing all they might to burn them; and being (though to small
purpose) busy in this work, the Turkish Guard about the Harbor and
Bulwarks, as also some Moors that lay a-boord the several Vessels, awoke,
and took notice of the Christians and their intent, which made them cry out to
those within the City, whereby, in an instant, both within and without, there
arose a terrible noise and vproare. By this time Palomeque was coming back
from the gate, and hearing the Turks and Moors in alarm, running in to his
Soldiers, he began to encourage them not to desist from the commenced
enterprise, and give fire again; which, notwithstanding, to their common
amazement, would never burn; wherefore he, mad with what he saw, not fearing
the infinite numbers of Barbarians that stood before him, with his sword in hand
made way, casting himself amongst the foremost, and satisfying his anger with
the deaths of some two or three of the Watchmen, he got safely aboard his own
Brigantines; and seeing the Moors now flocking together from all parts, he
commanded his men to weigh Anchor and to Sea. In this manner got Palomeque out
of the Port, and his men tugged as fast as they could at their Oars; but he
himself was so sad and pensatiue, that, after he had gone fifty miles, he
was upon resolving (as he told us since) to return, within three days
again to his enterprise.

Whilst these things passed, the Viceroy had notice of the success; and
therefore (though it were night) he willed that five of his best Captains
should come to him: whom he presently commanded, that they should with all
speed, disperse themselves several ways in pursuit of the Brigantines, and
though they rowed themselves to death, not return without them. The five
Masters having heard the Viceroys pleasure, were willing to effect his desire:
and so, suddenly manning their Galleys, one of them held his course Eastward,
and the other West: two others North; and the last Greek No-North-East. And
having lusty Rowers, and a strong desire to overtake the Christians, they
drove amain. The Pirates that went Northward directly for Valencia, rowed so
fiercely, that, the next morning before noone, they descried the two
Brigantines, that had now also kenned the Galleys: and suspecting the worst,
began to fly, and the Turks to give them chase above forty miles; till at
length, the Galleys having too great an advantage, ouertooke the hindermost, in
which our valiant Spaniard went; which, being boorded, but not without many
wounds, deaths and brave resistance, was at length taken, and the men in her,
Prisoners, whilst the other in the mean time escaped.

The Turks were not a little glad of the good success, and so much the more,
when by the Christians they understood the famous Palomeque to be one of them,
and also the intent of his Voyage: wherefore with wonderful rejoicing they
came back to this City; where they were no sooner landed, when (his
Captivity being known) all the Harbor and Seashore was covered with
Turks, Moors and Renegates, desirous to see with their eyes, him, whom
formerly they so much feared in their hearts. The Viceroy was exceedingly
gladded, and thanking the Masters, for having so well discharged his commands,
he willed that Palomeque should be carried to his Bathes, and there placed
with the rest of his Slaves, whither by next day a huge rabble of Moorish
boys were gotten together to behold (as a Prodigy) the distressed Palomeque
tied with a long Chain, and marked in the face for a Slave.

The Viceroy longed for examples sake to perform some notable piece of Justice
upon him, and so, without deferring his purpose, commanded, that setting up a
Gallows in the place where the Spaniard was landed, he should be taken, and
as chief Ringleader of such bold enterprises, be hung by the heels at a
Tenter-hooke, till with that miserable torment he dyed.

This barbarous intent was even ready (to the whole Cities rejoicing that went
out to see it) to be put in execution; but Heaven, that had not yet determined
the happy accomplishment of his martyrdom, permitted, that (coming to notice
of some of the Captain Pirates, how he should be put to death) they thinking
it too great a cruelty, and consulting amongst themselves, they resolved to
present their supplication to the Viceroy, and desire him to revoke the
sentence: and amongst many forcible reasons they alleged, the chiefest was,
the custom of good War, to procure what spoil they could to an enemy, in
goods, lands, or shipping: but not to punish the persons with death: and the
former they did, as, likewise the Christians to them, by destroying and
pillaging all that came in their ways: but such cruelty, they said, was
unfitting; for that happily the Spaniard might requite them in the like kind, if
they (as it was likely enough) should at any time be taken Prisoners: and they
that insisted most upon this, were the two that had taken him: wherefore the
Viceroy, much against his will, was forced to give order for vn-hanging him,
and (having remained so a long hour) to be returned to his bathes to the rest
of the Captives, by whom he was most lovingly comforted, and by a very good
Surgeon then amongst them, cured.

A long time after his recovery he remained in this Captivity, the Viceroy
not once offering to treat of his Ransom; though, diverse, at Palomeques
instance and entreaty proposed it: but he to avoid those frequent
persuasions, toward the end of his Government, in exchange of other Slaves and
handsome Youths, which he hearkened after to present to the Grand Signiors
Favorites, gave him to one of the Governors of Tremesin; to which place
Palomeque was shortly after (to his no small grief) carried: and now all his
means being gone by the loss of his Brigantines, he was utterly destitute of
all his hope; which yet at Argiers he had, that by help of the Trinitarian
Friars, who collect and carry charitable Ransomes for diverse Captives, as also
by the goodness of some other Christian Merchants trading in those parts, his
liberty might be effected: but wanting both these in Tremesine, he altogether
despaired of remedy; besides, his misery was more increased; for his present
Master, no sooner had notice of the Viceroy his leaving Argiers (for fear of
whom he durst not sell him) when, he caused him to lead the wofullest life
that was possible, all to the intent that the poor man should procure him a
round ransom, being impossible for him to effect, as you have heard. In fine,
seeing himself so strangely afflicted, and misse-vsed by his cruel Owner, he
was forced to demand of him, in how much he esteemed the price of his
liberty; telling him withal, that though himself were extremely poor and
wretched; yet, if his demand were any thing reasonable, he would write to
some friends at Argiers and others in Spain to relieve him; which, when the
Barbarian heard, he made known unto him, that he esteemed his ransom at two
hundredth Ducats, which he would have paid down upon the nail (threatening a
most horrible death withal unto him, if he did not speedily provide the
aforesaid sum:) Whereupon the poor Captive, not daring to reply, thought
upon some means for his liberty, and to this purpose, wrote to many Christian
Merchants, as also to the Bathes and Captives of Argiers, in which, for his
great Valor, he was well known and esteemed, giving them particular account
of the infinite miseries he endured, and requesting them for his ransom: so
that at last, against all expectation, the redeeming Friars helping, the two
hundredth Ducats were sent him, which he forthwith delivered to his cursed
Patron; who very leisurely fell to telling the money, and having done, without
a word spoken, laid hold upon a knotty Truncheon, and catching the poor Slave
by the Collar, gave him diverse bangs, crying out as then, Traitor, Dog; Is
this all I asked for thy Ransom? To this the miserable Christian, not a little
afflicted, made answer: Why, Sir, are not the whole two hundredth there?
perhaps, there may two or three be wanting. Good Master, be not angry for so
small a sum, since it shall go hard, but I will make them up. Whereto the
Infidel striking him a-fresh with the Truncheon, replide; Dog, I demanded no
less then two hundredth and fifty; which when Palomeque heard, and perceiving
withal the Barbarians villainy, he was glad to write again in the same style
for the other fifty, that were wanting, which, being not long after remitted
unto him, most iocund now, as thinking the miseries of this captivity might
have end, he presented them to his Patron, which was no sooner done, when,
that Infernal Monster, caught hold on him again, and with blows and buffets
most shamefully entreated him, saying, he was to give him two hundredth and
fourscore Ducats, or he should dye for it.

What should the unfortunate man do in this case? seeing himself so
causelessely tormented; and on the other side, considering, that, that cruel
beast had neither word, nor honesty to rely on? Poor soul! he accused his
hard fortune, bewailed his misery, importuned Heaven, melted himself to sighs
and tears, and wounded the very air with sad groans: but seeing there was no
other remedy, he durst not resist the infamous mind of his barbarous Master;
and, so, re-soliciting his charitable benefactors, by giving them to understand
of his strange misfortunes, he so moved some of their hearts to compassion,
that, in a short time they furnished him with the thirty Ducats that were yet
behind: and, so, carrying them to the Governor, he desired, that his Letter of
freedom might be drawn, since he had now gotten him the rest of his money.

Who could have thought, but that all was here ended, and that the Barbarian
was thoroughly satisfied? but nothing less: he rather (shameless) tells him, he
must make up the price of his Ransom, to just three hundred Ducats; for that
he, who could so speedily find two hundred and fourscore, might easily procure
the rest. And to force him to this, swears by his Prophet, that if he did not
comply, he would burn him alive. When the valiant Palomeque had heard out
this incredible wickedness, and that the inhumane Rogue, had neither fear of
God, faith nor reason, considering also how much pains and shame that money
had already cost him; that, with the importunity of his strange, several new
demands, he had vvearied all his Christian friends; and that now no place was
left from whence to expect further remedy, (his patience quite giving him
over, and his loathed life grown desperate) in an instant he ran to a sword,
which hung in the Chamber where they were, and clozing with his Patron,
thrust him (unable to defend himself) so often through the body, that he
tumbled to the ground; and there, cutting and hacking him, at every blow with
furious indignation repeates, There, Dog, take and satisfy thy insatiable
avarice of money.

There were present toward night when this was done, two of the Governors
Renegate Boys, (or Ingles rather) each being about a sixteen years of age.
These, when they saw their Master thus slain, began to enforce their cries,
but Palomeque quickly ouertooke one of them and slew him, the other was too
nimble for him, who had now raised the neighbors well-nigh, so that Palomeque
seeing his danger, was feign (the best he could) to shift for himself, and
vvanting no courage, with crossing three or four Lanes, through an open Gate
in one of them, he got into the fields, and running up and down there, at
length (unespied) he made to the chief Governors Garden, in which he knew a
captive Countriman of his served as Gardener. To him then Palomeque addressing
himself, made known his distress, and considering how strict a search would
be made for him, by mutual advice of both it was agreed, that Palomeque should
be locked into a Vault, which stood in a secret part of the Garden, where for
his safety he remained fifteen days, without coming day or night out of
that dismal obscurity, till at last hoping the worst was past, he determined
to fly by land to Oran, a Garrison town in Barbary belonging to the King of
Spain. To this resolution, though full of danger, (as being his last refuge)
he was forced; and such was his ill fortune, that the second day of his
travel, before he was aware, he lighted upon certain wild Alarbes Cottages,
and perceiving his danger, about to have retired; they seeing him, and he
defending himself, and withal offending those which followed him, unable long
to resist their violence, especially by being ouerturned by a horseman, that
pitifully rode over him and bruised his face; and wounded in his body, with
some Arrowshots, he was forced to yield. Not many days after the misfortune,
this Arabian, whose prisoner our Palomeque was, coming to the Port of Sargel,
a town not passing twenty Leagues to the Westward of this; he sold him to a
Tagarin, or Moriscan Pyrate of Andaluzia, who straight set him to the Oar,
with the rest of the Christian captives that were in his Frigot, where (though
his face was bruised, and he disfigured) yet he was by many known, who had
been formerly acquainted with him in this City; where the occasion of his
flight was by this time diuulged. Well knew the sorrowful Palomeque the danger
he was in, and therefore very sad and pensatiue, not knowing what course to
take, he justly feared, that if the Frigot went to Argiers, he should there be
put to death: which made him resolve to set up his rest upon his valor and
industry, either nobly to die, or bravely to escape.

It seemed that Fortune dallying with this man, presented him with all the
occasions he could wish for, that she might in the accomplishment, the better
show her wavering inconstancy; and so in midst of this troublesome confusion,
she offered him this last means, in which he showed to the world his
courageous mind, undaunted courage. Argiers was at this time much afraid, lest
the forces of men and munition, which our King Don Philip the third caused to
be in a readiness, (for the more safe expulsion of the Morisco's) in the most
important Ports of Spain, were meant to her; and therefore one of her Viceroys
cares was, to command, that all the Wheat which might be had in the
Territory, and other parts of Africa, should be brought hither; to which
effect, he sent to Sargel, giving order to the aforesaid Tagarin, Owner of our
Castilian, to repair to the City of Bona for provisions; which he
accordingly effecting, as soon as he came thither, landed Wheat, Butter, and
other provisions, even till Midsummer Eve, at which time all the Turks and
Moors went on shore, each desirous to buy some things for his family at home,
so that, not passing twelve or fourteen Soldiers left now aboard, the
courageous Palomeque intimating thus much to his companions that carried
Victuals and burdens to and fro from the Town to the Frigot, they perceiving
the slacknesse of their Masters, began to lay hold upon the vvondrous occasion
that was offered, to seize the Frigot. Palomeque too so helped on, that at
length they resolved at their next unloading to effect their purpose. The
Christians were in all, of those the Viceroy sent, and those that belonged to
the barbarous Andaluzian, some sixty and odd persons; and being thus resolved,
as they entered with their Clothes and Victuals, the Steward of the Frigot,
who was also one of the conspiracy, gave them four Turkish Semitars, which
he had kept secretly hidden; and the rest that had no swords, laid hold upon
Plankes, Billets, or any kind of Arms that came next to hand, which fury or
necessity ministered to them; and this done, they as suddenly set upon the
Turks that remained in the Frigot: Palomeque rushing amongst them, gave one a
terrible cut in the head, and he and his companions so outragiously bestirred
themselves amongst the rest, and so furiously oppressed them, that they forced
four of eight Turks which defended the Stern, to cast themselves ouer-boord
into the Sea. They that remained fore and off, sought all they could to hinder
the Christians from cutting the Cables, in which all their hopes cosisted; for
they were sure (if they could keep the Christians from making to sea from
their Anchors) their own companions would soon from Land give them aid: which
fell out as happily for them as they could wish; since their enemies unable to
withstand, gave leave to the multitudes of Turks and Moors that every way
beset them, to come aboard to their fellows; who with their shot made such a
slaughter amongst the poor unarmed, naked Christians, that having slain most
of them, they now entered all in at the fore-Castle, which they compelled the
Defendants to yield up.

The Tagarin thus re-possessed of his Vessel, the first thing he did, was, to
clappe such (as he thought fit) under Hatches, and threatening the rest with
grievous torments, he began to inquire out the author of this rebellion, (which
understood by some) their base fear made them not only confess the truth,
but desiring also to gain their Patrons good will, they made known unto him,
(which they might well have concealed) that the causer of this sedition, was,
the famous and feared Palomeque: with which, he extremely enraged, though in
part well pleased to have that party in his power, of whom so many wished to
be revenged, caused him to be kept in sure hold, and being arrived at Argiers,
he gave the Viceroy account of the whole success, and the Author of it:
desiring him for cloze and vp-shot of his discourse, that he would be pleased
to have some exemplarie justice inflicted upon him. The Basha, from the first
time of his arrival from Constantinople, desired much to know Palomeque, as,
being extraordinary affectionate to his strange valor and courage; and so
unable to dissemble his longing, he commanded to have him forthwith brought
to his presence, where having vvistly eyed him, and duly considered, that if
this man would turn Mohammedan, (besides the great good service he might do
his Prophet) he should also gain the Grand Signior an excellent, important
Soldier; after he had a little questioned with him, he proposed at last his
intent: sometimes seeking by fair means, and then again by threats to
reduce him to his purpose; and not only assured him (if he would fulfill his
desire) his life, but with great oaths and offers obliged himself, to choose
him a wife that should bring him large possessions, wherewith he might live
nobly, and maintain himself in all plenty. To all which, our honest
Spaniard, with much freedom answered, That his Highness needed not so vainly
trouble himself, to persuade him to so desperate a madness, from the
accomplishment of which he was so far, that with the trial, he should
better perceive by his constant resolution: for that not only the riches and
earthly fortunes proposed, were insufficient to make him forsake his Religion
he professed; but from that instant also he promised to suffer for it an
infinity of Torments, death, and Martyrdom. But for all this answer, the
Viceroys hopes, nor their persuasions present ceased not; though neither one
nor other, nor the Rack set before him, were once able to mollify his
firmness, rather with an invincible courage, when they most threatened, he
(least caring) smiled: wherefore the Viceroy, as well vexed with his
perseverance, as importuned by a great number of Turks and Moors, that cried
to have him put to death, without more delay, caused him to be delivered to the
kindred of those that were slain by him, that they might take what revenge
they thought fittest on him: and straight this news was blown throughout the
whole City, so that (being known who it was that should die) the streets were
in a trice even strewed with people; and the women unaccustomed to be seen,
got to their doors, and upon their Turrets with confused showtes of gladness
to be spectators.

Whilst these things past in every corner of the vproard City, the Turks and
Moors that were with Palomeque in the Palace, weary of reuiling, commanded a
vvild horse to be brought, and tied him with cords to his tail: and in that
manner he was dragged to the Marketplace, where those dogs perceiving, that
if they passed farther on, the Prisoner dying in that torment, might escape
others more cruel and bloody prepared for him, moved with their ravenous
desires, they made him to be unbound, and a base Moore, that was to be his
Executioner, suddenly stepped out; who fixing on the ground a pair of Stocks
near Palomeque, of some yard long, he laid hold on his left leg, and putting
it through a hole of the logge, proceeded in his Office, saying, Faithless
Christian, is it possible that (the Viceroy having pardoned thee, by offering
thee life, if thou will turn Moore) persisting so obstinately in thine error,
thou will rather suffer thy self to be torn in pieces? Consider, wretched
man, whilst yet thou have breath, and time to repent thy folly, beseeching his
Highness to use his accustomed pity and clemency to thee. To this not
falling one jot from his high courage, with an angry tone Palomeque suddenly
replied: Wretched Barbarian, thou, and all those of your damned Sect that
behold me, are those that blindly err, and are most miserable; since following
the senseless abuses of a cursed Impostor, you suffer your selves to run
headlong into damnation: and therefore I neither fear the torments of so
loathsome, nasty a generation, nor make any other reckoning then thou have
seen of their menaces. Cut, divide, tear, and dis-ioyne this wearied Trunk
of mine: when you have done all, and that this feeble body perish by your
miscreant hands; yet my soul, never forsaking her true Creator, shall mount to
heaven, and his divine goodness shall (I doubt not) give me courage and
sufferance for the extremest tortures you can inflict: and with this, raising a
more then manly voice, he concluded, crying out, A Christian I am, and a
Christian I will dye, maugre your powers, and Hels together. No sooner had he
so ended, when the merciless Hangman at four or five blows cut off his
stirrup leg close by the knee, and some Moors holding him from falling, gave
order to the same Barbarian, that as he had cut off the leg in the
supporting place, he should do the same to his sword-arme, serving both members
alike, which had been the cruel terrors to their nation. This was (as the
former) fulfilled, and our valiant Spaniard now turned into a double Spring of
blood, the grief and torment of his dismembered corpse, could not but be even
insupportable; but heaven gave this blessed Soul strength and courage to
suffer, filling with amazement, all the Turks, Moors and Renegates, by whom
in infinite numbers this horrible spectacle was encompassed. After this, the
body vnder-propped by four persons, they expected till the Gibbet was set up,
where he was to be hoysted, and fastened upon Tenter-hookes, which was soon
done, and his body caught up in the midst by a Pully, to the highest part of
the Gibbet, and being furiously let down again, fixed upon the Iron hooks,
which were set upon the fearful Engine, and so the expiring body was struck
through by those sharp points: but the blessed Palomeque in midst of that
dolorous Trance, lost not the least part of his manly courage; rather, in all
those cruel and fearful torments, the marvelous splendor of his true
faith, and firm affection to his Redeemer, shined more gloriously; upon whom
calling with miraculous perseverance, he gave up the ghost, after he had
remained almost four and twenty hours in that terrible anguish, to the
general astonishment of a world of barbarous Turks and Moors present at his
glorious departure. The next morning upon the Board, to which his arm and hand
was nailed, appeared an Epitaph in Verse, written in a fair sheet of white
Parchment, which being read by many Christians, before the Moors could take
that and the member down to burn them; and my self having been one amongst
the rest that had a sight of it, I think it not amiss, for the goodness, to
make repetition of it unto you.

Fix, Christian Passenger, thine eyes
On this brave hand: that Trunk, that lies
Now, (a void Carkase,) prey to Foul,
That late enclosed a glorious Soul.
Weep not for him, that joyed to dye,
To live a Martyr lastingly:
Dry up thy tears, for him; who (blessed)
Pitties our woes, that want his rest.
Let such as love their Countries good,
Dye Skarfes in Palomeque's blood,
And wear the Red; that, when some he
Half Barbary in Arms shall see
Hereafter, with the Skarlet sight,
Whole Squadrons he may put to flight.
You Captives, home to Spain that wend,
Those golden Sands bid Tagus send
His Ransom; and, Granada's Town,
Thy sacred Mount, this Martyr, crown.
Here ceased the compassionate Christian, leaving Gerardo to equal pity, but
with much more admiration at the strange success, and now before their Patron
should be at home, to find fault with their long being abroad, they were
willing, by way of prevention, to return to the Lodging.

You heard before, how Gerardo had a Chamber appointed by himself, where
separated from the other Captives, he might with some cheerfulness pass the
irkesomnesse of his slavery. Hither (taking leave of his companions) he
entered, and ready to sit him down in a little corner where his bed stood, upon
the Couerlet (contrary to his expectation) he found his supper wrapped up in a
poor course linen Clowt; which was, a loaf of bread, and some little fruit;
and giving thanks presently to his divine Maker, who in so great misery had
granted this particular favor unto him; about to cut the bread, he found a
piece of paper, which (to conceal the bulk and bigness of the same, was often
folded) stuck in it; which held him in no small suspense, till vnwrapping the
folds, he might see a woman's hand (as he gessed) in Spanish Characters, which,
though an ill one to read, yet looking more warily upon the Letters, he might
make a shift to collect out of them the ensuing Contents.

Christian, Heaven that has permitted thee to come to so great misfortune,
comfort thy afflicted heart; be of good courage, and despair not of thy
remedy. If the Patron this night set a price upon thy ransom, and it may seem
excessive to thee, be not troubled with his exorbitancie, nor disquiet him with
thy excuses: rather (because thou can not help it) yield to his demand,
asking first, sufficient respite. In which time, if, from Spain thou should
not be relieved, God Almighty may be pleased, that here thy wants shall be
supplide. I enjoin thee no secrecy, since thine own affairs will well
represent unto thee how much it imports thee.

Whom would not the Contents of these lines have rapt with admiration? and, who
again, in so sad an estate could but have received comfort, with such hopes?
which, though doubtfully fantastical; yet, did much rowze up Gerardo's
afflicted spirits, who (it may well be said) never found himself more wavering
and irresolute, then with the present success: for, though on one side his
willing confidence might give some credit to it; yet, on the other, his
judgment and good advice obliged him to a heedy fear of his barbarous Masters
subtlety, whose stratagem he might well suppose this was, to make him yield to
his demand, (which once performed) it would be altogether impossible for him to
be again freed from it.

In this manner he rested, betwixt two opinions, uncertain in his election,
till, such time as Ferru, being come in, he was called to go to him; so that
with this shortness of time, he now at length resolved to conform himself
to the instruction of the Letters unknown Owner.

Ferru, had but as then newly supped; and, therefore (though he found him
alone) he well perceived, that just as he came in, some women had retired
newly out of his company, for his eyes got a sight of them, as they drew
certain Curtains that served for the rooms partition.

Gerardo had many times heard, that the Moorish women were never so nice, as to
hide them from being seen by their Slaves; and therefore this seemed the
stranger nouelty unto him: but without consulting further with his suspicions,
he hearkened to his Patrons discourse, who, having courteously asked him of
his health, and he answered as respectively to his Masters content, he heard
him on, in this manner: Esteem it, Christian; for no small happiness, that
thou art come into my power: for (let me tell thee) had thou been in any of
our hands else, thy captivity would have been so insupportable to thee, that,
thou would not only not have expected thy Masters pleasure, but thou thy
self would have proposed thine own liberal Ransom, though it might not
have been accepted: which we use to do often, not, that any of us are
unwilling to ransom our Prisoners, but that they with seeing how difficultly
their liberties are obtained, may make the greater estimation of them, and
accordingly their own offers voluntarily the larger. I, Gerardo, omitting this
common custom, have been willing to excuse toward thee, all prolixe
suspension of misery; and have therefore left thee free to exempt thy self
from my other Captives, which I shall continue so to do, if thou resolve to
pay me for the absolute clearing of thy person and ransom two thousand
Ducats, which price, measured with moderation, I demand: and, that, being no
greater a sum, thou may cause it to be the sooner raised in thine own
Country. Thus, thou have heard my last resolution: go then to thy Chamber,
and bethink thee of a fit time and respite for the accomplishment (which
being not ouer-tedious) thou shall the better please me: but withal know,
that it is in vain, and to thy prejudice, to reply upon the said quantity;
for (not to weary thy self) I am assured thou art well able to pay it.

Gerardo, as soon as ever he heard the exorbitant sum named, would willingly
have answered the Patron, making known his impossibility of payment, neither
had he omitted so doing (knowing the scarcity and shortness of his own
fortunes, which by his suite and long imprisonment had been decreased;) but
that, just as he was ready to unfold his lips to speak, he might see one of the
women from the Curtains becken with her hand from her, giving by that dumb
language to understand, that he should be gone: (which increasing his care) yet
he immediately obeyed, and left the room, extremely sorrowful; for his
Patrons wilful obstinacy wonderfully afflicted him, and more, the difficulty
of the accomplishment; wherefore, his captivity now like to be more tedious
then he thought for, he could not but fall into afresh resentment of his
calamities.

Plunged in these cares, Gerardo passed all that night, and part of the next
day, when about dinnertime a Christian shee-Slaue brought him his ordinary
sustenance, and leaving it with him, he found, as the first time, a Paper,
which (opened) showed him these lines:

She, who to day and yesterday wrote to thee, is the same, who last night made
signs, that without replying to the Patron, thou should turn thy back:
Take it not ill, Gerardo, for the experience of his condition, forced me to it,
and had thou contradicted, the least of thy danger must have been to lie
in a close dungeon, which might have crossed and dashed many good proiects we
must set on foot: Arm then thy self with patience, and demand of Ferru six
months respite (four at least he will be sure to grant thee) for thy
ransom, in which time thou may send and hear from Spain; and I, by heavens
help, may think upon some convenient general remedy for us all.

The greatest light that this Letter gave to Gerardo, was, to increase in him a
greater astonishment and confusion, but, disposed wholly to follow the advice
of that invisible Counselor, he put it in execution: and, just as the Paper
fore-spoke, it befell him with his Patron; and therefore from that very moment,
he purposed to write to his Brother Leoncio and his dear Mother, giving them
notice of his miserable captivity, conueying his Letters by means of some
Christians ransomed, by the Trinitarian Redeeming Friars, who returned for
Spain; where they with the news no sooner were landed, when (for his
Tragical successes had made him famous) his Captivity was spread through all
those Provinces; I will not (for breuities sake) cumber my self, with
describing the fresh tears of his loved Mother, or the just grief of his good
Brother, his best friend Leoncio, and kindred: only I must not slightly
ouerpasse the sad moan and amorous resentment of the fair ill-recompenced
Nise, who still showed to the world her firm and loyal affection, since
neither Gerardo's obdurate hardness, his disdainful proceeding, strange
forgetfulness, nor time, that makes all thing to be forgotten, could one jot
diminish her affection, nor lastly, excuse her afflicted amorous heart, from
the grief and torment that seized it, as soon as she understood of the
bondage of her dear desired Owner.

She had (if in this Histories first part you remember) taken Sanctuary at a
Nunnery, from whence (conforming her self to her Fathers will) she attended
the prosecution of her suite with Gerardo, which she had soon given over, but
that a filial respectfull fear, and the hope of obtaining him for a Husband,
detained her: and therefore the first happy news of his liberty, she bore with
equal joy and sadness; though in her Father it made a deeper impression: for
as in men's noble breasts such hurtful accidents have a more powerful
operation, then diseases or the bodies infirmities: so, the considering
himself and his child dishonored, (hopeless of amends) shortened his days,
and quickly ended his life; insomuch that Nise's discomfort and solitariness
was increased, and the more, with the care of her estate and Family: though
none of all these were sufficient to draw her from the Monastery; where, many
a time, she would profess, that, living without her Gerardo, she would there
end her weary life. Here then the news came to her ears, and with notable
sorrow to her soul, the discreet consideration of what difficulties might be
opposed to his liberty, (she lighting on the very same, that there troubled
Gerardo in his captivity) sure too that his suite and former imprisonment could
leave him very small means, and on the other side she was no less afflicted
in being ignorant of the place where he endured his miserable slavery, for
till then, she had received no more then a kind of confused knowledge of such
a thing: so that, desirous to be certainly informed, she purposed to send one
of her servants to Madrid, who might there secretly understand the whole
business.

These things thus passed in Spain, whilst Gerardo expecting in Barbary his
Mother and Brothers Letters, wore away the tedious time of his imprisonment,
sometimes, in part diuerted, by the several tickets he received from the
unknown Writer, and otherwhiles with the hope of his expected ransom. But
that was long delayed, till at last, when even weary with gaping attendance,
he had reckoned days, measured hours, and numbered minutes: the time drew
near, in which, by all probability, (his Letters delivered) he might expect an
answer: After this, all he received was only a poor Letter, from his
poorer Mother, as full of comfortable words and sorrow for his misfortunes, as
void of satisfaction for his Patron, concluding at length, with letting him
know, that his Brother Leoncio had been absent from her, and that to effect
his desire, she had carefully dispatched one to him; but it seemed Gerardo's ill
luck was such, that though his sorrowful Mother used her best diligence, she
could not so speedily as the limited time required, provide his ransom, by
reason of Leoncio's dangerous sickness, which was necessarily first to be
looked into, that with the recovery of his health, his captiued Brothers
liberty might the better be effected.

Gerardo altogether ignorant of what passed at home, fearing least the limited
respite once expired, the Patron would change his style, falling to his usual
rigor, grew extremely melancholy, in such sort, that one of those Captives
who first bore him company, and with whom he most of al conuersed, perceiving
his grief, moved with pity and compassion, endeavored what he might,
discreetely to encourage him, and ease his forlorn hopes; and one day amongst
others, in which he saw him most heavy and sorrowful, taking him by the hand,
and leading him into a by-Court (less suspicious place) he began thus to set
upon him: I much vvonder, Signior Gerardo, that with so great unquietness you
thus go about to hurt your self, not only in discomforting your secret
heart, but in making known your griefs also to us that converse with you; so
that, by means of some one less trusty, when you least think of it, they may
come to the Patrons notice, and give him inducements to fore-stall his
suspicious condition, and guess that your sadness proceeds from some
impossibility of attaining your Ransom, whereby you may fall into his extreme
indignation. These two years have I put him off in the like kind, giving him,
as, To day, one excuse, to morrow another, faining still several
inconveniences; and though my limited time has often passed, yet I still bear
him in hand with new hopes: besides, his barbarous condition is not now so
fierce and bloody (as formerly it was used to be) to which marvelous
alteration, the affable, amorous conversation of a Spanish shee-Slaue of his
has reduced him, whom he has married, and (strange amongst these Infidels) so
truly and tenderly adores, that for her sake he will do any thing, a story
(that if time would permit, and our companions at hand were farther of) I
infallibly persuade my self, would be of no small entertainment to your self,
and diuersion to your ears. There could nothing in the world have offered it
self more happily in this coniuncture to Gerardo's knowledge; so that the
Captive no sooner touched upon that strain, when, full of joy, as thinking
(doubtless) he could not but mean the party whose frequent Letters himself
had received, he most cunningly saying hold upon the occasion offered, cut him
off, saying:

Gods providence, gentle friend, never inflicts greater miseries upon us, then
we should be willing to bear: I confess (for my part) I have strength for
heavier burdens, if he please to load me, how be it my sad countenance may
persuade you the contrary; and, though I might justly be excused for this small
show of weakness; yet, accommodating my self to your disposition, from
henceforth I shall grieve no more, only I desire, that my so willing
embracing your profitable counsel, may be recompensed with the Relation of that
woman's fortunes, since the priuacie of my Chamber may keep others from
ouer-hearing, and the affection I bear you, excuse my bold demand: this I
shall acknowledge for a most favorable courtesy, (amongst many others I have
received from you) and Heaven may so order our affairs, that this unfortunate
man may one day stand you in some stead. Gerardo used no further entreaties,
and indeed less might have prevailed with the affectionate Fulgencio, (so was
the Captive called) and having signified so much unto Gerardo, toward his
Chamber they went; where, being set, the other thus began:

There is none (I may well assure you) in all this City, can give you so
faithful a Relation of the present business, as my self, since Fortune still
made me an equal companion in all the circumstances of it.

The second year of seven, (in which I have been Captive) Mahomet Zanaga, (my
Master that then was) a famous and most cruel Pyrate, set sail from this Port
in a Frigot, (where I was bound to an Oar) to his accustomed Trade of Rouing,
and having taken some Prizes about the Island of Maiorca, and done wonderful
damage all thereabouts; being at last set upon by a sudden terrible storm,
we were all likely to have been cast away; and unable to resist the violence
of it, suffered our selves to be hurried on by a forcible Leuant wind, (which
beginning though in some few hours to slacken) we found our selves a great
way distant from the place where it first took us: so, we discovered a Coast,
and willing to make to the Land, by reason the Seas went yet very high, at last
we put into a little Creek, whither (just as we entered) a small Shallop had
got from the storm to shelter. We could not very speedily take notice what
passengers were in her, till such time as our Frigot drawing nearer, we might
see that all in the Boat (being to the number of some twenty persons) were
furiously in a bloody conflict together by the ears, and some amongst the rest
were tumbled into the Sea. But Mahomet came in so opportunely, that (beyond
expectation) he freed eight or ten Moors that were yet alive, and
captiuated seven Christians, who fought in that desperate manner with the
others for their liberties: but this their purpose so unluckily frustrated, our
Captain without difficulty seizing them into his power, desirous to be
informed of the success, understood from some of the Moors in the Shallop,
that having in the late storm lost a Frigot, in which their Captain, and many
others, with a great booty of Spanish Goods and Prisoners, perished; at the
instant when she was sinking, having the Shallop ready, and taking some of the
Christians for company, they cast themselves into it, and made to that place
for shelter, where they had been thus furiously set upon by those they saved;
that had they not bin so fortunately by him succored, not a man had escaped
with life.

This success (though told with many other circumstances, which I have quite
forgotten) much pleased our Captain, as well for having succored and delivered
his Countrymen, as to have remained by this means with the Christians, they
carried for his own; these he took with him, leaving the Shallop to the
Moors, to bring them in safety afterward to this City. Himself the next
day safely landed here; where making sale (as the manner is) of his Prisoners,
amongst others, he parted with this woman we now treat of, who by reason of
her disguize in man's apparel, was not presently known, till such time as our
Patrons affection discovered her: so having bought and brought her home with
him, putting her into a Moorish habit befitting her Sex, he himself grew
(unexpectedly) to be as well captived by her beauty, as she his Slave by
covetous purchase. At this time too Zanaga ridding himself of some
unprofitable persons, who by reason of sickness were no longer able to serve
at the Oar; my self, one of the number, was sold to our Master here, by
which means it was not difficult for me to know, what became of the fair
Christian; and by degrees I came to understand more, then I should have
presumed on, as being not only told of Ferru his violent affection, but also of
her stout constancy, with which (fearelesse of death often mentioned unto her)
she resisted his barbarous lust: vvhereupon he most cruelly treated her, and
his rigorous usage was so extreme, that fearing to kill her, and so to lose the
money she stood him in, he purposed at last to let her be ransomed. At this time
the Redeeming Friars were here, (who told of this Christian woman, and fearing
her Souls perdition, understanding the Turks mind, they dealt with him about
the price: which (with some difficulties, at last being agreed on) he received
his money, and she was committed to the custody of a Jewish Merchant, with
whom the Friars had also placed many other Christian women they had ransomed.
Within some few days after, the devil had so wrought in her Masters
imagination, that presenting afresh unto him the remembrance of his late
affection, he repented him of having sold her; and therefore in a furious and
raging madness, void of all shame, he ran back to the Friars, saying, that
when they ransomed his slave, he was out of his wits, and that now therefore
(being better advised) he had brought them their money, and they should
return her unto him again; and the rather, because being turned Mahometane,
she was not to be redeemed. The compassionate Friars extremely wondered at the
Patrons base proceeding; but that which most grieved them, was, the manifest
danger of this Christian foul, by returning again to his power: and therefore
first they went about to persuade with the barbarous Turk, but seeing all
their labor was but vain toward him that was so resolutely bent, so blinded
by passion, they hoped that the Law (as their last remedy) would on their
sides decide the controversy. The Judge, whom they of Argiers call, The Cadi,
commanded the Slave to be brought before him; where being come, our Patron
began disorderly to cry out, he would have his own: the Friars Redeemers
alleged his own voluntary sale; so, debating the matter on both sides to and
fro, the Turk perceiving his cause like to go hard with him, urged, that the
woman had turned Mohammedan: which when the poor soul heard (trembling for
fear) yet, unable to suffer so manifest a falsehood, she cried out many times
together alowde, that she was a Christian, and had never been otherwise, and
would die in that profession: which the angry Turk no sooner heard, but
fiercely setting on her with his fists, he also said: Thou shall with me, thou
damned Bitch, i will pay thee for thy impudence. Some there present were much
offended with this boldness, and chiefly the Cadi himself, who severely
commanded him not to mis-vse the woman, but first to present witnesses to make
good his cause. Ferru mad with choler, went straight out, and not long after
returned with two as base perjured Moors as himself, who came in and deposed,
that the captive woman was turned Mohammedan; which the poor creature hearing,
began to cry out louder, they were false Villains to testify so notorious
an untruth; and in so saying, her many tears moved the Spectators to
compassion: only this monster stood like a ruthlesse Rock, and hearing her
say all this, catching hold on her, (the standers by not once offering to help
it) he gave her a terrible buffet on the face, which he had seconded, had not
one of the Redeeming Friars put himself between; who laying hold upon his
Coat, told him how much he forgot himself, to wrong a Christian woman, and
one that was no Slave, in a place of so great respect. But the Barbarian with
this temperate and sober reprehension, was not only not mollified, but, in
stead of relenting, he began fiercely to cry out, saying, Why permit you this
Friar to lay violent hands (a most manifest lie) upon a Turk, and one that is
a Ianizarie? and that therefore according to the Laws, and their
preheminences, he was either to be executed, or at least, his right hand to be
cut off. And that you may perceive what a damned Nation they are, there were at
least forty Moors present, that swore it was true; and persuaded the Cadi,
that the Turk was stricken, and that therefore he was to do him justice upon
the Friar: wherefore the Judge tormented with their cries and noise, commanded
his hand should be taken off, as the instrument of the disgrace.

Then a number of other Turks and Moors began to lay hands upon the innocent
Friar, to have executed the sentence; when a Turk assisting the Cadi in his
place, (a great Lawyer) stayed their fury, commanding them not to inflict so
rigorous a punishment, since those kind of Friars were privileged persons
above other Christians; but, that because the Friar had stricken a Turk and
Ianizarie, which was unlawful, they should all there present inflict the like
punishment with their fists upon him, and so there might be quid pro quo, one
for another.

This then grew to be partly a matter of laughter and mirth, but 'twas
mournful indeed, to see how unmercifully those base vn-manly Infidels laid
upon the poor Friar; every one of them reaching him such knockes, that had not
some few of them (better minded) shifted him away, he might very well have
been banged to death.

Thus the distressed woman was left all alone, like a silly sheep in midst of
those insatiable Woolues, who presently adjudged her to go along with her
Owner, and so to be a Mohammedan perforce.

Certain it is, that the compassionate Friar would not, for fear of his life
have thus returned, had there been any possible hope of recovering her. God
sure had a hand in all, of whom none ought to demand a reason, who does nothing
without it. Our Patron having her home again, began to exercise his former
cruelty; by which she vanquished, but chiefly by seeing her self thus
unfortunately abandoned, began to grow less coy, more pliant; which he
perceiving, a little also slackened his hard usage: and to make short, (a thing
common amongst them) turned off his other vviues, thinking by this
demonstration of his, he might the better attain to his Slaves affection:
which indeed fell out accordingly, she resolving (unable longer to resist) to
free her self from the intolerable misery she endured.

Three years have they lived in this sort, so contentedly, as that this change
of his, has not only caused a singular admiration through all this City,
but with an extraordinary conformity of manners, has wrought marvelous
effects in him; turning him from rude and beast-like, to civil and affable, as
your self best of all can judge, having had experience; and which may most of
all be wondered at, in all his actions, he is wholly ruled and governed by the
advice and counsel of his fair wife, who is only waited on by women
captives, save two Eunuch Renegates, that you may have many times seen
ouer-seeing us.

Here Fulgencio finishing his relation, Gerardo doubled his thanks, but
thence-forward his cares increased the more, by having now more notice of her
that wrote his former Letters; but the care of his Ransom was incomparably
greater, and the lingering of that less to be endured. It grew now toward
Supper time; so his captive friend taking leave, gave way to Gerardo to receive
another Ticket; which having opened, he read it with the content you may by and
by perceive.

At length, Gerardo, the day I most wished to see, since I first saw you in
Captivity, is at hand: I (noble Signior) am a Christian, and one, that were
she known to you, your pitying heart would help bewail her sad misfortunes;
which, so publicly notorious, cannot but in part have come to your notice: as
also the cruel affliction by which my frailty was at last vanquished, though
I was never desperate to forsake my Faith; wherefore heaven, I trust, taking
compassion on my Soul, will afford me some remedy; the which with confidence
I rely upon, helped by your valorous determination, and of that I have had some
experience, as you shall know in a fitter occasion. Looking accidentally int*
some Papers of yours, which were taken with the rest of your Clothes
a-ship-boord, I espied your name; so that (knowing you) I cunningly dealt with
the Patron, that giving you good usage, he should likewise propose the price of
your ransom: I prepared you in like manner to what you should do, to give him
all the satisfaction possible in your answer, that so your person might in the
Interim of your moneys not being paid, enjoy the greater liberty. Touching my
present purpose, it is, so to dispose and govern our affairs, that without
their prejudice, we may once out-liue this miserable Captivity; for which, I
have waited till this present occasion, which is, (the Pirates and shipping
wintring now in safe harbor) our Patron goes to his Tillage, where he is like
to busy himself for some twenty days at least: and with this happy
coniuncture (notwithstanding our Renegate Guardians remain behind) I have so
well ordered the matter, that, your industry helping, it shall (doubtless)
obtain the success we would wish for; and therefore (for more security) my
opinion is, that you communicate the business with such of the Christian
Captives, as you may best trust, in this manner and form ensuing.

First of all you may let them know, that they shall not only have all Ferru
his Arms that are here remaining, but the keys also of his chiefest rooms;
that so, being furnished with all necessaries, the rest may be by your self
and them performed: to which purpose, it would be in the next place fitting to
know, how we might rigge and set out one of the Frigots that lies naked in the
Haven; for (this once compassed) it will not be difficult for us to get from
Argiers, by letting our selves down from that part of the wall, that ioynes to
our house; and so, having our victuals ready (of which our warehouse has
plenty enough for many Ships) we may set sail and away to Sea.

Well know I, Gerardo, that, if my device suite with your discretion, and our
companions consider the facility that is offered, there will be no
inconvenience in the effect: or, say, there should be some little, let no small
doubt hinder us; and suffer not for heavens sake, your self, me, and so many
poor Christians, that languish in this miserable thraldom, to miss the
blessed opportunity of their desired liberties: let me therefore, by the
Captive that brings your meat, know your resolution, her I have still trusted,
and I know you may do the like; for to speak to me is as impossible, as mount
the clouds; so wary and watchful are our suborned Keepers. Heaven keep,
direct and encourage your Noble generous heart.

Hardly could Gerardo keep in his joy from breaking into lowdnesse, as soon as
he had read the marvelous Contents of this discreet Letter, in whose
consideration busied, and mincing (as it were) each particular, restless, he
spent the lasting night, and longing to impart the important business, making
first choice of the well-knowne Fulgencio his breast, he up, and told him all,
from the first letter to the last; and having given him so strict an account,
he found as willing entertainment of the brave exploit in his courageous heart,
as he could possibly expect: who, thanking his friend with tears of his
gladness, for imparting so great a good unto him, desired him to leave the
ordering of it, to his care and industry, as being better experienced in the
Country humors and conditions of the Christian Captives, and therefore, best
knew to select those, which might be fittest for the turn; and also the best
means for the furtherance of their attempt. Gerardo willingly resigned the
whole business to Fulgencio, who having made it known to as many as he
thought good, to the general approbation, their flight was resolved on
against the second night after their Patron his departure.

Their resolution, if it be noted, was not rash; for according to the
courageous shee-Captiues advice, with the opportunity offered, they might
easily effect their design, since Winter was now well entered, at which time
all the Pirates and Rouers retire themselves higher into the Country from
Argiers (saving some few Ship-boyes, who lie aboard the dis-armed Vessels) so
that they might, without being perceived, at least ouer-taken, escape from any
that should follow them.

The expected day being come, the fair Christian given to understand of the
prefixed agreement, and Ferru absent at his Country Farm, about eleven of the
clock at night, a shee-Christian Captive, on whom they also relyde, carried
the keys with all secrecy to Gerardo, and presently after, by degrees, some
forty Semitars, halfe-Pikes and the like weapons: and (this done, conducting
him to a room where one of the Renegates lay) she (knocking at the door, and
the Eunuch frightfully answering) secured his fear, saying, 'twas she, such a
one: and that her Mistress would have him presently go to her about a
business of great consequence; so that he, thinking no less, began hastily
to dress himself, and no sooner opened his door, but Gerardo was straight
upon him, and in a trice claue his head with two sudden blows of his Semitar;
and so luckily, as he sent not out the least groan.

This good beginning adding double vigor to his courage, did the better assure
the success of the maine business: and therefore (losing no time) down he
went with his trusty guide, who brought him even almost to the street door,
near which the other Renegate lay, that kept the keys of the dungeons and
close prisons where the poor Christians remained; where, the wench using the
same slight that before, he coming out, but less careless, then his dead
companion, was set upon by Gerardo, so greedy of discharging his blow, that
his speedy haste had like to have marred all: for the Renegate slipping aside,
seeing himself in that distress, began to cry out, and vvithall to cloze
with Gerardo: but he that began now to carry more heed about him, redoubling
his force, with a wheeling cut of his Semitar, divided the Eunuchs
winde-pipe; which was done with so good a will, that the other had not a note
left, nor voice to express his disaster: so, getting into his chamber, he
brought out the bunch of keys, which were laid under his beds-head, and
opening the several doors, he vn-shackled as many of the Christians as were
able to follow them (to the number of some threescore.) And this done, with
extraordinary diligence and silence, distributing the weapons amongst them, he
went next (by help of his guide) to the Warehouse, where some began to fill
sacks and bags, with Biscuit, Butter and Fruits; and others, barrels of Water
for their use: a third sort, took the cordage and Candles which the Patron had
there laid in store for the provision of his Frigots.

In the mean time the beautiful Christian, who only expected, when her maid,
below with Gerardo, should give the word, extremely joyful to see how well
their business began to fadge, having not in all the while heard any of the
rest of her women the Captives, so much as once stir, taking first the
richest and most precious things that Ferr^ had, to bestow upon the Christian
Captives to encourage them, being called, she went down into the Court, clad
in the Barbarian fashion, but so admirably becoming her, that (though I may a
little digress) I cannot but let you know in what manner she appeared, by the
flaming lights to Gerardo, and the rest of the Captives that expected her.

She had on a transparent Smock of pure Lawne, (whose seames, wrists, and
Collar, were curiously wrought in different Silks and Gold) a close Horse-mans
arming Coat, which reached to her mid-legge, of Carnation Velvet, fastened at
the breast with goodly great Buttons of Gold massy and enamelled; over which,
she woare a skarfe in the Roman manner, with the knot gathered and tied upon
the tip of her shoulder, which falling partly down to her waste, and drawing
upward again over her head, an end of it came to be doubled under her right
arm, which kind of dressing most beautifully shaped and set her out. From her
neck, ears and hair, hung Pearls, round, oriental, so naturally as if they
grew there: her hand-bracelets were Gold set with rich Stones and Diamonds, as
her small fingers with several fashioned Rings, and that every part of her
might suite, it seemed her Moorish Owner would have her still remember she
was his Prisoner, by making her wear shackles of gold about her arms and
legs, which he called, The bravery of Argiers. She had last of all a delicate
Veil of Tiffany, whose ends caught by certain Buttons set with Saphires and
Emeralds, were fast, and upon her head so artificially, that no part of her
face else, but the best of it, a pair of pleasing eyes, were shown; with
whose admiring cheerfulness the thankful Christians extraordinarily taken,
as well as the shortness of the time would give leave, professed they were
now entering into a new Slavery, Hers: and next, without more delays, by two
and two to avoid noise, they went into the street, and after, to the wall that
was near at hand.

You must note, that the principal diligence consisted in getting Oars and a
Rudder that the Frigot wanted, which was (as you shall hear) by Gerardo's
friend (who disposed the whole business) happily effected: for first,
Fulgencio got from the top of the wall, and whilst the rest were descending, he
(all alone) went toward the water side; and so (without being perceived) to
the Bulwark near the Harbors Gate, where the Oars, which he was to
procure, were usually kept; and thus he made a shift to scramble upon the wall
(which without help seemed a thing impossible) and vn-heard by the Warders
now in a dead sleep, knowing where the Oars lay, down he went; but
suddenly two Dogs, who winding him, began to bark, had like to have marred
all; which made Fulgencio warily turn back again to his friends, the
greatest part of whom were by this time gotten down, but much troubled to know
his success; who, as wishfully now came in unto them, saying; Loved
Companions, be of good courage, and give God hearty thanks; for let me tell
you, our intent goes happily on: and so making known what he had done, he told
them the Oars might easily be had. So, leaving them with greater hopes of
their liberty, he returned with three or four of the Christians, taking also
two loaves of bread, to stay the Dogs from baying.

Toward the Bulwark they went, where Fulgencio with less ado by the help of
his companions might get up: and casting first some pieces of bread to the
Dogs, he quickly stayed their barking, and whilst they fed, let down some
thirty of the best Oars, which his friends below received. This done, he
boldly crossed over the Bulwark, and without being espied, went down to the
farther side of the City, and there, in a Plain betwixt two of the
wall-gates, he took a Frigots Rudder, drawing it from under certain Raisin
Frailes, whereon three Moors at the instant lay asleep; which thing to seem
credible, must needs have been miraculous. And with the same speed and
boldness he went again to the Bulwark, and from thence let himself down to
the shore: and leaving the Rudder with the rest of the Oars, he gave Gerardo
and his company diligent notice that the maine difficulty was ouerblowne; so
that they who were gotten down, began to strive who should fastest carry
Barrels, Sacks, Bags, Candles, Ropes, Cordage and binders for the Oars.

And being thus in the midst of their preparation (some nine or ten Christians
being yet to let down) there chanced to pass by unluckily (on the City side
of the wall) a Turk, that lived in the same street, who going carelessly
homeward, they that were upon the wall, hearing his steps, began to fear and
think he must needs espy them; for, besides his approaching nearer to them,
he carried a Lantern to light him in respect of the nights darkness: unable
therefore (as they thought) to prevent the mischief otherwise) they resolved to
cloze with him and to kill him (if it were possible:) which one of them willing
to effect, ran him through the body with a half Pike, but (not deadly
wounded,) he cried fearfully out, insomuch that some Moors coming to the
noise, seeing what had happened, began to proclaim from the walls, that the
Christians were up in Arms: which exclamation seconded by the Warders of the
Bulwark, and Shore, the unfortunate Captives about the Wall, dispersing
themselves disorderly up and down the City, gave over their hopes of
liberty: for hearing all that hurry, they much doubted the good success of
their friends: who, on the other side taking up their Oars and Rudder, and in
midst of their determinate squadron, the fair Captive and her Maid, went
toward the Seaside where the Frigot was, which Fulgencio kept still in his
aim, where setting the women a-boord and the most of the luggage; some of them
resisting the onset of the Warders, others fitting to the Oars, and a third
sort weighing Anchor, in spite of those that went about to hinder them,
Gerardo's exhortations and entreaties giving new life and courage, with
marvelous valor and celeritie they put to Sea; where (trusting to their good
fortune) they began to row so stoutly, that in a very little time they were
gotten two Leagues ahead the land; and setting up Masts and Sails with a
prosperous gale of wind they sailed on till morning, by when they might see
themselves (to their no small joy) gotten near fifteen Leagues to the East of
Argiers. Our Gerardo grew to be extremely desirous of knowing who the fair
Christian might be: but the wind (as God would have it) beginning to change
into North-West, the fury of it increasing, and the Seas beginning to go very
lofty, eased him quickly of that care, and made him more careful with the rest
of his Companions, to look to the safety of the Vessel, they (poor souls,
most sorrowful to see their contrary fortune, ^owing with all might and maine)
labored to resist the force of the vn-mercifull winds; but being altogether
unable to prevail, were forced back to the shore-ward: and so endeavoring to
shelter themselves in a Creek, some twenty miles Eastward from Argiers, they
set their Prowes thither-ward, at the just time, that two other sails in the
same danger designed themselves to their course: but our Frigot in some doubt
(for fear of a worse matter) what to do, at last (even desperate) suffered
her self to be forced on by the wind, in great danger of being swallowed up
by the waves, till seeing the two Vessels steer toward them, they were forced
to provide for their defense; suspecting, as by and by they might plainly see,
they were enemies.

The two were Frigots, who the day before laden with fuel for the Viceroy of
Argiers his provision, had set sail from Sargel: and though they thought at
first to coast along by the shore; yet fore-thinking they might have some foul
weather, they ghessed it more safe to keep the maine; and so driven on by a
strong Leuant that turned after to Nor-west, they were glad with the Christians
to direct their course to the same shelter; whom ouer-taking and seeing what
they were, with terrible noise and barbarous outcries they set upon them; and
being two, well manned against one poor unprovided Vessel, getting her in
the midst of them, they furiously sought to lay her a-boord: but the Christians
fighting with equal courage, and (more desperate) were not so speedily
boorded, but making brave resistance, wounding and killing the Barbarians,
they yet made a party good with them; but at the instant that the Christians
beat off the Turks, and kept them from entering, it happened that an unlucky
Arrow shot Fulgencio, and striking him to the heart, laid him a-thwart one of
the Frigots Benches; with which disaster Gerardo being much in his mind
griefe-strucken, and his courage failing him to cheer up his companions, that
fainted with the misfortune, the enemy perceiving their deiectednesse,
re-beset, and furiously at last began to board them: yet here the battle at
the last push, seemed to be again renewed, and with streams of blood that
increased, the Christians showed most remarkable valor, chiefly the undaunted
Gerardo, who with his sure Semitar (once his Patrons) scowring the Deck fore
and off, more fierce and furious then a Quartanary Lion, dealt fearful blows
on all sides: the bloody skirmish held on a pretty while, till such time as
fresh Turks coming on by heaps, and discharging their shot and Arrows like
Hail, seventeen of the Christians fell, and the rest remained in woeful
plight.

But in this miserable state, Heavens Creator, (whom the distressed souls
ceased not to inuoke) taking compassion on their extremity, when it seemed
most impossible for any to escape from death, with his powerful force, against
which the fury of the Elements is nothing, most miraculously succored them, by
affoording as a minister of his pleasure, the unexpected help of a tall Ship,
which at this time weather-beaten, came where the fight was, and no sooner
discovered the Barbarian Sails, and the lone Frigots danger, when presuming
upon the truth, she began to let fly a Chace-piece, and after, played upon
the Turks so furiously with the rest of her Artillery; that seeing themselves
in danger of sinking, they were glad to quit the yielded Christian Vessel, to
look to the safety of their own: and so, quickly turning their Prowes to
Barbary with loss of some thirty persons, they betook themselves to flight.
The lusty Ship was not forward to follow them, as fearing the danger and
neerenesse of the Coast, but they within her were glad so to have freed the
hard-beset Frigot, whose Passengers having sung thanks to Heaven for their
blessed deliverance, Gerardo amongst other things was first of all most
charitably careful, to see, whether in all this bickering either of the
Christian women had received any hurt: and no sooner turned he himself about
to the effect, when (for her masking Veil in midst of the fright was fallen
off) he might discover in the gallant Captive no less then the dainty, cruel
Iacinta's face. The unexpected sight caused such an amazedness in his
afflicted spirits, that he verily thought he had seen some infernal ghostly
apparition: wherefore he ran amongst his companions, and as far back as he
could, out of her sight, whom he long since had given over for dead, and
drowned in the raging waves (as the first Part of the Story mentions)
therefore he thought this to be some diabolical Vision.

The Spectators were more then he astonished, with this sudden accident, and
much more, when they might see the fair Dame, with eyes gushing forth tears,
run to Gerardo, and casting her self at his feet, hear her breathe out
these lamentable words:

Whither, Oh whither, valorous Gerardo, fliest thou, from this wretched, above
all that ever lived, most unfortunate woman? No more, dear Signior, refrain
your just displeasure; permit not (though I deserve far heavier punishment)
that, abhorred as I am by all the world, abandoned by thee, my life come to
some desperate end; by throwing my self into the deep Sea, that heretofore
with more pity, then thy present looks promise, preserved me. Suffice, what
is past; and may thy killing indignation at length cease, striking the Sails
of thy reuenges desires, which Heaven has thoroughly inflicted on me in thy
behalf, reducing me to all the extremities that barbarous Infidelity could
invent; from which thy hands have been instruments to free me: and not
without particular providence; that for the small service I have also done thee
in recompense of thy wrongs, I might be restored to my country and quiet, by
him for whose love and affection I first forgot and left it. It Is nothing else,
Oh noble Gerardo, I desire of thee, to no other happiness do I aspire; this
only good I expect, that grace I beseech thee grant; and that, by the true
affection I once bore thee, by all that is amiable and desired by thee, and
lastly, for his sake, God his sake, who has so miraculously freed our lives.
Here, undone, melted in tears, confounding her entreaties with sad groans, the
poor disconsolate Iacinta ceased; leaving the sence-bereaued Gentleman, so
indeterminably metamorphosed, that nailed to the place where he stood, a great
while, he had neither tongue to speak, nor hand to raise the grieved creature
from the ground. Neither ended the strangeness of this days successes thus;
for just as these things passed in the Frigot, they in the ship, desirous to
see who they were they had so luckily saved, commanded to grapple with her;
whereby it was not difficult for them, to hear the fair Dame make her moan,
at whose tender and dolorous lamentation, some of the Passengers getting
a-Sterne into the Gallerie; and amongst them two women, they might hear
Gerardo's name several times repeated, which made the one of them, with
extraordinary shows of gladness, desire the Pilot and Mariners to hang out a
Ladder, that they might the better pass into the Frigot* which, by help of
the Sailors they did; where coming toward our Gentleman in the midst of his
confused dumpes; she of the two, whose exceeding fairness the Christian
Captives most admired, spreading her arms, wound them about Gerardo's neck,
who, as if he had really awaked out of a drowzie Lethargy, finding himself
girt with no less then those ancient amorous kno^s, with which the divine Nise
once held him her captive, acknowledging her presence, and ruminating on such
strange unheard of accidents, wholly stupefied, he stood stocke-still like an
vnmoouing Image. Indeed such successes beyond either hope or belief, might
very well bring him into this deep enchantment. And because it is fit, that
the Reader, by my Pens laziness, run not into the self same credulity, let
me, before Gerardo be delivered from his, reconcile the strangeness of these
marvelous events.

Touching Iacinta, a very short recourse to our Stories first Part, may clear
the doubt: for (you cannot forget) how we left her at the last cast in the
Storm, when her Frigot willing to take shelter at Cape Gata, was sunk by the
Spanish Admiral; in which misfortune, (Gerardo supposing she had with the
rest perished) heaven disposed otherwise, and gave her help in the Shalloppe,
which some of the Turks and Christian captives hoisted into the Sea (as was
there set down) in which the poor men unable to resist, in respect that the
Turks were well armed, and more in number then they, were forced to row on
for Barbary, ragaining the first Creek they could discover upon the Coast for
shelter: where, the Christians, seeing that the Turks and Moors, wearied
with the late Storm, and their continual labor, fell to sleep; thinking
they had now a happy opportunity to make their escape, they began to set upon
some of them that seemed to sleep soundliest, and wresting their weapons from
them, the rest awaked, and amongst all, there passed a well-fought Skirmish:
but the Christians by the slaughter of many Turks, having gotten the better of
the Battle, were unluckily surprised by a Frigot, the same in which Mahomet
Zanaga went, the rest happening, as was formerly recounted by Fulgencio to
Gerardo. The fair Nise having had notice of his captivity, and (as you heard)
sent a servant to Madrid, to be informed of the whole business: and as soon as
the party returned with the certainty, the place of his abode, the price of
his ransom; and withal, signifying what diligence his Mother and Brother used
for the effecting his liberty, she, without more adoo, moved by compassion and
pity, but chiefly incited by the firm and loyal affection she always
truly bore him, began with all speed to make ready moneys: and so, greedy to
give the world, but more particularly to her Gerardo, a Testimony, by this
noble act, of her firm constancy, as also an humble discharge, for following
(like an obedient child) the will and pleasure of her deceased Father: leaving
the Nunnery, where till then she had still remained, her friends, kindred,
servants, and above all, a world of hazardous inconveniences, nothing able to
persuade with her, she held on her fixed determination, and taking only a
waiting woman and three men with her, she took a journey to the Port of
Cartagena, where being arrived, and resolved to be the principal Actoresse in
Gerardo's redemption, fearing lest his mother or brother might prevent her, she
imbarkt her self forthwith in a ship, laden with powder and warlike
Munition, for the Garrison of Oran in Barbary: her purpose was there to
demand safe conduct of Count Aquilar, Viceroy and Captain General in those
Parts, for her going by land to Argiers, that so, she might procure her Lovers
liberty: to which the stormy vvind and weather unexpectedly now brought the
ship and her, as also to give life and succor to so many valiant distressed
Christians.

Such and so admirable, often times, are the happy successes, to which in part
the affairs of our more wretched life are now and then subordinate; or to say
truer, so incomprehensible and miraculous is the divine Providence, which
disposes things (when we least imagine) for the best. This weighty
consideration took up Gerardo's whole understanding, and his senses left him
doubtful in the certainty and claritie of what he saw before him. Iacinta,
she tenderly lay weeping at his feet, ouer-ioyed with the sight of him that was
once her Lover: Nise (clung to his neck and breast) hugged him so close, that
he could scarcely see her face, much less hear the words that she thus
smootheringly close delivered:

I wonder not, my best loved Signior, that (so doubtful) you make difficulty
of giving credit to your knowledge, since the small love you bore me, may have
easily blotted Nise out of your mind and memory: but, not the experience of
this truth that costs me so dearly; not, the most cruel rigor, wherewith I
have been woefully treated by you; not, the long forgetfulness, disdaines,
absence, (affections bitterest tormenter) none of these, not all together, have
been able to alter my loyalty, or alienate my affection, or lastly, to lessen
the least part of my happiest wishes. These, my Gerardo, have made me seek
thee out, thus, nigh lost, hazarded amongst bloody Turks and barbarous Pirates,
who unjustly detained thee: this care alone, has made me forget so many
injuries, brought me through dangers, to leave my Monastery, provide thy
ransom, to travel day and night, tread down all difficulties, to no other
end but to obtain (finding thee) thy lost, by me most of all earthly goods
desired, liberty. May then, my best Signior, this amorous demonstration deserve
your admittance, by recompencing the firm love of her that has undertaken it:
and if it find not in your bosom equal reception, at least, permit, that my
wearied tongue may with your good liking publish, that Nise has only been
(howeuer wronged) for ever true, and her uttermost affections wholly, solely
her Gerardo's.

Amazement here left him, and it seemed, passed into the hearts of the
Spectators: for Gerardo, like one sprightfully returning out of a heavy
trance, most compassionately tender, and with a more lively admiration at
Nise's strong affection, and equally pitying the poor Iacinta's cross
fortunes, now comforting with noble intrailes, the afflictions of this; then
drawing near with affectionate gratitude to that party; sometimes mollifying
his rigorous remembrance toward the one, and then forgetting his just
indignation for wrongs from the other, unable without tears to dissemble his
passion, he raised Iacinta from the ground, and clasped the divine Nise about
the neck: and bashfully ashamed, craves her pardon, freely confesses his
hearts hardness, and blames his ungrateful proceeding: then turning to the
vvretched Iacinta, with like joy comforts, and promises her, not to forsake
her, till with desired rest, she may arrive to the shelter of her friends, or a
more peaceable harbor. And with this determination, whilst the two Dames,
more cheerfully, with equal emulation admited at each others Beauty, he
began to give order for their return for Spain. Nise was dumb and ielous,
though confident, as being so near her Lover. Iacinta dissembling her
trouble, as one that knew her self too unworthy to enjoy him, to bring her out
of her dumpes, broke the ice and silence by speaking first, and they were then
mutually courteous, both willing to be acquainted with the causes of each
others peregrination.

Gerardo fearful of another Storm, had desired that the Frigot might sail
under the Ships protection, till such time as they should land at Oran, and
from thence meet with more consorts for Spain: so they agreed, that for their
more conueniencie, the two Dames also should go together in the Ship, till
they came thither; to which purpose, they both were helped up by Nise's
servants and Gerardo: who thought fit not as yet to leave the company of his
good friends, and therefore taking leave of Nise and Iacinta, (who seeing the
reason he had, would not contradict it) he went back into the Frigot. But
that we may more evidently perceive the frailty of momentarie delights, and
what little assurance is to be expected from their uncertain being, let us,
in these ensuing Lines, note the last success, that befell Gerardo and the
fair Dames in this fortunate, unfortunate day.

All the while that the former matters passed, the Ship and Frigot were
strongly fastened together, as well for their more conueniencie of conversation
and keeping company, as the raking of the waves, which as yet went somewhat
high; and (increasing more) the Master and Mariners fearing lest being so
near, the Frigot, as the weaker Vessel, with the Seas fury might split; and
thinking Gerardo had been in the Ship, the Frigot fell off; but it was just at
the instant, that he being in the Ship-boate, thought to have gotten out of it
into the Frigot; which being now under Sail, and the Boat notable to overtake
it, having broken the Rope, by which she was tied to the Ships Stern, to the
terrible grief of the beholders, caught by the swelling waves, and violently
carried on, was like to be overwhelmed; where a long time Gerardo was seen to
be in manifest danger, though for all he was so far off, he might hear Nise
and Iacinta's cries, whose eyes proved unwilling witnesses of the sad
disaster.

Gerardo's valiant companions were not awhit dismayed in the Frigot, to see him
in this conflict; but tugging at their Oars till they were ready to burst, at
length they fetched up the Boat, and casting out a Ropes end, on which he laid
hold, by little and little (quitting the Boat) he swamme to the Frigots Oars,
and taking a little breath, holding by their broad feet, at last he was lifted
into the Frigot; where, after he had shifted and refreshed himself, his
Company began to steer the Ships course, till such time as the billows rising
more and more, they had quite lost sight of her. It was then about one of
Clock in the afternoon, at what time the wind enlarging, they set Sail, and
might have saved their Oars, in respect of the fair wind; but they used both,
and so made on to the Westward of Oran, whither the Ship was bound; and not
ceasing to row, (fresh men still helping) before dark night they were gotten
above threescore miles from the place where the fight was: but since none of
them knew to take the Altitude, and night came dark on them, uncertain of
their course, they yet held on Westward, that being the safest; and so after
the nights second watch, they found that they were near a Coast, and the wind
sitting a stern, they were ere long driven into a fair and well-sheltring
Harbor, on whose land stood a strong Castle, that was founded on a sure high
Rock, irresistable limit to the Seas salt waves.

The end of the second Discourse of the second Part.
THE SECOND PART OF GERARDO, THE VNFORTVNATE SPANIARD.
The third and last Discourse.
GERARDO, with the capacity of his frail understanding, measured (though
temperately) the powerful greatness of heavens providence: which made him a
little stumble at the truth so full of strange diversity: till coming nearer
to himself out of this mist of ignorance, his mind subjected his doubtful
credit, and his courageous heart, transcending all earthly hopes, promised a
happy end to those adverse means which brought him into so many narrow
Straites. The present confused accident does well and evidently paint out this
truth.

The poor Christians, how-euer free from all Sea danger, yet were now in worse
taking then ever, ghessing, that by the land they plainly saw, they were in
some Port of Barbary, which made their danger irremediably certain: our
Gentleman for his part, was more troubled now, then he had been formerly for
the loss of his liberty, to see that by the former mischance he was separated
from the fair Iacinta, but chiefly, firm and loyal Nise, whose notable
resolution (duly considered by him, all ancient passion set aside) he could
not but afford it a worthy estimation in his affectionate thoughts (some dead
Embers of those fires which once inwardly scorched him, lighting and nourishing
his grateful heart:) and, as his reuengefull desire could work no greater
effect in his noble breast then pity, that taught him to bewail the loss of
Iacinta, fearing from her natural weakness some other relapse, that would
quite frustrate her, by him promised, remedy.

These just and more then amorous cares, as much afflicted his wearied mind, as
any fear of imminent danger; though desiring too to avoid it, seeing that
hitherto they had not bin at al from any on shore discovered. Taking advice
with his companions, it was concluded, and amongst them agreed, that some two
of them landing, should with all possible vvarinesse inform themselves of the
place, and accordingly, they might set down some convenient course.

Here, each Christian began to have within himself a several faction,
dissuading also his best friend from the enterprise; but Gerardo, who was, as
it were the President of this counsel, to whom they remitted the election
that he pleased, not willing to cause any difference, and trusting to his own
good courage, named himself for one, and one of the weakest persons in the
Frigot besides for a Companion; and therefore being all fully satisfied, they
set the two on shore as far off as they could from sight of the Castle, for
fear of danger. They now on Land clambered up certain Rocks, and being got
near the top of them, might hear a noise of Horsemen, which made them stop.
The least they could in this occasion fear, was to light upon some Alarbian
Cottage; and therefore hearkening somewhat more wistly, they might hear voices
and talking: but perceiving those ceased (for they had a pretty while listened
from behind the Rock) and thinking that the parties had made a stand
thereabouts, without more ado, they stole creepingly on, till they came to a
spacious Plain (as it were) which were the Mountains Top, from whose
craggie precipices, they might plainly discover two men on horseback armed,
with their Lances in their hands, and Shields at the Saddles Pumels: who,
discoursing (as it seemed) somewhat earnestly, caused the noise, which so
carefully did lead these two on. Gerardo verily believed they were Moors,
which his fearful Companion was easily also induced to, though gathering
somewhat nearer close by the ground, to avoid being perceived, they might hear
the one of them use these angry words to the other:

Go to then, Don Martin, no more words, it is now no time to delay my revenge;
now you must satisfy the wronged Ismenia, with the price of your blood, in
dying by my hand; for to this purpose alone was the drawing you from Oran
contrived: and so ceasing, they might likewise hear his Adversary reply in
this manner: Rather, base Cauallier, these Rocks of Massalquibir shall prove
the eternal sepulcher of thy vain arrogance, which, how little I esteem,
thou shall quickly perceive, and how much fitter it had been for thee, not to
have owned another injuries: and with this, both of them falling back to come
on with more force, wheeling about to take field-roome enough, began to set
spurs to their horses.

It is not possible to express our Gerardo's gladness, as soon as by the two
Gentlemen's discourse, he knew the secure Country where he was; and willing to
free both of them from each others danger, but not daring alone to venture upon
two horsemen, he instantly dispatched his Companion to the Frigot with the
happy news, willing him to make all haste, and bring four or five of the
company with him, that, by their help, the furious couple might be parted:
who at this time (the Moon shining bright) making the staring Rocks dumb
witnesses to their valor, and the desert solitude their quiet Sticklers, with
undaunted spirits most desperately with their Lances rushed together. Gerardo
could not so perfectly note (by reason of the distance) each particularitie of
that bloody combat, whose disastrous end he fearing, and that his friends
would stay too long (setting his own danger aside) he ran in to part them:
just at the very instant, when both, with the violent shocke of their Horses,
came together to the ground: when suddenly (one of them courageously leaping
upon his feet, and about to have set upon his opposite with drawn sword)
Gerardo stepped between, and rebating the furious offers of his Semitar, desired
him likewise to forbear; but the enraged Gentleman was so blinded with
reuengefull madness, that, without either hearkening to the request, or least
mitigating his fury, seeing his Contrary still laid along, cried out to
Gerardo, to suffer him to make an end of the Traitor. By this time (for
doubtless otherwise these two might have fallen foul upon each other) came in
Gerardo's companions, but so speedily and fiercely, seeing him in that manner,
that, had not he, very warily prevented their fury, the impatient Combatant
might have been in a great deal of danger; who, amazed with the unexpected
sight of so many, would feign (to have avoided the hazard) have seized on his
Horse: but Gerardo, presuming, his fear was the same, that his own not long
since satisfied it, by crying out to him, that they were not Moors, but
Christians: with which, less troubled, they began now to approach nearer to one
another.

But no sooner began they to treat in colder blood, when our Castillian by his
voice remembered the present party, to be Don Iayme the Arragonian, his
singularly intimate friend, whose company Gerardo lost (as you find in the
first parts second Discourse) when by his help they forced Iacinta out of the
Nunnery. He was a little troubled with the unexpected accident, as thinking it
a dream: but (his second cogitations working better in his noble breast)
casting by his damasked Semitar, he threw his arms about the others neck.
His old friend was no less moved; for Gerardo's habit, and the improper
Moone-light, did much make difficult the knowing him, so (the truth uncertain)
his confusion was at a stand, and the rather when he might hear these ensuing
words:

Why, how now, Don Iayme, Valorous Sir, lift you your angry steel against your
greatest friends? Hold, stay that arm; for, if Gerardo, in appeasing your
wrath have offended you, as repentant as humble, he lays his head at your
feet. This melting language called back Don Iayme's remembrance, and
represented to him the voice and presence of his old acquaintance Gerardo:
whereupon straight ensued his thankful acknowledgement, making him joyfully
admire at the strangenes of the accident. By this time some of the company, got
in to the Gentlemen that lay on the ground, whom they found (weltring in his
blood, thorow-dead) run through the body with a Lance: which they made known
(for fear of what might ensue) to the new friends: the news was very
vn-pleasing to Gerardo, in respect of his friends danger; who, now nobly
compassionate of his enemies mortal hap, made one to help to hide him in the
secretest part of the Rocks: and (determined wisely to stay no longer there,
informed of their Frigot in the Haven) he resolved with them to imbarke
himself in her. This indeed was the safest course; and so both these Gentlemen
longing to know the occasion of each others encounter in those parts, went
back with the company to their Vessel; where entering, by that time it grew to
be day, diverse persons, that desired passage for Spain, repaired thither.

Gerardo had formerly desired to expect some news of the two Dames and their
Ship; but seeing as yet they were not arrived, fearing least some sinister
chance might hinder Don Iayme his Voyage; and preferring his friends safety,
before his own satisfaction, he was rather content that they should hold
their course for Spain; and having by the way recounted to the valiant
Aragonian, his strange fortunes since the time he saw him: one day (his own
discourse ended) desirous to know the cause that brought Don Iayme to so remote
hazzards, he made bold to motion an account of it, which the other most
willingly granted, not so much importuned by his friends request, as by his
own free desire to give him greater content: and so, sitting them down upon
the Stern, with sighs that drew on the past-future Story, Don Iayme thus
began:

Not long before your coming to Zaragosa, some Gentlemen and my self bestowed
the setting forth of certain shows and triumphs; in midst of which and the
solemnity, a distaste arose, caused by Lisauro (whom you well knew) as a
principal Motor, and my Uncle Don Iulio de Arragon, was he that most opposed
him, and consequently my self was forced to make a party, maugre Lisauro and
his friends. It imports not much to know the particulars, I may only tell you,
that the maine matter was, about a business deciphered but to no ill intent,
by the aforesaid Don Iulio, wherein Lisauro made construction of a wrong done
to him. From this slight beginning, greater combustions arose, nourished by the
vnquietest spirits of both factions, and thus they grew to bandy together, and
a long time after, with many fraies and brabbles to infest one another.

In the very heat of this feude, my Uncle being necessarily to take a journey
out of town, and I, to accompany him, this accident you shall hear happened
upon our return. As we came merrily riding homeward, within some three
Leagues of Zaragosa, a sudden storm came upon us, in such violent manner, with
Thunderclaps, Lightning, Wind, and streams of water that gushed out of the
Clouds; that (though the tempest caught us not in the gulf of Narbona, but in
a Valley of the River Hebrus) we alike feared drowning: and therefore spurred
on as fast as we could, till spying certain habitations, and amongst them a
good fair house of pleasure, which seemed to belong to some Gentleman;
striking out of the highway, and guiding our Horses thither-ward, we got to
the place, just at the instant that a Coach entered in at another gate, driven
(as it might seem) by the same necessity that we.

Here mine Uncle and my self, with the rest of our company, stayed a long
hour, expecting when the storm would cease, but with different intents, for
mine Uncle only longed to be at home; but I, (as a thing more proper to my
Peers) desired to see what company went in the Carroach; supposing (for the
Boots were very close shut down) they must needs be women within, (as indeed
true it was) though the searching out of this truth had like to have cost my
boldness dear: for I had scarce offered to lift up one of the boot lids and
look in, when, out issued two men; who laying hold on their swords, as they
jointly blamed my vn-mannerly act, obliged me to the like; and the rather,
knowing them to be no other then Lisauro and his kinsman Tirso, both, our
vowed enemies: and though my youthful rashness might something have been
excused; yet the matter proceeded now so far (choler and late enmity
depriving us all of reason) that our servants came in too to mend the
business. I much feared, that (any mischance happening, we being more in
number) it might be after imputed to us for cowardice: which made me altering
my purpose, seek to shelter them, by causing our people to retire, and to lay
the blame upon my own foolish curiosity.

And certainly the two Kinsmen, knowing how little there was to be gained from
us, would gladly have accepted my Apology, if at this time four or five of
their servants had not entered newly in; who (it seemed) loytered behind their
Masters, that with their coming changing their notes, broke off all parley,
and so the fray began, our side as willingly answering, that in a trice here
was the battle of Agrimant, nothing was heard but clashing of swords, noise,
cries, and groans of such as were wounded on every side.

No less were the outcries within the Carroach, near which the hottest of
the skirmish was. My enraged Uncle willing to end all distastes betwixt Lisauro
and him, most eagerly followed him, till such time, as he, stumbling at one of
the Carraoch Cushions, fell over and over: and Don Iulio with haste had like to
have fallen upon him: which it seemed Tirso had marked, and the advantage made
him approach: but I fearing mine Uncles misfortune, beat by two fierce thrusts
that Tirso tilted at him, and with my Sword and Dagger crosse-warded, bore off
a willing blow he made at me, for my charity to save another: by this time
Lisauro was gotten up; so that leaving Don Iulio and Tirso, to begin again
upon even terms, my fury, or rather good fortune guided me to a new encounter
with Lisauro: for with the first back-blow dealt, I left him without defense,
since, the blade flying out of his hand, he remained only with his swords
hi^t. I then took notice of the good success; and sure our old enmity had
here ended, had it not been for the intercession of two Dames; one of which
laying hold on my Contrary, all blubberd and afflicted, and the other coming
toward me, sought to assuage my anger, and to mediate for the dis-armed
Gentleman: she that spoke to me, had her face all covered with Tiffany, which
serving as a Mask, only discovered two fair eyes, but at this time clouded
with some pitiful tears, which accompanied with sighs and discreet phrase,
not only reined in my unbridled fury; but also (seeing Tirso on one side
wounded by mine Uncle, fly back, and on the other their servants driven up to
a corner, labor in their defense) made me to second Tirso, and re-bating Don
Iulio's blows and his, cried out to them to hold: and by this time some other
indifferent parties came happily in and parted us all. I signified to the
unknown Dame, that her discreet and noble carriage gained me to be her
servant, as far as the saving her kinsman or friends life, and should command
mine own. So that at last my Uncle constrained by my entreaties, got to horse,
and the like did I; and with our haste, I forgot to take so much as a bare
leave of the Gentlewomen, only commanded our servants to follow; with whom,
(as well to take order for what had passed, as to cure some that were
wounded) we returned to Zaragosa with such speed, that before night we were
gotten to our lodgings, though I stayed not long in mine, rather following my
Uncles advice, absented my self for at least twenty days in a Village some
days journey off, which was the cause I could not (to my desire) inform my
self of the Dame that spoke to me, whom I much longed to know.

The Officers of Justice having understood from Don Iulio the late accident,
with all the circumstances, fearing the resulting of some greater
inconveniences from it, sought to pacify all parties, which they so diligently
labored, that with much ado a general concord was effected, and all were
publicly made friends.

Then I returned again to my home and former care, but so unluckily, that
doing what possibly I could, I was not able to learn who the two former Dames
were, or whether they went; which difficulty was the more increased by the
fear I had, least my jealous enemies might fall into some new suspicions; if,
happily they should come but to the least notice of my curious intent: wherefore
desisting, I took truce with my desires.

Thus past I on some two months and better, in which time new inuitements,
different occasions, and several varieties, made me forget the former
business quite, till one morning amongst others, being to meet some friends,
who had appointed the venturing of a Rest at Primera, as I was going out of my
lodging, a Woman masked, came, and suddenly conveyed a Letter into my hand,
saying, To morrow morning, Don Iayme, you shall have me here for the answer,
and without another word, left me, as full of trouble, as longing for the
contents; and so opening it, I read, if not the same words, at least the matter
you shall hear.

My fathers lingering sickness, and former troubles, have made me defer,
though not forget, the acknowledgement of a particular obligation, in which
(Don Iayme) for your nobleness not long since to Lisauro, I am engaged to your
valor. Let this just motive, worthiest Signior, be a sufficient warrant to
excuse my looseness; rather, in your honored thoughts, afford it a better
title, since, though I presume as a stranger now, I doubt not but time and our
correspondence, may make me worthy of a reasonable estimation in your
affection; of which when I may have some sufficient proof, you shall know who
I am: in the mean time I humbly beseech you suffer like your noble self, in
which confidence Heaven protect you.

Here ended the pithie Letter, whose contents equally amazed, and gladded me,
to have gotten at length some (though confused) notice of the country Dame,
whose Letter (infinitely contented) I answered, and fully satisfied for my
neglect of not taking leave of her, when our bickering was, by letting her know
the exquisit search I had made to excuse my self, and express how much I was
her servant; urging withal, my desire with all earnestness to see her, though
in conclusion I closed up all, with submitting my self to her will, without
seeking to know or enquire any thing that might contradict her pleasure; and
what I wrote, I made good, giving my Letter to the disguized party, that the
next morning came punctually for it, without daring to demand so much as her
Mistrisses name, or the least circumstance.

In this manner, I continued a good while; but to deal plainly, though her
discreet Letters promised a subject of much worth and goodness, yet the want
of knowing her did more disperse my affections.

'Twas now about the gladsom time of Shroue-tide, more solemnly kept in
Zaragosa, then any other city of Spain; at which time, with some friends and
kinsmen of mine own age and condition, clad in colors, and Vizards, we
marched up and down the streets, enjoying many a mirthfull opportunity: for
at this time of year, our women have full liberty, and dispense with their
ordinary reservedness. In the heat of our pastime, on the Sunday night,
having notice of certain Revels that were kept in private houses, vvilling to
afford our eyes the content of seeing, we visited all: till such time, as at
last, coming to the house of one Signior Bellides; where, all the youth,
bravery, and beauty of the City was, we purposed to enter, but most warily,
in respect that the aforesaid Gentleman was of a contrary faction to us; for
(though we had been before made friends) yet we still kept aloof.

Never, since I was man, saw mine eyes a rarer Beauty, nor a more troublesome
object to my soul, then one, amongst the Dames there; and although there were
few present, that deserved not a particular commendation, yet she, who fell to
my lot, (I mean) she whom I set by, was so admirably beauteous, that the
rest, in comparison, were but swartie Egyptians.

The spacious Hall was set round with Torches, and Lights of several
inventions; and many of the Gallants and gallant Dames of the Revels began to
foot it, to the sound of harmonious musical Instruments; so that all the
Spectators eyes being fastened upon them, I might the more freely employ mine,
nailed (as it were) to that beautiful object. And (but falteringly) something
I would have spoken, when mine eyes with their earnestness better supplied my
tongues defect, by showing my hearts cares.

I know not whether the knowledge of my voice, or the lifting up my Vizard to
wipe my face, made her the more attentive to my words; but drawing closer to
me, with a soft and low voice she bestowed on me this answer: I am much
indebted to Heaven, Don Iayme, for my good fortune in seeing you, wherein my
desires are accomplished, which shall ever be ready, serviceable to your
happiness, though you may happily want good will to repay their affection: at
which you may not wonder, when hereafter you shall understand how much they
esteem you. And willing to have gone on in this discourse, (which strangely
amazed me, not knowing what she meant, and therefore troubled to answer) one of
the Gallants of the Revels interrupted us, who inuiting her out to a Galliard,
left me without her, and another Dame to take her place; whither, after she had
most gracefully danced, about to have returned, seeing the Room filled, she
was constrained to make choice of another; so that, to my souls grief, not
knowing how to get out of that adventure, into which I was thus embarked,
hardly could I dissemble my distaste, at least I made it known to one of my
greatest friends there with me, proposing to him, if he knew the occasion of
it: he told me she was daughter to the Gentleman of the house, which made me
much more wonder at the success, and sorrowfully despairefull, lest the
differences betwixt her friends and mine, would quite dash the prosecution of
that amorous fire, which by little and little had wholly seized my heart.

In these careful imaginations my affections wauered in their beginning, when
(the Revels growing to an end) being late, every man went home, and my self,
and company unknown, (as we came) and having rested that night, we returned to
our disguizes, and the pastimes: and though the sight of this fair Dame beset
me in diverse places, where the Shrouetide sports were, yet I could never after
get a fit opportunity to speak to her: so these merry days passed away, and
many others, in which, frequenting both day and night her street and house, and
otherwhiles coming punctually to the Church where she used to hear Mass, I
tempered with the favors she sent from her eyes, the amorous ardour of my
desires, mitigating with such poor comforts, the restless torment that
afflicted me.

Howsoever this new affection might have been sufficient to divert me from all
other, yet it blotted not out of my remembrance, how much the Country-Dame had
showed in her Letters, who understanding (I know not by what means) of my new
vvatchfulnesse and cares, when I least expected, by the usual servant sent
me a Ticket, in which she not only signified her ielous complaints, but
particularized also the most singular acts and signs, even to the very Phrase
I used to the Dame of the Revels, so right, that I was exceedingly astonished,
not gessing how it was possible for her to come by that punctual knowledge of
hers; and therefore vvilling to divert her, I resolved to deny all, requesting
likewise most earnestly to see her, that by laying such a necessary obligation
upon me, she might make sure my correspondence, and secure her own ielous
suspicions: and in conclusion, though in many other Papers of hers, she seemed
to be less satisfied with my excuses, yet since hers, for the accomplishing my
desire of seeing her, were far more, wanting a sight of her, mine eyes were
not to be blamed, if they were bent upon a subject less disdainful and coy: so
that slackening my return of answers to her Tickets, I began to re-prosecute
my amorous intents with the sprightly Dame of the Revels: And desiring nothing
more, then that she might truly know my affection, and how much the difficulty
of conuersing with her, troubled me, I was bold to request that my mind might
be signified unto her in a Song; and giving her notice of the time, with her
consent, accompanied with that friend, to whom (the night of the Revels) I made
known my thoughts, about Midnight, at the appointed time, we went into her
Street; where having taken Stand right opposite to my Mistrisses Window, the
Musicians began to touch their Strings, and one of them to warble out a Dittie
in the following Verses, having for subject my impossible Love.

Thou rotten Vessel, that each furious Wave
Measur'st, with little force, as damage great,
Where thy weak ribs weather and water beat,
Stopping those open mouths that favor crave:
Thou, that enforced, the Current do divide,
Fly now to Heaven, then to Abyssus fall:
Strike, now on Flats, then on high Rocks withal;
Casting out bodies from each splitted side.
Yet happy, thou, whose Passenger still lives
In hope of calmer Seas, and slacker Wind:
But, ay me! hapless, that a Loue-sicke mind,
Impossible to cure, no calm relieues.
All the while the Music played and the Song lasted, not only the Windows of
Signior Bellides, but the rest of the whole neighborhood were stuck with
auditors, to hear the Song, and many other toys and fancies, till such time
as day-breake being near, we returned homeward, where I remained, taking rest
until day was well come on, and going after dinner to have a revenge for my
losses at Primero, to the accustomed meeting, the servant that used to bring me
the Tickets from the Countrey-Dame, met me upon the way, and delivering a
Paper from her Mistrisse, left me to read the ensuing Contents:

I know not, Don Iayme, how you can excuse your proceeding; for though my
slacknesse to see you may seem to discharge you, yet that is but a poor
evasion, to matters of greater consequence, such as the promised vows of all
your Papers sent me: wherefore finding at present (witness your last nights
Music to Signior Bellides his daughter) your false dealing with me, no
marvel though my complaints (how just soever) be shunned by your ears. But
that you may know, what you contemn in me, is not inferior to ought of that
Dames, as well to do my self right, as to make you see your own loss,
(though you unjustly deserve the favor) I shall this night give you leave to
see me. The Bearer, if you list to expect her late at night at your own house
door, shall conduct you where we may speak together. Heaven keep you, and
make you acknowledge how much you owe to my affection.

No sooner, my Gerardo, had I read these last Lines, when I was much more
confounded, then pleased, with the received promise: so exceeding was my
trouble, to see how small credit was given to my truth, howsoever I determined
to obey; expecting the night, by which time my Guide was come, who taking me by
the hand, willing me alone to follow her, (the Clock then striking newly ten)
we went crossing the greatest part of the City, till coming to a narrow
Lane, without any sallie at the other end, drawing near to certain ruinous
white Walls; when we were just under them, she left me to expect, till such
time, as she by another way returned to give notice to her Mistress; and so
trudging apace from me, I waited the event, wondering as much at the manner and
contriuing of it, as wary and armed to prevent all hazard or inconvenience. In
this confused sort, I attended a long hour at least, by when I might hear a
Window not far from the Wall open, at which a Woman appearing; for though the
darkness hindered my sight, yet her voice made me easily perceive it was the
party which brought me thither, and so drawing nearer, she bade me get to the
top of the broken Wall, from whence they might conveniently speak to me. That
without difficulty I performed, and being nimbly mounted, she bade me there
stay awhile, and shutting the Window I went in, (my mind being now in such
trouble, as if willingly it would have forsaken my body) and my desires hung
on every the least noise, judging each breath of air to be my Mistrisses
wary step, whom at last I might hear gently open the Window and present
herself. The Wall where I stood was so high, that it well-nigh raught to the
Iron Frame of her Bay-window; and so, together with the glimpse of a Light in
the chamber, I could quickly take notice, that the fair creature present, was
no other then the gallant daughter of Signior Bellides; which so
vvonderstrucke me, that though I had bethought me sufficiently of what I meant
to say, yet, in respect the reasons I had forged in my breast, were more for
satisfying the ielous complaints of the Countrey-Dame, then for courting the
present subject; my tongue waxing dumb, I grew to that pass, that had not the
fair Dame (perceiving my alteration) laid hold on me, the Wall and my
countenance had been much of a complexion, but feeling my self revived by her
soft touch, recovering my lost spirits, I might hear her proceed. Why, how
now, Gallant, what fright is this? afraid of a Woman? or does my presence make
you fear the just punishment due to your inconstancy? I am she whom you so
unkindly used for Signior Bellides his daughter, and yet (obliged for the
services you did her) must pardon greater injuries: I, Don Iayme, am she, that
in the Country and company of Lisauro, your noble courteous behavior won unto
you: the same she that enjoyed your gladding conversation at the Revels;
lastly, the same Ismenia, Signior Bellides his daughter, and whilst life shall
last, maugre the Worlds contradiction, Yours. Knowing, my best loved Signior,
that the inuetrate enmity of our houses, might cross my designs, I deferred
our meeting, expecting, till some of times unexpected seasons, might (as at the
present) facilitate our desires; which I trust are now accomplished, since you
are disposed to love Ismenia, one of your Houses greatest enemies. That this is
true, your last nights Music persuaded me; which favor, for the pains it
cost you, I esteem with equal recompense, as my determinate resolution has
well expressed by this nights meeting; the disposing of which, has not been
without some difficulties and no less hazard. Heaven grant, my good Don
Iayme, that you acknowledge better then to the Country-Dame, how much Ismenia's
love and loyal affection merits; and in so doing, I shall live most happy,
neither shall your self complain at all of our not mutual correspondence.

And ending her discourse, she gave way to my vnloosened tongue, to satisfy
her amorous obligation: with the best discourse therefore my Soul could on the
sudden frame, she made known her grateful and greatest secrets: last of all I
excused the error of my inconstancy against the Country-Dame, attributing it
to the rare beauty, attractiue power of Ismenia; so that, the distaste I before
was guilty of, turned straight into mirthfull pastime, in which we spent
most part of that pleasing night; at which time I understood from my Mistress,
that the reason of her coming with Lisauro and Tirso to the Country House,
was, to avoid the Storm which that afternoon took them, as they were going
from Zaragosa to a Village, where at the same time her father lay very sick;
for whom, together with her mother, (the forementioned woman in the Fray) they
went to bring him more commodiously home: and that afterward returning to the
City, enforced, as she said (but more by her own generous condition) by my
courtesy, she endeavored by her trusty maid, to give me notice of her
affection.

So that after all this (both of us extremely joyful) day coming on, she
quitted the Window, and I leaped from the Wall, agreeing only still to
continue our amorous night-meetings at the same place. The next day passed on,
and night with my ioyfulnesse being come, at our prefixed hour, I went
toward my Ismenia's Street, and from thence to the usual Stand; which, as I
might now (less troubled) plainly perceive, was the backe-side of Signior
Bellides his house, though the former night little dreaming of any such thing,
I took no notice of it. Here stood I close expecting when the Window would
open; when, about to climb my Wall, I might upon a sudden perceive three or
four enter the Lane, and making a stand in the midst of it, heard them closely
whispering: so that the desired instant too for my approach, being come, I was
in a double fear, either of having the act (if I mounted) discovered, or if
not, my self: both which, and either of them might make me equally
thereabouts suspected.

In midst of this confusion, the worst that could be, fell out: for Ismenia at
her Window taking no notice of those men, out of her greediness to spy, and
only guessing it was I, called out, saying, Hist, why come you not, Don Iayme,
at which call, the parties in the Lane began to draw nearer, but I (fearing
lest by coming too near they might know me) without a word speaking, let fly
at them so outragiously, that at the very first encounter one of them fell
down sure enough; and his companions frighted with the mischance, instantly
turned their backs, crying out for help so loud, that I durst no longer
expect the issue; which was, that I had no sooner slipped out of the Lane, when
another troop of men entered into it, whom afterward I understood to have been
all of one party, Officers appointed purposely to apprehend some suspicious
persons thereabouts. Considering then my danger, before any one might follow, I
hastily took flight to my Lodging, remaining all that night as sad and
pensatiue, as the night before merry and joyful. As soon as it was morning,
I received a Ticket from my Mistress; in which, excusing with her shallow
experience, the inconsiderate neglect, cause of our disquiet, she concluded,
aduertizing me, how fitting it was for the security of our loves, to defer
private meetings, in respect of the careful watch which was kept, as well, as
without doors, in her house, being it was publicly reported, that an Officer
of Justice was slain in the nightime, for no more then having taken some
notice of a Gentleman, that spoke to somebody at her Window.

I well perceived the inconvenience with Ismenia's reason, and how important
therefore it was for me to follow her advice, since the danger, (my pretension
to her kindred known) was no less hazzardous then irremediable: and though
the loss of her sight tormented me to the very soul; yet, the fear of her
ruin, more then mine own, kept my affection at distance, and the better to
dissemble the matter, I absented my self from Zaragosa. Ismenia satisfied with
my intent, by her leave, I took a journey to a town of mine, your self at
that time and Iacinta going along with me; the accident in our journey falling
out, which enforced you to take her out of the Nunnery, where by my order she
was left, and likewise of losing our selves in the dark night, I arrived by
morning at my own home; and having caused all possible search to be used after
you, hearing no news, I endeavored to pacify matters in the Nunnery, which I
might easily do, considering the neerenesse of alliance between the Abbess
and my self; who, unwilling to bring me into danger, was contented to
dissemble the outrage.

At this time (though far off from my Mistress) yet still we held
correspondence by means of my trusty friends, whom (as you heard) I made privy
to my secret: and so, Ismenia's Maid delivering her Mistresses Letters into his
hands, they came safely to mine. But at last my heart unable to support longer
absence, at two months end, I returned to Zaragosa, and there to my former
cares. Ismenia soon knew of my arrival; for (to deal truly) no less was I
solicited by her Letters and persuasions, then mine own ardent desires; and
so the ensuing night, in company of Don Martin de Vrrea (this being my friends
name) I went to the usual place; where I remained in loving conversation with
my Mistress, till toward morning, and thus many a night after continued our
affections: which at last grew to that height of increase, that neither of us,
powerful to resist their inflaming effects, we at length determined to give a
joyful consummation to our passions. And Ismenia vanquished by my entreaties
for the appointed night, taking first Heaven and her true servant to witness,
of my hand and faithful vow to be her Spouse; she consented I should by the
window enter her Chamber, though for some necessary respects, the reward of my
labors was deferred till the next night: from which time I was able to take
no rest at all, but toiling up and down from one place to another, at all, but
toiling up and down from one place to another, thought every minute a long
Age, till the wished moment approached; so that, what should have been my
greatest joy, bred me greater disquiet, in which I passed the greatest part of
the day, till visited by my friend Don Martin, to the intent that he might not
discover my weakness, I forced my self to as much cheerfulness as I could
(which being forced, and I but counterfetly dissembling my inward trouble) he
might well perceive my alteration. This he made known unto me, and vvithall
requested to know the cause of my discontent: vvhereupon, I, that had formerly
trusted him with my bosoms greatest secrets, thought it no raritie now to
discover the present; and therefore made known unto him (would God I had dyed
first) our agreement: and indeed, Gerardo; though (as then) I took not the
notice I ought to have done of his looks, by what afterward happened (too late
to be helped) I called to mind, how Don Martin became suddenly sad, as soon
as ever I had made known unto him the cause of my unquietness, but mine eyes
were so blinded from his passion, that they never so much as marked the least
part of it, nor (though they had) might I have judged it to redound to my
prejudice.

Lastly, I requested to have his company (as I was wont) which he easily agreed
to; and so (faining a leave to prepare himself) home he went; and within a few
hours after, when it was time, came back again to me: and before we went
out, he was desirous we should change Cloakes, by which means (said he) we
shall the better disguize our selves: in this manner then coming to the lane
and place (being somewhat late) I might perceive that Ismenia expected; so that
with my friends help I got speedily upon the wall, from whence, about to have
climbed to the window, I no sooner went about it, when, two fellows newly
rushed into the Lane, began hastily to set upon Don Martin, with whom
(though to my seeming by him valiantly resisted) they began such a bickering,
as (the night you vvot of) happened unto me; but, suspecting as then no other,
then that we were laid wait for, I leapt to the ground, and seconding Don
Martin, we easily drove them out of the Lane, and I, desiring no more then to
set my Contrary from thence, seeing him begin to turn tail, following
somewhat hard to remove him a good way from my Mistresses danger, after I had
effected my desire, somewhat weary and breathless, I returned again to my
stand, where finding no Don Martin, nor any sign of the past skirmish, thinking
the same chance had happened to him, that to me; meaning not to expect him
longer, I ventured once again to the top of the wall, to effect my desires:
but having found the window close shut, thinking verily the fray and clashing
of our swords, for more security had caused it, I turned back again, though,
so perplexed with the unlooked for accident, that, I could willingly have
sacrificed my self.

In all that ensuing night, I could not afford my distracted mind one minutes
rest, whose morning comfort it fits, you next hear. About ten of the clock
the next morning, my Ismenia's Wench, as frollicke as 'twas possible, comes
into my Chamber, and giving me a Paper from her Mistress, asked me, if I were
more lively and less maidenly then ouer-night? I understood not her meaning,
and therefore making no direct reply, only demanded, whether we had been
perceived? who answered, Not. At last, somewhat more contented, I dispatched
her; but no longer lasted this contentedness with me, then mine eyes were
running over these Lines.

As in all my life I never had happier night, so, my delight never paid greater
abatement; for, as well your strange silence made my soul sorrowful, as the
danger also in which I first saw you: I am yet fearful, not knowing whether
yeu arrived safely at your lodging, which does mortally afflict me; and
therefore, loved Spouse, I beseech you, fail not to see me this night, since
you are now obliged to know, how ill I shall pass the tedious minutes, without
re-enioying your desired presence.

Even yet, Gerardo, the affrightment of these Lines still haunts me; which,
having as then sundry times read over, and comparing the Wenches former
questions with them, I could not tell what to imagine: but knowing that, till I
spoke with Ismenia, my labor was vain, I was forced to patience, and
expectation of nights approach, by when and before my accustomed hour, I went
to Don Martin his lodging, as well with purpose to have him along with me, as
to know also how he had sped the last night: but, though I bounced and often
called at his door, no answer was made me, which caused me to go alone; and
coming to the place, up I got, where Ismenia expected me.

Me thought as then, dear friend, my dis-ioynted lim^ were shattered from my
body; and, that my afflicted heart oppressed with some future mischief, leaping
within me, began to rent and tear: in fine, never such a stupid sadness
possessed man's faculties, though at the present I enjoyed all the happiness I
could in this world desire.

Ismenia soon took notice of my trouble, though no other light was by, then
what might have been sent from her sparkling eyes; and so, with equal
astonishment, and some few sighs, she said: Is it possible, Don Iayme, that
your extraordinary sadness thus should lessen our joys? last night you would
not have me so much as see you, neither could I obtain an amorous word from
you, in stead of many, that one who so freely delivered up the possession of
her self, might have expected: and now you proceed again with the same
strangeness: for Heavens love, loved Sir, leave this irkesomnesse, the
occasion of which I am wholly ignorant of, at least hide it not from me, since
fit it is, that your Ismenia should now be partaker both of your good and bad.

What grief (think you) could here be equal to that my soul endured,
hearing such bitter, vn-imagined misfortune? What tongue or words might
express the raging torment of my griefe-strucke heart; seeing Ismenia with
such simplicity to treat of my weightiest life's affairs? But, for all this,
not bending a jot under my passion, I resolved to try whether she iested; and
after, perceiving her to be terribly altered, when I denied my having been at
all with her the night before, knowing then plainly that there had been some
mistake, and that some other had been my substitute, so powerful was the
anguish of my heart, that, my spirits failing, I swouned in Ismenia's arms:
who, presently causing her Maid to bring a light, and perceiving in my lost
color the truth of her ill fortune, not any way suspecting my affection, which
she ever held to be unfeigned, she began by degrees to fear she had been
beguiled, and with one experiment was quickly satisfied that she was: for
remembering her self at that instant, of a little Relicke and Purse, which was
found under her Pillow, she knew it was left by him that possessed the place
and her honor; within the Purse also there was a little Book with Pictures,
in whose first leaf the Owners name, the false Don Martin was written: which
her Maid no sooner heard, when roaring out, and turning to the afflicted
Ismenia, and me that had now my senses better about me, she said:

You need not, Master and Mistress, trouble your imaginations longer, or
search for farther evidence of the truth: for undoubtedly the treacherous Author
of this villainy, is Don Martin; which, heaven knows, I might (beast that I
was) have helped, if the fear of some greater misfortune had not forced me to
silence; howsoever, I could never be persuaded, that his base thoughts would
ever have aimed at such an end: Know therefore, worthy Sir, that, as soon as
you had absented your self from this City, leaving (for better conuenience)
your conueyance of Letters to the said party, as soon as I had carried my
Mistresses first unto him, after some speech, he broke at last with me,
saying, My Mistress was much deceived in affecting you, to think to receive the
like recompense, for that your return of love was not only contrary, but
that, by your dissembling, you sought too to revenge the enmity of your houses
upon her honor: and that (to confirm this to be so) unmindful of her,
having violently stolen a certain Dame from a Nunnery, you lived lasciuiously
with her at your own home. This he told me, but so weakly hiding his own
passion, that I well enough ghessed at the falsehood, by perceiving the Owners
infirmity: his cares ended not so, but with all opportunities he returned to
the former theme, declaring himself at last so far as to offer me some gifts
of value, if I would make known his affection to my Mistress, insisting also to
have me persuade her (how treacherously you dealt with her) and the aim and
intent of your fained affection: but, the love I ever bore to your noble
proceeding, and the loyal service I owe to my Mistress, made me not only shut
mine ears to such base offers, but desire her to solicit your speedy
return: which Don Martin no sooner heard, and that you would be back, when,
with a false smiling countenance he made me believe, that all his former
endeavors were only to try my fidelity, as well as my Mistresses constancy;
and though I perceived, this was, but (like the Lapwing) crying out in the
false place, yet I durst not make it known to my Mistress, as thinking, that if
she should discover it to you, there must needs be some breach betwixt your
self and Don Martin, which might in the end light heavily upon me, to my
Mistress and her friends dishonours.

This (though well pondered) silence, is that, which has wronged you both; and
if the honest end for which it was meant, cannot free the Owner from
punishment; Lo, here is the party before you, inflict what revenge on her you
please.

Thus ending, and all of us falling into an exact consideration of each
circumstance in this woeful misfortune; as first, how unseasonably Don Martin
urged our exchanging Clokes, next the being set upon by those fellows just at
the instant when I was to get to the window, and my Contraries easy retiring,
comparing also the time that my false friend had to get into Ismenia's Chamber,
his silence all the while he was with her, with his commanding the lights to
be first removed, and lastly his fear and fright; by all these we not only
knew Don Martin to be the Actor of the Villainy, but the Author of the fray
also, plotting it with some friends or servants of his, in the manner related,
that whilst I should hazard my self in his defense, he might effect his
treacherous purpose: all these strong presumptions confirming poor Ismenia, no
humane thoughts can conceive her infinite tears, equal sighs, hearts
oppression, sad groans, and frequent dismaying. Many a dead trance she had
in my arms, and as often certainly had I seconded her, if the raging desire of
revenge had not courageously strengthened me. In fine, considering that for my
sake she had suffered so great an injury, and how much also I was in point of
honor obliged to mine own satisfaction, giving her the best comfort that
grief would permit, with a loving embrace I took leave, promising her
faithfully not to be at quiet, till her honor were fully satisfied, if not
restored.

The next morning in the Torment you may well suppose, I privily lay in wait
for my treacherous friend: but after I had long and to small purpose watched, I
understood, that the day before, he was ridden out of town; so that now it
appeared plainly, that having missed his Purse, and knowing by it his villainy
must needs be discovered, his guilt made him fly, as having neither heart nor
face to show himself to a friend whom he had so basely wronged.

This absence of his somewhat troubled me, as well, in retarding my revenge, as
being ignorant of his abode: but just Heaven provoked by his wickedness, was
pleased, by the means (that he thought was his securest) to make known unto
me where he resided; putting into my mind to go to the Post House, where
having sundry times looked over the Letters from all parts, at last I lighted
upon a superscription to a kinsman of his, which I broke open, and reading it,
perceived it came from mine enemy who wrote from Oran in Barbary, requesting
his kinsman to take order for the sending certain moneys and trunkes of
apparel. This joyful news I made known to Ismenia, and taking a speedy
leave, addressed my self for Oran, determined, if I could, to kill mine
enemy; and about some six days ago I arrived in a small Bark at the Port
of Massalquibir, where, fearing to be discovered, I came not till yesterday
abroad, informing my self as diligently as I could from one of the Soldiers
of the Fort, whether one Don Martin de Vrrea were not in the City.

As soon as the fellow had resolved me he was, giving him some pieces of
Silver to drink, that he might the more willingly take some pains for me, I
desired him to let Don Martin know, that in the Bark (which I fained to be
mine) there came certain Trunkes directed to him from Zaragosa, for which he
must of necessity come a-boord to fetch them that night, because with the
first fair vvinde the Bark was to set sail for Spain. All which the glad
Soldier willingly believed; and so promising to himself a new reward for his
good tidings, he effected my will (as by the success here you have seen:) for
before Sunne-set my Messenger returned with Don Martins answer, that he was
preparing to come, only stayed to provide himself of a Horse, and desired me
therefore to expect him: for, though it were late first, he would not fail to
fetch his Trunkes that night away.

So leaving my Soldier, and providing my self of a reasonable good Horse I
bought of a Moore (of those that peaceably traffike amongst us) and well
instructed in the way to the City, I betook me to my fortune: and having (as
I supposed) rode on the better half of the way, and expected under these
Rocks before us some two or three hours, hearing none pass by, I began to
grow doubtful of the Soldiers diligence, and hopeless of any good success,
was ready to have gone back again: but in the midst of these imaginations, I
might hear a horses trampling not far from me, and by and by perceived a
horseman coming somewhat toward me, and (as that Country manner is) armed as
I was, who coming close up to me, saluting me, asked whether I traveled
toward the City or the Port. My heart betwixt trouble and joy was ready to
have burst within me; and 'twas marvel, having known the Traitor by his
voice, I affoorded him any other answer then with my Lance: but though his
treachery deserved no courtesy, I, not knowing how to be base, yielded him
this reply; Thy self, false Don Martin, art the Port and Haven to which I go,
at which the satisfaction of my revenge must safely land; and to no other am I
bound; and therefore speedily defend thy self; for, know, I have not crossed
the stormy Seas, to return to the vvronged Ismenia, with less then thy life's
revenge. I suppose, my Contrary was not altogether pleased with this note:
from whom, though I received diverse replies, yet assured of his wickedness, my
angry spirit could not defer a vvrathfull execution, remitting to my hand the
just Revenge, which Heaven has pleased I should take, before such witnesses as
your self, and your valorous companions. Of Ismenia's goodness as confident
am I, as satisfied with the deserved chastisement of her wrong, which I purpose
to solder (since with honor I now may) by accomplishing my wedlock vow. This,
Gerardo, is my intent, this resolution carries me for Spain, more joyful then
when I left my Country, for I shall not only comply with my loves
obligation, but with a greater, my souls.

Thus far held on the generous Aragonian his Relation, and (that ceasing)
Gerardo began with his thanks, no less joyful for the success, then
approving Don Iayme's necessary revenge; he applauded his laudible and noble
purpose also: and so, within a few hours after, they put safely into the
ancient and famous Port of Cartagena, where, to the addition of Gerardo's joy,
they found the Ship, which with Nise and Iacinta he thought was lost:
wherefore, desirous to hear further news, the first thing he did (gotten on
shore) was to seek the Master of her; whom he soon found out, who
wondering extremely to behold Gerardo, having given him for a dead man,
informed him of all that had passed even to that very instant; how that after
they were parted, the Ship unable to hold her course for Oran, was forced
back to Cartagena; from whence, the fair Nise verily persuaded, that Gerardo
was cast away, bitterly bewailing her misfortune, accompanied by her servants,
meant to return to Cesarina; and that Iacinta with her Christian woman too,
returned toward Castile, but he knew not to what place there they would go.

This information (saving the sorrow of those Dames for him) in another respect
much ioyed him, as knowing for certain they had safely escaped the dangerous
storm in which he left them; and imagining that Iacinta (according to her
purpose) was gone toward Castile, desirous to make good his promise to her, he
determined to seek her out; and though he should miss of her, at least he
might be in his way to his Mother and Brother Leoncio, to whom he resolved to
make known his last mind, which was: To repay with vvorthie recompense the
dainty Nise's firm and loyal affection: and making Don Iayme acquainted
with this resolution, they both a-fresh exchanging promises and vows of love
and affection, with an embrace took leave of each other, as also of the rest
of the captive Christians: the Aragonian going toward Zaragosa, and our
determinate Gentleman making what haste he could, for Castile. The third day
of his travel he was forced to lie some six Leagues short of the Imperial
City of Toledo, at a Venta, that is, a lone Inn upon the way; where having
alighted, (in stead of a better Lodging) he was carried into an ugly close
dog-hole, where he was forced to be contented, and so resolved to lie in his
Clothes, that he might the sooner be upon his way, and the earlier in the
morning enter the City of Toledo. His hard riding exceedingly wearied him, so
that going supperlesse to bed, before it grew through dark, he was well entered
into his first sleep; from which, within a few hours after, the sollicitous
care of his journey awoke him, together with the Cocks crowing, which
vn-tuneable Music was his Alarm, and made him judge the time to be about
midnight; wherefore thinking it was too soon to stir out of the house, he
settled himself once again to rest: but his confused thoughts would scarce
allow him a wink, keeping him in this manner so long waking, till near his
beds head he might hear some talking; so that with the suddenness, and
thinking it to have been in his Chamber, he instantly rose up, and groping
about the door, feeling that to be shut, he returned with more quiet to his
bed; where hearing the noise again, hearkening more calmely to it, he might
easily distinguish it to be in the next room, divided only by some few
boords, and an old painted-cloth from his; through which, by the glimpse of a
candle he might perceive two men, who appeared to him earnestly contending: for
thus he might hear the one say to the other, In all the time of our
acquaintance I never knew thee so faint-hearted as now, which I am ashamed of,
and sorry these ghests came to thy house; for any where else I had sped better,
and not lost so good a booty.

To this, Gerardo might hear the other, whom he saw to be the Inne-keeper
himself, thus reply: Look you, Signior Isaguirre, it is not faint-heartednesse
which you see in me at present; for had I ever been so, I could never have
thriued so well, as to be reputed reasonable wealthy, and still to maintain
my house and family by the means chiefly you know; and therefore you may
think there is more in it then so: these Ghests (I much doubt) whether they be
vvorth our venturing on, for I suppose they have but little money, since they
supped so poorly, and besides, offered to abate of their reckening: why then
belike (quoth Isaguirre) you have forgot what I told you, or you believe it
not. I say again unto you, that with these eyes (though warily) I beheld very
good Jewels of theirs, which they brought on shore with them at Cartagena, and
ever since I have followed them to an inch I am sure; and therefore since time
has offered us a fit occasion, we may this one time grow both of us rich:
and besides, to save us harmless, look you, there is another Ghest in the
next room; there is no more to be done, but convey something of theirs through
the cloth and boords into his Chamber, and we shall easily make him thought to
have been the author of our handi-worke; your self and I, with our people,
witnessing what we please.

With this devilish resolution finishing his discourse, mine Oast was
vanquished; and so, not deferring the least minute their mischievous purpose,
one of them taking in his hand the Light, both vanished out of Gerardo's sight,
leaving him in the strangest confusion that might be, considering the danger
which on every side encompassed him: but resolving with himself, that the
lesser (though more hazardous) of the two, was to hinder their villainous
enterprise, he straight most courageously disposed himself to set upon them:
and so taking his Pistol charged, and his sword in his right hand, he stepped
out of his Chamber, just as these Rogues were lifting a door at the further
end of the entry off the hindges, where from within he might also hear a
terrible scrieking and noise (as he guessed) of women: whereupon the good
Gentleman, without delay, clapped in to the couple, who void of cowardice, (which
such people are commonly accustomed to) like ravenous beasts, seeing their
treachery discovered, sought to have clozed with him, but Gerardo had too much
advantage over them, as well in respect of his own personal valor, as having
also the better Arms: and so, discharging his Pistol at one of them, the
bullet of it quickly discovered the certainty of the hurt; for having struck
the party in the right arm, his sword fell from him, and himself likewise
with the grief, tumbled to the ground, yet at that time his companion
unluckily raught Gerardo a wound, and cut him over the forehead; which he
feeling, his fury had soon guided him to a revenge upon his Contrary, had the
Light been more propitious to his indignation; which (he that stood against
Gerardo, having on purpose or accidentally trodden under foot) was extinguished,
and so the dark prevented his punishment, at the instant, that with much
knocking and noise some company at the door called to be let in. The clamors
within doors, what with the wounded parties howling, the Inne-keepers roaring,
the women's wailing, and the whole houses affrightment, were so terribly
outrageous, that neither the one nor other could distinctly be heard: till such
time as he that had been Pistol-shot taking some courage, (which he might the
better do, in respect Gerardo in the dark retired further from him) groping
about the door, and putting back the Bolt, he straightway opened it; and
seeing five or six persons (those that called) without, he cried out to them
not to enter, for fear of a desperate thief within: whom he and the
Inne-keeper (he said) having resisted to keep him from robbing two women that
lay there, he set upon them, and discharging a Pistol, wounded him pitifully
in the arm: so that some of the company compassionate toward the party,
sought to help him; and the rest thought fit to beset the house, and not to
enter, that so the thief within might not escape.

All this while, they within kept wary silence, for Gerardo feeling himself
vvounded, and knowing not how to be revenged, was only careful in the dark
to stop his wound close, to keep it from too much bleeding. And honest, mine
Oast, for fear of another bickering, squatting down as close as he could, and
as round together as a third-bottome, stirring neither leg nor arm, was
settled under the Table; and the poor women that first cried out, knowing
their good or bad fortune depended upon the days approach, with vvishes and
prayers expecting it, had hid themselves in several places. They without,
thought it no whit secure for them to run into darkness, nor in the behalf
of strangers, to undergo a certain danger; and therefore both the one and the
other waited for day, and Sunrise; whose rays not long after crowning the
Mountain tops, (all being now visible) the false Inne-keeper came leaping to
the door, crying, Thieves, thieves! whereupon the Travelers having got sight
of Gerardo, called out to him to yield; and by this too, the fearful women
also were gotten out with their noise, the whole house appearing to be rather
an enchanted Mansion, then receptacle for Ghests.

The good Gerardo, with this roguerie of the Inne-keeper and his companions,
was as much afflicted, as doubtful how to behave himself, his noble mind
having never before been plunged into so disgraceful an accident, but
referring the success of all to his innocence, and relying altogether upon
heavens providence, he determined to stand forth; and being come to the doors
threshold, was scarce ready to have begun his satisfaction to those that
encompassed him, when in the midst of them he might perceive his brother
Leoncio, whose unexpected sight so amazed him, that (not knowing what he did)
his sword and Pistol dropped from him, which no sooner happened, but the
Inne-keeper and the rest thinking that to be a sign of yielding, clozed with
him; some laying sure hold, and others seeking for Cords to bind him withal;
and this, with such outcries and balling, that though Gerardo cried out unto
them, he was Leoncio's brother, he could not be heard, less known, by reason
his face was all stained with the blood that ran from his wound; till Leoncio
himself taking more careful notice of those loved Eccho's of his brothers
voice, which pierced his very heart; causing also some that laid hands on him
to stand off, (though all bloody and disfigured) he forthwith knew him, and
with incredible astonishment, and joyful tears embracing him, thought he
should never enough claspe him in his arms, breeding much amazement in all the
beholders.

Leoncio's servants were even mad with joy, when they saw the
so-much-bewailed Captive now returned: and the wretched Women hearing what
passed, rendering due thanks to Heaven, for being freed from their great
danger, drying up the remainders of their former sorrows, went out to show
themselves; and (though clad in strange array) no sooner were they seen by the
two Brothers, when Leoncio first knew Iacinta's face, and Gerardo both of them;
for the other was the Captive that acccompanied her from Argiers.

The afflicted Dame was so troubled at Gerardo's sight, that had it been in
the dead time of night, it might (possibly) have stricken her dead: for
persuaded (as you heard) that he was cast away, at such a time, her amazed
senses must needs have failed her, since even Leoncio with her sight in broad
daylight (for all his courage) was astonished, as if he had beheld some
apparition, till Gerardo awoke his confusion, who amorously embracing her,
satisfied his brother.

The next business was to hearken after mine Oast and his friend, but their
care of themselves, saved the others a labor; for no sooner saw they this
change, and heard the name of Brother pass to and fro, when they shifted
themselves away: and Gerardo now understanding from his brother, that the cause
of his journey was only to have carried Moneys to Valencia for his ransom,
(there being no need of his passing further) they returned all together
joyfully toward Madrid with the fair Iacinta whom they had along with them.

They thought it not fit to surprise their mother with Gerardo's unexpected
sight; and so they commanded a servant to go before to prepare her first by
degrees unto it: letting her know, they were fair and softly upon their way
toward her, some two days iourneys behind: in which time Gerardo giving his
brother particular notice of all that befell him in his captivity; Leoncio also
quitted his Relation, by giving him to understand what passed at Granada in his
absence, and that which was of most importance and greatest grief to him, his
friend Arsenio's death, Heaven pleasing to remove him from earth, before the
arrival of his desired, deserved liberty: and also the sentence of Violante's
Lover the new Leandro, whom, after a tedious imprisonment, the incensed Judges
at last sentenced to end his life in our Kings service at the Garrison of
Larache. This news, especially that of Arsenio, to save his hearts sorrow, he
could willingly have wished to be spared: but this discomfort of his was
quickly sweetened with the sight of his most loving Mother, to whose presence
the same day they arrived. Here the whole company rested some little time,
before any mention was had of Iacinta's affairs, whom (knowing that by her
means Gerardo obtained his freedom) the Mother as lovingly entertained as her
son, and (ignorant of their first more illicite acquaintance) she complied
with her just obligation, till time passing away, the fair Dame careful of
her own business, by good advice considering that, giving her Parents or
friends notice of her abode, and her husband too living, her life and honor
might be endangered, desisting from that, she dedicated the rest of her days
to a religious retirement; to which, without any help, but of the Jewels
brought with her from Argiers, she might easily attain, having not only in
them enough to make up her own portion for the Nunnerie, but for others also
as well borne, and of as good quality as her self: and so, making Leoncio and
Gerardo privy to her intent, they unanimously approved it, only were a little
troubled for the place, which at length they agreed should be at a Monastery
in a Village, not passing six Leagues from the Court; which being thus
necessarily resolved on, and all things fitting provided, taking Iacinta, the
Captive that would never forsake her, and another poor maid that Gerardo's
Mother recommended to her, along with them, they accompanied her till such
time as she was admitted and settled in the Nunnerie, where after so many
strange and different successes of her life, in singular abstinence, and
austerenesse of devotion she to this day remains.

This then to Leoncio's joy, and Gerardo's comfort happily effected, home they
went, and being now at full leisure, treated about the particular of most
consequence, touching the fair and discreet Nise, whose firm and constant
thoughts maturely waighed by Gerardo, and the new flames of his old Loves
remembrance breaking out, solicited his care so much, that at last he
resolved to recompense her affection, by bestowing himself upon her: and so
communicating the business with the rest of his friends and kinsmen,
accompanied (to their good liking) by them and his Brother, he purposed to set
forward to Cesarina, where he doubted not, but (as the Pilot told him) to find
his Nise: so, fitting all things for a journey, he began the same, only for
Devotions sake meant to take the famous Monastery of Guadalupe in his way,
which was indeed the shorter, save that it was not so full of good Towns and
Innes as the other more usual; which defect was well enough supplide by their
own mirth, and variety of company. Gerardo had a purpose, that Nise's joy
might be the more complete, to take her vn-awares, that (supposing him long
before dead, seeing him now again beyond all hope or expectation) her
affectionate content must necessarily be augmented; and therefore he would not
that any notice should be carried to her before they all arrived.

The sharpest of Winter was at this time quite past, though in the beginning of
March, it seemed to be retrograde: for the tender sprigs and grass were
covered with hoare frost, as in January, and the staring Mountain Tops with
condensed snow; so that by the fourth day of their journey, all the Gentlemen,
wearied and toiled out, with Rain, Snow, and other discommodities in the midst
of those wild Mountains of Guadalupe, desired (the evening drawing on) to
rest themselves at the nearest lodging they could come at; and to this purpose
willed their Muletiers to guide them to a known Inn in that way, called, The
Mary Magdalen; but the poor fellows were so wet and weary, that, though they
labored what they could, to bring their Masters thither, yet night and
darkness ouer-taking them, they lost their way, and the horsemen had much ado
to keep themselves from tumbling headlong: so steepy are the Cliffes and
dangerous precipices of those Mountains. All of them well perceived the
misfortune, and fearing yet some greater, if they should all night long remain
thus to the inclemencie of the weather; considering their danger, they trooped
together, till, at length, when they least thought of it, not knowing how or
which way, they were gotten to the foot of the Mountain; and being now in a
Valley near certain mudde walls, that joined (as they might guess) to a
house: drawing nearer to it, they might perceive it had some close entries on
every side; so, thinking they had met with no bad shelter, all of them
alighted. And Gerardo supposing there wanted not some inhabitant there, who,
taking pity upon their distress, might yet afford them a better welcome;
about to knock at the gate, going as near as he could, he might by the
manner of the building (having some small glimpse of it) perceive it to be a
Hermitage; whereupon, forsaking his intent of knocking, as (persuaded that in
so desert a place there could be no body to open to them) he turned back to
the company. But he was deceived in his distrust: for no sooner was he
beginning to utter his mind, when, perceiving the Hermitage door open, they
might also see a venerable ancient man with a light in his hand come out,
whose long silver Locks, gray beard, as well as his Religious habit, moved the
bystanders with a kind of devout respect to draw near.

The good old Father vvondred at the raritie, though, with gentle phrase he
saluted them, and cheerfully demanded the cause of their unseasonable
traveling through those uncouth parts: of which being by Gerardo sufficiently
satisfied, and of the necessity they were driven to, with most charitable
entrails he offered them his Cell for a Harbor: where all of them entering,
more speedily then from his vveake Age might have been expected, he made them
a reasonable good fire, with whose warmth (which they esteemed as an
extraordinary dainty) they by little and little dried themselves; and they that
had been before almost frozen with cold, and sick with wet, were now newly
revived; and making ready their supper (which was the Relikes of some dinner
meats that their servants carried in their Wallets) together with some little
fruit the old man set before them, giving God thanks that affoorded them so
good a shelter, they began to fall to. All those Gentlemen were maruellously
taken with the reverend presence of the holy Man, who at Gerardo's request sat
with them for company, to whose words and grave discourse they were more
attentive, then sollicitous to taste of the Cates set before them. So, Supper
ended, Leoncio and Gerardo would have begun to renew their thanks for his
courtesy: which he prevented, vvilling them to attribute all to the higher
powers, to whom their thanks were solely due.

And so leading them by the hands (the rest following) they came to the foot
of an Altar, where, by the light of a small Lamp, they might behold a
Crucifix, to which they all kneeled, and after their Devotion, were about to
have returned to their former seats; when, Gerardo, rising up, perceived, that
the ground where he had kneeled, was somewhat loose, and as if it had been
but that day newly broken up for a grave (as true it was:) at which
maruelling, and that any should be buried in so remote a desert; or thinking
perhaps they might be near some town, desirous to be resolved; he demanded
the cause of the Reverend Hermit: from whom, in stead of an answer, he might
see, how with those hoarie skeines of his, he wipte his grieved eyes, to
conceal their tears: at which unlooked for resentment not a little wondering,
and much greedier to know this and the former cause, he began with this
effectual entreaty thus to move him:

Honest Father, though the demonstration of your eyes might interrupt my
purpose, since I presume by my question your tears have been occasioned: yet
the force of my desires wills me in the behalf of this worthy company to
importune your satisfying my request, and making known the reason of your
sudden sorrow, that, if any here may give you ease or comfort, it shall be no
trouble or difficulty for him herein to serve you: and therefore the sooner you
declare your grief, the nearer grows your remedy.

Further had Gerardo proceeded, so much wished he to dispose the Hermit to his
will, but, perceiving, that by the others beginning to speak, himself was
cut off, with care and silence he gave ear: In all the time, my loved Son,
that in this solitariness my wretched life has been dedicated to Heaven, I
may safely promise you, that neither temporal goods have disturbed my minds
quiet, nor worldly cares my penitence or souls salvation; for which I must
incessantly praise my Creator; yet, I cannot but acknowledge and esteem as an
especial obligation what your nobleness has imposed upon me, which I should
most heartily repay in the kind you demand, were not the time more necessary
for your rest, then my small pains for your satisfactions. Rest your selves
all therefore for the present, for your weary travel has much need of it, and
to morrow morning, I shall accompany you (God vvilling) to Guadalupe; at which
time I not only promise to fulfill your command, but jointly for your better
edification to recount unto you the stupendous life of that Graves Owner.
Here, with a relenting groan, he finished his speech, though, in the hearers
their desires began anew: and therefore falling again to importune him, they
requested him not to defer his Relation, laying before him the hardness of
their lodging and tediousness of the night, which would be the better
beguiled, by their being by him kept waking; so that, at length loath to be held
too obstinate, he was willing to obey: but first he renues their fire with
some pieces of dry logs, and then the Brothers and whole company round
besetting the good old man, he thus sets upon their attentive silence with the
following Tragedy.

All wounds (an effect of the sovereign salve) are lessened by their cure; but
if any carelessely touch them, such rubbing increases their dolor, and their
recovery is so much the longer deferred; the same now befalls me: this last
night I lost my best friend; and though my Soul, Gods creature, be comforted;
yet, her affection cannot but resent the blow that was inflicted with your
demand; I obey notwithstanding, sacrificing my will to your wish; and though it
may be some ease to my pain, to divert your weariness, yet I must desire
more, that is, to have your attention bear a part in my Discourse, and your
selves to give to the truth of this accident, the credit and applause it justly
deserves.

To provide my self of some sustenance (the in-excusable Tribute to our
wretched bodies) I use weekly to importune certain poor Villages within a
four Leagues compass of this Valley with my necessities, from whence about
six years since, returning to this Hermitage, forced as well by Iulies
scorching heat, as my weakness of Age by the way, I sat me down to rest my
ouer-wearied limbs, on the shady brinke of a swift running Spring, the brief
Original of the near Brook: here then my thoughts found a weighty subject,
in which they might (considering the beauty, fragrancie of different Plants,
shadie Trees, enamelled Flowers, springing Grass, and crystal streams,
mounting even to the very foot of their glorious Artificer) reverence in them
the excellency of his Divine handy-worke.

In this elevation was I, when turning mine eyes toward certain Briars, there
appeared from them a kind of glimmering brightness, that almost dazzled them,
and altogether amazed me. At first I thought it to be some reflection of the
Sunne-beames, which shined into that thornie shade: but making several trials
with my sight, I might perceive the same light to remain still fixed and
immooueable in one place, which made me suspect greater matters, promising to
my worldly desire some stone of price, or metal of equal value.

With this imagination, up got I; and coming to the Bushes, with help of my
Crab-tree-staffe, I began to put them by, and so, quickly discovered the
occasion of my search, which was, a Ginet Saddle of marvelous neat
workmanship, embroidered, with all furniture to it, in several colors; at
the Bow hung the bit, head-stall and Reins. The Stirrops and Poitrall were
fairly gilt and enamelled. The accident made me somewhat wonder, yet the
gilded irons which made that shining, satisfide my first doubtful
imagination. The mystery of the Saddle, being thus left I was utterly ignorant
of; and therefore not once searching into the cause, covering the whole
furniture, I left it to the Owner in the same manner I found it; and so walked
on to my Cell; where (my mind better emploide) my thoughts had no leisure to
wander.

A week passed on after the accident, in whose last day (I being retired, my
door close shut) the sky covered with clouds, not without Lightning and
Thunder, there began a terrible storm (which are in this Valley, though not
lasting, yet as frequent as frightfull.) The violence of it much afflicted me
for the hurt it might do the Country; and so I made the matter of my Oraisons
for more moderate weather, praying to God to protect the earths increase: but
at the instant, the trampling, neighing and snuffling of a horse, suspended my
pious Zeal, and caused me to approach nearer to the Altar, thinking verily some
spirit had been near.

And wonder not at it: for I tell you true, the noise this night of your Moyles
and Horses worked no less horrid effect at first: for, now, as then, it seemed
impossible to me to hear any creature come near this place: which (though
not far from habitations) yet has ever been, by reason of the dangerous
narrow ways so inaccessible, and indeed so vn-promising a sally to Horsemen,
that it makes me think your coming hither miraculous; and therefore with these
circumstances, you need not think my fears then triuiall. So I stayed a
pretty while within my doors, not once stirring from the Sacred refuge that
protected me: but perceiving, as soon as I began to heat the noise, the
weather grew calmer, and the storm ceased, together with the Horses neighing,
I got me to my door, from whose open grates I might see a dainty Bay-horse,
with black feet, and of a very handsome shape, but without any furniture at
all upon him.

At first with much admiration I could not tell what to imagine of the sight;
till, calling to mind the Saddle found by me, I began to think, it might
happily have belonged to that Horse, and that some misfortune had befalne his
Owner, either by falling headlong from the steepy Mountain, or being slain by
Thieves in the maine highway, not passing a League from this place: though the
manner of the Saddles being as it were carefully laid up, and the Horse left
fo free, quickly made frustrate this opinion also.

At last (not to weary you) resolving my self, that the Thunder and extremity
of weather had forced the poor beast to seek some shelter, I purposed to
seize on him, thinking it better for me to keep him for his Master, then to
leave him as a stray in those deserts: and fo, opening my door, the Horse no
sooner heard the creaking of it, when suddenly he startted back. The showers
were quite ouerpast; and therefore though the Beast fled from me, yet I left
not to prosecute my purpose, and so fetched a compass to run before him, that
I might make him turn back again: in this manner as well as mine Age and
weakness would permit me, I was gotten at least half a League from the
Hermitage after him. But growing weary, at length I I was forced to rest, where
I remained some little while refreshing my self, and keeping the Horse still
in sight; and longer had I there stayed (so out of breath was I) but that the
clouds again thickning, I was compelled to seek out some place less subject
to the violence of a storm, so that rising up, not far off, I made choice of
the strong Trunk, and broad boughs of a wild Walnut-tree, whose height
reaching even to the Mountains Top, gave shade and shelter to the ground.
Where being arrived, I no sooner purposed to enter the hollow of it (caused
either by Art or Antiquity) when, I perceived a man who by way of prevention
was gotten into it before me. This kept me from my intent; for the novelty
surprised me, and the more, in respect that having heard me, he did not once
offer to stir, but, only hiding his face, now and then sent forth a
mournful sigh. His attire and clothes by their goodness showed the Owners
quality; and the liveliness of his well-fauour'd countenance, no store of
years. All which (besides admiration) caused a curious desire in me to know
more; and accordingly I expected a while, to see if the party would forsake his
dumpes: but seeing his behavior was still the same, taking the name of Jesus
in my mouth, I saluted him alowd; who, as if he had been awaked out of a
dream, looking up, replied: For ever be my Saviors glorious name praised;
and truning about, re-saluted me, asking what I would have? To which, not a
little astonished, thus I replide:

I know not, Christian Brother, what austere Cinicall person in the world
there may be, that, beholding you in this manner, would not desire to be
informed, and to know the cause of this your solitary being; and therefore I
most earnestly request you, to make known unto me, not only your grief; but,
vvithall, whether you be the Owner of a goodly Horse, in whose pursuit, I
have left my harbor: and hearing this, he answered me in this calm manner:

Though the power of so courteous a Request might enjoin me to obey; yet,
many times, such are the misfortunes of our life, as, oblige rather with wary
silence to leave the desire unsatisfied: So now it fares with me, that
desiring to give your demand content, the quality of my mishaps does
contradict my desire: Pardon, if this discharge serve not, for impossible it is
to obtain other from me: though, not to be altogether harsh or unsavory,
touching my being in these Deserts, I will resolve your doubt, which is, to
end my days in them. I was not willing to importune him with farther
questions, taking this his last answer for a settled resolution; neither would
I on the other side so leave him; but seeming to be ioyed with his intent,
replide:

These forty years have I lived in these Mountains, and though I have met
with many, in their rough and rugged paths, yet never before with such
determinate resolution in any: for, I suppose, the extremities of this
Wilderness are much more difficult to be tolerated, then pleasing to be
desired; and therefore wondering at your singular election, I cannot but
rejoice, and give you my best advice, since this kind of life's experience
gives me freedom, and may deserve credit for it: yet, if you would so please,
I should think it far better, for the undergoing so much hardness, that you
would accept of my company. Consider well of it; and if you think good, I
now presently offer it, together with my shelter, which is a poor Hermitage
seated in the secret'st part of these Mountains, sufficient to contain us
both.

Here (after some little pawse) without expecting further entreaties, up he
rose, saying; Come on then, Father mine; Go on, I follow; for it must needs
be, that God taking compassion of my soul, by this wholesome course disposes
of her remedy: 'twas he, that brought me through these unusual ways; he, that
has now twelve days miraculously sustained me with the plenty of these
Herbs, preserving me only to deliver me to such a Master.

What stay we for, reverend Father? let us go: for from henceforward, I submit
my affections to your grave advice; and from this instant, even till death, do
dedicate my life unto the Almighty his service; and so getting out of his
hollow seat, he followed me; and by that time we were gone some few paces,
the horse that was before so wild, as gentle now as any lamb, came to his
Master, and suffering himself easily to be laid hold on, we brought him along
to the Hermitage; and being here, I perceived him to be his Owner: for having
changed his apparel, and putting on some of mine, he desired me to take the
clothes, with some Jewels and Moneys that he had, and in his name offer them to
our Lady of Guadalupe; which I did, together with the fair Horse, Saddle and
Furniture, which he himself told me, he had hidden formerly in the Briars.

So that now in a poor Hermits Weed, in heavenly meditations, he so shined in
a short time in pious exercises, that, anticipating my years, he left me
behind: such and so strict were his fasts, so rigorous his penitence, and so
continually fervent his meditations; all which, chiefly the macerating his
flesh, had been much more outrageous, if my persuasions had not something
mitigated his feruorous spirit. In this manner he went on six years together,
in which time, he would many a time and often freely recount unto me the rare
and admirable events of his life; the which (stealing some hours from him) for
an example and warning to others, I have as exactly as I could, (which you shall
see) set down in these Lines; and drawing out a little Tiller, and out of that
a Paper-booke, opening the same, and taking some fresh breath, he began with
the ensuing Contents:

In the Kingdom of Toledo, not far from the Royal Cities self, is
situated the famous Talbora, qualified as well for her own Antiquity, as
known by her noble and ancient Gentry. Here, a Gentleman sprung from worthy
Ancestors, called Fernando, was borne; whose childhood, (though with
marvelous forwardnes it gave a strong likelihood of his more flourishing
maturer years) I pass over, as little suting with our purpose, and come to
his sixteenth year of age, at which time, his parents dying, he being left
free and rich, the disposition of his noble mind might the better be declared,
in which his generous virtues posting, as it were, in a short time, made him
the most loved by the vulgar, and most emulated by his equals, that might be.
He was not guilty of the least habitual noted vice, nor disposed much to
that youthful wantonness most proper to young Gallants of his age: or, though
his natural frailty might happily something incline him that way, yet his
proceeding was such, so wary, as escaped (at least) public notice: which
retiredness in his actions, made him singular in the general opinion. In his
expenses he was most prouidently regular, though far from pinching; for in
point of honor, upon himself, his family, and friend, in any good occasions,
he would express a liberal bounty nearer prodigality; being then the most
forward, most brave, most liberal. To strangers he was wonderfully
courteous, in defending or protecting them in extremities, careful for the
aduenturing in the behalf of friends too, his wealth, life, or what dearest,
reputation. To make this good, you shall clearly perceive it in the course of
his life, since his greatest troubles took their beginning from this cause.

Fernando at this time exceedingly affected a certain Dame, who, had his
parents lived some longer time, might have been his wife; and though this love
of his were governed with the usual wariness that the rest of his affairs,
yet it could not so be concealed from some of her friends and kindred, but by
means of a Damozell of hers, to whose notice it came, it was discovered to the
others: and although the alliance displeased them not, they closely dissembled
their knowledge, expecting when himself should first become an open suitor;
which had doubtless been effected, were it not that in the Interim a cross
business worthy your observing happened; from whence much unquietness arose,
and indeed the breach of these amorous prosecutions: and therefore though it
be to enter into a different matter from the present, I cannot but make a
succinct mention of that, to give the better light to our Story. Fernando
proceeding in his noble conditions, grew into a straight league of friendship
with a Gentleman, a stranger, one that also extremely loved another Dame of
Auila, both of them (upon several occasions) then residing in Talbora, she
with her Kinsman Segundo Octauio; he, with his father, Governor and chief
Justice of the place.

Gerardo from that very moment that the Hermit named Fernando, expected some
more evident token in his knowledge, but now thoroughly satisfied, crying out,
interrupting the relation, and pitifully fixed upon those hoarie locks, he
said: Peace, good Father, for Heavens sake forbear the prosecution of my life's
torment: Wretched and unfortunate man, that at length art arrived to such
grown ills; to be a witness, if not of thy best friends death, yet at least
of his grievous disasters, of his tragical story, and ignorantly with thy rude
foot-steppes to press his quiet Grave!

He could no more for tears: but his brother Leoncio, who with better temper
understood the success, perceiving plainly that the deceased Hermit was their
ancient friend Fernando, he could no less then hold fellowship with his
brothers sighs; they also that were ignorant of the first Parts successes,
were struck into greater confusion, but not long remained they in these
dumpes; for the godly old man, ghessing as well by the sad extremes of both, as
the speech of Gerardo only, that they two were (doubtless) the Gentlemen, of
whom he had heard so many things from his dead companion, he requested them,
that mitigating their passion, they would afford him a second, better
attention; which they agreed to, so that seeing them in more quiet, this
following discourse he first framed to their comfort.

Scarce could I this night (considering your unexpected arrival so full of
desperate passages) credit mine eyes in the truth before them: but having this
present occasion to know you, I am not only well apaid, but rest also most
assured and satisfied, that God Almighty was pleased out of a particular
goodness to direct you to this house, that the prodigious life, and late death
of this Gentleman coming to his chiefest friends notice, might not be buried
in the obscure silence of these remote Deserts: and therefore, though hitherto
I not condemn your just resentment; yet from henceforward it were a fondness
to embrace it: for knowing his valorous determination, holy election, and happy
ending, these should rather make you rejoice at his marvelous acts and
virtues, since they are rather worthy of admiration and envy, then
lamentation and tears; such are fitter to be used to the Author of his
happiness, to be sorry that we live behind him in a world of miseries: use
tears to him, or rather fervent prayers, to make you like your dead brother;
and believe for certain, that this arriual of yours, guided against a natural
and ordinary course, has been disposed to the intent, that hearing these your
friends admirable successes from my mouth, they may serve you as examples,
shunning their bad, to attain by his like repentant penitence, so happy an end
as that of his life, in which I now with your good pleasures will proceed, and
so much the more willingly, since I suppose the Relation may not be
unprofitable for some one present among you.

Leoncio and Gerardo had no replies left, which made him the more contentedly
turn to his Story, and so rehearsing the greatest part of that amorous,
tragical Discourse of Gerardo and Clara mentioned in the first Part, and
pointing at the actions, (in which Fernando as his familiar friend showed
himself on his behalf) at length he concluded them, saying, that the parents
and friends of Fernando's Mistress allied to the deceased Don Rodrigo and
Segundo Octauio, seeing him sided with their contrary Faction, not only
contradicted his suite, but altogether auerse from what so much concerned them,
the more to spite him, they wrought so effectually with her, that in fine they
persuaded her to a Nunnery; where, though Fernando labored by all possible
means to dissuade her, at the end of her years Probationer-ship, taking the
holy profession upon her, she cut the thread of his intents.

This wound of Fortune (said the reverend Hermit) our affectionate Gentleman so
painefully felt, that his grief now desperate, without all consideration he
suffered himself to be carried headlong on, in such sort, that with the
continuance of his passion, his complaints coming to Camila's notice, (so
hight his quondam Mistress) perceiving (though late) better then formerly her
lost Sweet-hearts affection, and calling to mind some ancient passages of their
amorous meetings, unable to resist the strong temptation of her thoughts, she
at length vvilfully plunged her self into them, and sent these following Lines
unto Fernando:

Though well I might (had you any reason to blame my determination) find a just
excuse from the necessary obedience due to my Parents; yet it shall be
needless, (there being no occasion) that I desire you to admit any; since you
can neither have the face to deny your self to have been the cause, nor can I
want courage to complain of your coldness. Your friend Gerardo was more
happy, whose affairs ('it is well known) you preferred before our affection,
smoothing all difficulties, to make his party good against my friends and
Allies; who, not unjustly (that being the greatest harm they meant you) have
taken what revenge on you they might. Consider then, whether I have not reason
to be sensible of what is past satisfaction, and you shall soon perceive that
my complaints are more warrantable, then those of yours (I am told of) which
might better be concealed; which that they may, I shall not much need, I
presume when you shall have read these Lines, to request you; my desire is
only to see you, and receive my satisfaction, which Camila better then your
self deserves.

Any Medicine comforts and rejoices the poor sick man, that panting for
desired health, often couets those most hurtfully prejudicial. Fernando's heart
was vvrung by his blind passion, and so (though his clear understanding might
have prevented a greater danger) the sharp prick of his scorching affection,
checking the free use of reason, spurred on his swift determination, and
oppositely crossed his more considerate judgment, which made him, to gain an
amorous conquest, adventure at one bold Vye, his souls perdition.

But Religion had little to do, where Fernando still led by blind passion,
followed his affection; who, by Camila's order, went often to the Nunneries
Grate to visit her, and had those cold Bars in stead of hardness, tongues,
they would (no doubt) have lowdly warned him from the detestable pursuit of
that subject, in that place. At this time (he before an afflicted Lover) had
less cause to complain; for Camila with his presence had more satisfaction
then ever, which made them fall back into their former loves, or (to limit my
self) to a kind of new devotion, which long (disposed warily) might have
lasted: but as such stations are much in favor of our common Enemy, so is he
more carefully punctual, more strong and powerful, to inflame the mind,
trouble the senses, and add Fuel to the fire. It seemed, his subtlety found
best access to the weaker vessel, by the readier way Camila's heart, which
having (heaven so permitting) possessed, stirring up by degrees her brutish
appetite, and fyring her inward concupiscence, she was at last quite
vanquished. No longer could her determinate will, for any danger of her close
retirement, defer the unchaste execution: for the Devil does easily
facilitate such difficulties, and till a sin be acted, all is plain and
smoothest way.

Only a shamefastness of her personal honor, pinched at the infamous price,
though by Fernando she was anticipated in that point; so that the consideration
of her Lovers modest behavior, (from whom, or in him, in all the time of their
conversation, she had not so much as heard a lascivious word, seen a lustful
action) perplexed her ignorance for want of meaner: but he, whose craft (as is
said) moved the whole engine, fearing the loss of so likely a booty with new
devices and stratagemes forced this last Bulwark to yield.

How far at this time (though amorous) was Fernando from a carnal thought?
he, only satisfied with the sight of his Votaresse, desired no other
happiness, neither could his wary condition hurry him to more vn-limited
bounds: he usually conuersed with her, and indeed, being a most punctual
frequenter of the Grate, not an hour passed him without a sight of her, nor a
day, in which she received not some dainty or other from him, holding the
expense of his estate upon Camila, as a gain and harvest; though she now
burning in the flames of lust, being one day alone with him, meant thus (as
you shall hear) to break her mind unto him.

The better to declare it, I must first aduertize you of this necessary point.
Camila, when she heard Fernando one day was come to see her, had purposely
(longer then she used) deferred her coming to him; insomuch, that sensible of
the novelty, his heart began to mis-doubt something; and in this trouble,
desirous to know the cause of her stay, glad would he have been, that the
Nuns sight might have prevented his asking: now she that used this fit
occasion, the better to order the Dance, when she came, fained, that as she
was coming to her usual Grate, a friend of hers by the way entertaining her
Votary at another, had called her; the cause proceeding from a certain nice
doubt which the two were sifting, in which, (making her, whether she would or
not, their Judge) she was to hear their allegations, which was the reason of
her (more important) not seeing him.

Here, Fernando much longed more originally to know the proposition; whose
desire, Camila not ouer-squeamish to be entreated, as one well studied in the
thing, most cheerfully fulfilled.

Clemencia and Fausto (said she) both whom you well know, have fallen into a
deep controversy, and into a tickle point: Fausto maintains, that in all
kinds, Possession of a thing is the chiefest good; which opinion Clemencia
contradicts, who holds, that Hope: to which she attributes the greater
excellency; and hereupon grounds her Tenet, saying, That this is so much the
more to be esteemed, by how much nearer it is to Joy and Pleasure, and
consequently distant from sorrow and repentance; but Hope is nearer Content,
and has less neighborhood with distastes: whereas in Possession happens the
quite contrary; which always, or for the most part, is accompanied with grief
and affliction: and with all (such is our natural frailty) things once
possessed, grow to lesser estimation: for there is no Beauty on earth so rare,
which once enjoyed, becomes not (if not loathsome) yet less prized then
before: wherefore too, it must needs be evident, that the time we spend in our
pretensions is incomparably better, then when accomplished with possession, it
is less looked after: for so, he that hopes, does carefully desire, couets
with delight and pleasure, that, which he who possesses, wants; since in the
glutted state he lives, he neither likes, desires, or esteems: and thus she
clozed up all, alleging, that Hope by it self alone, has much more
excellency and perfection, then Possession of what is hoped for: for the thing
desired, is in a manner jointly possessed as hoped after: when he that
possesses, has only the dominion of the thing he attaines to, and then his
hope finisheth.

But now you must mark, that Fausto wanted no reply, for the making good of
his part, and therefore enforcing the superiority of his opinion, he goes on,
saying, The whole life and encouragement of Hope, is in respect of Possession:
so that the good which redounds from Hope, is not in it self, but in the thing
hoped for; whereby the thing it self desired, is better then the hope of it:
for the end is ever more to be esteemed, then the means, which are only
disposed to the same.

The security and safenesse of a good consists in the greater perfection of
it, and this, he only that does possess, not he that hops, has: who (held
he Hope to be the better) never caring to come to Possession, he might, not
only expect, but also, not call that expectation Hope, rather, mortal
despair; for ill could he be said to desire a good, that declined so much
from the Possession: so that the perfection consists in the reality and
accomplishment of the desire, and not in the appetite it self: therefore
lastly, he that comforts himself with bare Hope, must needs be cast, since
plainly, he affects that which is most profitable: liking rather to live in a
continual warfare, then settled quiet peace, which is only found in quietest
Possession. They urged many other reasons to this purpose, but these are the
most material; and though they have named me for their Judge Arbitresse, yet I
confess my shortness of understanding; and therefore, Fernando relying on
your discretion, I mean to take you as an Assistant to sentence this cause
before we part.

Fernando gave pleasing attention to the whole disputation, and thoroughly
satisfied, thus replied to Camila: Believe me, dear Votaresse, the parties
(though to my cost) may render you many thanks, as not needing to complain
for want of attention in their Judge, nor to distrust the justice of their
cause: for it is not possible, that she, who has so well related each point,
and duly considered every circumstance, should err a jot in the sure
determination; and though I be well enough assured of this truth, yet,
subiecting my self to your commands, I must obey: and therefore resoluedly set
down, that you may sentence on Fausto's behalf, of whose right so confident
am I, that had not he to my liking sufficiently made good his opinion, I should
with fresh reasons endeavor to underprop it. Then belike (replied Camila)
whosoever is of that mind is vvisest, and consequently, he that is against it,
perverse and ignorant: To which Fernando, ignorant of her purpose, said, for
his part he thought no less; when, without more adoo the resolute Dame in
this manner proceeded: Go to then, Fernando, either you or I love not; or, if
the greatest good be in possession, and this wanting, why spend we all our
time thus fruitless to no purpose? Our Gallant hearing his Camila, was struck
speechless, and though at first he had supposed all to have been pastime and
merriment, yet looking nearer into the matter, and perceiving those Arguments
to have been beforehand premeditated, he fell into the purposed stratagem. It
oppressed him strangely, for his thoughts had never been so outragiously
boundless: he wisely feared the greatness of the danger; and yet the being
inthralled by his amorous passion, made him confusedly waver in his answer;
which at last was the safest, indeuouring to divert her from the impossibility
of her desires, framing greater difficulties in the obtaining them, then Camila
could ever have imagined: but she resolutely bent upon her will, not only
desisted not from her purpose, but angrily disdained his coldness, attributing
it to cowardice, and so was about to have turned from him.

But those fained shows of leaving him, so much prevailed with the Captive
Lover, that inconsiderately he condiscended to her pleasure; and reconciled,
they agreed upon a meeting, which should be, that Fernando might enter the
Garden by climbing the Wall, where (as the ensuing night) she would expect him.

Camila affoorded him no longer time, fearing lest with more, he might repent;
and so the prefixed limit drawing near, Fernando having provided himself of a
strong-corded Ladder, made known his intent to a kinsman of his that lived
with him; and finding sufficient company in him, both wel-armed, prepared
themselves to the exploit, which heaven auerted by more different means then
they imagined.

Fernando had at this time caused certain Scutcheons of his Arms, graven in
Marble, to be set upon the Arch of his Door, and to his purpose the Workmen
had raised scaffolding; so that, as he was going out to the said intent,
dazzled, as it were, upon a sudden, he stumbled upon the Timber, which fell
down so forcibly, that it brought down one of the Posts that sustained the
boords aloft, one of which vvanting the proppe, or not well fastened, or
(which was likeliest, Heaven so permitting) falling down, lighted upon his
foot, which, ('it was marvel) crushed it not to pieces, though notwithstanding
it shrewdly bruised him: his kinsman and companion was farther behind him, and
therefore having no share in the blow, might the better help and lift him up,
which he did; and knowing his hurt, was forced to carry him to his Chamber,
where he kept his bed a long time after.

This accident somewhat troubled Fernando, not that his blind affection would
let him fall into the true consideration of the cause of this effect; but how
he might give Camila satisfaction; for, for this he had much to do, neither
would she give credit to his hurt, till she had procured some trusty
persons, to be eyewitnesses of the same.

At length, after he was recovered, they fell back into their amorous
pursuit; and Camila re-solliciting her Lover, a new appointment was made,
against which time the two kinsmen provided, came fair and softly to the
Garden wall: where, upon the lowest part of it they cast their Ladder; and
Fernando began to mount just at the instant that, about the Nunnery gate, not
far from them, a great noise and clashing of Swords was heard, which made him
(fearing to be seen) step down again; and passing forward, he might perceive
three men (to his thinking two against the third) together by the ears.
Fernando seeing so manifest odds, and the poor single party begin to give
ground, could not contain; but, leaving his kinsman to look to the Ladder, in
a trice he ran in to the lone man's aid, but his charity came somewhat of
the latest; for the others Contraries having found their Advantage, gave him
several wounds, wherewith fainting, he fell down at Fernando's feet: which
the two perceiving (though hard laid to by the new-comer) betook them to their
heels; leaving him to look to their enemy that was fallen. So that now giving
over the principal business for which he came, both he and his kinsman
wholy intended the poor wounded man; whom, because he cried out for
Confession, they took up between them to have conveyed him to their own home.

Yet careful they were to avoid meeting with the Watch, and therefore went
through the least frequented and by-Lanes; but in one of those (their endeavors
mis-carrying) they met with those they shunned: it was not possible for them to
have escaped, neither thought they fit, by running away, to make themselves
delinquents in a matter wherein their charity was shown. So the Governor of
the Town, meeting and knowing them, sorry to see their carriage (though they
truly related what passed) and obliged by his Office, could not but commit
them both to sure custody.

Fernando, though his innocence might have provoked him, was little sensible
of this vvrong; rather for fear of falling into a new suspicion with his
Votaresse, he was so much afflicted, that his blinded heart bereaved him of
all other considerations; as also of the dangerous illicite business, into
which he was so wilfully embarked. In fine (glad) the Officers had not seen
their Ladder, they suddenly conveyed it from them, and now expected the wished
day; by when Fernando's imprisonment known and published; some, approouing it,
did much aggrauate the matter, others gentler minded, blamed the Governors
hasty proceeding, as supposing that to a Gentleman of his quality better
respect might have been had, if not entire credit given unto him; and
passionate in the case, thought his imprisonment was too rigorously inflicted.
The whole business at last was cleared; for the wounded party before he dyed,
declared the truth, accusing one of the two, who first set upon him, about a
difference at Play, to have with the others help slain him; which appearing
plainly by the Homicides their flight, Fernando was out of hand set at
liberty, and Camila now fully satisfied, more earnestly then ever, insisted in
her purpose: yet they resolved for more fittingnesse, to put it off for one
three or four days more, since, in respect of the late unlucky accident, the
Watch would be sure to walk more carefully, or some curious busie-bodie might
happily pry into his actions, being known to walk so late, till such time as
the novelty was a little ouer-blowne and past.

In this they were not unwise, for in small or less populous Cities, where
other varieties are wanting, suspicious persons lay hold upon all occasions,
maliciously to pry into their friends or neighbors actions. But the
difficulties of their meeting ceased not thus; for against a new prefixed time
by them, Fernando's kinsman fell desperately sick of a burning Fever, which
much hindered their business, in respect that the Physicians now had wholly
given him over.

Fernando made Camila acquainted with the mishap, but she would not believe or
admit of his excuse, the which her hardened resolution more plainly appeared in
these brief Lines:

I well see, Fernando, by this last fained inconvenience, what all the former
have been: Let your dallying cease; for if this night you fulfill not your
promise, I shall be satisfied, and your self forbear to be so hardy as
ever again to see me.

It seemed that the deadly sin of sacrilegious lust guiding her hand and
style, framed for Camila these Contents: so her own hand was made the
Sentencer of that destruction, which Heaven had fore-decreed to the Owner.

The blind Lover received this Ticket, and as the rigorous verdict of his
death, so feared he his Mistresses complaints, and so disposed to obey her:
all alone toward midnight he got him to the Nunnery wall. He had no sooner
climbed to the top of it, but he might hear a voice just underneath him,
calling out, Is it Fernando? Who replide, It Is I, sweet, I come. But with this,
I come, and his sudden haste to fasten the thred-Ladder, for his better getting
down on the other side, with the darkness of the night together, and his own
want of heed, he stumbled upon a great loose stone which fell from the wall
and him, and (it seemed) guided by Camila's destiny, or higher Providence,
lighted upon the unfortunate Creatures head; the weight of it was such as gave
her no leave to cry out, only Fernando might hear by one soft mortal groan,
the execution done, and his bitter loss. 'Twas in vain for him to leap
down; for the misfortune was helpless, but vainer to waste time there in
tears or sorrowful exclamations, since days approach would but pull an
irremediable danger upon his own head: every way he was miserable, all he
could do (hoping yet to hear some comfortable news in the morning) was to
make to his lodging: which he did, though there with the amazement of his
griefs he had much ado to live. His family and servants were not a little
troubled at the strange accident, insomuch that some thought best to have his
Confessor to him, others began to think of Physicians. Fernando had one only
Sister, very fair and equally discreet, and between both, living thus
privately to themselves, there was an extraordinary tenderness of affection:
she was privy to her Brothers cares, and therefore ghessing that his infirmity
was more of Love then more mortal danger, would not for the present that her
servants should call for any helps without; but, making no noise, left him to
his rest.

Toward eight of the clock in morning (after he had long considered his
misfortune, and at length taken some sleep) he awoke: and somewhat better
recovered, at what time they in the Nunnery (little knowing what state Fernando
had been in, or that he knew of Camila's death) sent him word of the
lamentable success; how (it seemed) the last night going late into their
Garden to her Devotions, walking under part of the wall, a loose stone had
fallen down and dashed out her brains; in which lamentable manner they found
her, being first found missing in her bed in the morning.

This advice (though woefully set down in writing) could add nothing to
Fernando's extremity, who was full enough of mistrust before: and yet though
he suspected the worst that might be, his humanity could not but take one
wailing leave more: and now in midst of his mournful groans he craves pardon
of his divine Maker; and so from that instant, with new and fresh vows he
proposed in his heart, not only never to have further conversation with
Religious Women, but for ever to abandon their houses, and Monasteries, which
afterward he shunned as his mortal bane.

With this happy intent (said the good Hermit turning to Gerardo) he remained
in Talbora, till such time as your imprisonment, and Clara's fearful end,
coming to his notice, mindful of your ancient friendship, he left his
Country, and soon effected your liberty, being then some months absent, till
his Sisters careful soliciting his return, made him, to give her content,
come back, where new successes began, such as follow.

Many matches had been severally both to Brother and Sister proposed, and some
convenient enough, though Fernando excusing himself, refused all, by saying he
would first see his Sister bestowed; she flying likewise from all Treaties, as
mannerly retorted her Brothers courtesy: so that each gave color of denial
of marriage to the other, and matter to the busy world to censure both: yet
some there vvanted not, to affirm, that Alcina, so was the Dame called, was
vvilling enough to marry, might it stand with her own liking, and not her
Brothers choice; their malice alluding to one Tirso whom she much affected, but
in respect he was Brother to Rodrigo, and consequently enemy to hers, he durst
not demand her to Wife, nor she own him for Husband. These and the like
speeches flew about Talbora, though no man willing to advertise so much to
Fernando, he (ignorant) was obstinate in his resolution, and Alcina wary and
circumspect least her amorous wakings might come to his notice, which heavily
ended (as you shall hear:) but first it is necessary for you to know some
other circumstances, before that disaster was compassed.

About this time there arrived a dainty Granadinian Dame, that, for some
private respects, at the instance of her kindred and friends, was dedicated to
the Religious retirement of a certain Covent there; vvhither, at the day
appointed for her receiving the habit and holy Order, all the Gentry, and best
of the City, were solemnly invited: only Fernando, mindful of his Vow, in
not going was singular; though, to comply with the fair Dames kindred his
friends of one faction, he sent his Sister Alcina to supply his place at the
solemnity. Which ended, and (the New Nun generally extolled) she remained in
the Monastery, and all the ghests returned to their several homes, wonderfully
pleased with the sight, especially Alcina, and so enamoured on the new Nun,
that she thought all possible commendations must needs come short of her due
praise: which went on in such height of endeerement, as at length bredde an
inward longing in Fernando, to see so much beauty, though having barred
himself the means, he was forced to give over his difficult curiosity.

Some there are so particular in their actions, so strange in their affections,
that many times without all foundation or ground, they fall to like or hate
something, forno other occasion indeed, then to have their opinions generally
vpheld, though most commonly they prove erroneous: such in extremity was
Alcina, a woman that wholly taken with her own judgment, desired that her
thoughts should have in every thing precedence, which made her improperly lay
hold on Elisa's beauty (that being the Granadinians name) laboring all she
might, that her Brother Fernando with his eyes might qualify her election.

To which purpose, going to visit some of her own kinswomen in the Nunnery,
she desired Elisa's acquaintance, making such shows of love or Court-ship to
her, that, but for the vvarrant of her sex; the other might have suspected a
hazard to her retiredness.

This acquaintance of theirs began so to kindle betwixt them both, as it grew
to an exceeding height of affection; by which means Elisa also, from his
Sister, came to have some notice of Fernando, whose parts and merit being
cunningly set out by the shee-relator (no marvel if happily Elisa might covet an
eyesight of the Owner.) The Nun, besides many excellencies in which Heaven
was propitious to her, had a most sweet and pleasing voice; and of her equal
skill too (though more warily, in respect she was but in her year of
approbation) Alcina now and then participated, giving afterward (but with
circumstances more flourishingly surpassing all that hitherto) notice to
Fernando, of that and other rarities; which doubling the former itch of desire
in him, made him plainly declare his mind: which understood by Alcina (but to
no other intent more then the confirming her opinion) she quickly so contrived
the matter, that without public note it might be effected: and so, sending a
warning to her kinswomen to provide her a seat near the Nuns Grate, she
went also thither before, agreeing only with her Brother, that he should stand
close, and not show himself, till such time as she had entreated Elisa to
begin to sing, which (because she was not yet a professed Nun) was very
difficult; and should Fernando be seen, or any other man, altogether
impossible.

The business suited just to her wish: and her Brother as ready, as unmindful
of his Vow, went thither, and came so opportunely, that both his eye and his
ear were quickly believers of Alcina's truth. Elisa (that knew nothing of his
coming, for Alcina fained it to have been casual) espied him, and blushing,
would feign have hid her self, but that the rest of the Nuns kept her back,
and the new-come Ghest making himself known to her, (a hardiness in him,
considering her modest composedness was not inferior to that rare beauty that
astonished him) they grew to some complementall acquaintance; and before they
parted, himself was caught a tender lover as ever, and she (but with more
chaste intentions) less coy and disdainful, which she better expressed, by
not suffering the Couple to return empty home, without a full satisfaction of
Natures best Music, her voice.

This Gentleman's relapse does so at the present vex my consideration, that me
thinks I even with my wish forestall the punishment that after happened unto
him, which I shall briefly come to: but this ensuing circumstance must first be
the Prologue or Introduction.

Fernando, after many a sight of Elisa, was so extremely gone in her affection,
that at last (the end of her year drawing on, at which time, if she professed
there was no help for him) caused his sister Alcina to put in for his
marriage. She made known his mind, but Elisa deferring her answer, and wisely
dissembling her intent, showed little will: rather, a strong inclination to
that devout life she had made choice of: which might have sufficed to have kept
him from molesting her quiet profession; but this, which he thought disdain,
so blew the fire of his growing love, that not now secretly, but in public he
prosecuted it, and made means to Elisa's kindred, who joined as suitors with
him, and used such diligent persuasions, that at last they won her to consent.

They esteemed themselves most happy in the alliance, and no less honored:
and so, notice also was given to her Parents, and in the interim of their
answer, Fernando as one sure enough, began to make several preparations of
bravery for himself, and the future Bride; and turning night into day with
Maskes, Music, and several delights; and day, into Bull runnings,
Canes-sport, and Dancing: the time passed on in mirth and pastimes, till at
last the answer of the Nuns parents was, that themselves were upon the way:
which generally rejoiced the Bridegroom, Bride, and their kindred. So their
arrival, and the time happily meeting, the desired Nuptials were solemnly
performed; which, and some weeks ouerpassed, the Parents returned to their home
at Granada, leaving their sonne-in-law with his Spouse as contented, as
themselves joyful with the match. Elisa was no less inwardly virtuous, then
fair without; so warily modest, that her Fernando might justly esteem
himself fortunate in her; who being himself also such, as we have formerly
described him, knew how sufficiently to account of those good parts in his
Spouse; and therefore giving himself wholly now to be guided by her will, he
lived most happy and contentedly: which to consummate and make up, the
bestowing Alcina only kept him wakefull, to procure her a deserving husband,
and rid himself of the careful burden of their double honor. Indeed
Fernando was ignorant of his Sisters secrets; who, though she were in love,
yet fearing the awful austere condition of her brother, dissembled all she
might her affection: and now with Elisa's free conversation and company, she
was less solitary, more then formerly at liberty.

In this manner, two years from Fernando's marriage were accomplished, at the
end of which, his wives father, and soon after, an only brother of hers
dying, she remaining sole Inheretrix of a good Estate, and her husband
importuned by her mothers Letters, was forced, for settling of the new
Inheritance, to repair to Granada: and though it much troubled him, to be thus
for some long time absent, yet the necessity compelled his patience to submit,
leaving his house and domestical affairs (for the better governing them) to
his Kinsmans careful ouerseeing, whom he loved dearly: and he having been
long maintained by him, relying with good satisfaction upon his honesty, he
betook himself the more cheerfully to that vn-willing journey and business,
which kept him almost half a year: in which time, though Fabricio (so was the
kinsman called) had at the beginning been very sollicitous, at the first,
perceiving the retiredness of Elisa and her sister-in-law, thinking his
watchfulness and labor vain, by little and little he grew careless, and so
passed on some days, till at length in one stormy Winters night, when he was
fast and securely sleeping, a servant that lay in his Chamber, awoke him,
saying, he heard Music and singing near Elisa's Window; whereupon suddenly,
and desirous to be satisfied, Fabricio got him to a low Grate which looked that
way: from whence he might see one walk to and fro in the Street, which made
him expect what the issue would be: and the Instruments sounding, he might at
another corner perceive a company together, who in three Voices began sweetly
to send forth this following Ode:

When thou in native thoughts did imitate
the simple Turtle Dove,
And constant were, I still did consecrate
to thy true faith, firm love:
(That rural Bird does never range,
Fixed to her Mate, affects no change.)
But since thy former plainness to disguize,
with Art thou do contriue,
And first affection less do equalize,
why do I longer strive?
For Love that does excuses frame,
Either is none, or not the same.
This Ditty madded the waking Fabricio: for coniecturing he might know the
subject to whom it was meant, yet his ignorance of the certainty robbed him of
understanding, though on the other side obliged by his care, he must proceed in
his attendance: yet comforted he was, as imagining the Music might be given to
some other in the Street, and out of his love to his kinsman, he would not
rashly suspect his chaste Spouse, till such time, as the new Eccho's of those
Voices began again in the following Song to increase his doubtful fears.

Vanish Hope, expect no more;
Ayrie Promises give over.
Where the re^ll Act does want,
Mean intentions are too scant.
Let, no longer, words or wind,
Dull, and wronged Patience blind:
Outward favors from the tongue,
When the true ones we prolong
Pinchingly, discover plain,
It Is but manners with disdain.
Toyling Clownes that sow the Land,
Ha^row, plough with weary hand,
Bodies to the cold i^ure,
Wind and Winters frosts endure;
Yet at length their suffering reapes
Joys, with corn and fruit by heaps.
All Loves joys, his blessedness
Is (the Harvest) To possess.
Other hopes, our fears, or care
Prove but barren, deep despair.
Can deaf door, dumb lock, or words
Two or three, dead faith affoords,
(Opposite, with Love at strife)
Hinder us the act of life?
Or Boords chinke, whose new-cut rind
Not least sight admits, scarce wind:
Or, is this the aim and scope,
Now, of all my lingering hope?
Is the Bed less secret (Fie!)
That so stiffely you deny,
Then a window, wall, or street,
Where a thousand hazards meet?
Each of these with traitorous eye,
Will, thus open Love descrie:
Then, to ease your honors doubt,
Let me in and lock them out.
With greater confusion the Sentinels ears turned into hollow trunkes,
impatiently heard out the Ditty, and with more torment, when he might hear a
Window open in Elisa's Chamber, and the unknown Gallant drawing near, begin
to discourse.

The two sisters in Fernando's absence lay together, but Fabricio, ignorant of
that, no sooner saw this, when without distinction he condemned Elisa's lust
and falsehood toward his kinsman. Impossible it was for him from where he was,
to hear their whole Dialogue, though by some answers of the one, he might
guess at the demands of the other. And hearkening with all attentiveness, he
might hear the man thus proceed: You cannot at last deny my just complaints;
for after so many vain shifts and delays, I cannot but be weary, though (as
I am a Gentleman) were your excuses grounded upon any the least reason, I
should still willingly suffer and expect, as I have hitherto done, and you know
how patient I have always been: but, if I see what a happy occasion we lose
in Fernando's absence, what may I think, but that I am abused, and that with
your falsehood you mock my unfeigned affection? Here Fabricio unwilling to
hearken longer, was thoroughly satisfied with what he had already heard: and
though his indignation egged him furiously on to have run into the street,
yet his more discreet understanding, suggesting unto him his kinsmans honor,
which might not have been so publicly wronged, by laying open a vviues
infamy, reined in his courage, only from that time forward made him more
circumspectly wary about the house.

But impossible it is to set sufficient guard upon a dissolute woman: Lust
(though locket up like Danae) will find way: so his watching was vain; for
(to his grief) not long after he came to the knowledge of more mischief;
there being some in the house, who pitying their poor absent Master, told
Fabricio not only of night-walking and Music, but unlawful egresse and
regresse too: and that at the same window where he heard discoursing, a man
most nights at unseasonable hours mounted by a Ladder, whom the party that
gave the more certain notice of it, being an old servant of Fernando's, many
nights saw from his own house, which was directly opposite.

Fabricio seeing the matter so openly scandalous, could no longer conceal his
resolute purpose; so that though the revenge belonged not to his hands, he with
them prepared it, by writing to Fernando; that without all delay he should
immediately return to Talbora, for as much as it concerned his honor so to do.

Any noble heart may easily suppose without my relation, the effect that this
Letter wrought in Fernando's breast; who, not without some sinister thoughts,
ruled by his kinsmans advice, took speedy Posts, and within four days
arrived at his house, to his Alcina's no little admiration; who not so soon
expected him, which made him the more joyfully welcomed, especially by the
fair Elisa; and next, longing to be resolved of his doubt, with a convenient
opportunity, he understood all that had passed in his absence from his careful
Kinsman; who, considering Fernando's dishonor and affront, was ready to have
slain himself. The other after he had pawsed a little with himself, made no
difference or distinction of the vvrong; for whether Alcina or Elisa, one of
the two he was sure had defamed her self and him: his wife was most dear to
him, for which reason his jealousy led him to suspect rather her falsehood: for
it is a natural effect of this hel-bred Passion, that where we most naturally
love and affect, there we most carefully fear. I^ his sister were in fault,
why, the grieuance was as equal to his blood, which equally provoked his
revenge. But after he had waighed with himself all and sundry particulars, he
began to think of first satisfying his own eyes, not wholly relying upon
the relation of another, in a matter that so nearly concerned his honor. And
so much the rather inclined he to this resolution, by seeing his wives
behavior and carriage in the same equal balance he left it; her observance
punctually the same; her honest looks and shamefac't blush no way diminished;
her affection equally composed, and her embraces as loving, as loyal as ever.
But if this relenting consideration would press too much upon his somewhat
mollified mind, the bitterness of the wrong would call back his furious
remembrance, and shut the doors to all commiseration: and then thinking there
was nothing but falsehood and dissimulation in woman, he fell passionately
back into his watchful diligence. Most desirous was he to satisfy his sight,
but the actors too cunningly deferred their dangerous pleasures. Fernando still
haunted with his jealousy, thought this was but a trick, and therefore with a
counter-plot, he fained a new occasion to return to the prosecution of his
business at Granado, and putting his intent in practice, without note or least
suspicion of his house and family, causing Fabricio and the servant privy to
the secret, to be in a readiness, who (as is said) had some of his windows
just opposite to his; in conclusion, all things cunningly handled, their
design was quickly effected.

But although he lay all that night, and the next following in wait, with more
care then Argus, yet he neither saw ought that might trouble him, nor heard
any noise that might increase his suspicion, which made him, a little
heartened, now begin to waver in the truth and credit of the matter, blaming
go himself his kinsmans too rash and easy being persuaded; (a fault that
sometimes the most careful are liable to:) yet his jealousy still prompting
him with misdoubts, the third night came on, in which (then thoroughly satisfied)
he saw no visions; no: but about midnight two men plainly walking in the
street, who having fetched a turn or two, perceiving the coast was clear, one
of them whistling, gave the sign, at which, the feare-cloth leaves of a
Bay-window were opened, and a woman appearing was his answer. The Moon shone
brightly at that time, so that though Fernando could neither hear the voice,
nor well know the face, yet by the apparel she wore he might perceive it
was Elisa, the stuff of her Gown silver Tinsall, with the Lace and trimming
suitable, giving his eyes an apparent Testimony. The unfortunate Gentleman was
with the accident extremely heart-strucken, though without any sudden haste he
quietly attended their short discourse: after which he might see (which he
thought was a preparation to the man's getting up) a String, and to that a
Ladder fastened at the Window, by which the Gallant nimbly mounted, and
straight the Window-leaues were clapped to.

Fernando more enraged then any angry Lioness that had lost her young ones,
could no longer forbear, but taking the speediest way, returned in by his
own door, where finding his kinsman, and two of his servants surely armed,
having given them instructions what to do, he left them to make good the
Street, if happily the adulterer should escape him within: which done, with a
false Key he opened the street door, and soon after got into his own
Chamber, where undauntedly rushing in, though the close room were dark, he
furiously lighted upon the bed, and finding first the vvretched Elisa, hastily
bestowed three or four stabbes upon her: at the very first the poor soul
awoke, securely sleeping, and not thinking her latest hour was so near: and
seeing her self so bloodily handled, all amazed, not knowing the Homicide,
threw her body out of the bed with the mortal pangs.

Fernando next of all carefully groped about with his hand for the adulterer,
and perceiving some stirring under him, thinking he was sure there, drawing the
Curtain, he directed his sword and rage thitherward; where he had no sooner
seconded his thrust, when knowing the voice of his sister, crying out, Enough,
dear Signior, oh I am slain, made him hold his hand, suspended by the
frightfull Eccho's of his own blood, yet he could not so much as imagine her
to have been the sole cause of his dishonor: and now too he might hear the
Window-leaues pulled open, at which the fearful Gallant had means with the
dark to leap into the street; which without Fernando's hinderance he did:
but his fear making him lose his aim, together with the height, when he
came to ground, he broke his leg with the fall; howsoever his escape had bin
beyond possibility, in respect of the three armed that there waited for him,
who quickly in the state he was in, with their swords dispatched him. By this
time Elisa's maids, having heard the deadly groans of their Mistress, were
gotten into the Chamber with Lights; where beholding the bloody spectacle,
they quickly ran to hide themselves from their Masters angry presence; who,
seeing how well his kinsman and servants had behaved themselves, yet, not
wholly satisfied, taking a Light from one of the women, with it soon
understood his bitter misfortunes: finding his Elisa with dolorous groans,
clung to an Yuory Crucifixe, that hung before, at her beddes-head, even giving
up the ghost, and by her, his only sister weltring in the gore-blood of her two
deadly wounds. His wife was not quite dead, with nothing but her Smock upon
her: but Alcina clad in her fair sisters Robes, in perfect sense and memory,
fully satisfied her wronged Brother, by letting him in her last agony know,
that Elisa died innocently, as having not so much as been a partaker of her
wakings; for, tempering her supper with drowzie Opium, which provoked her to
deadly sleep, she made sure of being seen or heard by her sister; so that
she her self alone justly deserved the fatal punishment: since so against her
honor and shamefastnes, she had admitted the embraces of her Houses enemy,
with whom, without her brothers knowledge or approbation, she had been
pre-contracted. And so ceasing, oppressed by her mortal pangs, she yielded up
her spirit; leaving the miserable brother that heard her, amazed with grief,
and sorrowful above measure, when repentance came too late; for Elisa too was
now stark dead in his arms. His tongue was fast tied, which silence wrought
in his mind in such manner, that his vital spirits even failing him, he might
suddenly have followed his dear Spouse, but that Fabricio coming hastily upon
him, rowzed him up, by telling him, the party whom they had slain below, was
no other then Tirso, Don Rodrigo's brother, one of his greatest enemies. The
noise also began to increase within doors, and to be seconded without: so
that seeing so many, so inexcusable mischiefs before him, to add no more (by
his own for vpshot) to the number, he was forced to provide for his own
safety, desperately leaving his house and housholdgoods to the arbitrament of a
distracted family.

With this resolution accompanied only by his kinsman, mounted on horseback,
they left the Town, posting on all that night, and the next following, till
such time as Fernando laying hold upon a fit opportunity, gave Fabricio the
slip, and crossing by a Bridge the Cristalline streams of Tagus, turning
toward the rugged mountains of Guadalupe, in a short time he got into the
secretst and wildest parts of those rockie Deserts, where even spent almost by
the vanquishing oppression of his disasters, he had by degrees wasted away, had
not Heaven that helped him, and enlightened his understanding, made him fall
into this consideration, that his present evils were but slight punishments for
his past crimes, which he abundantly in tears bewayling, not to be
ungrateful to his divine Creator, that had but superficially chastised him,
resolved in my company upon a rigorous penitent life, in which after he had
remained six years, three days since, with marvelous tranquillity of
soul, betook himself to his latest rest.

Thus ended the long, but not tedious Story of the devout Hermit, with no less
attention then sorrow from the Auditors, especially the two Brothers his
dearest friends; though conforming themselves to the divine pleasure, his happy
ending was a comfort to them; in whose life's circumstances, and diverse other
matters they spent the nights remainder; and in the morning accompanied by
their good old Oast, betook them to their way, and in the best part of it,
visited the famous Monastery of Guadalupe: and afterward taking leave of the
Reverend Hermit, and holding on their journey, within four days they came in
sight of the strong walls, and Towry Castle of Cesarina; and arriving about
Sunset, assuring themselves Nise must be within, they all alighted.

Gerardo had no sooner set footing on the threshold, when known by some of his
Mistresses servants, not without extraordinary shows of admiration, they
ran greedily to have embraced him; for as the news which Nise had divulged
held current, he was in all those parts given for a dead man, so that wholly
amazed, though they felt him, they doubted; and (though they saw him) whether
he were the object of their eyesight. These extremes filled Gerardo with no
less wonder, though at last informed of the cause, his desire increasing to
satisfy his Mistress, he could not be at quiet till he had seen her; but
manifesting his mind, he was by one of those servants told the occasion why
Nise was at that time out of the Castle, which was, that persuaded verily that
he had been cast away upon the Coast of Barbary, she returned to the Nunnery
where she had before lived; and leaving her possessions (against all
persuasions of her kindred) meant to take upon her the Religious habit of Saint
Clara, and to live and dye in that profession.

The ghests at the unexpected Relation were much troubled, though, in Gerardo,
this was not only an effect of trouble; for his eyes, without vvagging their
lids, staringly fixed upon earth, he stood as immovable, as if he had been a
Statue of brass, rather then a man of flesh.

Leoncio well noted the sudden alteration, and expecting a little to have him
come to himself, thinking it too long for a muze: about to have given him a
secret iogge, he had like to set him off his legs to the ground. Gerardo's
passion was not so slight, nor the Torment he endured so tolerable as his
Brother imagined, his heart quite failed him; and therefore applying new
helps, and causing a bed suddenly to be made, they laid him in it, his
Brother and kinsmen in this strange accident round besetting him.

These things passed not so covertly (the distance being not much) but that the
fame of them in an instant flew to Nise's ears: who though at first (relying
wholly upon her own thoughts) she could give no credit to the news; yet,
when at last she heard it severally confirmed, no tongue can express her
joy, though indeed her Lovers present danger mingled it with some sorrow: to
whom, she carefully dispatched sundry messages, disposing them so, that one
came in the neck of the other, yet all were answered by Leoncio: for the
brother lay yet in a profound Extasis, which made her ready to have forsaken
the Nunnery; which she had straight performed, leaving her holy habit, but that
such an Act might have been imputed to much leuity. But Leoncio with the rest
of the Gentlemen, not long after went to visit her, by whom she was told (to
her no small joy and comfort) that Gerardo amended: and after some speech
betwixt them the agreement was, that the next day (since the only cause of her
retirement, was, thinking that Gerardo was dead, and that the contrary at
present appearing, she might, without her honors hazard, quit the Order)
their so long desired Nuptials should in the Monasteries Church be solemnized.

This news was quickly spread about the Village, and so heartily celebrated,
that ere night, all the Turrets, Battlements and walls of the enclosure; as
also, Streets, Marketplace, Doors and Windows, were full of Lights, Torches
and Bonefires, nothing was heard but noise of joy and Music. The better sort
of the Gentry likewise, with the Ginetiers of the Coast, then in the Village
ran their several Carreeres before the Nunnery and Castle Gates: where,
though Gerardo were now somewhat better come to himself, yet he could not
thoroughly be comforted, neither could his kinsmen or Leoncio know what to
attribute the cause of it to, who much afflicted to see him still in that
manner, importuned him all he might, to know the ground of his strange
coffeehouse.

Gerardo, out of the mutual affection betwixt them, would soon have satisfied
his Brother, but that he justly feared, Leoncio's persuasions might prejudice
his secret intent: wherefore, dissembling the true cause, he told him that the
unexpected news of Nise's Religious estate (presuming his own to be
desperate, his sudden grief allowing him no time to weigh the matter) had so
much hitherto oppressed him; but that, understanding now the truth of her
affection, he was better pleased and contented. So was Leoncio when he heard
this, and assured that his Brother concealed not his cares from him, his, were
to provide against the prefixed time; and so taking order to have all things,
and the Bridegroomes bravery in a readiness, they all, that night, the better
to cheer up his brother, supped in Gerardo's Chamber. And toward midnight
every one withdrew to his lodging, and all, when day came, went down into the
Castle yard; where, with shows of noble emulation, in rich embroideries, an
Epitome of our West Indies might be seen: and in this manner (having sent
word first to Nise) Leoncio with them went to fetch the gallant Bridegroom
out of his bed: but finding the Chamber door shut, and his servants attending
his awaking, wondering at his drowzinesse (though some imputed it to the late
accident) they knocked aloude; but hearing no answer, Leoncio hastily with
his foot shoued the door open, which was but only close put to; and himself
with the rest entering in, thinking Gerardo was yet asleep, they drew the
Curtains, but neither found Gerardo in bed, not saw any of his apparel;
wherefore Leoncio much troubled, and fearing some disaster, caused search to be
made for him all about, and willed that they should see if his Horse were
missing, which was as he mis-doubted; and therefore his kinsmen called to have
theirs saddled, with purpose to seek him out: but a Letter which one of them
found upon one of the Pillowes, stayed their intent. The hand was known to be
Gerardo's, and seeing the superscription to Leoncio, he taking it, not without
some tears read it over first closely to himself, and then asswaging his
passions as well as he could, in presence of them all, he read alowd the
ensuing Lines.

Dear Brother, that this unexpected Act of mine, especially in an occasion so
urgent, must of necessity cause in your Noble breast (if not also compassionate)
a strong distaste against your Gerardo; I cannot doubt; yet must I likewise,
relying upon your wisdom, duly weighing the reasons thereunto moving me,
hope, your punishment may be turned into the pardon I presently desire: but
first let me request you, that, calling to your remembrance my past life so
full of affrighting, dangers and hazard, you would also consider the
miraculous means and ways, by which Gods goodness has freed me from them:
to whom I must, besides the general obligation of my Redemption, owe a more
particular duty, which, his unspeakable bounty, in raising me from the
bondage of a vicious life, has imposed upon me. This truth then granted, had
you your self received some especial benefit not from an equal friend, but
some mean soul, could you be otherwise then thankful for it? And, tell me,
instead of being so, were it fit with vile ingratitude, to go about to
bereave him of his only Jewel? What pitying breast would not revile you for
so loud a crime? which out of loving gratitude, or modest fear, you should
not dare commit, or less imagine.

If then, oh Brother, such be now my case; If this have happened in my life's
whole course: why should not I, by falling into the reckoning of my sins,
strive to expiate someone, by leaving to the quiet possession of my gracious
Maker, a Spouse, admitted to his Hymenean rites? And this, if not for infinite
blessings and mercies bestowed, at least for the just fear (Fernando's example
my woeful President) of an equal punishment. And think not you or any else,
that, that stupendous accident which befell us, was only casual (far be it)
To loose our selves in a highway, to descend with such sure and certain
danger, a steep craggie Mountain at midnight, to find in such a wilderness
so good shelter and company; and our old true friend, (though dead) proclaiming
lowdly in his life such successes. All this (believe me) was not without some
mystery, or government of Gods most liberal hand. Nise to me shall be no
Elisa, neither will I to niceties with heaven, or quiddities of her professing
or not professing: whether she may, ought or will accomplish my will (though now
it be different:) for should you say; 'Twere fitter too to satisfy her; and
that if Fernando wooed Elisa, it is otherwise with me: I wooed not Nise,
rather, there is a necessity to pay the forcible debt of honor; my answer
is, That the divine providence, from which nothing is hidden, fore-knew all
this; and notwithstanding that I was safe from the Seas danger, disposed her
heart and whole affection to so sure a choice, Whereby I collect, that that was
fittest for her, and most profitable for both our souls, which, mine, by
Heavens favor, shall follow, and I hope the discreet Nise will admit of the
reasons of this Letter, and my resolution, which I request you make known unto
her, and withal, that none of you trouble your selves in my search; for,
doubtless, in worldly affairs we shall never meet. And thus my only Brother,
and you, the rest, my Kinsmen, Friends, receive my last best wishes for
embraces; in exchange, if ever I were acceptable to your hearts or eyes,
comfort my absent, poor afflicted Mother; and lastly heaven give --

But here Leoncio's tongue was knotted, and the Paper dropping from him, the
pain he was in, bereaved him of his speech. The rest of those Gentlemen bore a
part also with him: so that nothing was heard amongst them, but a confused
murmr of inward sighs, which grew quickly to sad groans, with whose noise
Leoncio awaking out of his passionate slumber, cries out outragiously; Oh my
Gerardo! And so his whole content melted into bitter tears, and the cause of
them was straight dispersed about the Village.

'T was not the least of the good Leoncio's afflictions, to consider in the
midst of his griefs, Nise's just sorrow, which made him, as if he were within
her bosom, proclaim her complaints, fearing in himself, that not without
cause she might exclaim of her double injury, and being twice abused by his
Brother; and calling to his mind withal, that Masculine exploit of hers, when
for his liberty she left her home and Country, exposing her life to a frail
piece of wood, and the Seas danger, ashamed then, he durst not look upon her.
But knowing how precise a necessity there was of seeing her, deferring it no
longer, accompanied by his Kindred, he went to the Monastery.

Here, though he might have supposed all things to be in a readiness, and at
the first sight the Walls clad with Arras or Tapistrie, he saw no more
alteration then the day before, nor the least noise or stirring, that such a
solemnity might have required: wherefore with more admiration he desired tha
the fair Nise might be called: and thinking (according to the last agreement)
to have seen her in all her Jewels and bravery, he found himself beguiled,
and Nise, as formerly in her Veil and religious habit.

Accompanied she was by some other Nuns, her face and countenance, more
awfully grave, less cheerful then the day before: which persuaded them that
she was acquainted with Gerardo's absence: and therefore Leoncio presuming
that it was so, turning to the fair Dame, framed this discourse:

Considering you know of my Brothers unexpected accident, I may save a labor
to give you notice of it, complying in the rest, with what he has committed to
my trust and charge. Nise's heart was much oppressed with hearing this, and
cutting him thus passionately off, answered; How said you, Sir? Alas, what
should I know, that know nothing of his disasters? Is he dead, or what do you
mean? If so, said Leoncio in more confusion, I may proceed, though Gerardo's
absence, and the finding you so careless of these Nuptials (since ouer-night
to your liking they were agreed on) cannot but contain some especial
mystery: so, without more pawse he told her the whole business, as also of
the Letter: at all which, her compassionate eyes sent forth their tears, and
the afflicted Gentleman making an end, Nise, not so much troubled (as might
have been feared) made this modest answer: When Heaven so clearly shows his
wonders, 'twere needless to make strange my thoughts, or longer to conceal my
intention. Your noble Brother, Leoncio, has discreetly in fine made the
happiest election: in which (though you may think he prevented me;) I gained
him by the hand and eldership; for I no sooner yesterday departed from you,
resolved to be his Spouse, when my heart beginning to ponder, and my affections
altering, God Almighty was pleased to illuminate better my weak understanding;
and, considering I left clear light for lasting darkness, chose momentary
joys for eternal; and lastly, the Creature, in stead of my Creator, seeing
the manifest error I was in, my sorrow and repentance brought me to this
wholesome remedy of holy retirement: from which, not all worldly respects, or
above all other, that powerful love I once bore to your Brother, must ever
remove me: and therefore, I undoubtedly infer that two, so equal
determinations, two so mutually concurring affections, have been by Gods
particular providence disposed, whom I profess in this Religious Order to
obey, as long as vital breath shall --

In the midst of this valor she was drowned in tears, as accompanied by the
Spectators, and unable to utter a word more, with a farewell courtesy, she
meltingly left them, went into her Cell, and Leoncio with his kinsmen back to
the Castle; from whence that very afternoon, not once looking after Gerardo,
willing to obey his last commands, they returned to the famous Village of
Madrid: where these passages coming to my knowledge, I thought good to publish
them: desiring that for example and memory of men worthy to be immortalized in
the Press, they may last to future Ages.

FINIS.

