Credo Ecclesiam Sanctam Catholicam.

I believe the holy Catholic Church.

THE Authority, Universality, and Visibilitie of the CHVRCH, handled and
discussed.

By EDWARD CHALONER, Dr. in Divinity, and Principal of ALBAN Hall in OXFORD.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the Gray-Hound.

1625.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, Earl of PEMBROKE, Lord HERBERT of Cardiffe,
Lord Par and Rosse of Kendall, Lord Marmion, and Saint Q^intin, etc. Lord
Chamberlain of his MAJESTY'S Household, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, Knight
of the most Noble Order of the Garter: Chancellor of the University of Oxford;
And one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
THe first assault which was ever made upon mankind, appeared in the shape of a
Genesis 3. 1.
question, for in that manner did the Serpent set upon Eve; and the victory
then purchased, has ever since animated the Viperous brood of that
arch-enemie, to encounter the Church of God with the same engine. Aristotle's
positive forms of disputing, suit not so well with their distempered materials
as those of Socrates, which conclude in Questions. As it was at the building of
Babel, so is it now in Babylon, their confounded language serves only to ask
and demand, not to reply. For what are the cries of Rome, which more frequently
walk the streets, and fill them with louder clamours then those of London,
other then these? Whereupon do you lastly ground your belief? How do you
know the Scriptures to be the Word of God? Where was your Church in all ages?
If the Church of Rome profess not the same faith which anciently it did, when
did it alter or vary from her first integrity? Argumentations of other
natures, are forbidden the Laytie under pain of curse, this kind only of
disputing by Questions, is dispensed unto the rudest by the proverb, which
says, An Idiot may propound more in an hour, then the learned in a Kingdom
can resolve in a year. Having therefore discoursed upon these subjects, partly
in some Lectures had in a famous Metropolitan Church of this Canterbury.
Kingdom (where for a time abiding, I adventured to thrust in my Sickle into
the Harvest of more worthy Laborers) partly in my several attendances upon
our late Sovereign of happy Memory, and his Gracious Majesty now being, I
presume in humble acknowledgment of your noble favors conferred upon me, to
present these my poor endeauours to your honorable protection, beseeching
your Lordship to pass a favorable construction upon my boldness, and to
accept of them as from him, who is, and always will remain

Your Lordships humbly* devoted; ED. CHALONER*

The Contents of the first Part of this Book.
SECT. I. THe Preface and partition of the ensuing subject. page 1. SECT. II.
What act of Faith is employed in this Article of the Church, and the errors of
Romish Interpreters touching the same. page 3. SECT. III. The Romanists
distractions touching the Church, set down in eight Gradations. SECT. IIII.
The palpable abuse offered the Laytie, by obtruding the Church unto them as
their sovereign Judge, displayed by the present practice of the Jesuits. page
26. SECT. V. The objections out of the Scriptures touching the Churches
infallibility, answered. page 30. SECT. VI. The objection drawn from the
question, how we may know the authority, sense, purity and perfection of the
Scriptures, handled and resolved. page 36. SECT. VII. The new sleights and
devices, which the Jesuits use in enforcing these arguments touching the
Church and the Scriptures. page 51.
The Contents of the second Part.
SECT. I. THe first way whereby one may know the Church to be Catholic or
Universal. page 71. SECT. II. The second way whereby one may know the Church
to be Catholic or Universal. Together with an Application of the same to the
present question of these times, touching the existency of our Church in all
Ages. page 83.
Errata.
Page 58. The ^ which is in lin. 7. ought to be in lin. 14. ibid. lin. 12. for
obligation, r. Religion. ibid. lin. 14. for but search, r. but by search, page
91. lin. 19. for The fifth, r. The sixth.

Credo Ecclesiam Sanctam Catholicam.
I believe the holy Catholic Church.
SECT. I. The Preface and partition of the ensuing subject.
THis parcel of the Creed, how compendious soever it seems in words, yet is
it in signification so ample, that if the Jesuits Comment exceedes not the
Text, this, alone, is an abridgement of Divinity, this, a Catechism
sufficient to engrosse the Layties whole study and belief. It is not a matter
of small consequence to them which oppose names to things, and triumph in the
naked sounds of Church and Catholic, whether you apparel the sense in any
other furniture of Language then this: they cannot reply as Augustine. Cont.
Crescon. gram. lib. 2. c. 1.
Demosthenes did to Aeschines, when being vpbrayded with the improper use of a
word, he answered, that the fortunes of Greece consisted not therein; No, in
hoc sit a sum fortunae Romae, in these Sillables the fortunes of Rome are
entrenched; not the seven Hills whereon she is seated, not her extended Walls
whose ancient Tracts are almost en^omb'd with Age, not her Castle of Saint
Angelo are half so relied upon by her, as this single Article; For why? She
hopes, the Church will serve her for a Cittadle or Tower of defense, Holiness
will color her title, and Catholic will from all quarters furnish her with a
voluminous Army of ancient and experienced soldiers. Howsoever therefore I am
not able to undertake this subject, either with that power or skill, as those
which have preceded me in the same, yet because, as Rome was not built in a
day, so neither can she be surueied in an hour, or as she is Reu. 13. 1.
the Beast with seven heads and ten horns, resembling Hydra, which as soon as
Hercules had smitten off one head, maintained the fight with another; so there
may remain after those greater labors of others, something for us of
succeeding times and ages to meet withal; Be it as it will, I shall not
think my pains misspent, if whilst others have pared off an head, my weaker
strookes force her but so far as to shrink in a horn.

But to leave Prefaces, and come to the handling of the point. The words now
read unto you, containing in them a matter of Faith and Belief, do present
two things to our consideration; Viz. 1. First the act of Faith, in these
words, (tacitly implied) I believe. 2. Secondly the object of this Faith, the
Church, pourtraited and described by two properties. Viz. 1. Sanctity in that
it is called, Holy. 2. Vnjuersalitie, in that it is styled Catholic.



SECT. II. What act of Faith is implied in this Article of the Church, and the
errors of Romish interpreters touching the same.
COncerning the act of this faith ( I believe) though it be not prefixed to
the beginning of this Article, as neither to the rest which follow it; yet is
it to be understood; the former ( I believe) which precedes the Article of the
holy Ghost, communicating it self to this and the subsequent, and that
chiefly for two reasons.

The one, to teach us, that the principal object of our faith is God himself,
considered in unity of Essence, and Trinity of persons, and therefore to each
of the persons, there is either a ( Believe) prefixed, or the Particle ( in)
set before, to show that on them we are to build the certainty and assurance
of our hope; but as for these Articles of the Church, the forgiveness of
sins, the Resurrection of the body, and the like, they being creatures, are
but the secondarie objects of our Faith, not to be trusted upon immediately in
themselves, but only under God and through God, and therefore have not a Credo
a ( Believe) a part to themselves, but prefixed to one of the persons ( I
believe in the holy Ghost.)

The other, to set out and divide by this means unto every of the persons an
appropriate and special work. For as God the father has Creation in the
Articles attributed unto him, and the Son Redemptionem merito, Redemption by
the merit of his Death and Passion, unto him; so the holy Ghost by the (
Believe) which is prefixed to his Article, and is in part of sense to be
conuei'd unto the following; has the application of our redemption, Virtute
and efficacia, by his virtue and efficacy appropriated unto him also; to wit,
The sanctifying of the holy Catholic Church, the uniting of the members in a
communion with their head, the infusion of justifying faith, which apprehends
the remission of sins, the quickening of the dead in the Resurrection, and the
conferring of life, both vitam gratiae, the life of Grace, and vitam gloriae,
the life of glory in the world to come.

So then, the act of faith ( I believe) which belongs to this Article of the
Church, is to be fetched and derived from the preceding Article of the holy
Ghost. And yet because it descends not in the same form and garb of sense
altogether, which it bears there, but something altered and transfigured, the
question will be, what act it properly imports in this place toward his
object, the holy Catholic Church.

For the better resolving whereof we must necessarily call to mind that
ancient distinction of Aug. 181. sermon. de temp. P. Lom. 3. sent. did. 23.
Thom. 2. 2. q. 2. art. 2.
Saint Austens, and the Schoolmen touching Credere to believe: That there is
1. Credere in aliquem, to believe and put ones trust and confidence in one. 2.
Credere alicui, to believe or give credit to one. 3. Credere aliquem, to
believe that one is in being, or to believe that one is after this or that
manner in being.


The first of these, which is Credere in aliquem, to believe in one, does
virtually indeed include the other two, for one cannot believe in one, but he
must presuppose that he is, and that he is to be credited, but yet the proper
object of it, is bonum, a thing as it is good, and the formal act which it
exercises, is chiefly an act of the will; whereas the rest have rather for
their object, verum a thing as it is true, and the act which they exercise,
appertains only to the understanding; but with this difference, that when I
say, credo alicui, I give credit to ones saying, the act of faith has relation
to his object, as to obiectum formale, a kind of principle for whose sake and
cause I believe; but when I say, Credo aliquem, I believe that one is in being,
the act of faith has relation here to his object, as only to obiectum
materiale, or quod, (as the Schoolmen speak) a conclusion, which it believes,
and not as to the motive or inducement for which it believes.

Now to bring this home to the mark; The Church of Rome and we do agree, that
the ( believe) which is prefixed to the Article of the holy Ghost, does not
communicate it self with the restriction caused by the Particle ( in) to this
Article of the Church and the rest which follow it (for that were to believe in
them, and then no difference should be made between the Creator and the
Creatures) but simply and without addition, and the question is, what act it
now exercises; whether such an one as whereby our faith has relation to the
Catholic Church, as only to a material object or bare conclusion which it
believes, by reason whereof we may say, Credo Ecclesiam, I believe that there is
a Catholic Church, or moreover, such, as whereby our faith may reflect upon
the Church as a formal object, cause and principle, for whose sake it yields
credit and assent to all other things, so that thereby, though not expressly yet
tacitly is implied, Credo Ecclesiae, I yield faith and belief To the
Catholic Church?

The Greg. de Valent. in Thom. Tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 1.. 6.
Jesuits, howsoever they would palliate the matter, and make show, that the
Church is only a condition, and not a formal cause of our belief, yet others
of them speak more plainly what the rest aim at; Scot. 3, sent. did. 23. q.
un. Gab. q. 2. Can. lib. 2. c. 7. Durand. 3. d. 24. q. 1 Et d. 25. q. 3.
For Scotus and Biel, to whom Canus ioynes Durand, do teach that our faith is
last resolved into the authority of the Church; and Staplet. cont. Whitak. de
authorit. scriptur. l. 1. c. 14.. 6. and lib. 8. princip. doct. cap. 21.
Stapleton yet more punctually affirms, that this Article of the Church is
inserted into the Creed, Tanquam medium credendi alia omnia, as the only
means whereby we believe all other things, importing thus much, Credo illa
omnia, quae Deus per Ecclesiam me docet, I believe all those things which God
teaches me by the Church. Whereby we may easily collect, that the Papists by
this Credo Ecclesiam, I believe that there is a Church, do understand also,
Credo Ecclesiae, I yield faith and belief to the Church.

We for our parts do reverence the name and testimony of the Church, we
acknowledge it to be of all humane the greatest, we confess moreover that
the Catholic Church in the whole never has erred, nor ever shall err in
fundamental points, the providence of God sustayning it. In regard whereof, it
has the promise of our Savior Matthew. 16. Joh. 16. 13. 1. Tim. 3. 15.
that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, that the spirit shall
lead it into all truth, and it is called by the Apostle, the pillar of truth,
as who would say, that it retayneth a saving profession of heavenly truth, and
vpholdeth the same against all the stratagems of Satan and his accomplices. But
that it is not either in it self, or in this place to be taken, for the
formal cause of our belief, that is, the foundation of our faith, upon whose
credit and authority we are wholly to depend, I shall by these following
reasons drawn out of the Creed it self easily make apparent.

First by the Grammatical construction of this Credo, I believe, which when it
imports to yield credit or assent to a thing, is not joined with an Accusative
case, as here in the Creed, but with a Dative, whereas we say not, Credo
Ecclesiae, but Credo Ecclesiam, to show that the Creed in this place implies
veritatem in essendo, a belief of the Churches being; and not veritatem in
significando, a belief of the Churches saying: Staplet. lib. 8 princip. doct.
cap. 21.
Stapleton notwithstanding would feign find an cuasion from this argument,
saying, that to yield belief to the affirmations of the Church, is the
Theological sense of the Creed, though it be not the Grammatical; much like
as Bellarmine, who endeavoring to prove Purgatory from these words of Christ,
Matthew. 12. It shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the
world to come, Respondeo non sequi secundum regulas dialecticorum, id quod
inferimus ex verbis Domini sed tamen sequi secundum regulam prudentiae. Bell.
lib. 1. de purgat. cap. 4.
Confesses in the end, that it follows not indeed according to the rules of
Logic, but only according to the rule of Prudence, as if forsooth the Arts
were contradictorie to Divinity and not subordinate unto it, and that one
might not justly suspect something to be amiss in that house, where the
Mistress and her hand maids are at variance.

Secondly I argue from the word Catholic in the Creed, which by the Precipue
vero in hoc articulo non praesides solum sed etiam qui parere debent
significat. Catech. Roman. part. 1. cap. 10.. 9. and 13.
Tridentine Catechismes own confession, signifying the Flock as well as the
Pastors, and excluding no time, no persons, nor any condition of men, is not
possible to be seen, nor capable to be heard, nor able to be consulted with,
and therefore according to the sense which the Church believes in this place,
it is absurd to conceive that these words Credo Ecclesiam, I believe that there
is a Church, should be equivalent to these, Credo Ecclesiae, I yield faith and
belief to the Church.

But for breuities sake, omitting other proofs as more behoofull for those
which write large Tracts, than for my self, who desire to observe as near, as
I can the laws of Catechizing, my third reason shall be drawn from the word
Church, which being by the Papists inuolued with so many contrarieties and
contradictions, from it, I thus argue.

That which is to be the foundation of my faith, and to which I am to yield
assent in all things, that must be a thing certainly known and determined,
what it is; It is not sufficient to be acquainted with the word, but we must
also understand the thing; for faith is not verbal but real, neither are we
conveyed to heaven by bare sounds, as by Magic spells, but by truths and
verities which are couched under them. But according to the Papists own
assertions, this Church, which they here would make to be the foundation of
their faith: and to which (say they) we are to yield assent in all things, is
not to them a thing, as yet certainly known and determined what it is, which
by these Gradations following I shall demonstrate.

SECT. III. The Romanists distractions touching the Church, set down in eight
Gradations.
THe Church is divided by some of the Popish I Siluest. Prierias in Luth. tom.
1. page 159. fundam. 1.
Doctors into the Church, 1. Essentially, which they make to be the Convocation
of all that believe in Christ. 2. Representative, which they say, are either
the Bishops assembled in a general Council, as most do affirm, or the
College of Cardinals, as Siluester Prierias imagines. 3. Virtually, which they
conceive to be the Pope.


The first Gradation.
1. NOw grant the Church to be such a Pillar of truth, that who so hears it
cannot err, yet, First, it is not determined by Popish writers which is that
Church, to whose Oracles and definitive sentence we are to listen.

1. The Cap. 24. q. 1. c. a recta. Quaero de qua Ecclesia intelligas quod hic
dicitur, quod non possit errare? Resp. Ipsa congregatio fidelium hic dicitur
Ecclesia.
Gloss upon Gratians Decrees, which contain the Popes own laws and
constitutions, asking the question, what Church it is to be meant off, when it
is said, that the Church cannot err, answers, that it is to be meant not of
the Pope but of the Congregation of the faithful, that is the Church
Essentially.

2. But this opinion of the Church is generally by almost all the Papists
rejected, for being the judge of Controversies, and consequently the foundation
of our faith; the reasons are, First, Neque tamen debere Pontificem fidelium
omnium Sententiam inquirere; Hoc enim neque fieri potest, neque si possit
expediret. Fere enim eiusmodi sunt quae in controuersiam fidei adducuntur, vt
captum vulgarium fidelium long superent Valent. in Thom Tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1.
p. 7. 47.
because such a multitude dispersed far and wide throughout the face of the
earth, cannot be so marshalled as to have their opinions calculated. Secondly,
because the greater part of these are Lay People, whose apprehensions
oftentimes reach not unto the matters controuerted. Lastly, At posset tamen
nihilominus errare mayor illorum pars. Valent. 16.. 45.
because there is no promise made either to the flock or to the Pastors and
doctors of the Church, that a greater part of them shall not err, but only that
all of them shall not err. Wherefore though the whole Church in this sense
cannot err, errore personali, with a personal error, yet Bellarmine in his
fourth Book De Romans Pont. and fourth Chapter, tells us, that we must seek out
for one that cannot err, errore iudicali, with a judicial error.

Some therefore of the Papists are of opinion that the Church in this sense, as
it is taken for the judge of controversies and foundation of faith is the
Church, representative in a general Council of Bishops, no matter whether
with the Pope or without him, because the Pope Bell. lib. 2. de council. cap.
14.. At alij auctores.
(say they) though he be the head of all Christians and all Churches in
several, yet is he not of all the Church assembled in a Council together.
And of this opinion, besides those which Bellarm. 16. Porro de proposita. Ocham
in dialog. Dried. de degrees. Eccles. lib. 4. c 4. Council. Constant. session. 4.
Basil. act. 2. and 18.
Bellarmine reckons up, as Cardinalis Cameracensis, Ioh. Gerson, Iacobus
Almanus, Nic. Cusanus, Panormitanus, Cardinalis Florentinus, and Abulensis, we
may join, Ocham, Driedo, the Bishops assembled in the general Councels of
Constance and Basil, and in a word the University of Paris, as Coriolanus in
his Preface to the Councels Praelud. 5. does confess.

3. But many of the later Papists and especially Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp.
1. q. 1. p. 7.. 45.
the Jesuits, perceiving that the former opinion touching the Authority of a
general Council above the Pope, ( Ideo vsque ad hanc diem, quaestio superest,
etiam inter Catholicos, Bell. lib. 2. de council. c. 13.
howsoever the contrary be not yet determined) does indeed overthrow the
very faith of the Popes Primacie, and finding (as they say) no promise made to
a general Council without the Pope, for that the Church is to be built upon
the rock; and not the rock upon the Church, they do concur, that the
Church whose definitive sentence we are bound to believe, is nothing else but
the Church virtually, that is the Pope, whereby they delude, and impose upon
the world more than ever, for whilst they boast of the Church their Mother,
they mean and intend nothing else thereby, but only the Pope their father.

The second Gradation.
But secondly, grant for the Church at the Jesuits request, that it be the
Pope, upon which we are to rely, yet is it not agreed upon by them for the
manner, whether it be the Pope alone, or whether the Pope in an assembly of
the Church representative, and again whether this Church representative be the
College of Cardinals, or whether a general Council.

1. For no mean Writers amongst them do hold that the Pope may err if he
define without a general Council, as besides many of the Parisiens Alphons. a
Cast. lib. 1. cont. haeres. c. 2. Adrian. 6. quest. de confirm. Vid. Bellarm.
lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 2
Alphonsus a Castro, and Pope Adrian the sixth do auerre, that we may see not
only private men, but also Popes themselves to have suspected the Papal
authority in this point. And here though Bellarmine vaunts, that all
Catholics do conspire in this, that when the Pope defines any thing in a
general Council, he is then out of danger of erring, either in faith, or
general precepts touching manners, yet it is not decided say Resp. secundum
Abb. in cap. nimis de praeb. in fi. quod non reperitur Specifice decisum, qui
debeant Concilio universally inter esse, nec in text. nec in glossa. Gloss. i^
institu. Iur. Can. lib. 1. tit. 3. in princip.
Canonists, of whom this general Council is to consist. For as it is
generally defined it imports Instit. Canon. ibid. Bell. lib. 1. de council. c. 4.
an assembly of Bishops or holy Fathers, met together out of all quarters of
the earth. But Si omnes, nullum suit ergo hactenus concilium generale, neque
videtur deinceps futurum, Paulo post. Sic in concilio Nicaeno primo ex
occidente Solum fuerunt duo Presbyteri missi ex Italia, vnus Episcopus ex
Gallia, vnus ex Hispania, vnus ex Africa. In Concilio secundo and tertio, nulli
fuerunt ex Occidente, Bellarm. li. 1. de council, c. 17.
Bellarmine in his first Book, De Council. and 17. Cap. says that such a
general Council never was, nor possibly can be, since in the first general
Council there were present but two Priests out of Italy, one Bishop out of
France, one out of Spain, and one out of Africa. In the second and third there
were none out of the West, and in the fourth, only the Legate of Leo, which
delivered the consent of the other Bishops of Spain, France and Italy, who had
before sent the same in Writing unto the Pope forth of their own Provinces.
And on the contrary in Councels celebrated in the West, few Eastern Bishops
have bin found. What then thinks the Cardinal best to be done? Quatuor
conditiones sufficere, Prima vt euocatio sit generalis, ita vt innotescat
omnibus maioribus Christianis prouinc ijs. Bell. ibid.
Why, he tells us, it is enough if it be published and made known to all the
greater Christian Provinces, neither matters it (say Canus lib. 5. de loc.
Theolog. c. 2. Turrecrem. lib. 3. de Eccles. c. 16. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3.
disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7.. 45. Vid. Bell, vt sup.
Canus, Turrecremata and Gregory de Valentia) that all be Cited, much less
that all do Come; sufficient it is (says Bellarmine) if no Bishop be
excluded, if out of the greater part of Christian Provinces some do appear,
and if the four chief Patriarchs, which are besides the Bishop of Rome, be
present, either by themselves or by their substitutes, though he thinks that
this Condition be not very necessary at this day; considering they are either
Heretics or Schismatikes. So that here they commit main Contradictions. For
first, they make a Council to be general, and to represent the whole Church,
and yet to Ex quo sequitur posse interdum concilia nationalia esse multo maiora
generalibus, quoad numerum Episcoporum. Bellar. ibid.
consist oftentimes of fewer Bishops than a National, and those for substance
but of one Angle of the World only, the rest either not cited, or not
expected. Secondly, they judge it sufficient for the Patriarchs which are
absent, to depute others in their room, Vid. Catalog. ad fin. Council. Trident.
the which was also practiced by their Bishops at Trent, and yet (as Quia vt
Turrecremata lib. 3. de Eccles. c. 6. 8. and 38. and Canus lib. 5. de locis
Theol. c. 5 recte docent, potestas ipsa Pontificis ad infallibiliter
definiendum deligari alijs nequit. Valent. in Thom. vt sup.
Valentia and others well dispute in the Case of the Popes Legates) the
assistance of the holy Ghost is a thing personal, and cannot be delegated
unto another. Wherefore to salve all sores with one plaster, Quin etiam licet
non conuenerint in eiusmodi aliquibus Romany Concilijs Episcopi variarum
Prouinciarum, tamen ratione Pontificiae authoritatis, quae vniuersalis est,
Vniuersalia quodammodo dici possunt, vt notauit Turrecremata, lib. 3. de
Eccles. cap. 3. Valent. in Thom. ibid. Vid. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Council. cap. 5.
Valentia and Turrecremata, do affirm, that considering those difficulties,
the Popes own authority (it being universal) is capable to make a particular
Council to be Universal, as it has done in some of the Roman. But see then
a third contradiction, no less misseshapen than the former, ascends the Stage;
for whereas, Bellar. lib. 1. de Council. cap. 15.. prior autem sententia
refellenda nunc est, ac primo ratione desumpta ex Scriptura. Item, Fran. Longus
a Coriol. praelud. 4. ad Sum. Council.
Bellarmine in his first book de Council. and fifteenth Chapter, and others,
and endeavor to prove jure diuino, by the Law of God, that Bishops only have
deciding voices in a general Council, and that the promise of delivering the
truth is made to them only, as being the sole Pastors of the Church, Ex
priuilegio autem and consuetudine, etiam Cardinales, Abbates, and Generales
Ordinum licet Episcopi non sint. Bellar. lib. 1. de Council. c. 15 Vid.
subscript. ad fin. Council. Trident.
they confess notwithstanding in their writings and declare by the practice of
the Tridentine Council, that Cardinals, Abbots, and Generals of Orders have
voices there, though not ordinary and by right, yet by privilege and custom,
whence it follows, that either the Church has that prerogative to assign and
appoint whom the holy Ghost shall assist; or else that a major part in a
Council may be made up by those to whom the holy Ghost has past no promise
that they shall not err.

2. These absurdities therefore considered, some of the Church of Rome do
abase that high esteem which for a long time was conceived of general
Counsels, making either their first original to be but humane, as Albert.
Pigh. lib. 6. coelest. Hierarch. cap. 1.
Albertus Pighius, or their use not absolutely necessary, as Bellar. lib. 1.
de Council. c. 10.
Bellarmine and others. Hence it is that a second sort contracting the face of
the Church into a lesser model, do teach that the Church here disputed of to
be the Judge of Controversies, is the Pope in the Church, represented, not by
Bishops in a Council, but by the College of Cardinals in the Consistory,
which opinion is recited by Valent. to. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7.. 42.
Greg. de Valentia, in his Disputations upon Thomas.

3. But because the College of Cardinals seems too compendious a walk
wherein to impale the greatness of the Pope, and a general Council too
uncertain a path to tread, therefore the greater cry rings this peale, that
the Church we talk of is the Pope himself, whether with a Council or
without a Council, whether with the Cardinals or without them, as in the next
Gradation shall appear.

The third Gradation.
But thirdly; grant for the manner, that it be the Pope himself, which is
this Church, whether with a Council or without a Council, whether with
Cardinals or without them, yet is it not determined for the time when, it is
the Pope.

1. For some teach, that it is the Pope at all times, in that he cannot
possibly be an Heretic or publish a falsehood, and of this opinion is Albertus
Pighius, in his fourth book de Hierarch. eccles. cap. 8.

2. But others hold, that it is the Pope then only, when he publishes a
doctrine under this condition, to be believed by the whole Church as an
Article of Faith, and of this opinion is Bell. lib. 4. de Romans pont. c 2.
Aquin. 22. q. 1. art. 10. Walden lib. 2. doct. fid. c. 47. and. 48. Turrecrem.
lib. 2. Summae. c. 109. Dried. lib 4. de eccles. dog. c. 3. part. 3. Caiet. in
opusc. de potest. Papae and council. c. 9. Hos. lib. 2. cont. Brent. de legit.
iudic. Eck. lib. 1 de prim. Petri. Ioh. a Lou. de perpet. cathed Petri protect.
cap 11. Pet. a Soto in Apolog. part. 1. c. 83. Can. lib. 6. c. 7. de locis.
Valent. tom. 3. disp. 1. p. 7. q. 1.. 40. Becan theol. Scholast.
Bellarmine himself, and by his account, Thom. Aquinas, Waldensis, Ioannes de
Turrecremata, Driedo, Caietan, Hosius, Eckius, Ioannes a Louaine, Petrus a
Soto, Melchior Canus, besides Valentia, Becanus, and the whole fraternity of
Jesuits.

The fourth Gradation.
But fourthly, grant for the time, because haec est communissima opinio, this
is the most common opinion of all Catholics (says Bellarmine) that the Church
is then the Pope, when he propounds a doctrine to be believed by all men as
an article of Faith, yet is it not sufficiently resolved by them, for the
matters, what matters they must be, in resolving whereof his proposition is
infallible.

1. For you have been hitherto made believe, that whenever he buckles
himself to define any thing to be believed as an Article of Faith, that then
he is in his Chair, and then he cannot err, and amongst other points in
which they say that we are to believe assuredly that the Pope cannot err,
Bellarmine, and Greg. de Valentia reckon up Bell de sanct. beat. lib. 1 cap.
12. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q 1. p. 7. 41.
the Canonization of Saints to be one, and that the Bell. lib. 2. de Romans Pont.
cap 12. Valent. vt. sup.. 37.
Pope is the successor of Peter to be another.

2. But on the other side, it is first confessed by Bell. lib. 4. de Romans Pont.
cap. 2. Conueniunt omnes Catholici posse Pontificem etiam vt Pontificem and cum
suo caetu confiliariorum, vel cum generali Concilio, errare in controuersijs
facti
Bellarmine, and as he says by all Catholics, that the Pope may err even
with a general Council at his elbow, in matters of fact which depend upon
information, and the testimonies of men, and such is the question touching the
legitimacie of the Pope, confessed to be by Bell. lib. 4. de To. Pont. c. 12.
Bellarmine. And because the Canonization of Saints is of the same nature,
Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 7. 41. Non est autem ita prorsus
ab Ecclesia tradita haec doctrina, qua ponimus Pontificem non posse etiam
errare in Canonizatiorne Sanctorum.
Valentia confesses that the Popes infallibility therein is not so altogether
delivered by the Church, and Canus in his fifth book de locis theolog: chap.
5. says that it is not certain, de fide, as a matter of faith, neither will
he pronounce him to be an Heriticke who after so great a pudder as has been
kept about Saint Francis, shall yet deny him to be in heaven. Secondly
Turrecrem. lib. 2. de eccles. cap. 112. ad arg 7. and lib. 4. part. 2. cap. 16.
Syluest. in Sum. Verbo. Opinio.
Turrecremata in his second book de Ecclesia, and Syluester in his sums do
grant that the Pope may so far as in him lies, endeavor to establish his
own heresy, and obtrude it upon the Church; nor do Valent. ibid. Namsi
tantummodo voluerunt Pontificem vt priuatam Personam errare posse, aut etiam
priuatum aliquem suum errorem in fide manifestum, perverse velle Ecclesiae
ipsi, aduersus exploratam aliorum in eadem Ecclesia fidem obtrudere, rem illi
opinantur non penitus improbabilem. Sic Bellarm. lib. 4 de To. Pont. c. 7.
Valentia and Bellarmine dissalow their position under these two prouiso's, the
one, that if he do it effectually, then the contrary has been formerly
determined by the Church; so that the Church can then receive no danger thereby
of erring; the other, that if the contrary was never before determined, then
the Pope may indeed attempt it, as did Valent. vt sup.. ad confirmationem. and
Bell. l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 14. Voluit autem lobannes questionem definire, etc.
Ioh. 22. in a question touching the state of the soul after death, but God in
his providence will take such course, as that he never shall accomplish it.

The fifth Gradation.
But fifthly, grant for the matters, that the Pope be this Church in determining
any matter of Faith whatsoever, yet is it not resolved clearly by them for the
person in general, whether the Pope upon which we are so to rely, be the
present Pope, or whether the Popes deceased.

1. For the voice of the Jesuits speaks this, that it is the present Pope,
nay Valent. tom. 3. in Thom. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7.. 3.
Gregory de Valentia is so confident therein, that neque Scriptura sacra
(says he) neque etiam sola traditio (si ab ea separes praesentem in ecclesia
authoritatem) est illa authoritas infallibilis, magistra fidei etc. that is,
neither the Scriptures, nor yet traditions, if you separat from the present
authority in the Church, is that infallible mistress of Faith and Judge of
controversies. So Bellarmine, Bell. lib. 2. de Sacram. cap. 25
omnium conciliorum veterum, and omnium dogmatum firmitas pendet ab authoritate
praesentis Ecclesiae, the strength of all ancient Counsels and all assertions,
does depend upon the authority of the present Church; and Valent. ibid.. 12.
Sicut de authoritate scripturae, necesse est per aliquam aliam certam
authoritatem constare, ita etiam de authoritate traditionis. Et Paulo post. Cum
traditio fere scriptis doctorum conseruetur, questiones moueri possunt de sensu
illius, etc Bell. ibid. Non enim habemus testimonium infallibile, quod Concilia
illa fuerint and legitima fuerint, and hoc aut illud definierint, nisi quia
Ecclesia quae nunc est, ita sentit and docet.
their reasons alleadgedare, for that without the authority of the present
Church, we neither can be assured of the certainty of Traditions and
Counsels, nor of the sense and meaning of them.

2. But contrariwise, the case being put (as you have heard) by Turrecremata
and Siluester; that the Pope may do, what lies in him to propose an heresy,
both Valent. ibid. 41. Bell. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 7.
Valentia and Bellarmine grant the position not to be impossible, upon
condition that the heresy have been condemned formerly by the Church, for
then according to their doctrine the Church is to examine the errors of the
present Pope, by truths resolved by precedent Popes. So that if in all points
necessary to salvation the truth have been already determined by former Popes
(as in 1600. years space they have had leisure enough to do it) the present
Pope cease to be a competent Judge in such matters, he may err touching
them he may do his best endeavor to obtrude upon the Church heresies
concerning them, nay he stands himself to be arrained at the bar, and
Tribunal of his Clergy, whether he be Orthodoxe or no and that by the
prescripts of his predecessors.

The sixth Gradation.
Sixthly, grant for the Person in general, that it be the present Pope which
is the Church, in that no danger can accrue from the Popes propounding an
heresy, if that heresy have been formerly condemned, because Bellar. lib. 2.
de Romans Pont. c. 30.. Est ergo quinta opinio vera.
(as they say) the Church may then know him not to be their Shepherd, but a
Wolf, yet is it not agreed or determined sufficiently amongst them for the
means, how the Church may be able to judge or truly discern him to be such
an one.

1. For they which hold a General Council to Vid. Grad. 1.
be above the Pope, and that it cannot err, as Gerson, Cameracensis, and
others above mentioned, do hold likewise that the Pope so erring may be
judged both for his person and doctrine by the church in a General Council.

2. But they which hold a General Council not to be above the Pope, but that
wanting his company it may err even in matters of faith, as Bellar. lib. 2.
de Council. cap. 11. Valent. vt sup.. 45. Cajet. in Apolog. part. 2. c. 21.
Turrecrem. lib. 3. c. 23.
Bellarmine, Valentia, Cajetan, Turrecremata, and others, these disable any for
being competent Judges of the Popes doctrine. For howsoever they may pretend
that the Council proceeding according to former Popes declarations cannot
err, yet because they teach that the certainty and sense of former Decrees
depends upon the judgment of the present Pope, I cannot see what means may,
according to their opinion, be affoorded for the trial of the Popes doctrine,
if he should chance to err.

The seventh Gradation.
SEauenthly, grant for the means that the Church never need to pass verdict
upon the Popes doctrine, yet is it not agreed upon by them for the Sea, whether
the Popedom be necessarily united to the Sea of Rome, so that the word Roman
for ought they know assuredly, is not conuertible with Catholic, but that he
which brags he is a Roman Catholic to day, may, if the Pope should chance to
die, prove a Vid. Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacram. in Genesis c. 27.
Geneua Catholic tomorrow.

1. For Dom. a Soto in 4. sent. did. 24.
Dominicus a Soto upon the fourth of the Senten. says, that the Apostolical
seat and power of universal Bishop is annexed to the Bishopric of Rome only
jure Ecclesiastico, that is, not by the Law of God, but by the Churches
constitution, so that by the authority of the Church, a Bishop of another See
may be chosen Pope. And Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. c. 12. and lib. 4. c. 4.
Quod non sit omnino de fide, a Romana Ecclesia no^ posse separari Apostolicam
sedem, patet, quia neque Scriptura, neque Traditio habet sedem Apostolicam ita
fixam esse Romae, vt inde auferri non possit.
Bellarmine graunts, that it is no matter of faith, that the Apostolical seat
may not be separated from the Church of Rome, forasmuch as neither Scripture
nor Tradition do avouch it.

2. But Canus lib. 6. loc. Theol. c. 4, 5. and 6. Dried. lib. 4. de varijs
dogmat. c. 4. part. 3. Turrecrem. lib. 2. de Eccles. c. 40. Valent. in Thom.
tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7.. 38.
Canus, Driedo, Turrecremata, and Gregory de Valentia, do hold the contrary,
that the Bishop of Rome is Peter's successor, not only by the constitution of
the Church, but also by the institution of Christ, though Valentia confesses,
varias hac de re doctorum sententias, that the opinions of the Doctors be
diverse in this point.

The eighth Gradation.
Eighthly (for I shall not yet leave them) grant for the Sea that the Bishop of
Rome be the ordained Successor of Peter by the institution of Christ, not
only in the Popedom, but also in the particular See of Rome, yet is it not
certain for the particular person of this or any present Pope, whether he be
the true and lawful Bishop of Rome or no?

1. For although Valent. ib.. 39. Atque ipse mihi persuadeo nunquam futurum, vt
incapax eligatur, Deo id prohibente. Sed quia graves etiam doctores eiusmodi
casum tanquam possibilem admittunt, etc.
Gregory de Valentia does think that Gods providence will always secure the
Church of a lawful Pope. 2. Yet he confesses that grave Doctors do admit
the case as possible, and this according to them, may fall out diverse ways.

First, if the Pope be promoted by Simonie, and that this is not impossible,
Aquinas affirms it, 2a. 2a. q. 100. where he says, Papa potest incurrere
vitium Simoniae sicut and quilibet alius, the Pope may incur the sin of
Simonie as well as any other. The which opinion Cajetan and others upon Thomas
do follow, and it is moreover a clause in the Bull of Pope Julius the second,
That if any Pope happen to be chosen simoniacally, the same election shall be
actually void, although inthronization, protraction of time and adoration of
the Cardinals have established him in the Sea.

Secondly, if the person elected by the Cardinals be not of the Valent. ib.
Mulier autem and infidelis Pontificatus minime sunt capaces.
masculine gender, as not a few of their own writers do affirm to have been
sometimes experimented.

Thirdly, Valent. ib. Praeterea idem patet, si errore eligeretur infidelis
quispiam non baptizatus. and Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacram. cap. 28.
if the party chosen Pope were never truly baptized, and of this by their
Tenants one can never be assured. For the Papists do make the Sacraments to
depend upon the intention of the Priests, and therefore Bellarmine in his third
book de Iustif. and eight chapter, disputing against Ambrosius Catharinus
concerning the certainty of grace, Neque potest quis esse certus certitudine
fidei, se percipere verum sacramentum, cum sacramentum sine intention ministri
non conficiatur, and intentionem alterius nemo videre potest; that is, no man
can by the certainty of Faith be assured that he receives the true Sacrament,
seeing that the Sacrament without the intention of the Priest is not made, and
the intention of another does no man see. To these Turrecrem. lib. 4. p. 2. c.
20.
Ioh. de Turrecremata adds, that the Pope is deposed by God even for mental
heresy, which we know, is a thing not liable to the sense.

Whereby we may behold into what laborinths the Papists do cast themselves by
proiecting their faith upon the Pope. For if he have intruded upon the Papacy
by Simonie, or be of the wrong Sex, or that the Priest at his baptism owing
his parents a spite, or his wits being a wooll-gathering, intended not to
baptize him; nay, put the case that he be rightly baptized, yet if the Bishop
which conferred priesthood upon him, or those which baptized or ordained that
Bishop missed their right intention, or farther, if any of his predecessor
Popes which either made Laws for the form and manner of electing the Pope, or
created so many Cardinals as might make a major or exclusive part, in the
election of succeeding Popes, failed by reason of the forenamed Cases, or
lastly (according to Turrecremata) if being truly elected, he chance to fall
into mental heresy, then is not such a man by their own positions true
Bishop of Rome, that supposed Bishop of Rome not lawful Pope, that Pope has
not the spirit of infallibility annexed unto him, and yet this may happen Vid.
supplicat. ad Imperat. Reg. Princip. etc.
(nay, by some it is proved to have happened) and yet the Church never the
wiser.

For howsoever Francisc. Long. sum. Council. praelud. 10. assert. 2.
Franciscus Longus in his late Sums of the Counsels, finding that their
faith must needs stagger which depend altogether upon the infallibility of
the Pope, if it may not be certainly known who is true and lawful Pope,
makes this assertion, De fide est dicere, hunc numero Papam viz. Gregorium XV.
esse verum successorem Petri and Christi Vicarium, that is, That it is an
article of faith, to say, this very Pope in particular, to wit, Gregory the
fifteenth, is the true successor of Peter and Vicar of Christ; yet by his
leave, I should hardly grant that privilege to a priuateman, which is not due
to a General Council, and the Pope himself; or think it equity to impose
any thing upon men to be believed as an article of faith, concerning which the
Doctors of the Church, and the Bishops of Rome themselves may err and be
deceived.

Now, who knows not, that Pope Stephen the sixth in a Council of Bishops, did
disanull the acts of Formosus his predecessor, and commanded those which had
been ordained by him, to be reordayned again, as not acknowledging him for a
true and lawful Pope. Again, how John the ninth disanulled the acts of
Stephen the sixth, and approved the acts of Formosus; yet farther, how Sergius
the third re-established the acts of Stephen, and made void the acts of
Formosus, and by consequence those of John, both which notwithstanding, all
succeeding Popes have received as right and undoubted successors of Peter in
the Papal Throne. Nor does Bellar. lib. 4 de Romans Pont c. 12. Respondeo
errasse Stephanum 6. and Sergium 3. sed in quaestione facti non iuris. Et paulo
post, Praecipua ergo quaestio fuit, an Formosus fuisset Papa legitimus, necne?
in qualibus quaestionibus non negamus posse errare Pontifices, and de facto
errasse Stephanum and Sergium.
Bellarmine otherwise defend these errors of the Popes, then by saying that
they erred, in quaestione facti non iuris, in a question of fact not of right,
and concludes, that the chief question was, whether Formosus were lawful Pope
or no, in which kind of questions (says he) we deny not but the Popes may
err, and that Stephen and Sergius erred indeed. In like manner, did not John
the three and twentieth sit five years as Bishop of Rome, and moreover in that
rank which is esteemed by the Jesuits to be the right Line; yet Bellar. lib.
4. de Romans Pont. c. 14.
Bellarmine tells us, that he was not a certain and undoubted Pope, and
therefore not needful to be defended, considering that there were three at
the same time; neither could it be easily decided amongst so many learned
Patrones which each of them had, whether of them was legitimate. And if it be
true which the Bellar. lib. 2. de Council. c. 19.
Cardinal tells us in another place, disputing the deposing of this John, that
dubious Papa habetur pro non Papa; a doubtful Pope is held for no Pope, surely
of whose election we may any way doubt, his decisions we may justly fear,
and the validity of his pardons prouidently suspect.

SECT. IIII. The palpable abuse offered the Laytie, by obtruding the Church
unto them as their sovereign Judge, displayed by the present practice of the
Jesuits.
NOw by this which has been already spoken touching the Church and the Pope,
may appear what sophistry is current in the Romish pale, and what
legerdemayne, is practiced in popish markets, whilst one thing is showed and
another sold, the Title of the Church being used but as a clowd, wherein they
carry poor people, whilst the mystery of iniquity more covertly works;
which being revealed, it will appear that a lay-papist (whose faith is lapt up
in the implicit belief of the Church) being defined, will prove no better,
than a creature that believes he knows not what, and credits it he knows
not why, resembling somewhat the patient which received this precipe of his
physician.

If thou would be cured of I know not what disease, thou must take an herb
I know not what, put it I know not where, and thou shall be cured I know not
when.
Si vis sanari de morbo nescio quali,
Accipias herbam, qualem sed nescio vel quam,
Ponas nescio vbi, sanabere nescio quande.
To make this the more palpable and evident to the sense, I will wade a little
into the practical part of this doctrine, and show to what miserable shifts
the learned of the Romish side are driven, by undertaking the defense of the
Churches preeminency in matters of faith.

Imagine therefore, a poor papist thus tormented in his conscience. I am
(says he) enjoined by my Confessor, to ground my faith and belief upon the
authority of the Church. Now, woe is me, what shall I do? Our Masters which
should be lights to the blind, and inform us, which is that Church whereon
we are to depend, they are distracted in their opinions, one says a General
Council, although without the Pope, another a Council and the Pope together,
a third that it is the Pope alone, and surely there is but one Truth, besides
which can there possibly be (in so important a business as this is) hope of
salvation? Yes (will Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 2. Non est haeretica, nam
adhuc videmus ab Ecclesia tollerari, qui illam sententiam sequuntur etc.
Bellarmine resolve you) for though it be heretical not to believe the Church
in gross, yet is it not heretical to mistake the acception of the Church,
which is in effect to believe a false Church; for examples sake, To take a
General Council without the Pope for the infallible Church, inasmuch as we
see (says he) these tolerated by the Church which defend that opinion,
although it be erroneous and next to heresy. But alas (replies the poor man)
now that I am come so far by your instructions, as to know that the Pope is
the Church, which is a great deal farther than many of my ghostly Fathers are
come, yet because I perceive a dissension amongst you, and that you which hold
this Tenent are not agreed, when and in what matters, it is that the Pope
cannot err, I find my conscience but a little eased by your resolution. No
matter for the Popes erring or not erring, will Bellarmine answer, for all
Catholics Bellar. ibid. Deinde omnes Catholici conueniunt, Pontificem solum,
sieve errare possit, sieve no^, esse ab omnibus fidelibus obedienter audiendum.
(says he) do accord in this, that the Pope, whether he may err or no, is
yet to be heard with all obedience. But what comfort (will the man object) can
this be to me, that live happily in England or Spain, far remote from Rome; It
is the present Pope (you say) upon whose judgment I am to depend, whom I am
neither able to hear, neither does your Bellar. lib. 3. de verbo Dei, c. 5. Si
etiam intelligamus, etc.
Cardinalship think it necessary that he should be a preacher to be heard.
Tush (says Bellar. ibid. Nee enim potest Pontifex omnibus ho. minibus
concionari, nec est opus, cum sint in singulis Ecclesijs qui concionentur.
Bellarmine) it is not material that you hear the Pope, when as there be
Preachers in your own Parish who may inform you. But (faith the man) there is
no promise made, that whatsoever my Parochian teaches me, is forth with the
true and undoubted doctrine of the Church, considering that he may err and be
deceived. Nor have you (will Bellarmine tell you) more assurance of the Popes
word, if you and your whole Nation should travail to Rome to hear his
resolution, Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 14.. Quadragessimus est
Innocentius octauus.
For as much as when he teaches not the whole Church, he is in as much
possibility to err, as Innocent the eighth was, when he permitted the
Norwegians to celebrate the Eucharist without wine. What then is to be done?
Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. quaest. 2. punct. 5. Nam vt infra quaest. 11.
docebimus, quandoque potest co^tingere, vt quis teneatur conari ad eliciendum
assensum fidei supernaturale, circaid cuius contrarium reipsa est verum. Vt si,
Verbi gratia, Synodus Episcopalis, aut etiam communis consensus plurium
Theologorum statueret aliquam propositionem esse propositam ab Ecclesia vt de
fide, atque adeo iuberetur quis praebere illi propositioni assensum fidei; tunc
talis teneretur conari ad eliciendum talem assensum ex praecepto fidei, and
tamen cum Synodus Episcopalis and plures etiam Theologi errare possint, posset
contingere etc.
Greg. de Valentia in his third tome upon Thom. 1. Disp. makes this answer,
That if you find but an Episcopal Synod, or the consent of diverse Divines
only affirming such a doctrine to be the sentence of the Church, you are bound
to believe it, though it be a lie. But is it not a sin (will the man reply)
to believe a lie. Gab. lib. 3. did. 25. q. un. art. 1. Si quis ipse simplex
and in eruditus audire praelatum suum praedicare aliquid contrarium fidei, --
putans hoc a Praelato suo sic praedicatum esse creditum ab Ecclesia, talis non
solum non peccaret, sed etiam sic credendo falsum, meretur.
Gabriel Biel, and Tollet. de instruct. Sacerdot. lib. 4. cap. 3. 7. Rursus si
rusticus circa articulos credat suo Episcopo proponen. ti aliquod dogma
haereticum, meretur in cre dendo, licet sit error; quia tenetur credere, donec
ei constet esse contra Ecclesiam.
Tolet the Jesuit (to the end that we may see how both ancient and later
Papists have been forced to the same streights) will answer, that if one
hear his Bishop or Prelate preach contrary to the Faith, thinking that it is
so believed by the Church, such an one shall not only not sin, but also in
believing that falsehood, shall commit an act meritorious.

It is no marvel then if the Romanists boast so much of Visibilitie,
considering that their faith is built five stories high; the Layties belief
upon his Pastor, the Pastors upon the common opinion of neighbor Divines, or
an Episcopal Synod, that Episcopal Synod upon the Church, the Bell. lib. 3.
de Verbo Dei. c. 10.. Respondeo ad hoc argumentum.
Church upon the Pope; and the Pope upon Christ. Wherein how skillful Artizans
soever the Jesuits are in other Trades, I know not, surely in architecture
they show but little skill, having not provided any thing to supply the room of
the Pope in the vacancie, so that for a year, and more, sometimes, the upper
stories must like Esops Towers be seen to hang in the air For howsoever Vid.
Bell. lib. 2. de council. cap. 14.
those which hold the supreme authority, to be subiectiuely and formally in
the Church, and instrumentally only in the Pope, may supply the place of the
dead Pope with a general Council, yet the Jesuits and others which with open
cry, now adays condemn this opinion as false and next to heresy, may be
challenged of more folly, then Matthew. 7. 26.
he which built his house upon the sand.

SECT. V. The objections out of the Scriptures touching the Churches
infallibility, answered.
WHat now remains, but that we answer those arguments, whereon our adversaries
seem to ground this supposed power of the Church, in challenging absolute
belief to what she affirms.

The first rank of arguments contains such places of Scripture as concern the
privileges of the Church in general. As 1. Tim. 3. 15. That thou Rhem. Transl.
may know how thou ought to converse in the house of God, which is the
Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth. I answer that the
Church here mentioned is not that Church, which the Papists make to be the
Judge of Controversies, that is, either the Church representative, which is a
general Council, or the Church virtuall, which they imagine to be the Pope;
but the Church essential, in whole or part, which is the congregation of all
faith full believers and therefore not to the purpose. For the Papists
themselves do discharge it in this sense from the office of defining, because
in part it is fallible, and in whole it is avast body, composed of parts far
asunder, and wanting a speaker. And that the Church in this place is so taken,
besides the confession of Bell. lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 14. Probatur haec
veritas, primo de Ecclesia vniuersa, vt continet omnes fideles, ac primum ex
illo 1. Tim. 3. Eccle sia Dei est collumna and firmamentum veritatis.
Bellarmine who acknowledges it; the very circumstances of the place do
carry it; for Saint Paul tells Timothy here, that he wrote this Epistle unto
him, that he might know how to converse or behave himself in the house of
God, which he expounding to be the Church, it must on necessity be
construed of the Church essential as consisting of the faithful, in gross,
unless one should be so absurd, as to say that Saint Paul delivered directions
unto Timothy in this Epistle, how he should converse in a general Council,
whereof there were none in three hundred years after, or else (which is more
absurd) how he should behave himself discreetly and with circumspection in the
Popes belly.

So Matthew. 18. 16. And if he will not hear them, Rhem. Transl.
tell the Church; and if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee, as
the Heathen and the Publican. I answer, that here be three degrees of
admonitions and reproves set down by our Savior, in case that one brother
trespass against another. Viz. First corripiendus amore, he is to be reproved
with love, verse 15. go and rebuke him between thee and him alone. Secondly
corripiendus pudore, he is to be reproved with shame, verse 16. if he will
not hear thee, join with thee besides one or two. Thirdly corripiendus
timore, he is to be reproved with fear, verse 17. if he will not hear them,
tell the Church.


So that I willingly grant this honor to have been here given by our Savior,
to his Church, that the last resort and appeal upon earth should be made unto
it; but you must remember withal how far this present case will besteed you.
For he says not absolutely, whatsoever thy brother shall say or believe, but
if thy brother shall offend or trespass against thee, which (make the most we
can) Bell. lib. 3. de Verbo Dei. cap 5. Obseruandum hic quidem dominum loqui de
iniurijs quas vnus ab aliquo paitur.
is but quaestio facti non iuris, that is, a matter of fact, not of faith; it
is only touching some personal and particular injuries, in deciding whereof,
the Papists themselves deny not, but the Church may err. See above, Grad. 4.

So Matthew. 23. 2. Upon the chair of Moses have Rhem. Transl.
sitten the Scribes and the Pharisees, all things therefore whatsoever they
shall say unto you, observe ye and do ye. I answer, that these words
whatsoever they shall say unto you, are either to be taken conditionally, that
is, with this prouise; that they speak the truth, otherwise not and then
aduantageth it nothing the Papists cause; or else absolutely, and then our
Savior should contradict himself, who reproved the errors of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Math. 5. and forewarned his Disciples to take heed of their leaven.
Matthew. 16. 6. Besides, all precepts concern the time present or future, now
Bell. lib. 2. de council. c. 8. Respondemus Pontifices and Concilia Iudaeorum,
non potuisse errare antequam Christus veniret, sed eo praesente potuisse. Sic.
lib. 3. de Ecclecap. 17.. ad tertium.
Bellarmine himself confesses that the Highpriests Councels of the Jews
were at this present, liable to error, nay farther, that it was prophesied
that they should err and deny Christ. Isa. 6. Dan. 9. and therefore this
could be no such absolute precept of obedience, as the Papists imagine,
especialy to those which now lived, when (by their own acknowledgement) such
as possessed the Chair of Moses might err and be deceived.

Other places are alleged by our Adversaries, which, because they run rather
in the plural number with vos, you, arguing a democracie or aristocracie in
the Church, then with te, thee, implying a Monarchy, (which to maintain the
Jesuits bend all their forces) and for that they are to be understood
primarily, totally, and absolutely of the Apostles, secondarily, partially, and
conditionally only of other pastors, as John 16. The spirit of truth shall
lead you into all truth, and Luke 10. He which hears you, hears me,
therefore the weight and load is laid upon such particular promises, as our
Savior is thought to have made unto Peter in the Gospells. Where, to omit that
of our Savior to Peter, Luke 22. 32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not for which, the Cardinal cannot produce one ancient father (Popes
excepted) to prove that our Savior intended therein any special benefit to
Peter's Successors, save only to his personal faith; as also that which he
spoke unto him, John. 21. 15*. Feed my Sheep, which of a precept, they would
willingly change into a promise, contrary to the rules of Grammar or Logic,
as if Saint Peter had made Popes of the inferior pastors of the Church and
their Successors, when he bad them in like manner, Feed the flock of Christ,
forasmuch as Christ's word is the same in his own mouth, and in the mouths of
his Apostles. The maine foundation whereon at length they pitch, is that of our
Saviors to Saint Peter, Matthew. 16. 18. And I say unto thee, that thou art
Peter; and upon this rock will I build my Church and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. In which words, they let not a tittle fall to the
ground without admiration. Our Savior (say they) speaks not as at other times,
Simon thou son of Jonas, this was his vulgar style, he brought with him from
home, and it was of his fathers bequeathing; nor as otherwhile he did by the
surname imposed by himself pronouncing it barely without an Emphasis, only
Peter and no more; but making as it were a preface to some new dignity which
he purposed to bestow upon him, I say unto thee, thou art Peter, as who would
say, thou art a rock, and upon thee, that rock I will build my Church. To give
more color to this interpretation, they will us to take notice how our Savior
spoke not in the Greek, but in the Syriack language, in which Cephas, the name
of Peter, is the same in termination, sound and sense, that Peter is, implying
both of them a rock. This is a fair gloss if they were Masters of Languages,
and had commission to set forth new Calepines. But first, how chance that the
Apostles which were better seen in the Syriacke Tongue (it being their
natural dialect) than you can be, understood not this elegancie, but did
afterward quarrel about precedence, not knowing that their Master had before
past his promise thereof unto Saint Peter. How comes it that the Fathers picked
not out your sense, who lived nearer the times of the Apostles, as S. Austen,
Chrisostom, Hilarie, Basil, Ambrose and others, by this rock, understood not
Peter, but either his confession, or Christ whom he confessed, seeing this
knowledge of the Church, how by Scripture it is built upon Peter, was as
behoofull for them as for us. But secondly, what if our Savior foreseeing that
this Rock would be lapis offendiculi a stone of offense (and that some
supposing Peter to be it, would at the sight thereof, no less then at Gorgons
head; be stupefied and turned into stones) has in the Greek edition of Saint
Matthewes Gospel (which themselves deny not to be authentical) distinguished
between the one and the other by a threefold Gramatical difference? then we
cannot without contempt offered to Grammarians admit it, or at least the sirrop
of blind obedience, swallow it down. Now our Savior says not, (...) thou art
Peter and upon thee Peter, or (...) thou art a rock and upon thee, that rock I
will build my Church, but with a triple mutation and alteration in the
construction, first of the Person, thou Peter in the second, and that rock, in
the third; secondly of the gender (...) the masculine and (...) the feminine;
thirdly of the sense (...) which by the judgment of the most judicious
Grecians signifies usually but a single stone and (...) which implies a Rock;
so that as our Savior in another place tells us, that God can of stones raise
up children unto Abraham, in like manner he does now by a nominall
Metamorphosis convert a Son of Abraham into a stone, and a stone of his
building too, yet he does not by this Charter so enlarge his shoulders, as to
serve for a rock, whereon to support his whole building. Say farther he did
make him a (...) a deriuatiue or denominatiue from that rock, and so (as the
Fathers sometimes used the word) by a Metonymie term him a ministerial rock,
by which he built his Church, yet did he not by this make him the principal
rock, on which he built it. Grant again, that he was taught, that amongst the
ministerial rocks, he should be Petra primaria, a prime rock, yet was he not
made Petra solitaria, the only rock. In a word he might be admonished by this
name, to be Petra deuotione, a rock for devotion and zeal in adhering, and
yet not promised to be petra virtute, a rock for virtue in sustayning. So
that to conclude, there may be (as you see) in many things a likeness between
petrus and petra, this rock and that stone, yet not so much, as that a
reasonable lapidarie may not distinguish them.

SECT. VI. The objection drawn from the question, how we may know the
authority, sense, purity and perfection of the Scriptures, handled and
resolved.
THe last form of argumentation which they use, is drawn from the dependancy,
which (they say) the Scriptures have upon the Church, though not absolutely in
themselves, yet in respect of us and our discerning of them. Whence they thus
argue; if the testimony of the Church be not infallible, how shall we be
resolved in these three interrogatiues.

The first is touching the Scriptures authority, whether they be the undoubted
Word of God, or no?

The second touching their interpretation, what their sense and meaning is?

The third concerning their purity and perfection, whether they be perfect and
entire, or maimed and corrupted?

To prepare the way for the resolving of these questions; we are to note, that
as to the right apprehension of an object by the sense, so to the due
comprehension of the Scriptures by the soul, three things are ordinarily
required. Viz. 1. First, that the Scriptures be an object capable to be
apprehended and discerned. 2. Secondly, that there be organs and faculties, as
those of the body, so these of the soul, fitly disposed and qualified to
receive and discern that object. 3. Thirdly, that there be a medium, that is,
a middle instrument, or means, to convey, present, and unite the object to the
organ.


1. For the first, we agree, that to the end, the 1. Object.
Scriptures should be an object capable to be seen and discerned, it is
requisite, that they should be endowed with such remarkable properties and
notes, as may distinguish them from other writings. For we take not to task to
teach unreasonable creatures as did Saint Francis, neither do we dream of
fanaticall inspirations, imagining that God reueales things unto us over and
besides the Word, but we inuit you to look upon the marks and characters of
the Word, and we say as Philip did to Nathaniel, Ioh. 1. Come and see. Now
these properties, notes, and Characters, by which the Word of God becomes an
object, distinct and capable to be known by us, are Either 1. Outwardly
accompanying it, as antiquity, miracles, fulfilling of prophesies, testimonies
of Martyrs, and the like, which do only procure attention, and prepare men to
believe probably, and with less difficulty. 2. Inwardly imprinted in it, as
first, the divine and spiritual matters therein contained, surpassing all
humane wisdom, being things which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man. Secondly, The form of the style,
void of affectation, yet transcending in quickness, majesty, and fullness,
the Master-peeces of the most polite and elaborat Orators. Thirdly, The sweet
harmony and consent of parts with parts. Lastly, The efficacy and virtue which
it has to produce the love of God and our Enemies, to procure the peace of our
Consciences, to alienate a man from the delights of the Flesh and the World, to
make him rejoice in afflictions, to triumph over Death, all which do
necessarily conclude the divine authority of the Scriptures, seeing nature it
self is thereby vanquished, and a strong man cannot be bound, but by a stronger
than himself.


2. For the second, we agree, that seeing we are 2. Organ and Faculties.
not able to discern the Scriptures, by any natural habit or inbred quality
of our own, For the natural man (as the Apostle speaks) receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, because they are foolishness unto him, neither
can he know them, for that they are spiritually discerned, 1. Cor. 2. that
therefore we are enabled thereunto by faith, and by the inward enlightening and
persuasion of Gods Spirit. But I need not insist upon a point, which
Bellarmine himself labors so to prove in his 6. lib. de Great. and lib. Arbit.
cap. 1. 2. and is confirmed by the Tridentine Council in the 6. Sess. and 3.
Can.

3. For the third, which is the medium; we are 3. Medium.
not of Democritus opinion, who thought, that if the air (which conueyes the
beams of the Stars unto us) were away, one should be able to spy a pismire
in heaven, but rather with Aristotle, we think we should then see nothing,
according to that axiom in philosophy, In vacuo and per vacuum nulla fit
visio; we conseut therefore, that God has appointed an ordinary means to
convey and present such celestial objects as the Word of God, to our view, and
this ordinary means we say is the Church; to which we willingly attribute
these two ordinary uses in that employment. Viz. 1. First, of a witness,
testifying the authority and sense of the Scriptures unto us, wherein for the
effect, the papist and we differ but this, that we say it produces a faith
no more than humane; they, less than divine. 2. Secondly, of Gods instrument,
by whose ministry in preaching and expounding the Scriptures, the holy Ghost
begets a divine Faith and other spiritual graces within us.


So that the question between us, is not whether Stat. quaest.
we are to exclude the ordinary ministry of the Church testifying and
propounding the Scriptures unto us, for this, we do not: Nor on the other
side, Whether the authority of the Church, be a sufficient argument of it
self, to produce a divine assent unto the same, for this the learneder sort of
them (as anon you shall hear) will not affirm; But this, Whether to the end
that we may by the assistance of Gods Spirit, and those inward notes and
properties found in the Scriptures, discern the Word propounded by the Church
unto us, to be the Word of God, infallibility be a requisite condition in the
Propounder? As if in playner terms one should say, whether to the end, that I
may by the visage, gesture, and garments discern my friend approaching toward
me, to be such an one, it be needful that the air which conueyes those
forms to my eye, be never and at no time capable by reason of mists or other
accidents, to represent false and deceitful forms? Or this, whether to the
end, that a Goldsmiths may by his touchstone discern a piece of gold
delivered him, to be good and current, it be required, that the parties
credit which sells it him should be unquestionable? This is that which in
effect they affirm, and this we deny.

To resolve therefore the difficulty; We grant, Resolut.
that where the Propounder is the principal, final, and only cause, for
whose sake we believe a thing, there, if the Propounder be liable to error and
deceit, a firm and undoubted belief of such a thing cannot be had. As for
example, if one only Trauailer have been in the Indies, and brings relation
by word of mouth, touching the commodities of the Country, and of the
privilege of traffic which the King thereof tenders to our countrymen, in
this case, if the Relators credit be suspicious, it were dangerous to build
upon his report, because here he is the principal and only cause, upon whose
sole affirmation we can finally rest. In like manner, if two persons only be
present at the death of a friend, and depose, that in this or that manner he
bestowed legacies: in this case, if they be of doubtful repute, it will be
hard to determine positiuely, what is the truth, because that here they are the
principal and only witnesses, and there are no other authentike proofs
whereby their depositions may be examined. But where the Propounder is only
the instrument, by whose means, we are brought to see proofs of an higher
nature, and by whose ministry, arguments of greater importance do display
themselves; (as if the Trauailer shall bring letters of Credence, under the
Hand and Seal of the Prince confirming his Relation, or if the persons present
at the death of their friend, shall, besides their own testimony, produce a
formal will, subscribed by the hands of lawful witnesses, and strengthened by
an authentike seal) here the possibility of erring in the Propounder, takes
not away the certainty of the things propounded by him, because, in this case,
the same may be supplied by other more sufficient demonstrations, upon which,
as the principal causes of our belief, we may finally rest. Now to apply
this to the Church. I say, that if the Church were the principal or only
Cause, for whose authority, our faith does finally assent to the mysteries
propounded by her, then and upon this supposition, it were to be acknowledged,
that if the Church might err, and that her testimony were not infallible, the
assured truth of things, so assented unto could not be attained by us. But we
say, that in working an undoubted assent unto the mysteries propounded and
delivered unto us, the Church, though it be one cause, to wit, an inductiue or
preparatiue, Sed non propterea vltima fidei nostrae ratio and suprema causa
haee vox and determinatio Ecclesiae est. Quia tota haec vox, tota haec
determinatio, vna tantum causa fidei nostrae est, eaque minus principalis.
Stapleton. triplic. aduersus Whitak. cap. 16.
yet is it not the only, no nor the principal or final upon which we lastly
depend. The principal and final causes, for whose sake we firmly believe
those truths which the Church propounds unto us touching the Scriptures, are
two. The one the Word of God it self with the properties, notes, and
characters (above mentioned) imprinted in the letter thereof, which serve as
the handwriting and Deed of the great Maker, produced by the Church in
confirmation of what she vtters. The other, the inward testimony of Gods
Spirit, enlightening the eyes of our understanding to discern the Scriptures,
by those notes, and persuading us what we discern, steadfastly to believe,
serving as a seal which confirms to the consciences of the Elect, the Deed to
be lawful and authentike.

The former (which is the Word it self and the notes thereof) cannot be
denied by an ingenious Papist to be there found; for howsoever some of them,
by a just judgment of God for being injurious to the Scriptures, in branding
them with obscurity, imperfection, etc. have been so blinded by the Prince of
darkness, that (setting aside the judgment of the Church) no reason to them
has appeared, wherefore Aesops Fables should not as well as the Scriptures
themselves be thought Canonical, yet others, as Bellar. lib. 1. de verbo Dei,
c. 2. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. Gretserus tract. de agnoscendis
Scripturis Canonicis, cap. 4.
Bellarmine, Greg. de Valentia, Gretser, etc. do acknowledge these
distinguishing notes to be in their kind argumentatiue, and to shine in them,
as the excellency of the Doctrine, concord, efficacy, and the like, whereby
may be verified of the whole Book of God, what the Officers sent by the
Pharisees and Priests, said of our Savior, Ioh. 7. Never man spoke like this
man.

Nor is the later (which is the inward testimony of the Spirit) denied by the
learneder sort of Papists to possess another chief place in the discovery of
the Scriptures. For although in popular air they seem to vent the contrary,
yet when they are called to give a more sober account in writing, they utter
the same in effect which we do. Staplet. lib. 5 de authoritate Script. c. 12..
11. Vt denique intelligas Ecclesia^ quidem ratione sui ministerij and
magisterij a Deo accepti, facere vt credamus, formalem tamen rationem, non esse
cur credamus, sed Deum intus loquentem, suoque diuino spiritu omnem nobis
veritate^ intus testificantem. Staplet, ibid.. 12. In hoc quidem judicio
acquiescit fidelis animus, sed no^ per hoc iudicium, sed per internam diuini
Spiritus gratiam. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 1.. 7.
The Church (says Stapleton) by reason of her ministry and mastership
received of God, does make us to believe, but yet the formal reason wherefore
we believe, is not the Church, but God speaking within us. Again, The mind of
a faithful believer (says he) does rest in the judgment, but not by the
judgment of the Church, but by the inward grace of the holy Spirit. So
Gregory de Valentia; The infallible proposition of the Church (says he) is as
obscure to us, as any other article of faith whatsoever, alleging out of
Canus, That if a man should ask wherefore he believes the Trinity, he should
answer incommodiously, in saying, because the Church does infallibly propose
it. And Canus Can. loc. lib. 2. c. 7. etc. 8. Vltima fidei resolutio, non fit
in Ecclesiae testimonium, sed in causam interiorem efficientem, hoc est, in
Deum intus monentem ad credendum.
gives the reason, Because the last resolution of faith (says he) is not into
the testimony of the Church, but into a more inward efficient cause, that is,
into God inwardly moving us to believe. Becan, Theol. Scholast. part. 2. tom.
poster. tract. 1. c. 8. q. 8.
If therefore (adds Becanus) you be asked, wherefore you believe, that God
revealed such a thing, and you answer, that you believe it for the authority
of the Church; it is not the assent of a theological faith, but of some other
faith of an inferior rank. Many more testimonies might be added, it being a
firm position amongst the Schoolmen, that principles of faith, such as the
Scriptures are, cannot be believed (as they ought to be) but by infused
faith. But I will conclude where: I began, with our Countriman Stapleton,
because he lays down the very fundamental reason upon which this Doctrine is
grounded. Staplet. lib. 8 princip. c. 20. Fides eadem est in reliqua tota
Ecclesia, quae est in Prophetis, Apostolis, etc.
There is the same faith (says he) in the rest of the whole Church, which is
in the Prophets, Apostles, and all those who are immediately taught of God.
They have one and the same formal reason of their act of believing. But the
faith of the Apostles and Prophets which was by immediate revelation, was
lastly resolved into God alone the Reuealer, and did end and rest upon him
only, as the supreme and last cause of believing, therefore the faith of the
rest of the whole Church, has the same formal object.

These foundations being laid, it shall not be hard to shape distinct answers
to the several questions above propounded. To the first, if the testimony of
the Church be not infallible, how shall we undoubtedly know the Scriptures
to be the Word of God?

I answer, that we may know them to be so, partly, by the light of the Word,
that is, the divine notes and characters therein imprinted, and partly by the
enlightening and persuading grace of Gods Spirit, enabling us to see, and moving
us to believe what we see.

Now on the contrary, I demand of them; (If one cannot be assured of the
certainty of the Scriptures propounded by the Church, unless the proposition
of the Church be infallible) how the lay Papists in this Land do know any
article of faith to be infallibly true, considering that few or none of them
ever heard the voice of that Church, which they suppose to be infallible;
(that Church being according to their supposition, either the Pope in his
chair, or a General Council) but are engaged altogether to the reports of
particular Priests and Jesuits, whom none will exempt from being subject to
error and deceit.

2. To the second question, if the exposition of the Church be not infallible,
how do we know the sense and meaning of the Scriptures?

I answer, that although all places of the Scripture are not alike
perspicuous, as all are not alike necessary to salvation, yet for the opening
of the sense thereof, so far as is behoofefull for his Church, God is the
best Interpreter of his own meaning, expounding outwardly one place of the
Word by another, and inwardly both opening ones eyes to discern, and enclining
ones heart to assent unto the truth. As for those which cannot see but with the
Popes spectacles, and pretend the Scriptures to be every where throughout so
ouershadowed with a mist, that nothing presents it self clearly to their view,
I wonder the less at them, because their blindness is such, that they cannot
see to serve God, without burning Tapers and lighted Candles at noone day.

Now, on the other side I demand of them, if one cannot know the certain
meaning and sense of the Scriptures, unless the exposition of the Church be
infallible.

1. Wherefore has not the Church of Rome all this while published a set
interpretation upon any one book of the Bible, considering, that they say, it
is so necessary, and that the Popes Commentaries upon it, have for so many
Marts been expected?

2. How a man which cannot discern the sense of the Scriptures in plain
places, shall be able to shun the process in infinitum, and not run his wits
out of breath, considering that according to the Papists themselves, the voice
of the Church uttered in former Decrees, requires the exposition of the present
Church, meaning the Pope, and that the Churches Canons are inuol'd with no
less, if not more perplexeties than the Scriptures? I could instance in
ancient Counsels, as the Nicen, and ask whether the sixth Canon, wherein
these words be, Quoniam talis est Episcopo Romano consuetudo, are to be
understood, according to the opinion of Ruffinus, or Balsamon, or Caranza, or
Bellarmine, which four are recounted by Bellarmine lib, 2. de Romans Pont. c.
13. But because I desire to confine my self to that which is pure Roman, let us
cast the water of the Tridentine Synagogue, and see whether that runs so
clear as they pretend. I ask therefore, first, touching the Canonical
books, the number and names whereof the Fathers therein assembled, were so
careful to set down, Sess. 4. whether that which we call the Apocrypha.
Esther, be there canonized, as Bellarmine affirms, lib. 1. de verbo Dei c. 7.
or whether that book and those which are called additaments, be there
excluded from the Canon, as Sixtus Senensis in lib. 1. and 8. biblioth. sanct.
does avouch? Secondly, for the intention required by the Council in him which
administers the Sacrament, Sess. 7. I ask, whether the words of the Council,
be to be understood according to Catharinus opinion, in opusc. or Bellarmines
lib. 1. de Sacram. in Genesis c. 27. Thirdly, I ask how it comes to pass, that
Priscian and our old Grammarians will not serve to construe the text of the
Council (if the Roman Church can endite with so perspicuous a style) but that
Sess. 7. Can. 8. Opus operatum, must, contrary to the Grammar rules (as
Bellarmine confesses, lib. 2. de Sacram. c. 1.) be understood passiuely. And
that in the sixth Sess. cap. 5. de iustif. it is said, Neque homo ipse nihil
omnino agat, wherein Vid. hist. Council. Trident. lib. 2.
contrary to Grammar, are two negatiues expressed, which cannot be resolved
into an affirmative. Fourthly, if the interpretations of the Church are so
facile and easy, whether was the Council of Trents meaning concerning
Original sin and Justification, the same that Vide, Dominici a Soto, de
Natura and Gratia libros tres, ad sanctu^ Concilium Tridentinum. Item,
Apologiam Dom. a Soto, qua Ambrosio Catharino de Certitudine gratiae respondet.
Item, Expurgationem Ambros. Catharini, aduersus Apologiam Domin. a Soto.
Denique, confirmationem defensionis Catholicorum pro possibili certitudine
gratiae, Amb. Catharini ad Dominicum Soto.
Dominicus a Soto affirms it to be, or that which Ambrosius Catharinus
attributes unto it, seeing both were present at the drawing of the Canons, both
presented books for proof of their opinions to the Council (which are now
extant) and the Hist. Council. Trident. lib. 2.
Council it self being appealed unto, could not decide the Controversy, nor
agree what was her own meaning therein.

To the third question, if the tradition of the Church be not infallible, how
shall we know, whether the Scriptures be perfect and entire, or maimed and
corrupted? I answer, that there is a double perfection of the Scriptures, the
one of integrall parts, which appertains to the perfection of each book,
Chapter, and verse in particular, the other of essential parts, which pertain
to the perfection of saving knowledge. If the question be of the integrall
purity and perfection, how I know, that there be copies of the Scriptures in
the world, by judicious comparing whereof, light may be given to correct all
manifest errors and defects crept into the Text, whether by negligence or
ignorance of the transcribers or otherwise, I answer, that I am assured
thereof, by the promises of God in general to establish a perpetuity of
saving knowledge and true belief in his Church, and consequently, by that
firm foundation of his providence, which appointing the end, to wit eternal
life, will never suffer the means conducting thereunto, either to perish, or
being disparaged by corruptions, to become fruitless. Neither does Greg. de
Valent. in Tho. tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 1. p. 7.. 41.. Respondeo ad hoc
argumentum. and. 43.. Ad primumigitur.
Greg de Valentia run for farther proofs to secure the Popes legitimacie, and
salve the danger to which the Latin vulgar edition of the Bible is liable by
often impressions, then this providence of God. But if the question be of the
essential purity and perfection of the Scriptures, how one may be assured,
that so much as contaynes points necesarie to salvation, is preserved perfect
and entire in them; I answer, that to resolve ones self herein, he has
(besides the general promises of God, and his never failing providence) an
experimental knowledge, also springing from that amplitude of comfort and
consolation, which Gods Spirit effects by the Scriptures in the hearts and
consciences of true believers. For such is the union and coherence of points
necessary to salvation on with the other, that one works not his proper
effect, where the other is not, at least in some reasonable and convenient
measure known and believed.

Now on the contrary, I demand of them, (if we cannot be assured of the
purity and perfection of the Scriptures, unless the Tradition of the Church
concerning it, be infallible) how a man can ever be resolved thereof from the
Church of Rome?

Which, first could neither heretofore preserve her Latin vulgar editions of
the Bible, (which she preferres before the original) from manifest
Corruptions, as may appear by the corrections of Origin and Hierom, Sixtus
Senensis. Bibliot. lib. 8. page penult. De erroribus vero quos Hieronimus in
veteri translatione annotauit, and recentiores in hac noua editione pariter
annotarunt, ingenue fatemur and nos multos errores ab Hieronimo emendatos, in
veteri traductione, and similiter in hac nostra noua editione nonnullas
inueniri mendas, solaecismos, barbarismos, hyperbata, and multa parum
accomodate versa, and minus Latin expressa, obscure and ambigue interpretata,
itemque nonnulla superaddita, aliqua omissa, quaedam transposita, immutata, ac
vitio Scriptorum deprauata, quae Sanctis Pagninus, Th. Caietanus, Franciscus
Forerius, and Hieronimus Oleastrius, viri ex Dominicano ordine eruditissimi
interpretationibus and explanationibus suis indi carunt.
nor at this day has been able to Canonize any edition, without permitting
faults, solecismes, Barbarismes, Misinterpretations, Ambiguities, Additions,
Substractions, Transpositions, Immutations, Deprauations and the like, which
are confessed by Pagnine, Caietan, Forerius, Oleaster, Sixtus Senensis, Bellarm.
lib. 2. de Verbo Dei. cap. 2.. Dices si ita est.
Bellarmine and others, to be found in their newest and most approved Bibles.

Secondly, which disparageth the Churches fidelity and care, teaching that it
has lost many books of the Old Testament, of which Becan theol. scholast.
tom. post. part. 2. tract. 1. q. 7.
Becanus reckons up particularly no fewer then 18. theol. scholast. part. 2.

Thirdly, which actually has lost many articles of faith, heretofore defined
and declared by it, as Valent. in Thom. tom 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7.. 12.
Postremo multae in Ecclesia varijs temporibus definitae ac declaratae sunt
senten. tiae, fidei, de quibus non ex. tet vsque adeo expressa traditio.
Valentia grants, Tom. 3. in Thom. disp. 1.

All arguing her to be an incompetent Mistress of other men's purses, which has
been so negligent a guardian of her own.

So then let us cast up the reckoning, and see what small advantage the Papists
have of us in these questions of the Scripture: We run on thus far
together, that to a distinct resolution of them, there is required the
testimony of the word speaking outwardly to our ears, the testimony of the
spirit speaking inwardly to our hearts, and the testimony of the Church
preparing the way by her message for the other two. The combat stands chiefly
in this, that they believe the message, because they think the Messenger
cannot lie, we believe the message not because we think the Messenger cannot
lie, but because he which sent him speaks the same by his deed and seal; nay
farther, comes in person along with him, and by a double affirmation, the one
of his word, the other of his spirit, confirms the Messengers saying in this
particular to be true; so that in fine, their lusty brags obtain but this
issue, that we believe the man for the masters sake, they believe the master
for the man's sake.

SECT. VII. The new sleights and devices, which the Jesuits use in enforcing
these arguments touching the Church and the Scriptures.
But see, what the Lions paws can effect, they think to compass by the Foxes
wiles, and therefore they have instilled a method of disputing into the common
people, which howsoever it will not hold water in the schools, yet because it
happily passes the throng in the streets, it shall not be amiss to discover
some tricks and devices of theirs in this kind, that you may see how they
detain the truth in injustice (as the Apostle speaks) and that the penury to
which they are driven, is such, that now their chiefest war is but defensive.

The first trick of theirs is, to teach the people to require us to prove and
show by evident demonstration, the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and that
to those which believe them not. As if one should say; Imagine that I gave no
credit to the Scriptures, how will you (which depend not finally upon the
authority of the Church) make it appear by evident conuincing proofs and
reasons unto me, that they are the Word of God? I could retort, and how will
you convince me by the authority of the Church that they are the Word of God,
if first I believe them not to be so; considering that your own Divines, Bell.
lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 3. Dicimus ergo notas Ecclesiae quas adferemus, non
facere euidentiam veritatis simphciter -- apud eos autem qui admittunt
Scripturas diuinas etc: faciunt etiam euidentiam veritatis. Tametsi enim
articularum fidei veritas non potest nobis esse euidens absolute tamen potest
esse euidens ex hypothesi, id est, supposita veritate Scrip turarum.
Bellarmine by name lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 3. confess, that one cannot
evidently demonstrate the true Church by any notes, to be the true one, but to
such an one as first believes and receives the Scriptures, because the notes of
the Church are from thence to be taken and deduced. But by this question you
may perceive, that Popery is a disease working upon corrupt humors, and
cannot domineere, but there, where the flesh and humane reason wear the
breeches. First they require one to prove that by such evidence as it is not
capable of. For principles of faith (such as the Scriptures are) are
apprehended by faith, and this faith, howsoever it brings with it certainty,
yet it does not clearness, Whether you reflect upon the matter, which are
things not seen, Heb. 11. or the manner, it being through a glass, darkely.
1. Cor. 13. Again, that certainty being inward, it serves but for the
satisfying of ones self, not for the conviction of others. Secondly they bid
us prove it to one, who by Aristotle's Aristot. 1. Eth. cap. 3.
rule, in a like case, should be excluded from being partaker of so high
mysteries, in that he is not idoneus auditor, that is, one that by reason of
unbelief is not capable of the right and proper proofs, which is as much, as
if one should dispute of colors with a blind man. Against which fopperies,
Thomas Aquinas lays down two remarkable propositions. 1. part. q. ^. art. 8.
The one, that Divinity is not argumentatiue, to prove her principles, but
only to prove her conclusions. The other, that against one which absolutely
denies her principles, and namely the Scriptures, one cannot proceed probando,
but soluendo, that is, not by proving the truth thereof, but by dissoluing the
reasons brought to the contrary.

Their second device is, to question us not only how we prove the Scriptures
in general to be the Word of God, but also in special, how we know the
Gospel of Saint Matthew to be the Gospel of Saint Matthew? how we are
assured of the sense and interpretation of such a particular verse? how we
rest satisfied that this or that syllable is correctly imprinted, or that happily
not understanding Hebrew and Greek, one may be confident that our translation
accords throughout with the original? This form of questioning might indeed
carry some credit with it, if we either dreamed of a perfection of knowledge
in this life, or conceived a paritie of gifts in all men for the discerning of
this Word, or an equality of necessity in the things therein contained. But
forasmuch as we acknowledge neither perfection nor paritie of gifts to be found
here, nor lastly an equality of necessity in the things; to require a
distinct answer to all such questions from all men, is most unjust, and
altogether besides the purpose. For as touching perfection, we confess with
the Apostle, that we know but in part, and prophecy but in part, 1. Cor. 13.
9. And as for equality, as we ascribe not that degree of judgment to any one
member which we do to the whole Church, so we make the skill of discerning to
differ in the members, and that in a threefold respect.

1. First, in respect of the grace of God enlightening us, which is given unto
every one, not equally, but according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Ephesians. 4. 7.

2. Secondly, in respect of the means wherewith the holy Ghost cooperates,
which are hearing of the Word of God preached, meditation, study, skill of
tongues and the like, which are diverse in all. For we rely not (as I said
before) upon special and immediate revelations, as the Prophets and Apostles
did, but on the grace of God concurring with our meditations, and the use of
the public means.

3. Thirdly, in respect of the matters contained in the Scriptures, whereof all
display not themselves alike, being not all equally and alike necessary to
salvation, some imposing an absolute necessity of belief, others only a
conditional, that is, a preparation of mind to give fuller credence, when it
shall please God farther to enlighten one; as in the question of the authority
of the Scriptures, the knowing of the Instrument or Penman, whether it be
Saint Matthew or Saint Paul, is not simply so requisite, as to know the
principal Author which is God, nor to determine punctually of the words so
oblieging, as to believe the sense; nor again of the sense of some places and
texts as of other; all are to strive unto perfection, but as the difference is
in the gifts of art, grace, and nature, so shall the difference be in the
measure of the knowledge of all or some.

The third trick and sleight of theirs, which they put upon the people in this
kind, is, that bidding them to urge us to prove the Scriptures to be the Word
of God, or that they are clear and easy in points necessary to salvation,
and knowing that the chief proofs upon which we rest, are embowelled in the
very body of the Text itself; first, they forbid the lay people to read the
Scriptures, unless they obtain special license from the Bishop or Inquisitor
to do it; as appears by the fourth rule of prohibited books, which is at the
end of the Tridentine Council. And the granting of these licenses, is now
again taken away by Clement the eighth as may be seen in his Index of
prohibited books, printed at Paris by Laurentius Sonius, and cited also by
Iustinianus a Priest of the Congregation of the Oratorie, lib. 1. de Scriptura,
cap. 9. Secondly, because they know that some people will be itching
(notwithstanding this prohibition) to look into the Scriptures, and to see
whether matters be so as we affirm them to be, therefore they cry down
our Bibles, and present a Bible of their own translation, which (to argue the
obscurity of the Scriptures) they patch up with such gallimaufrie and
inke-horne terms, that an ordinary man may be confounded with the
strangeness of the words. As in the old Testament published by the College of
Doway; in stead of Foreskin, they put Prepuce; Genesis 17. for Passover, Phase;
for unleavened bread, Azims, Exodus 12. for high places, Excelses, 2. King. 15.
for the holy of holiest, Sancta Sanctorum, 1. Chr. 6. Nor are they less
ridiculous in the new Testament, set forth by the College of Rhemes, where you
have these English words piping hot out of the Popes mint, Depositum,
Exinanited, Parasceue, Didragmes, Neophyte, Gratis, with the spirituals of
wickedness in the Celestials, and many more, laboring by what means they can
(as our learned Fulke shows in his Preface to that Testament) to suppress the
light of Truth under one pretense or another.

Their fourth stratagem is, that after their lay disciples have given so loud a
defiance to our Cause, as may make simple standers by conceive, so great a cry
must needs carry some wool with it; (then if by chance any of the company
undertake to answer them) to fetch them off again with advantage, by making
it known aforehand unto their Pupils, that howsoever they may brag, it is
forbidden yet unto a lay man under pain of excommunication, to dispute of
matters of faith, which constitution is in the Popes own Decretals, and De
haereticis, cap. Quicunque, in 6. Inhibemus quoque ne cuiquam laicae personae
liceat public vel priuatim de fide Catholica disputare, Qui vero contra
fecerit, exco^municationis laqueo innodetur. Eman. Sa, Aphorism. voce, fides,.
3. Prohibitum laico sub excommunicationis ferenda paena, disputare de fide,
cap. 1. lib. 6. de haeret. quam prohibitionem si sciens contra faciat, peccabit
mortaliter.
Emanuel Sa has it in his Aphorisms, voce, fides. By which means, they both
bar us, after just provocation, to inform and satisfy their adherents, and
with all cherish presumption in their followers, as not being silenced by the
weakness of their cause, but by the command of their Superiors.

Their fifth device is, that if notwithstanding the prohibition to dispute,
above mentioned, some of their lay Auditors should be so hardy as to venture a
skirmish, then to divert them from reasoning out of the Scriptures, least the
light thereof should some manner of way or other display it self, they busy
their heads with questions above their capacity, as where was our Church
before Luther, what the exposition of the Doctors in all Ages, what the
Doctrine of the Fathers, Counsels, and Schoolmen? which is the common Theme
of this Age; hoping that either a few old wives fables or fragments of
antiquity, shall serve to puff up their men with conceit of victory; where
they find not equal opponents; or where they do, yet they shall not abate
thereby any whit of their courage, as being for want of arts and languages,
unable to see the point of the weapon which is darted at them, I mean the
truth of those things which are alleged.

Their sixth device is, that if any of their laytie, notwithstanding those
prohibitions and this diuersion, will presume so far upon the indulgencie of
their ghostly Fathers, as to hazard a dispute out of the Bible, yet to do it
with advantage enough on their side, they counsel him to make no thrusts, but
to lie only upon the ward, and therein to enjoin us, to show the articles of
Faith established in our Church, in just so many words and syllables in the
Scriptures and (as if grace destroyed nature) to forbid us the benefit of
Reason or Consequences.

1. If we infer any thing by way of consequence, they tell us, that we violate
that which we have promised to the World, which is, to prove all our
Assertions out of the pure Word of God. Whereas, according to the grand
principle of Arist. lib. 1. Prior. Analyt. cap. 1.
Logic, De omni and de nullo, a truth deduced out of another truth, is
acknowledged to be contained therein; for otherwise it could not be drawn
from thence. So that to be in the Word of God, is to be the Word of God. As
Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 6.
Gregory de Valentia says, of the more distinct conceptions of any object,
that they are contained implicitly in the more general, as particulars are in
vniuersalls. And therefore Bellar. lib. 3. de Iustif. cap. 8. Non potest
aliquid certum esse certitudine fidei, nisi aut immediate contineatur in verbo
Dei, aut ex verbo Dei per euidentem consequentiam deducatur.
Bellarmine speaking of matters of faith, makes those things as well to be
known by certainty of faith, which are deduced by necessary consequences
from the Scriptures, as those which are immediately contained therein.

2. If we deduce an article from premises, whereof any one proposition is not
in the Bible, (though otherwise it be a principle of nature) as for example,
that a body cannot be in two places at the same time, they ask how such a
Conclusion can be of faith, or how we can auerre that our articles of faith
are proved out of the pure Word of God, Bellar. lib. 3. de Eccles. c. 15. Quod
vt melius intelligatur, notandum est, omnem sententiam de fide nasci vel ex
duabus propositionibus de fide, and tunc totam co^clusionem ineuidentem esse,
vel ex vna de fide, altera euidenti, etc. Talis est ista conclusio, Isti
homines qui nunc profitentur fidem sub Romans Pont. sunt Ecclesia Christi.
considering that a Conclusion takes his efficacy not from one, but from both
the premises? Which argument concludes our Adversaries as much (if not more)
then it does us. For the maynest principle of their to wit, That those which
profess the faith under the Bishop of Rome, are the Church of Christ, cannot
be deduced by Bellarmines logic, but search made in the Court Rolls of Nature,
and by borrowing an Evidence from thence to supply the place of one of the
premises. But to speak more punctually, we say, that those principles of
Nature which we employ in this kind, are also vertually included in the
Scriptures, though not expressly. As he that faith, Socrates is a man, faith
also by consequence that Socrates is a substance, that he is a living creature
and that he is reasonable, because Man contaynes all these things in his
nature. So the Scripture saying that Christ has a body, says by consequence,
that according to his humane condition, he is finite, and being finite has a
limited and bounded existencie, and therefore cannot be in many places at the
same instant. For art in this, is grounded upon nature, and in nature the
immediate cause implies the effect, the species the genus, the subject the
properties, the whole the parts, and one contrary remooues the other, so that
these Maxims of Philosophy are but dilated verities, being before
contractedly contained in the Letter, and add not any thing to the Scriptures
fullness, but only are displayed by the understanding faculty, as the species
and forms of an object are by a perspectiue glass multiplied and made more
visible.

3. If we press them with the force and necessity of our consequence, they
bid them, demand of us, whether we cannot err in the deducing of a
Consequence? if we say we cannot, then to tell us that we oppugn a doctrine of
our own, which determines that the Church may err; and if we say we may,
then they will them to ask us, how we can build an article of faith upon a
Consequence which by our own confession is fallible. To which we say, first,
that a posse ad esse non valet argumentum, from a possibility of erring, to an
actual erring, an argument will not follow. Again, the necessity of a
Consequence depends not upon the person of him which deduceth it, but upon the
intrinsecall union and real affinity between the terms of the Antecedent
and Consequent. But lastly, because they press us, to show, how we can assure
our selves that in this or that particular Consequence we do not err,
considering that there is no subject wherein we do not acknowledge, that we may
err. Let me ask them again, how any of them can assure themselves that they
know the meaning of the Church in any one article of faith, considering that
there is none of them in particular (the Pope in his chair excepted) which may
not (by their own Tenets) mistake a word, or misse-conceiue the Churches
meaning. Sure if this reason were of force, we should for the same Cause take
away all certainty of knowledge which comes by the sense, which was the error
of the Academikes and Pirrhonians. For what sense is there which at sometimes
by reason of the Medium, Organ, or Object, is not liable to err and be
deceived? But as Nature, which (Philosophers say) is not defective in things
necessary, has for the remedying of these inconveniences endowed man with
reason, common notions and principles, whereby he is able to judge of the due
site, habitude, and disposition of things, so the God of Nature, which is also
the God of Grace, and knows the necessity of his children, gives unto them
(besides that portion of reason, common notions and principles aboue-mentioned)
the spirit also of discretion, for the spiritual man judges all things, 1.
Cor. 2. So Saint John, These things have I written unto you, concerning them
that seduce you, but the anointing which you have received of him, teaches you
all things, 1. Ioh. 2. 26.

4. If the Consequence be so evident, that they cannot for shame deny it,
then they counsel them to ask us, where the Scripture says in express
terms, that whatsoever follows by evident and necessary consequence from
her Pages, is an article of faith. Where they hope to choke us with an
equivocal acception of the word article. For an article of faith is sometimes
taken strictly, for one of those verities which so nearly touch the foundation
of faith, that a man cannot be saved unless he expressly know and believe it,
sometimes largely for any Catholic truth whatsoever. If they take it in the
former sense, they fight with their own shadows, for which of our men ever
said, that whatsoever follows from the Scriptures by evident and necessary
consequence, is in such manner and sense an article of faith. But if they take
it in the latter sense, we need not run far for Texts to prove that such
consequences are articles of faith, and require (according to the nature of the
subject and evidence of the deduction) a belief, either explicit, or implicit
of them, because that conclusions, as I showed before, lie hid in their
principles, as a kernel in the shell, and that consequences are materially in
their premises, and being in them, are to be esteemed part of them, and
therefore he which is bound to an absolute belief of the one, is bound also,
at least conditionally, that is, upon the appearance of the evidence of the
consequence, to believe the other.

5. If we dispute syllogistically, they bid them tell us, that not the
Scriptures, but Aristotle prescribes rules for syllogismes, and that Aristotle's
rules cannot bind the faith. As though syllogisticke forms were principal
causes of the truth of things, and not only instruments, whereby the Truth
which was before, and might otherwise by natural Logic and the strength of
the common apprehension be perceived, is made somewhat the more easy and
apparent. For many Conclusions follow necessarily in regard of the matter,
which are vicious in regard of the form. Galen invented a fourth figure which
others reject. And therefore we build no more upon Aristotle in matters of
faith, then an house is built upon the Carpenters Hammer, Square or Rule, which
are neither whole nor part of the building, though otherwise they conduce
thereunto as instruments.

6. If we stop their mouths, either with manifest Texts of Scripture or
pregnant consequences, then they bid them demand of us Who shall be judge? Which
is a piece of Sophistry beyond the Devils, Matthew. 4. 6.
who being taken tardie by our Savior in missequoting places of Scripture,
forgot to ask the question: Who shall be judge? This cavil is squint-eyed, and
looks three ways at once. If we say the Holy Ghost, then they vpbraid us with
flying to private spirits, and making our selves Judges in our own cause. If
we say the Scriptures, they reply, that the Scriptures are not sufficient to
execute the place, being mute and wanting a voice to declare, which (amongst
many senses) is their own; and if we say the Church, then they conceive the
victory to run on their side, and think we have granted them their
Conclusion. But what if we make neither the one nor the other sitting alone, to
be this Judge, but acknowledge a Concurrency (though not equal) in all of
them, and that Concurrency (though not to the enacting of the sentence) as it
is considered in se, in it self, yet to the publication of it, quoad nos, as
it has reference to us? What then shall become of these sequells? And so it is
indeed. For howsoever we make one supreme Judge in this high Court of Verity,
yet we do not imagine him to speak but by writing, nor that writing to be
ordinarily read and declared without an Herald. The principal Judge, we say,
is God himself, from whom proceeds the knowledge of all supernatural truths
whatsoever. The instruments, whereby he communicates them unto us, are
threefold; first, his Spirit, whereby he speaks inwardly unto us, both
enlightening us to behold, and persuading us to believe the sense and meaning of
his mysteries. Yet is not this a private spirit, because it reueales not ought
unto us besides the public writing, nor ordinarily without the ministry of
the Church. For to speak more clearly, a spirit may be termed private. Either
1. Ratione Principij, in regard of the author and efficient from whence it
comes. 2. Ratione Subiecti, in regard of the subject or person in which it
dwells. 3. Ratione Medij, in regard of the means which it uses.


Now the spirit whereby we judge of divine truths, howsoever it may be termed
private, in regard of the Subject or Person wherein it inhabites, he being
happily (as most men are) of a private condition; yet we allow it not to be
private, either in regard of the means which it uses, which are the reading
of the Scriptures, public ministry of the Church, Counsels, Fathers, etc.
or in respect of the Author and efficient thereof, which is the Holy Ghost, the
common father of light and grace, at which kind of spirit Saint Peter specially
aims, when he says, no Scripture is of private interpretation. 2. Pet. 1.

The second instrument whereby God declares his sentence, is the Scripture;
which is the only outward infallible rule whereby Controversies may be resolved
and decided, and is not to be accounted imperfect or insufficient, for this
purpose, because all men are not able to pry forth with into the meaning
thereof throughout; or for that it wants vocal organs to express, which
(amidst variety of senses attributed unto it) is his own. For it promises
not to do this, but to those who are enlightened with the spirit, and which
make right use of the public means, as the ministry of the Church, reading
of Authors, comparing of places, and the like; Logicians telling us, that an
instrument is then said to be sufficient, not when it serves for all uses and
in all manners whatsoever, but when it serves to such an end, and in such sort
applied, as the principal efficient has ordainedit; as a writing is then
sufficiently legeable, if those which have eyes and a will thereunto, can read
it, though to the blind and negligent it seem otherwise.

The third instrument whereby God publishes his decrees, is the Church, and in
it the Bishops and Pastors thereof, whether assembled in Councels, or otherwise
considered in their ordinary ministry. This holds the place of an Herald,
and howsoever it stands not in equipage with the two former, yet God has
commanded us to hear it, and promised that it shall never err in fundamental
points either totally or finally;

So that in sum the total and plenary indicature of matters of Faith,
belongs to the Holy Ghost, whereby the Judge of these things properly taken, is
he alone; the gift of his spirit, the Scriptures and the Church, are but
partial instruments of promulgation, serving only as several trunkes and
pipes, whereby his decree arriues at the ears of our understanding; yet if any
shall compare the outward instruments together, the Church and the Scriptures
and demand, by which of the two it is that the Holy Ghost speaks properly; as
he is judge of Controversies, and on which we are finally to rest for his
infallible sentence; I answer, not the Church, but the Scriptures. First in
respect of their dignity, because the Scriptures are the immediate work of
God, dictated by his Spirit; Whereas the expositions of the Church proceed not
immediately from God, but mediating the voice of the Scriptures. Secondly in
respect of their certainty, for the church is subject to error, the Scriptures
are not. Again the truth in regard of the Scriptures is fixed, and therefore
easy to be there found, she being always lodged in the same books, but in
regard of the Church it is Ambulatorie, and therefore needs more search to
discover it there, as not being entayled either to chair, place or person.
Thirdly in respect of the order and manner of knowing them, for howsoever by a
confused knowledge, the Church may be notior Scripturis, known better then
the Scriptures, andbefore them, yet according to a distinct knowledge, are the
Scriptures notiores Ecclesia, known better and sooner then the Church; for the
true Scriptures, are known by their own light, but the true Church, is not
known but by the light of the Scriptures.

The conceit, that the Church must be accompanied with infallibility, if to no
other end, yet to make a final end of Controversies upon earth, is ridiculous;
for if they suppose a final end of Controversies amongst all men, whatsoever,
first, they suppose that which shall never be whilst the Church is militant
upon earth, for the Apostle tells us, that there must be heresies. 1. Cor. 11.
Secondly, they present a means vncompetent to compass that which they
design, by naming the Church of Rome, to that office; both in that she is a
party, and has not as yet cleared her title to that dignity, and in that
infallibility in the Judge is not sufficient to compose differences in
supernatural matters, without grace in the hearer, which is no coin, that
comes out of the Popes treasury, nor hear be that grows in his Garden, but
raines from heaven where and what measure God pleases. On the other side, if
more particularly, they require an end of Controversies amongst those whom God
has elected, and that so far as is necessary for the salvation of their
souls, it is needless to attribute infallibility to the Church, for the
serving of this Cure; because to them, God supplies the infallible assurance of
his truth by means more excellent and agreeable to the nature of his
spiritual Kingdom, to wit, by his Wisdom, in furnishing them with a rule,
both able to be known by its notes and characters, and also sufficient to
decide all necessary questions that may at any time be incident; by his Grace
enabling them to see the truth and demonstrating the certainty thereof to
their consciences, and by his Providence raising up faithful Pastors in one
place or other, to prepare, open and display those verities and decisions to
the flock.

Many like cratchets to these, and answered by the same grounds, do issue
daily out of the Jesuits warehouse, as for example, if we produce one place of
Scripture to prove the meaning of another, they bid them call upon us to
allege a third place, which shall say that this place ought to be expounded
by that, as if we needed a Text to prove God no liar, or that he does not
contradict himself. If in disputing upon any subject, we go about to destroy
their Assertion, they will them to press us to show not only our
affirmatiues, as before, but also our negatiues just in so many vowells and
consonants in the Bible, as we express them; whereas not only consequences
drawn from thence are sufficient for that purpose, but also this one thing, not
to be contained in the Scriptures either directly or by consequence, is in
effect all one, as to be no article of faith. In a word, if to these and the
like mountebanke affronts, we answer them not according to their mind, they
furnish their Scholars with premeditated speeches and scoffs, to say, that
they brought us to that plunge, as to use these words, Vid. M. du Moulin.
Jesuit euasions.
that is to say, and it is so by consequence, and to say that a Coach is also a
consequence, because it follows the Horses.

This method of disputing was invented first by Methodo Veronica, cap. 7.
Gontier a French Jesuit; polisht by Veronus, sometimes one of the same Order;
practiced by Arnoldus the Confessor in most of his late bickerings; approved by
the Prelates of France assembled at Bordeaux, See the book entitled,
L'establissement de la Congregation de la Propagation de la Foy, and de
Missionnaires generaux de Prelates de France, pour conferer auec les Ministers,
and Prescher aux ports de leur Temples, etc. approuee par N. S. P. le Papa and
le Prelates de France. Par M. Francois Veron Predicateur de sa M. pourles
Contreuerses. A Lion chez Claude Armand. 1624.
An. 1621. as also at Rome and by sundry Universities; commended by the Pope,
and the Society newly erected at Rome by the Bull of Gregory the fifteenth,
for the Conversion of Heretics, entitled, The holy congregation of the
propagation of the faith; and so far admired, that this Veronus, has in
imitation of that Roman society procured letters Patents for the establishing
of a French Congregation of Missionaries, as he terms them, culled out of all
Orders and Universities, who dispersing themselves throughout the Kingdom,
shall after the Sermon ended, by this method alone so blanke the Ministers of
the Reformed side, that within four or five years he doubts not but to
convert all within that Kingdom to the Roman faith. To be short, this method
has travailed most parts of Christendom, being translated into several
languages, and (as outlandish toys cannot long want a Merchant to transport
them hither) so this has been lately taught to speak English, and applied to
the articles of our Church, as before it was to the Articles of the French
reformed; wherein such confidence is put, that Veronus vnder-takes to make a
Cobbler able thereby to put the learned Minister of France to a non plus,
though he deal so favorably with him as to allow him the Geneua Bible or what
translation else, he best likes, to boot. It seems, a Cobblers disputations
are thought good enough to beget a Colliars faith, which to effect in the
common people, is the Jesuits greatest ambition.

It needs not be doubted, but that this method may as easily, if not with
more advantage to us, be retorted upon our adversaries; and that it is no
difficult task to beat them with their own weapons. But it shall not be
amiss to observe, from these new invented shifts of the Jesuits, into what a
straight they are brought, that they dare not enter the lists, but upon most
unjust and unreasonable conditions. They bid us to demonstrate that by sensible
evidence and reason, which themselves confess cannot be rightly apprehended
without faith, which is as much as if one should bid his fellow to see with his
Nose, or smell with his Eyes. They require the meanest of our side, to prove
that which is not absolutely requisite for every man to know. They challenge us
to show, and threaten their pupils with thunderbolts if they see. In a word,
they are contented to venture a disputation, provided we forbear therein the
use of Consequences or Reason, as if Popery could no longer subsist, unless
the reasonable soul should resign her office, and men could be persuaded to
turn either beasts, madmen or fools.

And hitherto have I treated of the act of faith employed in this article, which
at the first appearing no bigger then a man's hand, grew at length, like Elias
clowd, so great that it well-nigh ouer-shadowed 2. King. 18. 44.
my whole text, and I was drenched therein, ere I could arrive at Iesrael. But
now I hope, the threatening storm is ouer-past, and the object of this faith,
the holy Catholic Church, like the City of God, discouers it self to your
view, upon whose description I purpose (God willing) to adventure, in that
which follows.

Credo Ecclesiam Sanctam Catholicam. I believe the holy Catholic Church.
The second Part.
SECT. I. The first way whereby one may know the Church to be Catholic or
Universal.
Having in the former part treated of that act of Faith, which is employed and
intimated in this present Article, the course and order of the words, lead me
unto the object of that act, the Church; whose definitions being many, and
those not a little controuersed, I shall content my self with that description
of it which is insinuated in the Creed, that it is a society of men professing
the Faith, called out of the world (for so does the word Ecclesia imply) and
qualified with two attributes or properties, Holiness and Universality.

Concerning the first of these, which is Holiness, I purpose not to insist
long upon it at this present; sufficient it is, that it is called Holy in three
respects. Viz. 1. First, in respect of the Righteousness and Holiness of
Christ imputed, which may be termed sanctitas imputata, an imputed sanctity.
2. Secondly, in respect of those degrees of sanctification, wherewith it is
endowed in this life, which may be termed sanctitas inchoata, an holiness
begun here, and consummated in the world to come. 3. Thirdly, in respect of the
rule and law by which it is directed to serve God with holiness and
righteousness, all the days of our life, which therefore may be termed
sanctitas imperata, an holiness commanded and enjoined.


The second property of the Church, is Catholic, concerning which, two things
may be deduced out of the Creed; modus essendi, the manner of its so being,
and modus cognoscendi, the manner of knowing it to be so.

Modus essendi, the manner of the Church Catholics being, cannot better be
expressed then by the word Catholic it self. For Catholic implies that the
Christian Church is no peculiar, copt and shut up within the Land of Canaan, or
the Territories of Jacob; no tenure intayled to the Heirs of Abraham according
to the flesh; or Lease expiring with the death and funeral of our Savior,
such as was the Church and Synagogue of the Jews, but general and universal,
and that in three respects. Viz. 1. First, in respect of place, because it is
diffused and dispersed through all Lands and Countries, as it is written,
Revel. 5. Thou have redeemed us with thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation. Not that the Church is to be in all Provinces
of the world, simul and semel, at one and the same time, but as Bellarmin in
his fourth book de Ecclesia and seventh chapter, gathers out of Driedo, it
suffices that it have been or hereafter be in all Lands and Nations, at
least successiue, successively one after another. 2. Secondly, in respect of
the persons, because it excludes no sort or condition of men. There is neither
Jew nor Greek, there is neither Bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor
Female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, Gal. 3. 3.
Thirdly, in respect of time, because it shall never cease nor fail, but
continue in one place or other, until the last day, according to that promise
of our Savior, that he would be with us always, even unto the end of the
world, Matthew. 28.


Thus you see modum essendi, the manner of the Church Catholics being, but
modus cognoscendi, the manner of knowing it, is more questionable; for on it
depends that great question of our days, wherein the Jesuits so triumph,
concerning the perpetuity and visibilitie of our Church in all Ages. For our
better progress wherein, we are to note, that a thing may be known two
manner of ways. Viz. 1. The one a priori, that is, by arguments drawn from
causes, or principles, which force an assent to a thing, though as yet one sees
not the truth of the same by experience. Thus from that principle in
Philosophy, that heavy things tend downwards to the center, I know that a
plummet of lead, would fall to the center of the earth, if no thick or gross
body interposed it self, although I never saw any conclusion or practice of
the fame. Thus from that principle in Divinity, that there is a resurrection
of the body, I believe that who ever lie buried in their Sepulchers, shall rise
again, although mine eyes were never witnesses of any such resurrection. 2.
The other a posteriori, that is, by arguments drawn from the effects to the
cause, or by grounding ones knowledge and certainty upon the sense of an
experiment, as when one believes that the fire is hot, because he feels it
burn, or that the Sea is salt because he tastes it brinish.


Both these have their uses being rightly and with due circumspection applied,
but they are not always and in all subjects alike demonstratiue, and therefore
the question will be, which of them the Creed requires for the procuring of a
firm belief and assent to this article of the Catholic Church.

I must confess, that arguments a posteriori, that is, from testimonies of
men, pointing out by name the Professors and vpholders of any Religion in all
Ages, is a great motive and inducement to persuade, that such a Religion is
Catholic, that is universal in respect of place, persons, and time; and that
the Church professing such a Religion is of the like amplitude and antiquity.
But yet this is not that modus cognoscendi, that manner of knowing the true
Church, to be Catholic, which is proper to the Creed, or by which Faith
cleaues unto it, and believes it, as an article of salvation: that manner of
knowing it to be so, is only a priori, by divine principles, that is, by Gods
promises made unto it in the Scriptures, where we read, that of Christ's
Kingdom there shall be no end, Psalm. 2. that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it, Matthew. 16. and that our Savior will continue with us unto
the end, Math. 28. these are the pedigrees of Christ's Church, by these it
proves it self to be of an ancient stem, that it had noble Progenitors: he
which plays the Herald and points out the several descents of her sons,
with their lots and portions in all Ages, he may somewhat illustrate the Church
Catholic, he cannot strengthen or confirm it; he may be a Thomas Didimus,
which will not believe unless he sees, he cannot be any of those blessed of
our Savior, which see not, and yet believe, Ioh. 20.

Now that the Catholicisme of the Church, that is, the universality, duration
and perpetuity thereof (so far as it enters the Creed) is to be known
only a priori, by the promises made in the Scriptures unto it, and not a
posteriori, that is, by instances showing the visible Professors of the same in
all Ages, I shall not need to travail farther then the Creed it self to make
it good.

My first reason shall be drawn from the condition of the Church Catholic as
it is an article of our Creed, and as we say, I believe the Catholic Church.
From whence I thus argue. Whatsoever we are to believe as an article of the
Creed, the same must be endowed with these four conditions, The first, that
the proof of it be perfect, for otherwise, if it prove but in part, it cannot
suffice for an article of faith. The second, that the ground upon which it
depends be some divine and infallible principle, for otherwise it may create an
opinion in one, but it cannot beget a faith. Thirdly, that all those who are
bound to believe it be capable of the manner of proving it, as Gregor. de
Valent. in Tho. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 7.. 18.
Valentia requires in these cases. And lastly, that it be not the object of
sense. For Faith (says the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 11.) is the evidence
of things not seen, and Thom. Aquin. 2^. 2^. q. 1. says plainly, vt fidei
obiectum sit aliquod visum fieri non potest, it cannot be that the object of
faith should be any thing seen. But the proof of the universality of the
Church which is a posteriori, by the several visible Professors of the same,
first, is no perfect proof, for it depends upon the testimony of Doctors
whereof in some ages, few have written, and those which have written, have not
written of all points, so that their consent in diverse Articles is rather
charitably presumed, than certainly known Secondly, it is no proof depending
upon divine and infallible principles, but upon the testimony and credit of
men, who may err and be deceived. Thirdly it is not a proof, of which all
men are capeable, for it consists partly of the voluminous writings of
Historians, partly of the immense dictates of the Fathers, partly of the
perplexe and inextricable subtilties of the Schoolmen, to which, few have
time and means, all not capacity to attain. Lastly, by demonstrating the
universality and perpetuity of the Church from the visibilitie of it, it makes
the Church as Catholic to be the object of the sense, and so by consequence
makes it to be no Article of Faith.

My second reason shall be drawn from the nature of the Church Catholic in it
self, and the incapability of it, to be subject to arguments a posteriori,
that is, of sense and visibility; it being not properly, or if properly yet not
always snfficiently visible for this purpose Forth better understanding
whereof, we must premise some distinctions touching the Church Catholic.

The Catholic Church may be considered either in respect of its. 1. Matter
of which it is composed which are men. 2. Form.


In respect of its Matter, so it may be taken either according to its full
Latitude and extent, excluding no time, no places, nor any condition of men; or
in a limited sense in respect of its parts, and those considered not together,
but severally, with relation to their proper times and places.

In respect of its form, so likewise it has sundry considerations: for the
form of it, is Either 1. Internal, which is the mystical union, which the
members thereof have with Christ, and through Christ, one with another; which
union is wrought by faith. 2. External, which is the uniformity, the parts
have one to another in the profession of the truth, and the right
administration of the Sacraments; which truth and right administration, we say
must be, if not in all points whatsoever, yet at least in all points
fundamental and necessary to salvation.


Now to bring this home to my argument; the Church Catholic, of these four
ways that it may be considered, is not visible at all three ways, and the
fourth, it is not always so clearly visible, as that the visibilitie should
serve for a note whereby to come to the knowledge of the universality and
perpetuity of the Church. It is not visible at all. First in respect of its
matter taken in the full Latitude thereof, excluding no times, no places nor
any condition of men. In which sense by the Tridentine catechismes own
confession it is taken in the Creed. For nothing is visible which is not
present: I may remember times past, or read of men absent, or conjecture things
to come, but I can see only those things which are present. Secondly it is not
visible at all, in respect of its inward form, which is the mystical union of
the members with Christ, and one another wrought by faith, for this is rooted
in the heart, and the heart of man God only sees. Thirdly, not in respect of
its outward form, which (as it enters the Creed) is not only an outward
profession of a Doctrine or Discipline, but a profession of the same under the
notion of truth; and that the Church in this sense is invisible, Valent. in
Thom. disp. ^. q. 1. p. 7.. 16.
Gregory de Valentia confesses in his 3. Tom. upon Thomas, and 1. disput. and
Bellarmine in his 3. book de Eccles. and 15. chap. where he says, In Ecclesia
aliquid videri and aliquid credi; videmus eum caelum hominum, qui est Ecclesia,
sed quod isle caetus sit ipsa vera Christi Ecclesia non videmus sed credimus,
That is, in the Church something is believed, and something seen; we see that
company of men which is the Church; but that this company is the true Church,
we do not see it, but believe it.

Again, the Church considered in her most favorable sense for the Papists,
that is, according to her matter, which are men, and that again, in a limited
acception, not as she is taken in her Latitude and extent, for the whole, but
in respect of her parts only, with reference to their proper times and places,
yet in this sense, I say, is not so clearly visible at all times, as to have
her visibilitie to serve for a note whereby to know it to be Catholic and
universal. For, Not a sufficiens ac propria ad dignoscendum Ecclesiam, omnino
necesse est, vt sit omni hominum generi atque conditioni accommodatum, it is
Gregory de Valentia's own rule in the place above cited, q. 1. punct. 7.. 15.
that is, that for a sufficient and proper note to know the Church, it is
necessary, that the note be fit for all sorts and conditions of men, and that
all men be qualified and capable to discern the Church by it; But the Church
even in this sense, by his own confession in the 16.. is sometimes so tossed
with the floods of error, schisms and persecutions, that to the unskillful,
and such as cannot prudently weigh the reasons of times and circumstances, it
is hard to be known; so that by consequence the Visibilitie of it is not
always so apparent unto all sorts of men, as to serve for a note or proof of
the Church as Catholic. To make our argument yet more pregnant, let us but
ask where the Church was in the time that the Arrian heresy ouerspread, and
he will tell you out of Hieron* cont Luciferian.
Hierom, that the ship of it was almost sunk, and out of Hilar. cont. Auxent.
sub. finem.
Hilarie, that it was then non in tectis, exteriori pompa querenda; sed potius
in carceribus and speluncis, not to be sought for in buildings or outward
pomp, but in Prisons and Caves. Ask Turrecremata and others, where the Church
was in the passion of our Savior, and they will tell you, that it remained
only in the Virgin Marie, which they say, is signified in the Church of Rome by
the putting out of all the Tapers save one only in the celebration of the
passion. Nay Bell. lib. 3. de Ecclesia. c. 17.
Bellarmine though he oppugnes this opinion of Turrecremata's the most he
can, yet he is contented to concur with Abulens. q. 24. prolog. in Math.
Abulensis in this, that howsoever the Apostles might believe, yet he thinks
that the Virgin Mary only had fidem explicitam, an explicit belief of
Christ's resurrection, without which the Apostle says, that our faith is vain,
we are yet in our sins, 1. Cor. 15. Now, grant that the Apostles believed as
well as Marie, yet if their belief was but implicit, their profession could
not be visible, idem est non esse and non apparere, it is all one not to be
and not to appear in this case. Nay, ask Bellarmine, but how the Church shall
be in the days of Antichrist, and he will answer in his third book de Romans
Pont. and seventh chap. Bellar. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 7. certum est
Antichristi persecutionem fore grauissimam, ita vt cessent omnes publicae
religionis caeremoniae and sacrificia.
that it is certain the persecution then shall be so great, that all public
ceremonies of Religion and Sacrifices shall cease.

How unjustly then do the Papists deal with us in this question, touching
modum cognoscendi; the manner of knowing the Church to be Catholic, that is,
universal and perpetual, by tying us to prove it a posteriori, instancing who
were the Professors, who the Pastors, what their Names, where they abode in all
Ages, as if ignorance of a thing were a Cause sufficient to make it not to be,
or Gods promise were not a gage strong enough for such an incredulous
generation as theirs is, unless there were Registers to show how and in what
manner he kept his word. Certainly, if God in his wisdom had thought these
kind of proofs necessary for his Church, he would have erected an Office
and Officers for the purpose; now he has given us indeed his Royal promise,
that it shall be so, but no promise has he given that there shall be Scribes
in all Ages to commit to writing the names and persons of those by whom it came
to be so.

If therefore a Papist should in this manner question me, Where was your Church
before Luther, or what Professors of your doctrine were there, or what
assemblies of men professing the same faith that you do, ever since the time
of our Savior until this present? I would thus answer him out of the Creed.
That the Church of which I am a member was before Luther, that there were
assemblies of men professing the same faith that I do, and that ever since the
time of our Savior unto this present, I do believe with the same faith, and
upon the same grounds that I believe the Catholic Church (because I believe
our Church of England to be a member of the Catholic) and this, I believe a
priori, that is, for the promise sake made in the Scriptures that it shall be
so. But where our Church was before Luther, or who were the Professors of it
ever since the time of our blessed Savior until this present, is no part of
my Creed. There is not a syllable in it which inuites me to proceed that way.
Do, I say, I believe the universality of Christ's Church, and must my
foundation be such only as can breed in me but an opinion, or naked hope? do
I begin in Faith, and with the Galathians must I end in the flesh, that is,
with sense? Do I build with one hand a Church Catholic, which cannot be
seen, and with the other must I draw it in a Map, or point it out to the eye?
Nay, set the Church as Catholic aside, and consider it but in her parts (which
consideration of it belongs not to the Creed) yet in this sense also is the
Church at sometimes so obscured, that by our Adversaries own confession, none
but the prudent and wise are able to discern it. The Church, is (I confess)
compared in the Revelation Revel. 12.
to a woman clothed with the Sun, in Isaiah to a Isay 2. 2.
City built upon an Hill; and by the Fathers to the Moon; the Sun, the
Moon, and a Hill, are things most easy to be discerned; yet we know, this
Sun may be obscured with a Clowd, an Hill may be hid with a mist, and the
Moon (as Saint Austen in his 119. Epist. alluding to the Church, observes)
has her wanes and eclipses in the time of her peregrination.

SECT. II. The second way whereby one may know the Church to be Catholic or
Universal.
IF any should mistake me, and think that pressing so earnestly the
preeminencie of knowing the Church to be Catholic and Universal a priori,
that is, from the promises made unto it in the Scriptures, we do suspect our
proofs a posteriori, from the Professors of our Religion in all Ages, to be
either none or weak, let them know that we want not those who have scored out
variety of sufficient paths to proceed this way also, which howsoever they be
not like the testimony of our Savior to beget a faith; yet are they like the
testimony of the Samaritan woman to induce a credulity.

For not to tire you with large discourses, which were to exceed my limits
(only for satisfaction herein to the reasonable and impartial Hearer) let us
take along with us these few considerations.

1. The first, that we are to distinguish between our affirmatiues, that is,
such things as are purely affirmed by us, and our negatiues, such as in whole
or in part we deny, between which there is a great difference to be made in
all sciences. For, affirmative propositions only are the proper parts and
ingredients of a discipline, Negatiues are admitted (say Logicians) not so much
by way of Precept as of Cautell and of Commentaries to vindicate the other from
misconstruction.

2. The second, that such affirmatiues of ours as are established by our Church
of England, at least such as concern the foundation of faith, have been in
all ages professed by the Church of Rome it self; For explication whereof, we
are to observe, that the Popes Arithmetic which he uses in calculating the
articles of faith, is not substraction but addition: what we purely affirm,
the Popish writers for the most part do affirm the same; the difference is,
that they affirm somewhat more then we do. They deny not so much that our
affirmations are truth, as that they say we affirm not all the truth,
whereupon they usually style us in their writings Negatiuists. For example
sake: We agree on both sides, the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith, the
Books of the old Testament written in Hebrew to be Canonical, that we are
justified by Faith, that God has made two receptacles for men's souls after
death, Heaven and Hell, that God may be worshipped in spirit without an Image,
that we are to pray unto God by Christ, that there be two Sacraments, that
Christ is really received in the Lords Supper, that Christ made one oblation of
himself upon the Cross for the redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for
the sins of the whole world. In a word, where they take the Negative part, as
in withholding the Cup from the Laytie, forbidding the administration of the
Sacraments in the vulgar tongue and restrayning the marriage of Priests, yet
even in these they condescend unto us for the lawfulness of the things in
themselves, and in respect of the Law of God, and oppose them only in regard
of their necessity and conueniencie, and for that the Church of Rome has
otherwise ordained.

But see, our affirmations content them not. To the Scriptures they add and
equalize unwritten Traditions; To the Hebrew Canon, the Apocrypha; To Faith in
the act of Justification, Works; To Heaven and Hell, Purgatory, Limbus
Patrum, and Limbus Puerorum; To the worship of God in spirit, Images; To prayer
to God by Christ, invocation and intercession of Saints; To Baptism and the
Lords Supper, five other Sacraments; To the realitie of Christ in the
Sacrament, his corporal presence; To the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross,
the sacrifice in the Mass; with other like; and these we deny.

3. The third, that our affirmations (by the judgment of the Church of Rome)
have been in all ages deemed sufficient to salvation, so that our Negatiues
take not away any doctrine, the explicit belief whereof is absolutely
necessary.

For first, in regard of knowledge, the Schoolmen hold that much less is
needful to be explicitly believed then what is contained in our affirmations.
For whereas we entertayne and embrace amongst our affirmative articles, not
only the doctrine of the three Creedes, but also sundry other assertions as
may appear by the book of Articles and Homilies established in our Church.
Albert. Mag. In 3. did. 25. art. 6. Bonauent. ead. did. art. 1. q. 3.
Richard. ib. art. 4. q. 1. Durand. ead. did. q. 1. number. 6.
Albertus Magnus on the contrary with Bonauenture, Richardus and Durandus,
think that so much only of the Creed is necessary as the Church solemnizeth
in her holidayes; Aquin. sum. 2. 2. q. 2. art. 7. Scotus in 3. sent. did. 25.
q. 2. Gabriel. ib. q. vnica. art. 2. Adrian. quodlibet. 3.
Thomas Aquinas, Scotus, Gabriel Biel, and Pope Adrian the sixth, which go
farther, think it needful to believe but the whole Creed, and Alex. ab Hal.
part. 3. q. 82. memb. 3. art. 1.
Alexander ab Hales which goes farthest, thinks that one need but add to the
Apostolical Creed the Nicen and Athanasian, to make a complete believer,
quanquam hoc nimis durum videtur, though this seems too hard an imposition,
says Gregory de Valentia in his third Tom. upon l Valent. in Thom. tom. 3.
disp. 2. q. 2. punct 4. Quanquam hoc nimis durum videtur -- and postea. Satis
fuerit illorum substantiam simpliciter credere, sicut continetur in symbolo
Apostolorum: ita videlicet vt sensus verborum proprius vtcunque intelligatur,
etiam non admodum propria notitia.
Thom. 1. disp. although one wade no farther therein then the proper sense, and
have no great distinct knowledge of the matters. Nay, Bell. lib. 4. de verbo
Dei, cap. 11. Quaedam in doctrina Christiana tam fidei quam morum, esse
simpliciter omnibus necessaria ad salutem, qualis est notitia articulorum
symboli Apostolici, item cognitio december praeceptorum and nonnullorum
Sacramentorum; caetera non ita necessaria sunt vt sine eorum explicita notitia
and fide and professione, homo saluari non possit. Et postea. Ea quae sunt
simpliciter necessaria Apostolos consueuisle omnibus praedicare, aliorum autem
non omnia omnibus, sed quaedam omnibus, quae nimirum omnibus vtilia erant;
quaedam solis praelatis, etc.
Bellarmine is so confident in this point, that he sticks not to say, that the
Apostles themselves never used to preach openly to the people (much less
propounded as common articles of faith) other things then the articles of the
Apostles Creed, the ten Commandments, and some few of the Sacraments, because
(says he) these are simply necessary and profitable for all men, the rest
besides, such as that a man may be saved without them.

Secondly, for practice, they grant, that one may attain salvation without the
performance of such duties as we refuse to undergo; For if one believes no
more then what is written in the Scriptures, he believes (as Bellarm. ib.
Bellarmine confesses) as much as is necessary and profitable unto all men.
If one worships God without an Image, they deny not, but that this worship is
acceptable; If one pray immediately unto Christ and repeates the Lords prayer,
they will not say that his devotion is fruitless; If one perform the best
works he can (which we also require) and stand not upon the point of merit,
but only upon the mercy of God, as we do, Bellar. lib. 5. de Iustif. c. 7.
Propter incertitudinem propriae iustitiae and periculum inanis gloriae,
tutissimum est, fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere.
they judge it to be not only profitable, but also commend it as most secure.
Now, what would a man require more of a Christian, then to believe well, pray
well, live well and die well?

The fourth consideration is, that those points of theirs whereof we hold the
Negative, were not received as articles of faith, nor the contrary judged
heretical by the Church of Rome for many hundred years after Christ. For that
Church could not judge us to be enemies of her faith, or oppugners of that
foundation whereon she was built: which first, by our Adversaries own
confessions, held Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 11.. Nota secundo.
all those things which the Apostles used to preach openly, and which were
necessary and profitable for all men, to be contained in the Scriptures. 2.
Which until the time of Bellar. lib. 1. de verbo Dei, cap. 10.. Respondeo B.
Augustinum. and. vlt. Sixtus Senens. biblioth. l. 8. c. 9. Dowists in their
Preface to the old Testament.
Saint Hierome and Austen, had not received the Apocrypha books to be
Canonical, nor in many Ages as well after as before, wanted learned writers to
oppose their authority. 3. Which Bellar. lib. 2. de verb. Dei, cap. 19.
saw not that latin vulgar edition of the Bible, which she now equalizeth
with the originalls, before the time of Saint Hierome, nor Valent. in Thom.
tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. ^unct. 7.. 43.
established it in such manner, that men might not call the words of it into
question and doubt, until the Council of Trent. 4. Which Bellar. lib. 4. de
Romans Pont. c. 2.. vlt.
made not those Heretics which deny the Pope to have infallible judgment,
Bellar. lib. 2. de Council. c. 13. deinde. and cap. 17.. Ad hunc locum.
or to be above a General Council. 5. Wherein Roffensis cont. assert. Luth.
art. 18.
Purgatory for a time was not known, and not for a long time after resolved
which way it concerned salvation, Bellar. lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 1. Valent. tom.
4. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 2.. 8.
either in regard of the persons thereby to be purged, to wit, the damned,
iustest, or only the middle sort, Harding against Jewels Apology, 2. part.
cap. 16 diuis. 2.
or in regard of the ends and effects which it has, whether to satisfy Gods
justice, and to punish sin past, or by correcting the souls of the dead in
such wise as temporal pains are wont to do, to diminish and take away the
affections of sin yet remaining. 6. Wherein Durand. Antonius, Roffensis, apud
Bellar. lib. 2. de Indulg. c. 17.. Sed vt a primo.
Popish Indulgences for many ages were not known, nor Bellar. ibid.
any one instance given of the Popes dispencing them for a thousand years
after Christ. 7. Which Suarez ex Alano. disp. 54. sect. 1. Fauentinus in 3.
sent. disp. 22. c. 6. Bellar. lib. 2. de Imagine. cap. 9.. Nicholaus lib. 2. de
cultu imaginum, cap. 4. and Bellar. cap. 8.. Ego dico tria.
worshipped not Images, nor ever approved the Image of God to be lawfully made.
8. Wherein Bellar. lib. 1. de Sanct. beat. cap. 8. vlt.
there was no Law which enjoined the worshipping of Saints, and Bellarm. ibid.
cap. 10.
whereas it is forbidden in the Church of Rome publickely to worship an
vncanonized Saint, Bell. ibid. c. 9. dices plurimi Sancti sunt.
the first Pope which they ever read to have canonized a Saint was Leo. the
third who lived eight hundred years after our Savior. 9. Wherein the Vide
Missam pro defunctis. vbi haec leguntur. Libera animas omnium fidelium de
poenis inferni, and de profundo lacu: libera eas de ore Leonis, ne absorbeat
eas tartarus, ne cadant in obscurum. it is not said, ne maneant in obscuro, as
if they were there already, but ne cadant in obscurum, whereas to those which
are in purgatory there is no fear or danger of falling into hell, they being
according to the Papists, sure of their salvation. Bell. lib. 2. de purg. cap.
4.
Church admmitted no prayer into her public Liturgy for the release of
souls from the pains of purgatory, but only for their acquital and
absolution at Gods tribunal, as the forms of prayer for the dead expressed in
the Popish Lyturgie unto this day do sufficiently testify. 10. Wherein Bell.
lib. 1. de cleric. cap. 18.. At Beatus Thomas. and. Non esse autem iure, etc.
the marriage of Priests was held not to be forbidden, iure diuino, by the Law
of God, but was allowed and permitted to be practiced. 11. Bell. lib. 2. de
sacrament. cap. 24 and Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. q. 6. p. 2.
Wherein, the number of seven Sacraments was not by any writer once mentioned,
but where they are purposely handled by the Fathers, there are mentioned but
two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. 12. Scotus. Vid. Bell. lib. 3. de
Eucharist. c. 23.
Wherein Transubstantiation was neither named, nor made an article of Faith,
until the Council of Laterane. 13. P. Lomb. sent. lib. 4. c. 12. and Aquin.
3. part. q. 83. art. 1.
Which a thousand years after Christ and more defined the sacrifice in the
Eucharist, to be only a memorial and representation of our Saviors
sacrifice upon the Cross. 14. Which administered the Cup to the Laity. 15.
Which The Latin tongue was then vulgar. See also Hardings answer to Jewels
articles. art. 3. diuis. 28.
celebrated divine service in the vulgar tongue which the people understood.
16. And lastly, Wherein Valent. sup.
the Priests received not the Eucharist alone, but together with the people.

The fifth consideration is, that if we were for the first ages after our
Savior in possession as well of our m Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1.
p. 7.. 44. Albasp. obseruat. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Negatiues as of our Affirmatiues, it concerns our adversaries to show when
they dispossessed us, and what prescription they have against us, for by their
own law, Vid. Gloss. in 8. reg. iuris in fine 6.
they which at the first are no heretics in their belief, are presumed to be
none, until they can be convinced to be such, semel bonus semper praesumitur
esse bonus. Now because it is a necessary condition required by the Jesuits
to an Article of faith, that it be lawfully propounded by the Church and it is
not fully resolved amongst our Adversaries themselves, when the Church opens
her mouth to define and propound but in a general Council, we require of them
Valent in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7.. 24. Quaerimus enim quando
Apostolica doctrina adulterari caeperit non per eos errores, quos fine
controuersia sub initium Ecclesiae serpere caepisse, sed per eam doctrinam quam
hodie Romana Ecclesia profitetur; neque id quidem tantum priuata vnius aut
paucorum opinione, sed authoritate and decretosummorum Pontificum, and communi
eius caetus consensu, qui vera ante Christi Ecclesia fuisset, quique proinde,
deficiens communiter a vera fidei doctrina, vera etiam esse Christi Ecclesia
desierit.
in answer to Greg. de Valentia's own challenge, to show when those doctrines
of theirs which we deny, were in such manner ratified and confirmed, and when
to hold the contrary, became damnable and heretical? And this we challenge
them that they do according to the laws prescribed by themselves, whereof the
first is, that the Counsels alleged by them be general; for particular (by
their own consents) may err; the second that those general be received for
lawful, and not either rejected as was the Constantinopolitan against Photius,
and the second Nicen which established Images, (this by that of Franckford; the
other by the Lateran under Pope John. Anno Dom. 879.) or be doubtful, for as
Bell. lib. 2. de Council. auctorit. c. vlt.. respondeo. 2.
Bellarmine says of the Pope that dubious Papa habetur pro non Papa, a
doubtful Pope is held for no Pope, so we may by the same reason say of
Counsels, that doubtful ones are held for none; The third (which is Bell.
lib. 2. de Council. cap. 12. Atin Concilijs maxima pars actorum ad fidem non
pertinet. Non enim sunt de fide disputationes quae praemittuntur, neque
rations quae adduntur, neque ea quae ad explicandum and illustrandum
adferuntur, sed tantum ipsa nuda decreta, and ea non omnia, sed tantum quae
proponuntur tanquam de fide -- quando autem decretum proponatur tanquam de
fide, facile cognoscitur ex verbis Concilij, semper enim dicere solent, se
explicare fidem Catholicam, vel haereticos habendos qui contrarium sentiunt --
quando autem nihil horum dicunt, non est certum rem esse de fide
Bellarmines own rule) that neither such disputations as are premitted, nor
such reasons as are added, nor such things as are brought for explication and
illustration sake, but only the naked decrees themselves be counted de fide,
of faith, and not all those neither, but such only as are propounded tanquam
de fide, as it were of faith, as when they say that they explain the
Catholic faith, or that they are to be counted for Heretics which think
the contrary, or that they pronounce an anathema, and exclude such from the
Church as think the contrary. For when they use none of these phrases, it is
not certain (says he) that it is a matter of faith which they propound. This
if they do it will soon appear that the Church of Rome for a 1000 years after
our Savior, professed no other Faith nor published any other belief in points
fundamental, either Negative or Affirmative then we do.

The fifth, that after a thousand and some few years more were expired
(Transubstantiation and Adoration of the Host, with other dregs of Antichrist
being established) though we cannot say that the Church of Rome was from
thenceforth absolutely our Church, yet we may boldly say, that our Church was
from that time, until Luther both within the Roman Church and without it For
the clearer demonstration whereof, we are to note, that our Church had in
those days a twofold subsistencie, the one separate from the Church of Rome,
the other mixed and conjoined with it.

Separate, so it was in the About the year 1160.
Albigences and Waldenses, a people, who so soon as the Church of Rome had
interpreted her self touching sundry of those maine points of difference
between us, and that a man could no longer communicate with her in the
public worship of God, by reason of some Idolatrous rites and customs which
she had established, arose in France, Sauoy, and the places near adjoining,
and professed the same substantial Negatiues and Affirmatiues which we do,
in a state separate from the Church of Rome, having Pastors and Congregations
apart to themselves, even unto this day. From these descended the Wicklefists
in England, and the Hussites in Germany, and others in other Countries, who
mauger the fury of fire and sword maintained the same doctrine that they did.
And if any be desirous to be more particularly informed touching what they held
and taught, because they are out of malice (as Haillan. Hist. Gallican. l. 10.
Thuan. hist. sui temp. lib. 6.
some Popish writers more ingenious do testify) branded with new and unheard
of opinions, (which their confessions, Catechismes and other writings to be
seen at this present, do disclayme) as were also the Christians in the
Primitive Church by the Pagans, and we in like manner by the Romanists, let
the testimonies of their Adversaries themselves which are strong ( (...)
as one spoke once of Porphyryes) and admit no contradiction, clear them. For
points of doctrine therefore Reiner. cont. Waldenses. cap. 3.
Reynerius an inquisitor against them, and one that lived three hundred years
agone, will tell you, that they believed all things well of God, and all the
articles of which are contained in the Creed, only the Church of Rome, they
hated and blasphemed. Seysellus aduersus errores and Sanctan Waidensiu^
Claudius Seysellus Archbishop of Turin in Piedmont, who died more then an
hundred years since, and (being their neighbor labored most carefully both to
inform himself concerning their positions, and also to confute them) lays no
more to their charge then what Alphonsus a Castro, Prateolus, Cardinal
Bellarmine, Gregory de Valentia, Gaulterus, and other of the Roman Pale do in
their writings acknowledge, viz. that they denied.

1. The invocation of Saints. Bell. de cultu. sanct. lib. 3. cap. 7. 2. The
placing of Images in Churches or worshipping of them. Bell. de reliq. sanct.
lib. 2. cap. 6. 3. Confirmation to be a Sacrament. Castro. v. confirmatio. 4.
Auricular confession. Castro. v. confessio. 5. Popish Indulgences. Valent. in
Thom. tom. 3. disp. 7. q. 20. p. 2. 6. Purgatory. Valent. in Thom. tom. 4.
disp. 11. q. 1.. 6. Bell. lib. 1. de purg. cap. 2. 7. Masses for the dead.
Prat. v. Waldenses. 8. Merits. Castro. v. ieiunium. Gaulterus in Cronolog. ad
an. 1200. 9. Orders of begging Friars. Castro. v. Monachatus. 10. Extreme
unction to be a Sacrament. Castro. v. extrema vnctio. 11. Exorcismes in
Baptism. Castro. v. exorcismus Gault. cron. loc. citat. 12. The consecrating
of Oil, Salt, Franckincence, Boughs, etc. Castro. v. benedictio. 13.
Transubstantiation. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Eucharist. cap. 2. Valent. tom. 4. in
Thom. disp. 6. quaest. 3. punct. 1. 6. 14. The Popes supremacy, Bellar. in
Praefat. ad lib. de Romans Pont. 15. Unwritten Traditions to be the rule of
faith. Seissel. p. 4. with many others of like nature.
For Discipline I cannot tell what the necessity of the times might force them
to practice, this we are taught by Sanders, haeres. 150. and by Gaulterius in
his Chronology, ad an. 1200. (both Romanists) that they held three Orders to
be in the Church, viz. of Deacons, Priests, and Bishops, nay, the Hussites
which descended from them, did so highly esteem of these Orders, that as
Bellar. lib. 1. de Sacram. ca. 26. Valent. in Thom. tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 11. p.
1.
Bellarmine and Gregory de Valentia do acknowledge, they received none into
the Office of Pastors, but such as were ordained by Bishops.

The state of the Church mixed and conioyn'd with the Church of Rome it self,
consisted of those, who making no visible separation from the Roman profession,
as not perceiving the mystery of iniquity which wrought in it, did yet
mislike the grosser errors, which at this day she maintayneth, and desired a
reformation.

For there may be a Church, which in respect of her chief Prelates, and a
predominant faction therein, may be false and Antichristian, yet may contain
some members of the true Church within her Pale, who though they refuse not to
communicate with her; nay more, are infected with some smaller errors of the
time, yet swallow not down all untruths without difference, but keep still
the foundation of faith entire and unshaken. Thus it was with the Church of the
Jews at the coming of our Savior. They which fate in Moses chair, were the
Scribes and the Pharisees, who perverted the doctrine of the Law, and were the
professed enemies of our Savior, yet many there were, who though they
communicated with them in the outward Sacraments and discipline of the Church,
yet were the flock of another fold, and like a few Olives at the end of a twig,
after the shaking of the tree, claue to the right stock, and waited for the
redemption of Israel by Christ. And thus doubtless it was with some, which
being outwardly of the Church of Rome, we may justly notwithstanding challenge
to our selves.

1. For first, there was baptism, which admitted them to the rights and
privileges of our Church, for they were baptized unto Christ's Truth, and not
the Popes errors.

Secondly, In the ordination of Popish Bishops, it is said. Interrogamus te, sl
omne^ prudentiam tuam quantum tua capax est natura diuinae Scripturae sensibus
acco^modare volueris? Vis ea quae ex diuinis Scripturis intelligis, plebem cui
ordinandus es, and verbis docere and exemplis? Accipe Euangelia, vade and
praedica populo tibi commisso.
There was true and lawful ordination, wherein their Pastors received
commission, and did promise to teach the people, not the Popes legends, but out
of the holy Scriptures, and to intend wholly to the sense thereof. So that both
Pastor and flock, were ours by admission, promise and engagement, theirs by
abuse and practice; for howsoever the Priest at the baptising, or the Bishop at
the ordination, had another meaning, yet the words wherewith they baptized and
ordained being the words of Christ, are to be taken in Christ's meaning,
inasmuch as he which receives a thing from another, is to receive it
according to the intention of the principal Giver, and not the isntrumental
giver. He which conferres Baptism and Orders as the principal Donor is
Christ, the Bishop or Pastor conferres them only as his instruments.

Thirdly, There were sufficient means of Calling besides, to supply the
Pastors negligence and default, as first, profitable parcells of Gods Word read
in the Church, and the whole body of the Scriptures at hand, which though it
were in Latin, yet many might understand it, and this our Savior pointed at,
when he brings in Abraham in the Parable, thus speaking to the rich man
touching his brethren, habent Mosen and Prophetas, they have Moses and the
Prophets. Secondly, The Writings and Commentaries of the Fathers, to whose
interpretations their Council. Trident. Sess. 2.
Counsels bind them to adhere, and out of whom diverse of the Papists both
ancient and modern, do confess (as you have heard) that many of the chief
articles of Popery were not for a long time brought into the Church, nor
believed. Thirdly, Schoolmen and others of their own side, which taught
publicly in their Universities, our very doctrine (not, I confess so entirely
as they should) but some in one point, others in another, whereby there was
both pregnant means to know the truth, and strong reasons to think at least
the doctrines so controuerted, and diversely resolved, to be in the Popish sense
at most no article of faith.

Lastly, there were no Counsels generally received by all, and not excepted at
by some, which so expressly delivered the grounds and Tenets of Popery as now
they are, until the Council of Trent.

So then who can deny, that they were ours by Calling, ours by Ordination, by
institution and admission ours, and why should any doubt, but that some were by
practice and obedience ours; surely, God which called Job amongst the Heathen,
and the Queen of the South by the bare report of Solomon, would not suffer
this Calling to be still in vain; the Ordination to be wholly unprofitable; or
that Admission in baptism to be always frustrate; that is, to be the savor
of death unto death, and in none the savor of life unto life. For if sheep in
a pasture, where venomous herbs are mixed with wholesome, can by the instinct of
nature make choice of that which is proper for them, and abstain from the
contrary; what marvel is it, if the flock of Christ, who know the voice of
the true Shepherd from the voice of strangers, should by the guidance of Gods
assisting Spirit do the same. Who can deny that God has his Temple where
Antichrist has his Throne, seeing, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Revel. 18. 4.
Antichrist (as the Apostle tells us) is to sit in it? or that some of Gods
people may be in Babylon, seeing such are warned by the Spirit to come out of
her: and it were in vain to command a man to depart a place if he were not
there.

Now, if any shall think these motives and considerations of ours, especially
touching the last six hundred years, not to be altogether so exact as the
Papists require, who challenge us to produce the names of such visible
Protestants in all ages, as professed the same entire doctrine in all respects,
that we do; I answer, first, that it is not our hold that the Church never
erreth or discordeth from it self in minoribus, in matters of less moment,
and therefore it is sufficient for us to show who professed our faith entirely,
in majoribus, that is, such points as of themselves are fundamental. Secondly,
we say, that whereas we find a twofold state of the Church in the Revel. 20.
2.
Apocalypse: the one before the loosing of Satan, whilst the old Dragon was
shut up in the bottomless pit for a thousand years: the other after his
loosing, when the Devil was to be let free to go and deceive the Nations, not
in one petty Hamlet, but in the four quarters of the earth, that is, (as
Saint Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 8. and 9. Vid. Bellar. lib. 3. de Romans
Pont. c. 7.
Austen expounds it) under the reign and tyranny of Antichrist; We are not
bound to give so strict a reckoning and account of our Professors, under the
second state of the Church, as under the first. The reason is, because the
Church in her first estate was glorious to behold, appearing like a Revel. 12.
1.
Woman clothed with the Sun. But in the latter she was to be under the
thraldom of Antichrist, and our Adversaries themselves tell us, that then we
are not to enquire for visible Professors of the true faith, or for the public
exercise of Religion, so Suarez lib. 5. cont. sect. Angl. cap. 21. Bellar. lib.
3. de Romans Pont. c. 7.
Suarez, Bellarmine, and others. In a word, then was the time that the Church
was to flee into the wilderness, as was foretold, Revel. 12. Now, to expect
multitudes x Revel. 12. 14.
of people, frequent cities, pompous splendour, affluence of food and provision
in a wilderness, were extreme madness; this were to suppose a wilderness to
be no wilderness. In Deserts there may be assemblies of men, but they are
rare; there may be food, but we know it is but little, and such happily as is
but absolutely necessary for the life of man; and there may be buildings and
edifices, but through the thickets of trees, and shades of leaves hardly to be
discerned. And so did it fare with the Church under the tyranny of Antichrist.
There were some always of it, but few; there were assemblies, but not so
evident to the eye of the world; and there was the food of the Word and
Sacraments, but not so plentiful, nor every where so pure as before times.

But who would think that the Jesuits were all this while but in jest, and
that they are conscious to themselves, that the task which they require to be
performed on our part, is not fesable on their own. For let me but question
them from their own grounds; whether the entire articles of faith, which the
Church of Rome now holds, are found mentioned by Writers in all ages? The
Cardinal and others of the Jesuits ingeniously confess they were not, and
namely Indulgences, the Churches treasury, the Popes canonizing of Saints,
etc. only they answer, that it follows not, that they were not believed
because they are not mentioned: Be it so; but if their articles of faith be
not mentioned, how will they make it appear by the testimonies of writers in
all ages (as they undertake to do) that such Tenets were from the time of the
blessed Apostles held without interruption. Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei, cap.
9.. Quarta regula.
Bellarmine therefore answers, that the concurrent testimonies of some Writers
of greatest note, affirming such a Doctrine to have been professed and
believed by the Church in all ages, none gaine-saying it, will serve the turn.
But here, besides that they stand not to their first bargain, which was to
produce the testimonies of Writers in all ages; I demand of what ages they
mean that their writers shall be, to whose concurrent judgment they will
adhere; if of the primative Church, we accept the offer, but this will little
advantage them: for neither are many points of difference between us and them
mentioned by those writers, as above was specified, much less affirmed to be
Apostolical Traditions: neither are those which are mentioned, allowed of in
that sense which they deliver. If the writers of the after Church, and namely
the Schoolmen, let them hear Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7..
46. Solum est in eo discrimen, quod si quid vniuersi patres de religione
tradunt concorditer, id statim, tanqua^ dogma common doctorum omnium, qui
varijs aetatibus vixerunt, recipitur, quoniam illud etiam scholastici doctores
(saltem pro maiore part) recipient, vt qui in materia fidei atque religionis
sanctos patres duces sequuntur. At non vicissim quicquid scholastici doctores
concorditer tradunt, id existimandum est Ecclesiae alios doctores omnes, qui
varijs aetatibus vixerunt, tradidisse. Multa enim scholastici ad doctrinam
patrum explicatius addiderunt.
Gregory de Valentia's own censure concerning them. Whatsoever all the
Fathers (says he) do uniformly deliver, that is to be held for the opinion
of the Doctors of all times, because the Schoolmen do follow the holy Fathers
as their guides; But not on the contrary, whatsoever the Schoolmen do
deliver uniformly, is to be thought to have been believed by the Doctors in
all ages; because the Schoolmen have added many things more explicatly to the
doctrine of the Fathers. Seeing therefore, neither ancient writers will serve
their turn, no latter may be admitted, I demand by what other authority they
hope now to make good their brag? By what (do the Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo
Dei, cap. 9. 5. Quinta regula. Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 7..
44.
Jesuits answer) but by the testimony of the Church, and chiefly the
present, affirming such a doctrine to have been universally believed in all
ages. And this indeed is their last refuge, whereby it may plainly appear,
that after they have so lowdly dared us to show the perpetuity of our Church
in all ages, a posteriori, by producing the names of our several Professors,
they can be contented quietly to relinquish that title themselves, and to fly
to the testimony of the Church, which being with them the foundation and
principle of their faith, is not properly to argue a posteriori, but a priori,
the difference between our arguing in that kind and theirs, being but this,
that we proceed descending downwards from the Scriptures, they ascending
upwards from the present Church. But I ask now, will the Churches testimony
in this case serve their turns, to prove, that whatsoever is held at this
present as an article of faith in the Roman Consistory, was always so
believed in the Church. No, do Bellar. lib. 1. de verbo Dei, cap 10. Valent.
in Thom. tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 1. p. 6.
Bellarmine, Valentia, and other Jesuits inform us: for some points (say
they) were not heretofore defined by the Church (in which to err was then no
heresy) which now are; and Thomas tells us that the Pope may make a new Creed:
But we ask then, how their articles of faith were held in all ages? They
reply, that these new additions of theirs, though they were not as then made
articles of faith, nor believed by the Fathers explicitly, yet were they
implicitly believed. But this plungeth them then into another gulf, for if
implicitly only, then the profession thereof was not visible; for an implicit
belief is like seed buried in the ground, and cannot serve for any of those
proofs, whereby the visibilitie of the Church which is in question, may be
tried. But happily (will some say) those points which in former times were not
mentioned or not expressly believed, or not defined, are but matters of less
moment, and such as the present Church of Rome makes not to be fundamental.
No, do the Jesuits answer; for they are even such as are by the Tridentine
and other General Counsels, commanded under pain of an A^athema to be
believed, and to deny the which is by their Constitutions made damnable
heresy.

Thus, whatsoever they pretend, they find no harbor, but in their present
Church, and that like the Sirtes too, troublesome and tempestious. For our
parts, God has affoorded us a quiet Haven where in to anchor, the holy
Scriptures, which teach us, that if we cannot discern the Church Catholic,
fide oculorum, with the faith of our eyes, and say videmus, we see it: we
should yet apprehend it, oculis fidei, with the eyes of our faith, and say,
credimus, we believe it.

Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam. I believe the Catholic Church.
Vnde Zizania? THE ORIGINAL AND PROGRESS of Heresy.

Handled and applied before his late MAJESTY at THEOBALDS. An. Dom. 1624.

By EDWARD CHALONER, Dr. in Divinity, and Principal of ALBAN Hall in OXFORD.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby.



Vnde Zizania? The Original and Progress of HERESY.
MATTHEW. 13. 27. So the Servants of the Householder came and said unto him, Sir,
Did not thou sow good Seed in thy field? From whence then has it Tares?
THe Progeny of Heresies, begotten by the Prince of darkness, and conceived
in the conclaue of Hell, cannot be seen by mortal eyes, but in aenigmate, in
a riddle or Parable, and therefore most fitly in a Parable, is here set forth,
the original and progesse of them. First, You have their Antecedent, to wit,
the sowing of good Seed before them. For, howsoever Heresies may be antiqua,
ancient; yet they are not prima, the first and most ancient, and therefore is
Christ the Husbandman, first presented in the Narration, as seminans, sowing
good Seed in his field, before the Enemy is produced reseminans, resowing the
same Acres with unprofitable grain. Secondly, their Efficient or Author, the
Devil, who is pointed out by two remarkable properties, his malice, in that he
is termed inimicus, the Enemy, and his subtlety, which appeared by those
advantages which he took in sowing. The first was the opportunity of the time,
for he wrought not his mischief in the face of the Sun, whilst the Servants
of the Husbandman might bear him witness, but in the dead of night; not
whilst the Husbandman himself slept; for he which keeps Israel, neither
slumbreth nor sleeps, but, Cum dormirent homines (says the Text) whilst men
slept, that is, whilst the Pastors and overseers of the flock, those to whom
the Master had let out his Vineyard, were supine and negligent in their charge.
The second, was the nature of the grain which he sowed, sympathising and
according with the good Seed in the manner and likeness of growth, that is,
Heresies bearing the Image and Superscription of Truth: He took not therefore
Acornes, or Mast, or Kernels, or Fruit-stones, but Tares; nor set them with
their stalk or bulk, but buried them in the Seed, that they might appear
with a Copy of old age, being not espied till they had taken root, and then
displaying themselves gradatim, by little and little. The third, was the
conueniencie of the place for such a purpose, being free from suspicion (among
the Wheat) and the last his hypocritical covering of his action, abijt, he
went away, id est latuit (says an Interpreter) he lay hid under the fair
penthouse of zeal and seeming devotion. For had either his venom spawned in
any other soil then where the Husbandman had bestowed his Wheat, or had he
been spied traversing the field in his proper shape and complexion, the
servants of the Householder could not have bin so surprised with admiration; so
soon as the first bud had saluted the light, they would have said, behold
Tares, behold the Enemy: now that the field had been manured and cultiuated
with Gods Husbandry, the earth made to travel with the fruits of his Garner,
and the Enemies footings undiscerned, these second seeds must spring up, those
sproutes become to blade, that blade bring forth fruit, ere the servants will
believe the (...) or quod, as Logicians speak, that they are Tares, and yet
for the (...) or propter quod, that is, the Author and Sower of them, they are
still ignorant, they come to the Householder and say unto him, Sir, Did not
thou sow good Seed in thy field, from whence then has it Tares?

The case being thus put to the Husbandman by way of question or problem, and
the Servants like Scholars in the Mathematickes requiring a sensible
demonstration of the same, my Text may be not unfitly divided into these two
parts, datum and quaesitum. Viz. 1. First, Datum, the thing given or granted,
Sir, Did not thou sow good seed in thy field? For Interrogatiues in holy
Writ are oftentimes equivalent to affirmations and assertions, and not notes of
doubt or dubitation. 2. Secondly, Quaesitum, the thing demanded, from whence
then has it Tares?


The first is here, and has bin by all good Christians ever granted, and
therefore shall not by me be disputed; Far be it from any to question the Seed
of the good Husbandman, or to suspect his Grain. Bellarmine and Becanus two
Jesuits, would feign lay the aspersion upon us; the one, that we teach
directly, the other that we affirm by consequence, God to be the Author of
Sin, and so to fasten the Tares upon his sleeue. But let them know that we
receive this, datum, this granted Proposition, that God ever sowes good Seed in
his field, with no more scruple then did these Servants. Our Controversy is
only the same that theirs was, touching the Quaesitum, the thing demanded,
from whence the Tares are. And here we that are Servants of the Householder
are no more exempted from Cauils, then his field from adulterate Grain. The
Devil has scattered his Seed amongst the Wheat, the World beholds it not
only in the blade, but also bearing fruit, and yet the Servants of the Enemy
deny that it is Tares, unless we can show vnde, from whence they are? This is
the Riddle wherewith the Antichristian Sphinxes do assault us. But alas, how
is the Text perverted, the Scene altered? serui non Patrisfamilias, sed
inimici, the Servants, not of the Householder, but of the Enemy, of him which is
conscious to his own act, veniunt and dicunt, they come and say; and to whom
do they say? non illi, not to the Oedipus that can resolve them, the
Husbandman, but nobis, to us, dormientibus, us that slept, they ask us the
question, they require of us to dissolve the knot; Name the Heresy (say they)
whereof we cannot record the Brochers, describe the place, date the time
Bellar. l. 4. de Eccles. cap. 5.
of its Nativity? Could Arius, or Nestorius, or Macedonius, play their prizes
vnspyed by our Sentinels? Could they, or any other Heretic ever escape the
Eyes and Ears of our Intelligencers? Thus they insult before the Victory. They
indeed which are of the Enemies Council, may be privy to his Plots: we that
are of the Householders retinue, may decerne the Tares, and yet not know the
sowing, and we may say without prejudice either to our cause or skill with
these men, (...) From whence has it Tares?

But the ground hereof will yet better appear, if we compare the Enemies
carriage in this Parable with his wiles and legerdemayne at other times. All
creatures which inhabit this Globe of Earth are subject to a vicissitude of
Light and Darkness, Day and Night, and to the necessary actions thereof,
waking and sleeping. That which properly in this kind belongs to man considered
in his Naturalls, the same by a certain symmetry and proportion is found also
in his Intellectualls, that waking in the one, he may be said sometimes to
sleep in the other. Genesis 2.
This advantage the Devil took in his first Masterpiece, sowing the Seeds of
original transgression in the fairest of Gods fields, our Mother Eve. For the
Verse. ^.
man being absent and deficient in his watch, the Enemy assaulted the woman (as
here in this Parable) in a manner unseen, appearing not in the colors of an
Enemy, but of the Serpent, who whilst Adam the common Citizen of the Earth
continued in his integrity, was a Domesticke creature and parcel of his
Family. And it is worth our noting, how in the whole Story, God conceales the
Devils name, because the Devil ever in such cases conceales his nature. In
this disguise therefore, tendering matter of argument and discourse unto the
woman, he scattered a seed so small at the first, that it exceeded not a grain
of Muster-seed, only of question and doubt, Yea, has God said, ye shall not
eat of every tree of the Garden? Who would have thought a naked question could
harbor so much poison in its bowels? yet so dangerous is it to entertain a
question of Gods peremptory Injunctions, that this alone in the next reply,
brought forth the blade, which was incredulity, and imboldned the Devil to
give God the lie, saying, Ye shall not dye. This blade at length Verse. 4.
shot up so high, that the Prince of the Air does now therein nestle himself,
and yielded that bitter fruit, And she did eat, and gave unto her Husband,
Verse. 6.
who did eat.

Thus he sowed the Seeds of Heresy in the Church of the Jews at the coming
of our Savior. The Prophets which had successively tended the flock of
Israel, were now asleep in their Sepulchers, and the watchmen which remained,
slumbred upon their Couches of carnal and temporal proiects, dreaming of an
earthly Messiah, and Kingdoms of this World; when lo, the Enemy shrowding
himself in the frock of men venerable for their profession, [ Scribes and
Pharises] seasoned with the leaven of seeming devotion ( long Prayers and
Hypocrisy) remarkable for their industry, in compassing two vast Elements Sea
and Land to gain one Proselite, instilled those Errors which at the first
unseen did in a while send forth an ominous blade, and that blade a worse
fruit, observing still the same rule of progression, that if the Masters were
one, their Proselites should be two fold more children of Hell then
themselves, Matthew. 23. And to be brief, thus is the Enemy prophesied to sow
the Seeds of those great defections and fallings away from the truth toward
the latter day, when the whole world almost was to sleep, being intoxicated
with the wine of the Whore of Babylon: What part thereof wherein he expounds
not this Parable with his act, and wherein those stratagems of deluding men, so
slumbring with counterfeit devotion, appearing truths, and insensible growthes
lie not buried? Would you understand the kind of doctrine which he should
insinuate? know, that it was not a professed opposition of the Truth, but a
secret undermining of it; and therefore, both by Saint Paul and also in the
Revelation it is called (...) a Mystery 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Revel. 17. 5. Revel.
13. 18.
which none but the wise and he which has understanding can penetrate; Would
you take a view of the Actors? Imagine not that you see the faces of Neroes or
Dioclesians, but what we read in Daniel of Antiochus the type of Antichrist,
that he should Dan. 11. 21.
get the Kindome by flatteries, the same in holy Writ is affirmed of Antichrist
himself and his Accomplices. The Teachers which in the last and perilous times
must arise (says Saint Paul) are men having the form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof, 2. Tim. 3. The Beast in the Revelation is described
with two horns like the Lamb, but withal having the voice of a Dragon, Chap.
13. The woman which sits upon many waters is an Whore, and inticeth with
dalliances like another Dalilah; and with a Cup of abomination makes drunk the
Inhabitants of the earth, Chap. 17. Her Army are Locusts, whose faces are as
the faces of men, whose hair as the hair of women, but look either within,
and then see teeth as the teeth of Lions, or behind, and behold there tails
like unto the tails of Scorpions, Chap. 9. Lastly would you see the manner how
his poisonous doctrine is to gain upon the Church? Then as before you beheld
not the faces of Nero's, so neither must you here expect the marches of Iehu's.
Away with that fond imagination of Bellarmine and other Bellar. l. 3. de Romans
Pont. c. 8.
Romanists, who imagine that Antichrist, must defer his war upon the Church
until the end of the World, and that he must dispatch all his conquests, and
finish his reign within the short space of three years and an half. No;
Saint John tells us that Antichrist was already come, and Saint Paul, that in
his days the mystery of iniquity did already work, but how? not that the
servants of the householder could take notice of it, for that, he that did let,
would let (says he) until he were taken away, and then (and not till then)
should that wicked one be revealed. 2. These. 2. For as it is true in
morallitie, that nemo repent fit pessimus, no man at the first push becomes
extremely bad, so the Apostle says, it shall fare with these Seducers, they
shall not renounce the truth at once, but decline from the sincerity of it by
degrees, growing (as the Text has it) worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived. 2. Tim. 3. 13. What therefore is observed, touching the methodicall
disposition of the seven Churches in the Revelation (though it cannot be
typically or prophetically applied (as some have fondly imagined, to any
Churches in particular) Beda. Lyra. Gloss. ordin. Alphonsus Conrad. in Apoc.
the Rhem. upon the 1. Re.
yet the Ro^anists (who by these parts understand the whole) may observe the
same, in the several states and conditions of the Church universal. If Ephesus
the first and mother Church of lesser Asia, leave her first love, chap. 2.
verse 4. this defect of love in Smyrna, the second Church, begets counterfeit
professors, them, which say they are Jews and are not, but are the Synagogue
of Satan, v. 9. Smyrnas counterfeits in Pergamus the third Church, prove
Balaams, and cast a stumbling block to those of the covenant, even the
Orthodoxe believers, pointed out by the Children of Israel. v. 14. Now what is
but a stumbling block in Pergamus, the third Church, procures a tolleration
for Iesabell to preach it in Theatira the fourth, v. 20. and lo, what in
Theatira the fourth is preached, and as it were sowed, the same springs up in
Sardis the fifth, and choakes a great part of the good corn, and the precipe
to the Angel (that is, the Bishop thereof) is, strengthen the things which
remain, that are ready to dye. chap. 3. verse 2.

Whereby we may note the difference between the particular heresies of Arius,
Nestorius, and the like, whose Authors and beginners, the Papists brag that
they can assign, and this general defection or falling away under Antichrist,
of which they challenge us to nominate the time, and Authors. For first, those
backslidings were of them, of whom S. John says, they went out from us, but
they were not of 2. John. 2. 19.
us, and therefore making a rent and separation from the Church, were the more
remarkable, this of Antichrist (who is to sit in the Temple of God) is to be
of 2. These. 4.
those who were of us, and went not out from us, and therefore making no
visible rent from the Church, must needs be the less noted. Secondly, those
being but of some few, left Sentinels enough behind to eye them; this was to
be universal, of the Sentinels and Watchmen themselves, even of the stars
which the Dragon was to pull down from heaven with his tail; and if the
Watchmen themselves sleep, who shall discover the approach of the enemy?
Thirdly those made open invasion upon the truth, and oppugned the bulwarks of
Faith with hostile fury, as Arius the divinity of Christ, Macedonius the
divinity of the Holy Ghost and the like; this is a claudestine conspiracy,
and opposes of the faith, not directly, but obliquely, not formally, but
virtually, not in express terms, but by consequences, and therefore until
the trumpets sounded the alarm, and the thunders in the Revelation gave
warning, few sufpected it. Lastly, those were like the gourd of Jonas, Jon. ^.
10.
which sprang up in a night; this was like the tares, first but a seed, then a
blade, and lastly a fruit; and therefore approaching by insensible degrees, was
the less observed and discovered.

And to apply these things more home to the Church of Rome, let any speak
whether the tower of this second Babell mounted not by the same steps and
ascents unto the battlements? How many things at the first were but stumbling
blocks, that in time became stairs to lift Iesabel into the Pulpit? how many
positions in the infancy of the Gospel unknown, that after a while were
disputed, then sided, and at length ratified and confirmed? What opinions that
at first were but dogmata scholae, tenants of the schools, that in their riper
age were made dogmata Ecclesiae, Constitutions of the Church, and lastly
dogmata fidei, Articles of faith? What errors, but Pigmies in their birth, that
became grand heresies and sons of Anak in their grouth? So that we may truly
say of the master builders, which upon a foundation happily of gold of silver,
laid rows of stone or brick, and their prentises which thereon advanced a
second story of slime or rubbish, as Vincentius Lyrinensis Vincent. Liren
cont. haereses.
did of the Donatists, building their heresy upon the authority of Cyprian. O
maruailous change of things, the authors of the opinions are judged
Catholics, but the followers thereof are Heretics; the masters are
pardoned, but the scholars or learners are condemned; the writers of the
books shall without doubt be the Children of the Kingdom, but Hell shall be
the place for the abettors and maintainers thereof. And truly it is an
observation no less judicious then true of Albaspinus, Bishop of Orleans, that
scarce any error Albaspin. de veteribus Ecclesiae ritibus. lib. 1. cap. 9.
has crept into the Church which took not its original and sourse from the
ancient approved Discipline of the Church, not that the institution was bad,
but that the application is now amiss, the servants of the Householder made the
laws, but the servants of the enemy added the gloss. Hearken what Ferus a
Friar says upon the eighth of Judges, speaking of Gedeon. There was (says he)
a double sin in Gedeon, Fer. Annot. in. Jud. c. 8. Colon. 1571. Duplex.
igitur peccatum eius fuit, and quod Ephod contra verbum Dei fecit, and quod
ipsius abusum videns, non iterum aboleuit. Quis autem non videt similia in
Ecclesia contingere? Quam multa instituerunt sancti bona intention, quae tamen
nunc videmus partim in abusum, partim in superstitionem verti? Exemplo sint
festa, ceremoniae, imagines, miss^, monasteria, etc. Nihil horum ea intention
institutum fuit qua nunc habentur, etc. and tamen Gedeones nostri tacent, non
absolent abusus non auferunt superstitiones.
both in that he made an Ephod contrary to the Word of God, and in that seeing
the abuse thereof he took it not away. Now who sees not, that the like happens
in the Church? how many things did the Saints ordain with a good intent, which
we see at this day changed, partly by abuse and partly by superstition? The
feasts, Ceremonies, Images, Monasteries and the like, none of them were
instituted in that sort at the first, as now they are used, and yet we Gedeons
hold our peace, they take not away the abuse, they take not away the
superstition.

For if we take a reuiew of what was anciently practiced in the Primitive
Church, we shall find that the Discipline thereof had the same scope touching
the soul, which Physic has for the body, and may accordingly be divided
into that which is (...) that is, tending to the preservation of health, and
(...) which aims at the restoring of health, the one conducing to the
preventing, the other to the remoouing of Diseases. Now, as there be in a
Christian man three principal virtues, from whence as from so many vital
parts, all graces in man do flow, to wit, Faith, Hope, and Charity, so this
parcel of Church Discipline which concerned the preservation of health, was
employed in prescribing such Cordials and Antidotes, as were behoofefull to
preserve, fortify, or increase some one of these.

For the benefit of Faith, in respect of knowledge, and to season it with a
true sense and apprehension of divine matters, the Church did apply diverse
instruments.

First Books, and those principally the holy Scriptures, comprising such
writings only as we style by the name of Canonical. To them the Jews of the
dispersion, called Hellenists, added in their Greek translations the Apocrypha
books, as profitable, partly for their matters sake, partly for the supply of
the history of the Bible. Now the Greek and Latin Church receiving their
translations of the old Testament, not of the Jews inhabiting Judea (who never
mixed the Apocrypha with the other) but of those of the dispersion, and being
loath to distaste them to whom they were beholding for their pains, were in
the beginning contented only not to sever them from the Canonical Books in
binding, howsoever they did in authority; afterward they began to cite them
in their Sermons and Works, though not as divine, yet as venerable and familiar
writings, then permitted them to be read (as Athanasius Athanas^in Synopsi.
affirms) to the Catechumenists, in length of time, to the Congregation, and
in the end, custom giving them credit; they were doubtfully in the Florentine,
but more palpably in the Tridentine Council. Florent. in decret. sup. un. Jacob.
and Armenian. Trident. Council. sess. 2.
Council canonized with the style of Canonical, and made equal in authority
to the other.

Secondly, Translations; for books in an unknown language are like Trumpets
giving an uncertain sound. And therefore, no sooner was the Gospel preached,
but the Scriptures had their translations. The universal Church by custom,
established none, because none could be of universal use. Yet amidst such
variety as was then extant, that which passes under the name of the
Septuagint, found best entertainment in the Greek Church, and a translation
made out of the same into Latin, by an uncertain Author, found somewhat the
like in the Latin. The chief cause whereof seems to be Hieron. praefat. in
lib. Job.
this, that for a long time there wanted in the West, those who being skilled
in the Hebrew could supply their wants from thence with a better. This Latin
translation was afterward partly mended, partly Bellar. lib. 2. de verbo Dei,
c. 9.
patched with fragments and phrases picked out of Hierome; winning authority in
the Western Church by two means, Custom and Ignorance of the Originalls, and
at length in the Council of Trent made authentical, and by two Popes, Sixtus
Council. Trident. sess. 2. Bellar. lib. 2. de verbo Dei, c. 2.. Dices. Sixtus
Senens. lib. vlt. cap. vlt.
Quintus, and Clement the eighth, confirmed by two contrary Editions, with the
solecismes of the Translators, and errors of the Transcribers.

Ceremonies were the third instrument; whereby, as by certain outward signs
and characters, the Church would imprint in the minds of ignorant people, the
use and effects of the Sacraments. These at the first were performed by
expressions rather verbal then real, as Exhortations, Prayers,
Interrogations, and such like, as we use in baptism. But after awhile, to
these verbal and audible ceremonies, real and visible were added, and that
without any bad meaning or intention of their first founders; but see how Tares
in the end displayed themselves amongst the Wheat. For what were at the first
but few, by Saint Austens time were so multiplied, that in his 119. Epist. he
complayneth of their burden, and now are so increased, that they are more then
can be borne; what were then but Bellar. lib. 2. de Sacram. cap. 31. Quinta.
things accessorie, and helps to the worship of God, are now become parts of
the worship of God and meritorious; what were then but signs, and had only
vsum significandi, a use to signify, are now Bellarm. ibid.. Secunda, and.
Tertia.
become causes, and have vsum efficiendi, a use to produce supernatural
effects.

From these Ceremonies, in process of time, abused and misunderstood, many
gross errors had their original. For to begin with Baptism, it borrowing a
ceremony from Exorcising, which in those days was a gift in the Church of
casting out Devils by adjuration, it signified thereby (not that men before
Baptism are possessed with the Devil) but first, what they are by Nature,
that is, children Aug. de Nupt. and Concupisc. cap. 29. and Epist. 105. ad
Sixtum. Socrat. histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 5 cap. 21. Joseph. Vicecomes de
antiquis baptismi ritib. lib. 1. cap. 19. and 20. Hieron. dialog. lib. 3.
aduers. Pelag. in fine. August. lib. 2. de Nupt. and Concupisc. cap. 18. Item,
libris quaruor, ad Bonifacium, and sex libris contra Julian, etc.
of wrath, and servants of the Devil; and secondly, what we are by Grace
(whereof Baptism is a Sacrament) that is, freed from the bondage of Satan,
and made Co-heires of the Kingdom of heaven. But howsoever, Baptism was not
held for a long time so absolutely necessary to salvation, that setting
contempt or wilful negligence aside in the party which dies unbaptized, a man
might not be saved without it, witness the custom of the church, which was to
have but one or two times in the year at the most (to wit, Easter and
Whitsontide) assigned for the same, yet this exorcising at length began to
work so far with some, especially after that diverse of the Fathers spoke
hyperbolically of baptism in eagerness against Pelagius the Heretic, who
taking away original sin, took also away with it by consequence the
necessity of baptism, that what was at the first held necessary, necessitate
Bellar. lib. 1. de Baptism. cap. 4.
precepti, by the necessity of a precept, was made to be necessary,
necessitate medij, by the necessity of a means; and in conclusion, the
Schoolmen having taken a more distinct survey of Hell, then was Bellar. lib.
2. de Purgat. cap. 6.
done afore-time, assigned lodgings in the third story for children which die
without baptism, wherein they award them poenam damni, pain of loss, though
not poenam sensus, pain of sense, affirming Bellar. lib. 1. de Baptism. cap. 4.
farther this pain to be eternal.

As it fared with Baptism, so did it with the Eucharist; For what was
Transubstantiation therein at the first, but non ens, a thing neither proueable
by the Scriptures, as many of the learned Romanists Biel in Can. Missae.
lect. 40. Cajetan. in 3. Quaest. 72. art. 1. Fauentin* in 4. sent. disp. 45.
did. 11. c 3. Camaracens. and Scot. apud Bellar. lib. 3. de Sacram. Eucharist.
c. 23. Scotus apud Bellar. ibid. Vid. August. in de Catechizandis rudibus, c. 9.
do confess, nor (as some of them do also grant) received for diverse hundred
years into the articles of Christian faith. The Fathers indeed acknowledged a
change of the Bread and Wine, but it was a change not of their substance, but
of their use, for of common elements, they become Sacraments. This change of
their use by occasion of Altars and other ceremonies which crept in, as also by
reason of the figurative speeches of the Ancients, uttered partly imprint a
lively apprehension of the things exhibited, and partly to breed a reverend
opinion of the Sacraments, as containing in them so great mysteries, produced
in the end a doubt of the change of the substance, but what kind of change it
was, was sooner defined then understood. For Berengarius was forced in his
abiuration, to acknowledge a sensual change, wherein the body of Christ is
touched by the hands, and broken by the De consecrat. did. 2. Can. Ego
Berengarius. Bellar. l. 1. de Eucharist. c. 2.. Quinta Gloss. ad Can. Ego
Berengar. Bell. de Imag. sanct. l. 2. c. 22.. Secundo. Lomb. l. 4. sent. did.
11. A. Scot. 4. sent. did. 11. q. 6. Cajet. 3. part. q. 75 art. 6. Soto. 4.
sent. d. 9. q. 2. Marginist. Scoti. Theor. 1. and 2. Dura^d. 4. sent. d. 11. q.
3. Suarez Metaphys. disp. 31.. 6. Fonsec. Metaph. l. 4. c. 2 q. 4. and lib. 5.
c. 8. q. 5. Goffred. quolibet. 8. q. 16. Mirandul. in Apolog. q 9. Henric.
quolib. 9. q. 9. and quolib. 11 q. 4. Fab. Fauent. in 4. sent. disp. 16. c. 6.
Thoma and Thomistae volunt transubstantiationem esse ad substantiam, and per
ipsam accipientem esse, quae dicitur transubstantiatio productiua. Tho. 3.
part. q. 75. art. 4.
teeth of the Receauer, which the new Romanists do disclaim, and the gloss
tells us, that unless we cautelously understand his words, we shall fall into
a worse heresy then that wherein Berengarius himself was, whereas there are
no exacter forms of speaking in matters of faith (says Bellarmine) then those
which they use that abjure heresy. Peter Lombard, the father of the
Schoolmen, though he acknowledges a change of the Bread and Wine, yet what
kind of change it is, whether formal or substantial, or of any other kind,
he professed he was not able to define; much less could he call it
Transubstantiation, which term in his days was not coined. Many of the
ancient Schoolmen which succeeded him, being loath (as it seems) to quit all
the truth at once, held only a partial change, that is, either of the matter
without the form, which opinion by some is attributed to Scotus, or of the
form without the matter, as Aegidius and Durand, or of the matter and form
without the subsistencie (which the Jesuits in their Metaphysics make not to
differ really from the essence) as Goffred, and after him Picus Mirandula; or
lastly, of the specificall nature without the individual, as Henricus. Thomas
Aquinas, the first that set Popery in joint, and to whom the present Church of
Rome owes for many Tenets, held a total change, and added withal, that this
change is conuersio productiua, a conversion whereby one thing is produced of
the other; but the Jesuits, though they hold the change to be total, yet
they say, it is not conuersio productiua, a conversion whereby one thing is made
of the other, but only conuersio adductiua, a conversion whereby Bell. l. 3. de
Eucharist. c. 18.. Ex his colligimus conuersionem panis in corpus Domini, non
esse productiuam, nec co^seruatiuam, sed adductiuam.
one thing is brought into the place of the other, and so instead of
Transubstantiation, which was confirmed in the Lateran Council, they have
invented in respect of the Bread and Wine a Desubstantiation, or Annihilation,
and in respect of Christ's body a Translocation.

Ceremonies and the exorbitant Phrases of Rhetoricians having brought
Transubstantion into the World, their Infant turned Midwife to the Mother, and
delivered her of two other Monsters, adoration and the Sacrifice of the Mass,
though her travel of this later seems to have been both hard and tedious,
for as the Master of the Sentences, and also Aquinas P. Lomb. sent. l. 4. did.
12. g. Thom. 3. part. q. 83. art. 1.
long after him defined it, the proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the
living and the dead, was not then received, but only, the commemoratiue and
Eucharisticall which we acknowledge.

To leave other fruit of the same tree untasted; by the same wicket of
Ceremonies, crept Images into the Church. For Ceremonies which at the first
were no more then representations of accidents, and symbola virtutum,
descriptions and pictures of virtues, became afterward to be representations
of Bellar. l. 2. de imag. c. 9. Sanderus l. 2. de cultu imag. c. 4 Fauentin. in
3. sent. c. 6. Suarez ex Alano. disp. 54.. 1. Eusebius. l. 7. hist. c. 14.
substances, and imagines personarum, Images of persons. Howsoever it was,
these personal representations in their birth, were more modest, being only
of Christ's humanity, or of the Saints, and those in private houses, or
profane places, not in public Churches. But after three hundred years, the
custom which (Eusebius says) sprang from Gentilisme, of erecting Images in
honor of those whom Epiphan. Epist. ad Johan. Epis. Hieroso. tom. 2
men esteemed Saviors, brought them to find entrance (though not without
opposition) into some Churches, but to this end only, as having an Historical
use to recall to mind the memory of things past. About six hundred years
after Christ, besides the Historical use to inform the understanding, they
acquired also a Rhetorical use to stir up Greg. l. 7. Ep. 53. ad Secundinum,
in fine. Bell. l. 2. de imagine. c. 12. Septima Synodus definiuit, imagines esse
venerandas, non quidem cultu latriae, sed honor illo, quo etiam prosequimur
sacras literas etc. Vid. Bell. l. 2. de imagine. sanct. cap. 20. Alex. 3. part.
q. 30. art. vlt. Durand. l. 3. sent. did. 9. q. 2. Alphonsus a Castro, verbo,
Imag. Thom. 3. part. q 25. art. 3. Caiet ibid. Bonauent. Carthus. Ailman.
Capreolus in 3. sent. did. 9. Bell. l. 2. de imagine. c. 20. 2^
devotion, and Gregory the Great, though he misliked worshipping of them, yet
he allowed worshipping before them. This worshipping before them in the second
Nicen Council gained them the honor, though not of adoration, yet of
veneration, and this veneration in the end by Thomas Aquinas and others came to
be interpreted adoration, but with this difference, that some spoke more
doubtfully, teaching the Image not to be worshipped in it self, but only the
person before, or by the Image, as Alex. de Hales, Durand and Alphonsus a
Castro. Others more bluntly, that the Image is to be worshipped in it self,
and that with the same worship that the person is which it represents, as
Thomas Aquinas, Bonauenture, Caietan, Carthusianus, Ailman and Capreolus. But
the Jesuits walking the middle way, have invented an Idolatry more sublimated
and refined, saying that the Image is not to be worshipped with the same
worship that the person himself is which it figures, understanding by the
same, the same for its own sake, but yet it may and ought to be (say they)
with the same for the persons sake which it represents; with the same, though
not of it self, yet by accident; though not properly, yet improperly; though
not perfectly, yet imperfectly; though not directly, yet reductiuely; though
not univocally, yet anologically; the one sending his Scholars to Hell by
Sunshine, the other through a mist of distinctions.

Now as the Primative Church was studious to benefit and advance faith in the
point of knowledge, so was it no less solicitous to arm and fortify it
against the battery of temptations. Hence it was, that during the heat of
persecutions, the custom of the Christians was, daily to receive the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, as a sovereign Antidote against the fear of death. But
the persecutions being ended, and the peoples devotion (as in prosperity it
comes to pass) somewhat abated, this daily communicating was retained only by
the Clergy, not that the Laity might not receive with them de iure, of right,
but, that they did it not de facto, in deed. Now, because there were not in all
places store of Clergy to communicate together, as in private Parish Churches,
Hermitages and the like, for a while the Priests in those places, (imitating
the Socrat. l. 5. ^. 21
Alexandrian custom) read only the Prayers and Gospels of the Communion, and
received not, but afterward fearing to be defrauded of their Offerings (if
they read only and not received) they began to receive alone, teaching that
this action of theirs being performed in the name of others, was applied and as
beneficial unto them as if they did it themselves; and hence grew private
Masses in the Church of Rome, wherein the Priest communicates or excommunicates
rather without the people.

The second Christian virtue which the Primitive Church labored, by her best
Medicines to support and preserve, was Hope, which reflects upon the future
bliss, and the joys of the World to come. For excitement whereunto, two
customs were entertained; the one pointing at that happiness which the Saints
enjoy immediately after their departure hence; the other, at the fullness of
glory which they shall participate at the end and cosummation of the World.

That which pointed at the joy and bliss which the Saints enjoy immediately
after their departure hence, consisted partly in thankesgiuings unto God for
the glory bestowed upon them, partly in other remembrances, to excite and
stir up men from consideration of their reward, to be imitators of their
Virtues. For deeper impression whereof, there were wont to be yearly
Solemnities at their Sepulchers, Commemorations of their names, and Orations
made in their praises. Now it being the custom of them which fell in
persecution, to implore the Prayers of Martyrs in Prison for them: Saint
Cyprian Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 3. l 3. Ep. 18.
upon supposition that Saints departed hence do pray for the particular
behoof of those whom they know they left behind them, did desire some Martyrs
and others, not after, but before their deaths, that if they prevented him and
went before him into their Masters presence that then they would not forget to
remember him unto God. This soliciting of Martyrs before their deaths, brought
in the next Age a custom to call upon them after their deaths, and this
calling upon them after it, howsoever it may be accounted rather amongst the
strains of Rhetoric (being done in their Aniuersarie Declamations) then the
Aphorisms of Faith, yet by Gregory the Greates time, it weaued Prayers into
the Lyturgie, that God would hear their Intercessions; but afterward when the
Glass of the Trinity was perfected, wherein the Schoolmen conceive the Saints
to see whatsoever is done upon earth, then these Prayers to God to hear the
Intercessions of the Saints, were changed into Prayers, to the Saints, to hear
our Intercessions themselves, which is the practice of the present Church of
Rome, and came in (says Bell. l. 1. de sanctor. beatitud. c. 8.
Bellar.) consuetudine non lege, by a custom not a law.

The other Custom that aimed at the fullness of glory which the Saints shall
enjoy at the end and consummation of the World, was performed by Prayers for
their glorious Resurrection, and their public acquittall in the last Day, the
one being an exemplification of the Petition, Thy Kingdom come, the other of
that which follows after it, Thy will be done. For the greater solemnity
whereof, Oblations at Funerals and sometimes yearly, by the friends of the
deceased were made, not (as some Popish Writers do conceive) of the Eucharist,
but (as Albaspinus notes) of common Bread or other things, Albaspin. de vet.
Eccles. ritibus, l. 1 c. 10.
of which the Congregation eating and communicating, acknowledged the deceased
by that action (as a sign of Communion) to be co-members with them of the
same mystical Body the Church, and interested in the Common Prayers touching
the last day. The which produced sundry opinions amongst Sixth. Senens.
bibliothec. li. 6. annot. 345.
the Ancients; for Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Lactantius and
others were from hence of opinion, that no particular judgment passes upon
the Saints until the last day; but the church following, being loath as it
seems to put off this particular judgment wholly until then, and yet not
willing to determine, that it should be given immediately upon the passage
hence, but allowing an indefinite Vid. officium pro defunctis, and Bell. lib.
2. de purg. cap. 5. Offic. de funct. ibid. Libera domine animas omnium
defunctorum de ore Leonis, de profundo lacu, ne absorbeat eas tartarus, ne
cadant in obscurum, he says not, ne maneant in obscuro, as if they were there
already, but ne cadant in obscurum, of which fear they who are presumed to be
in purgatory are by the Jesuits own confessions, altogether freed*
time for the same, did apply the Churches prayers and well-wishes, (besides
their former reference to the final judgment) to this interim also allotted
for the particular; in the which they thought they might accompany them to
Gods Tribunal, and pray for their deliverance from hell, and the jaws of the
Lion. At last the doctrine of purgatory, which (as I shall now declare) for a
long time passed as an uncertain or particular opinion amongst private men,
getting sway, the self same prayers were interpreted neither of a general,
nor of the particular judgment, but of the iayle delivery of souls out of
purgatory, and so established in the Florentine Council celebrated. An. 1438.

Another opinion which the oblations and prayers for the public acquittall of
the dead wrought amongst some of the ancients, was, that (seeing few dyed which
by the bounty of their friends enjoyed not that honor more or less) all men,
good and bad were either at the general Judgment, or before, to be purged by
fire, the pain whereof, if need were should by these prayers of the living be
either diminished or taken away. And hence it is that purgatory got entrance
into the Church, which being at the first like the unknown land at the South
of America called terra del fogo, was by Origin upon misconstruction of the
prayers aforesaid, and an ouerweening opinion of advancing the mercy of God,
translated out of their Academie of Plato into the Schools of Christians. Long
it was ere this misshapen Monster could be brought into any probable form. For
Origin who first embraced it, taught that the Devils themselves should be
saved by it. Others Vid. August. de ciuitate Dei. lib. 21. cap. 17. and 23.
cap. 18. and 24. cap. 19. and. 25. cap. 20. and. 25. cap. 25. and 26. cap. 22.
and. 27.
to correct that extremity, said, not the Devils, but yet all men. A third,
not all men, but all Christians and such as are baptized. A fourth, not all
Christians nor all such as are baptized, yet all such as have been once in
their lives true believers. A fifth, not all such as have been once in their
lives true believers, but yet all such as persevere in the Orthodoxe faith
until their death. A sixth, not all that persevere in the Orthodoxe faith
until their death, but yet all such as perseuering do give alms; for these
(say they) how great sinners soever they be otherwise, shall have judgment
with mercy. A seventh, not all that show mercy, but yet all that have Christ
for their foundation, that is, all Bell. lib. 2. de
that dye in the state of grace, which opinion is purg. cap. 1. Harding. cont.
Apollogiam Iuelli. cap. 16. Diuis. 2. Bell. lib. 1. de purg. cap. vlt..
respondet.
attributed unto Saint Ambrose, Hierome, Rupertus, and others. Saint Austen who
complains that his age was full of presumptions, being not able to resist the
stream of these ouerflowing errors, thought yet to use the same policy
touching purgatory, which he did in other points, as prayer for the dead
invocation of Saints, and the like, that is, either to moderate it, or make it
doubtful, thinking by degrees to make it incredible. Sometimes therefore he
seems to allow it, but yet by the Papists own consession under this prouiso,
that if any such place should be, yet it is uncertain what end or effect it
has, whether to satisfy Gods Justice for the sin past, or whether to
diminish (as temporal pains use to do) the evil affections of sin still
remaining. Again sometimes Aug. Enchirid. cap. 67. Item de ciuitat. Dei. lib.
21. cap. 26. Hypognost. l. 5. Bell. lib. 2. de purg. cap. 1.
he denies the thing it self, sometimes he doubts of it. Nor is it yet
agreed amongst the Papists either for the fire, or the place, or the time of
it; only thus far they seem at length to concur, that souls do therein
satisfy both for venial sins, and for the guilt of punishment due unto
mortal sins, when the guilt of the sin it self is remitted and forgiven;
which, how contrary both to reason and the ancient purgatory of the Fathers
it is, I leave to the judicious to consider. It was first confirmed in the
Florentine Council above mentioned.

Charity succeeds, for the maintenance and increase whereof, they used the
best policy they could to plant Unity and Concord both in the Church
Universal, and also in particular Churches, that so did. 99. cap. 1. Vbi
primates erant seculi, ac primaiu diciaria potestas -- ipsis quoque in
ciuitatibus vellocis nostros patriarchas, etc. Berterius, diatrib. 2. cap. 12.
Septem sunt in orient. and diat. 1. cap. 3 Occidens omnis 6. habet.
if possibly they could, all schisms and contentions amongst Christians, might
be removed, and the bond of peace might be kept inviolable.

For the preservation hereof in the Church universal, it was thought good,
that according to the secular division of the Empire, the Church should be
divided into certain Diocesses, whereof there were at the first (by Berterius
account) thirteen in number, who under the names of Patriarchs and Bishops of
the first Seas, should join in care and counsel for the good of the Christian
Commonwealth. Amongst these, three were (in regard of the Cities wherein they
resided) more eminent then Hegesippus de excid. vrb. Hierosolim. l. 3. cap. 3.
the rest, and began to encroach upon the others jurisdiction, to wit, Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch, to which in the second general Council was added for
the same cause, Constantinople and afterward Jerusalem, though this last had
indeed until the fifth general Council, but a title without substance as
being subject to Caesaria, his Metropolitan and in last resort unto Antioch.
Now because all things should be done in order, it was thought fit that the
Pope, because he was Bishop of Rome, the imperial City should have the
precedencie, though not Council. genesis 5. Vid. Cyprian. epist* 55. and 68. edit.
Pamel. Item Aenaeum. Silui. ep. 288.
of authority super reliquos, over the rest, yet of place, inter reliquos,
amongst the rest. This precedencie of place wan him in time a precedencie in
power, but it was at the first but potestas honoraria, a kind of courtesy
authority, not long after it came to be claymed, as ordinaria, as an ordinary
power and so was confirmed in the Florentine Council. Lastly, this ordinary
power bare sway awhile, because the Pope was great in general Counsels, but
now since the last Lateran Council, under Leo the Bell. lib. 2. de Council.
cap. 17.
tenth, the Jesuits will have it to bear sway, by another title; because the
Pope is great over general Counsels, which adds a farther degree to his
greatness, that whereas he was heretofore heard de facto in deed, for that he
was judged Orthodoxe, he now challenges to be believed de iure, of right,
because he cannot be heretical.

For the preservation of unity and concord in particular Churches, there was a
kind of Communion amongst the Ancients, which they celebrated by Eulogies,
that is, by Bread, not consecrated for Albaspin. de vet. Eccles. rit. lib. 1.
cap. 8.
the use of the Sacrament, but otherwise blessed by the Bishop, the which
howsoever it was not at the beginning exported forth of the Church where it was
offered, yet afterward it came to be sent upon solemn festiualls from the
Mother Church unto the Parishes and Villages thereto belonging, by
communicating whereof (as by a lively symboll) the fellowship and communion
between all the faithful of the same Diocese was represented, and the people
acknowledged themselves to compose the same body of Christ together. Now, some
being possessed (as Albaspinus observes) with a religious Alb. ibid.
conceit of this ceremony, began to deal in like manner with the Eucharist,
as may be gathered out of the fourteenth Canon of the Laodicean Council,
where the practice thereof is expressly forbidden. But partly the custom which
some particulars, in the time of persecution (especially Hermites (who seldom
had the opportunity of receiving) took up, of carrying part of the Sacrament
home with them, to partake thereof when they pleased, and partly the charity
which in some places was showed in like manner to the sick, bringing Eusebius.
hist. lib. 6. cap. 36.
unto them the remaynder of the Bread and Wine, in token of their Communion
with the rest, prevailed so far at length with the Roman Church, that what
was then but voluntary, and sprang from private devotion, is now made
necessary, and enjoined by public injunction; and what then was used
sacramentally and for a sign of Communion, is now ordained for other uses, as
circumgestation, adoration, and the like.

Thus having given a taste of some principal errors in Popery, which sprang
from that part of Church discipline, which consisted in the conservation of the
souls health; it follows that something should be said of that which
belonged to the restoring of the same in such as had impaired it by their
falls. This part consisted in two principal ingredients, Corrasiues, and
Lenitiues. The Corrasiues were such medicines as were applied to those that
fell, for purging out of the old corruption, and keeping of others from the
like infection, the which was performed, partly by confessions, and partly
other satisfactions.

Confessions, were nothing else at the first, but public recognitions, for
public scandalls; which being found useful to Penitents, made Origin and
Origin. homil. 2. in Psalm. 37.
others to persuade men to do the like to their Ministers for private
offenses, to the end that making known their griefs, they might have
plasters for their wounds. But these public confessions through the abating
of zeal and avoiding of shame, being turned into private, some began to
confound the one private confession, which was imposed by Church discipline,
with the other which was voluntary, and so in time, of Consilium
Ecclesiasticorum, an advice of Churchmen, it became Praeceptum Ecclesiae, the
precept of the Church; and this again, which beforetime was only a Confession
of sins, quoad substantiam, for their substance, was by Council. Lateran. sub.
Innocent. 3. cap. 21.
the Lateran Council under Innocent the third, farther clogged with an
Inquisition of sins, etiam quoad circumstantias, even together with all their
particular circumstances.

Satisfactions which properly come under the Law of Church Discipline, were
certain outward remonstrances of sorrow and repentance, wherewith for the
trial of Penitents and example of others, the Primitive Church did exercise
those that fell, before they restored them to the same state of Communion
wherein aforetimes they did stand. Diverse of the Fathers, that they might breed
a willingness in men to undergo them, spoke somewhat Hyperbolically in their
commendations, saying, that offenses were thereby redeemed, purged, and
expiated, which being understood (as the Master of the Sentences expounds them)
not of purgations P. Lomb. sent. l. 4. d. 18. I.
from the offense as it is an offense to God, or from the punishment due to
sin (both which are opposed unto Justification) but only of the macula, or
spot (which the Schoolmen making to consist in an habitual prauity is opposed
chiefly to Sanctification) can little advantage the Popish cause. For who
doubts, but that Repentance and Sorrow, though they are not meritorious causes,
yet are isntrumental, whereby grace takes her speedier effect in diminishing
the evil affections and vain desires Guil Duobus modis sumitur remissio
peccatorum, Primo, pro non imputatione eorum, secundo pro abolitione macularum
ipsorum. Dionys. Carthus. in 4. sent. did, 16. q. 2.
which dwell in us? But the ancient rites of Satisfaction degenerating with the
Times, and the Schoolmen, beginning to confound Justification with
Sanctification, ( First, by adding the purgation of the macula, or spot unto
that which is truly termed Justification, as a Species of it, and afterward
forgetting to distinguish them at all) another kind of Satisfaction succeeded
in the formers place, differing from it, First, in the matter, as building upon
Works of Supererogation, viz. Pilgrimages, Whippings, Vows with the like.
Secondly, in the end, being not imposed to satisfy the Church in case of
scandal, but to transact with God upon terms of Justice. Thirdly, in the
time, not being now performed before absolution (as formerly was used) but
after it. Lastly, in the object being not so much for sin in it self, as for
temporal punishment due unto it, when the offense is remitted.

The Lenetiues which the Church applied to such as she perceived to be truly
contrite and sorrowful for their sins committed, resided chiefly in
absolutions which were exercised either in foro conscientiae, in the Court of
the Conscience, whereby the penitent was certified of his reconciliation to
God, or in foro Ecclesiae, in the Court of the Church, whereby they who had
given public offense by their fall, were reconciled unto the Congregation.

For the first of these, as the Church never denied the benefit of it to those
who rightly desire it, so the Popish necessity and other positions concerning
it, are but doctrines of a new Edition. For most Lomb. 3. sent. did. 18. Occam
in 4. sent. q. 8. and 9. ad 1. arg. Scoti. Alex. de Hales, Sum. part. 4. q. 21.
membr. 1. Thom. in 4. sent. did. 18. Richardus, apud Dion. Carthus. in 4.
sent. did 18. q. 3. Bonauent. ib.
of the ancient Schoolmen held the absolution to be but either declaratiue, as
Peter Lombard, Occam, Alexander de Hales, or at most but dispositiue, whereby
faith is ingenerated in the minds of the hearers, by the which they are made
capeable of remission, as Thomas Aquinas, and Richardus, to whom Bonauenture
may be added, who says, that the power of the Keys extends it self to the
remission of the fault by way of deprecation, not by way of imparting it. The
Council of Trent sends a banne after them, which deny the Priests to have that
power of remittting sins which the Church understands them to have, but was
so wise in the mean time, as to conceal what the Churches meaning should be,
yet if we would know by the Jesuits, what it is at this present, they will you,
that the Priests do absolve from sin, not by declaring or preaching, but by
extingishing and dissoluing it; as blowing does the fire, or the wind does the
clouds, that is by a true and Physical efficiency, so Bellarmine, Suarez,
Bell. de poenit. lib. 3. c. 2. Suar. 3. d. 9.. 2. Tollet. Com. Luc. 5. annot.
41 Council. Elib. Can. 1. 36. 22. Nicen. Can. 11, 12.
Tollet, etc.

The second sort of Lenetiues, consisted in relaxations, or releasements from
Ecclesiastical Censures. For whereas, during the heat of persecutions, the
severity of Church Discipline was such, that for some offenses, ten years, for
some the whole life after was adjudged to the doing of penance; the
satisfaction notwithstanding, which some gave the Church by outward signs of
penitency, and requests Albaspin. 1. 1. cap. 20.
of Martyrs in Prison for them, caused the Bishops to release them either of
all or of part of those years wherein they stood bound to undergo their
penance, and these were the Indulgences of those days. But the times growing
more loose and licentious, and withal the esteem held of Church Censures
diminishing, the Clergy was saine to remit much of their rigor; and to
change public penances into private, or other good works, and so to bring in
that which we call commutations. Now these also in the end being slighted,
the Bishops who had let go and quitted the true reins, took hold by the
false, and taught, that whatsoever a man omits to perform of his commutations
in this life, the same he shall pay full dearly in Purgatory, in the the World
to come; which brought an eager and fresh desire in men to procure with all
cost and charges, Pardons for the neglect thereof; and because some cases were
reserved to the Popes own power of dispensing (every man being desirous to
have a plenary or full pardon) they began to neglect other Bishops, and
established the Pope (by that means) in the sole right of granting
Indulgences, which being at the first, but absolutions in the Consistory of the
Church, and that for the living only, became a thousand years and more after
Christ, to be absolutions in the Chancery of Heaven, and that also for the dead.

By these few examples it may appear, how from the misconstruction and wrested
Interpretations of Primitive Discipline, the body of Popery is descended, and
withal the degrees whereby it sprang up to this stature which now it has, to
the end that the Devils policy being ripped up, our ignorance of the first
Founders of Romish Cockle, may seem as pardonable, as was this of the Servants
in my Text of the Sower of Tares: and withal that our Adversaries may not
think us so stupid as to know nothing, though we be not so skillful as they
require, to know every thing. The basterdly brood of a common Strumpet may have
his reputed father known, though not his natural, and there may be Acts and
Records to show by whom it was legitimated, though not authentike Registers, by
whom it was begotten; and so can we show, when, by whom, and in which of the
Popes Markets or Councels these Tares were first allowed and sold for good
Wheat, though we be not so cunning in the black Art, as to know the Devil or
his Disciples name that sowed them; we know them as the Servants did in facto
esse, being shot up and bearing fruit, though we may be ignorant for their
fieri, by what evil Genius they were planted, or under what malignant Planet
they took root; for what shall we say? does a thing desist to be what it is,
because the time and original of it is not known? Old Age, is it not old age,
because the hour or day wherein it begins cannot be given? Does a
Consumption cease to be a Consumption, because the moment when one falls into
it cannot be assigned? Is not the shadow of the Dial toward night removed
from the place it possessed at noone, because the moving of it cannot be
discerned? Are no Customs of force, because the Authors and Commencers of
them be not written? Or may any conclude against the Apostle, that he erred in
saying the mystery of iniquity did already work, because he teaches 2 Thessalonians.
2. 7, 8.
in the same place, that the wicked man was not then revealed? But how should
we hope to discover fully the practices of Satan and the proceedings of
Antichrist, which is de regno tenebrarum, of the Kingdom of darkness, when as
our Savior tells us, that the Kingdom of God, which is regnum lucis, the
Kingdom of light, is as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should
sleep, and rise night and day, yet should the Seed spring and grow up, he
knows not how? Mark 4. 27. That which Saint Aug. Epist. 29. ad Hieronymum.
Austen therefore in his 29. Epistle has touching the propagation of original
sin, may teach us what use to make of the births and propagations of
Heresies, that when a certain man had fallen into a pit wherein was much water
ready to choke him, another passing by that way, and wondering at the chance,
said, how fellest thou in, the poor man being in more need of relief than
discourse, answers, cogita quomodo hinc me liberes, non quomodo huc ceciderim
quaeras, it is but a superfluous question to ask how I fell in, think rather
I beseech thee, by what means thou may help me out. The Servants in my
Text, propounded the like question (as you see) when they demanded, From whence
the Tares are? But what answer did the Householder shape them? Did he name the
Author, or describe him (as the Jesuits require of us) by individual
differences, saying, Such an one has done it? No, only in general, (...) an
Enemy, or as Beza renders it, inimicus quispiam, some Enemy has done it; as
who would say; it concerns you rather to use all possible diligence you can to
root them up, and to look upon that which is before, then with too
thriftlesse expense of time, tolooke at that which is behind, and to study
vnde, From whence they are.

Nor does it any whit impugn our industry employed this way, that the Servants
asking the Husbandman, if they should gather them up, he answered, Nay, least
whilst you gather up the Tares, you root Verse 29.
up the wheat with them; for he says not, ne cohibeatis, you may not
restrain them, nor does he say, ne dispergatis, you may not disperse them
(for as Chrysostom upon this place notes, The Conuenticles of Heretics are
to be dissolved) but ne colligatis, you may not gather them up at once; ne
colligetis, you may not bind them in bundles. There are in this Parable two
sorts of Taskers mentioned; Operarij ad messem, Laborers to prepare the
Harvest, and Operarij messis, Laborers of the Harvest. The former are we, who
in this Parable are called Servants; the later are the Angels, which are here
termed reapers. Verse 27. Verse, 30. and 39.
To us, the Servants, he says now, Plantate, rigate, amputate, Plant, water,
prune, for preservation. At the Harvest, he will say, non nobis (as Saint
Austen notes) sed messoribus, not unto us, but to the reapers, colligite ad
iudicium, gather together unto judgment, colligate in fasciculis ad
supplicium, bind in bundles unto punishment, but congregate in horreum ad
praemium, gather the wheat into my barn, for the reward; which God of his
infinite mercy grant unto us, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the
Father and holy Spirit, one Essence and three Persons, be rendered all praise,
honor and glory, might, majesty and dominion, now and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

