IHS



THE LIFE OF B. ALOYSIVS GONZAGA of the Society of JESUS, Eldest Son of
Ferdinand Prince of the S. R. Empire, and Marquis of Castilion.

Written in Latin by the R. Fa. Virgilius Ceparius of the same Society.

And tran^lated into English by R. S.

AT PARIS. M.DC.XXVII.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE THE LADY MARY COUNTESS OF Buckingham etc.
MADAME,
I know better with what mind, then with what words to reco^mend this life of
B. Aloysius to my Country, and principally to your HONOR, and in you to the
Nobility of both sexes in this Kingdom. For if my learned Author F. Virgilius
Ceparius (whom I reverence for his piety, and can sooner admire then imitate
for his Eloquence) never satisfied himself, in drawing this Blessed Model to
the life; what may I hope for, being but a seely Interpreter of his harmonious
Pen? Howsoever, if out of the forwardness of my desire to do good, I have
offered violence to my judgment, I cannot but expect pardon from your HONOR;
and from my Country not only pardon, but even thanks, for so much as they may
plainly see, that in respect of their profit, I have undervalued my own
credit.

Happily would I esteem my self beggered of my reputation, if by my means
this Blessed Cittize^ of Heaven, speaking English to my Countrymen, might
enrich either them, or me with any of his Virtues. And how better to
acco^modate him to speak unto them, then under your Honorable Protection, I
cannot well imagine. For whereas it has been usually the art of skillfull
Grafters, in those trees that they would have to prosper fairly in themselves,
and yield their fruit plentifully to their owners, to graft them in stocks of
their own kind (and for such I take your Ladyship to be, in your affinity to
Blessed Aloysius, for Honor, and the prosecutio^ of virtue;) most worthily may
I suppose, that both the humble service I owe unto You in particular, and the
respect that I ought to have to my whole Country in general, exact at my
hands that I dedicate this Book unto your HONOR; hoping that it may both
encourage and instruct you in that happy course of Virtue, which so
prosperously you have begun; and unto others your Inferiors yield those
successful fruits, which seriously I wish it should; who will always rest,

Your Honors humble servant to be commanded. R. S.

TO OUR MOST HOLY LORD, PAVL THE FIFTH, Supreme Bishop. Francis Gonzaga Prince
of the S. R. Empire, Marquis of Castilion* etc.
MOst Holy Father.
Whereas Aloysius Gonzaga my elder Brother (o^ which Honor truly I think my
self unworthy) in respect of that holy ^ife which he lead upon earth, and in
respect of those things which after his death, by the intercession of his
prayers, are effected above the force of Nature, is so much renowned, that not
only in Italy, but in foraine Countries also, there is exhibited veneration and
honor to his Picture, expressed either in Tables, or Brass, as if it were of
some Saint: And for so much as it is the custom of Families, to propagate the
memory and Honor of their Ancestors or Illustrious Fame, by preserving their
Pictures or statu's; I had likewise determined to keep at home for the behoof
of me, and my Posterity, this History, as a monument of my duty, and observance
toward him, being a representation not only of his body, but also of his mind:
which part of us, truly, is so much the more admirable, for that it makes
admirable all other parts, and so far the more worthy, because it is the
Author of all dignity and worth.

But afterward being exhorted by Pope Clement the eight, a man most worthy of
Eternal Memory, who for so much as he did both remember with what sanctimony
he had lead his life, and had heard the fame of his miracles, thought it fit to
be diuulged for the public good, changing my resolution I determined to put it
in print. This truly during his life, was not in my power to perform; since,
he departed out of this world at the time when I was called by my Sovereign
Lord the Emperor, into Germany. But now, seeing You (most holy Father) have
with infinite congratulation of all sorts of people succeeded him; and have not
only approved of this his will, but also, after You were certified by certain
Illustrious Cardinals of the sacred Senate (upon whom you imposed that
charge) of his excellent example of virtue, and sanctity of manners, have
vouchsafed some few days since, by your letters sent unto me, to honor him
with the title of Blessed, I now come with all the humility I can, to
consecrate unto your Holiness, his Life, augmented not only with those
mira^cles which were wrought even until that time, but with others, that also
followed afterward.

The which thing I thought good to do, both for other causes, and especially,
that when Eternal Honors are wont to be deputed to Saints, by that supreme
Council of the world, over which You (most Holy Father) are the chief; and
that consultation is had in the same, of conferring them upon him; you may take
knowledge, by how good desert of his, and upon how just causes, you may bestow
them upon him. Which truly, that you will do, your Benignity persuades me to
be confifident, (and I beseech you speedily to condescend thereunto) and that
you will give care not only to the pe^iti^s of all the Princes of our Family of
Gonzaga, but also to those many others, who are most humble and earnest
suppliants unto you for his Canonization. And if you please to permit this to
be obtained at your hands, they profess that it would become a thing very
grateful both to them, and to the people of their Dominions. To conclude,
after the custom of my Ancestors, humbly kissing your Holiness fee^, I
ea^nestly beg your Blessing.

TO THE MOST ILlustrious and Excellent Lord Francis Gonzaga, Prince of S. R.
Empire, Marquis of Castilion, Chamberlain and Counselor of Rodulph the 11.
Emperor, and his Ambassador with our Holy Lord, Pope Paul the V.
Virgilius Ceparius of the Society of JESUS, wishes health.
MOST Illustrious, and Excellent Prince.
B. Aloysius Gonzaga your elder Brother, even from his very first Childhood,
gave himself with so great ardour to Christian Religion and Piety, that about
the eighteenth year of his age, out of a desire to enter into the Society of
JESUS, he yielded up unto Marquis Rodulph, who was in like manner his brother,
all his ancient Dominion, and Fortunes. Where in a short time he attained to so
singular a glory of excellent Virtue, and so great a name of Sanctity, as
afterward Almighty God declared, by those miracles that were performed by his
intercession after his death. Therefore by the consent of all, he is to be
accounted amongst those, whose lives as a common, and wholesome document for
Christian men, are committed to writing: upon which consideration, this task
was imposed upon me by my Superiors, to compose this book of his life and
conversation. The which having now by Gods help finished, do s^na the same unto
you (most Excellent Prince) and my request is, that you would give me to
understand whether you would have it published or no.

For although I make no doubt, but that it will much avail to the increasing
of zeal in men, and love toward God, notwithstanding I thought it not fit for
me to do so much, without knowledge how your will stood affected thereunto.
Wherefore I offer and present it unto you, unto whom of right I ought, not only
in respect of your propinquitie with him in blood, wherein you are nearest
allied, and the love wherewith he did always most singularly affect you; but
also (which truly I make most account of) for that as in this degree of life in
which you remain, you may seem to imitate the innocence and virtue of his
mind: so far, as the Bishop of Brescia doubted not upon a time to affirm that
there was no cause why he should be so^icito^s of that part of his Diocese
(Most Excellent Prince) which was placed in your Dominion; for so much as you,
and your most prudent, and choice Espouse Bibiana Pernestainia, did with most
excellent examples of a commen^ab^e life, and also with a government full of
Religion, and Piety, season the minds of those people that were subject unto
you, with so much observance and devotion toward God, that even he made a
great question, whether he was able to strain them up to an higher pitch.

Therefore (Most Excellent Prince) accept this small gift, but such as according
to my singular affection toward you, is given with a very wi^ling mind, and in
this respect comfort, and recreate your self; to the end you may know, that
men of your kindred do flourish, not only upon earth in Military Valor, and
Amplitude of Dominion subject to their power; but even in Heaven also, with the
glory of perfect Virtue, and Sanctimony.

THE AUTHOR OF THIS WORK, to the Pious Reader.
NO one ever was conversant amongst Histories, and the lives of men, who at
diverse times have flourished for sanctity in the Cartholick Church, but by
reading might discover, that the Dinine Providence, so often as it vouchsafed
to the world any Saint, or man of upright example, did for the most part
provide some one of his acquaintance, and familiar friends who, moved out of
some heavenly instinct, should set forth his life and manners. To wit, least
that* whereas their lives being as a rule to direct ours, and point out unto us
the str^it way to B^atitude (much more certainly then either books or
sermons) the fame of them might end together with their death; but rather to
the common good and document of posterity, should flourish even in succeeding
ages. Now for so much as the monumentall acts of those ancient men famous for
sanctity of life, although replenished with all exemplar virtues (as being
further remote from our practice and understanding) are not, in the minds of
many men, of that validity, as of right they should be, and move for the most
part rather admiration then desire of imitation; whereupon some have not feared
now and then to affirm, that it is impossible for any one, now to arrive to
that degree of absolute virtue, which those ancient men attained so happily
unto, as if, forsooth, by process of time, the vigor of minds, and
celestial assistance should be rebated. For this cause therefore, not without
the special providence of God do there daily spring up in the Church (which is
adorned like a fair garden) some men like so many fresh plants and flowers,
who aspire toward heaven with a certain exact manner of life; questionless
to the intent that we may clearly understand, that the hand of our Lord is not
shortened, and that we may as well now, as in times past be conversant in
worshipping God with offices of perfect sanctity.

Amongst these was B. Aloysius Gonzaga, in our memory, a young man never
celebrated with praises answerable to his excellency, who in that space of 23.
years and 3. months which he lived, shined in so much innocence of life, and
proceeded so far in the practice of virtue, that into as many as knew him he
struck admiration, and into diverse that were his familiar friends, a love to
imitate his example. To the intent that they who knew him not whilst he was
living, should not be destitute of his so remarkable presidents, God in his
behalf as he is wont to do, moved the minds of many, to note and set down
in writing those things which they were given to understand of his life. For
to omit, that his coming to religion is compendiously set down in the Annual
letters of the Society of JESUS of the year 2585. committed to print, where
discourse is made of the Roman House of probation: and that in the life of
Eleonora Archduchesse of Austria, and Duchess of Mantua a most eminent woman,
which is likewise published in print, upon occasion, his said entrance into
religion, and departure out of this life, is very commendably made mention of.
He that did principally set forth in writing the virtues of Aloysius, was
Hieronymas Platus, the author of that work entitled, de Dignitate
Cardinalis, ad Fratrem, and in like manner of that other, De bono status
Religiosi, a man of rare guiftes both natural and divine, but especially
endued with an excellent judgment and prudence, and with singular piety and
Religion. He, when as at that time he governed the Nouices at Rome in the House
of the Professed of the Society of JESUS, who are sent thither to assist at
Mass, to which place Aloysius being as yet but a Nouice, repaired, on a time
required of him, that he would orderly recount unto him the whole course of his
life, his purpose of embracing religion, and finally all those benefits which
he received from Almighty God, whilst he lived as yet, in the liberty of the
world. Which truly, for so much as they seemed unto him to proceed after a
singular and altogether an unusual manner, and no otherwise then from a
certain peculiar grace and favor of God, the young man being gone from him,
he briefly set down all those passages in writing.

Next unto this man, I my self began to write his life at Rome, whilst he yet
lived. For whereas in the Roman College I was daily familiar, and in a manner
inward with him, and perceived that all who both heard and beheld his words,
and manners, were excited to piety, no otherwise then men are wont to be who
with a mind rightly prepared, and a desire to profit, read the acts of Saints,
I was of an opinion, that the examples of his sanctity, would work the same
effectual operation with strangers, if they did but once entertain a
knowledge of him. Therefore out of a peculiar instinct (as I suppose) of God,
out of a desire to render a commodity to very many, I determined to commit to
writing his life. And this my resolution F. Hieronymus Platus, with whom I did
communicate the same, did not only approve, but also that he might encourage me
thereunto, delivered me that his writing, which hitherto he had concealed.
Therefore making use of this help, and adding those things which I either
observed my self, or heard from others, almost two years before he departed
out of this life, I so set down his affairs, that notwithstanding, least the
same might come to his ^are, I acquainted very few therewith. We being bereft of
Aloysius, Robert Bellarmine, who is now Cardinal, and had with great
contentment of mind perused that my former part of his life, was very instat
with me, to add theru^to the things that were d^ne in the two last years of
his life, which were yet wanting. But for so much as at that (...) was busied
with other employments, having gathered great plenty of things together, I
delivered all to F. John Val^^ino, who about that time had come out of Sicily
to write the Annals of the Society, that at least he might finish that which I
had beg in, or might use them as should seem best unto him. He, although he
had never known Aloysius, notwithstanding so soon as he vnde^^^ood, that he
shined with so singular fame of sanctity in the Roman College, thinking it a
thing not to b^ deferred, ^il (...) ha^ ordered the mat^ers in his Annals, did
in a particular volume write his life. And that other life of Aloysius has
been frequent in the hands of men.

But because for the most part, those things upon which we insist^d in our
writing, were a great part of them, by a certain holy subt^lty, extra^^ed from
the young man's own mouth, who out of ^is love to humility so related his own
affairs, that many of them ^e cutoff, many he extenuated, very many he
concealed, we entertained a desire more exactly to inform our selves, adding
the certain notes, of times, places, and persons. Therefore whereas we had laid
for intelligence with many at Mantua, Castilion, and other places, so great
plenty and variety of matter was given in, that we thought good to begin, and
write again, the whole discourse. In the mean while Va^trino before this
business was dispatched, departed out of this life. But our most Reverend F.
Claudius Aquauiua the General of the Society of JESUS, for so much as he had
an earnest desire, that the life of a young man of so remarkable sanctity,
adorned with the documents of such singular example should come to light, he
commanded me a new to setvpon the composing and finishing of this history.
Verily, I took unto me this task, as imposed upon me from heaven, and to the
intent that I might more fully inform my self of all things, I first took my
iourny to Florence, where for the space of diverse days I particularly enquired
after this young man's whole course of life, of Francis Turcius, who at this day
governs the family of John Medices a most illustrious man. For he when
Aloysius was borne, lived in the Court of Marquis Ferdinand, by whom he was
afterward made tutour of his childhood, and ouerseer of his manners, and
belonged unto him for the space of eight years, til he entered into the
Nouiship of the Society, whereupon he accompanied him in all his iournies, and
never departing from him, was very well acquainted with the whole life of the
young man. From Florence I passed into Lumbardy, and after I came to Castilion;
the dominion whereof belonged unto Aloysius, I carefully enquired all things of
the young man's mother, a most Illustrious woman, and in like manner of all his
kindred, and of as many as in his former course of life had served him; and to
the intent that they might be of so much the more authority, by permission from
the Bishop, I gave order that there should be a legal Inquisition made into
his life an^ manners, and thereof two very substantial instruments to be
drawn. Moreover I received many monuments written of him out of Spain and
France, restimonies like wise and authorities after a solemn manner registered
in the presence of diverse Ecclesias(...)all Tribunals both in Polonia, and
Italy, to wit, before the Patriarch of Venice, before the Bishops of Naples,
Mi^lan, Florence ^o^ogna, S^enna, and Turino; before the Bishops of Man^ua,
Padua, Vicenza, Brescia, Forli, Modena, Rhegio, Parma, Piacenza, Mouterega^e,
Ancona, R^canate, and Tiuoli. Furthermore I my self did more then once
travail up and down to those Cities and Towns where I might conceive any
hope to be certified of these things. And finally I be^ooke my self to write
at Br^scia, where I might have commodity s^eedily to be certified from
Castilion, which is near unto it, of those things that I had any doubt of.
From these registered tables of those witnesses, and writers, I have taken all
these things, which I relate. And I do here profess, that I have ^ecounted
nothing of the virtues of this blessed servant of God, which may not be auerred
upon the oaths of grave witnesses, whereof those Reverend and Religious men
herafter cited, give testimony. The inward virtues of his mind I had
understanding of, from that Illustrious Cardinal Bellarmine, from that writing
of Hieronymus Platus, from the questioning of diverse of his Superiors, from
his Ghostly Fathers; to conclude from those that familiarly, either diued into
or otherwise directed the inward dispositions of his mind.

Those which are more manifest, and which fell out before his entrance into
Religion, I learned from the relation of Francis ^^nzaga the Bishop of Mantua,
a most Reverend and Illustrious man, and also by that his own handwriting,
which he likewise confirmed by oath; from Prosperus Gonzaga a most Illustrious
man. who was his Godfather in Baptism, and conuersing afterward much with
him, knew many things; and in particular from his mother, Tutour, Chamberlain,
and Servants, who from his first childhood were in his service, and accompanied
him in his iournies which he took into many Countries; the testimonies of all
which are registered in authentical Records.

Of these things, gentle Reader, I would not have thee ignorant, not to boast
of my diligence, but to give thee to understand, that these things which I
would have to find ^redit with thee, are written faithfully, as best becomes a
History.

I have made use of a plain and familiar style, set forth with no art, or
Rhetorical Am^^^fication. My narration is not tied to certain heads, but that
you may easily dis^^y, where, and at what age, he did every thing. It orderly
sets down the young man's years, and the places of his abode, in which
respect, although sometimes it was requisite to iterate some of them, in which
he used to converse, notwithstanding I am of an opinion that many will be
delighted therewithal.

My History is divided into three Books. The First comprehends his life
which he lead in the world, til he took upon him the Institute of religion.
The second his religious life even til his death. The third, those things which
by him were done after his happy departure out of this world. It may seem unto
some, not to stand with the decorum of a History, for ^e to descend to the
relation of certain small matters, as of set-purpose I do, in my second book.
But for so much as my intention was to help by these my endeauours, men's piety
and religion, and that I did not undertake to recount the life and manners of
any magnanimous Emperor, or excellent Statist, but those of a Religious man,
which may seem worthy of imitation, the praise whereof is either obscured, or
increased with the least mutation of any addition; induced by the example of
many, who have observed the same in relating the acts of Saints, and especially
by the advice of some grave and learned men; I will of purpose prosecute those
things, which although unto many they may seem small, yet therein will appear
a certain excellency, and perfection of his sanctity.

This aduertisment I thought good to give, least any one might impute it to
rashness. If there shall be found any error in my relation, I would have it
attributed unto my self. If any thing rightly performed, that it should be
ascribed to God, whom I humbly beseech, that he would vouchsafe us his grace,
to imitate the admirable acts of this Blessed young man, and to obtain that
felicity which we believe he does now enjoy in heaven.

And thou, most holy and most B. Aloysius, who in those fortunate mansions of
heaven reapest the rewards of thy labors, and in that bright mirror of the
Divinity, (in which thou beholdest that of our affairs, which it is his
pleasure thou should) see my imperfection, vouchsafe me thy pardon, for so
much as with my poor style I have vilified thy almost divine virtues: and
calling to mind that thy propense charity wherewith whilst thou liuedst, thou
did embrace me, pray for me to our Lord, that I may in such religious sort
order my life here, that relying upon thy help and patr(...), it may befall me
at the last, when it shall so seem good unto Almighty God, to enjoy together
with thee, that everlasting Bliss, and Beatitude. Amen.

MOST REMARKABLE testimonies concerning B. Aloysius and this History, given by
four Reverend, and Religious Fathers, who had read the same, and compared it
with the public Instruments at Brescia.
The Testimony of the VICAR OF THE INQVIsition, of the Order of S. Dominicke.
I Fr. Siluester Vgolotus, Reader of Divinity of the order of the Friars
Preachers, and Vicar General of the holy Office of the Inqui^^^ion, in the
City and Diocese of Brescia, do testify, and under my oath affirm, that I
have read the life of that B. Prince Lord Aloysius Gonzaga, Marquis of
Castilion, and of the Religious Society of JESUS, written by the most Reverend
Father Virgilius Ceparius a Divine, and Preacher of the same Society, which I
have compared with the public instruments, out of which it was drawn, and I
find that whatsoever is recounted of the virtue and sanctity of th^s B. young
man, is all taken from testimonies confirmed by oath, and from instruments made
by the Pa^riarchall, Archie^iscopall, and ^piscopall authority of many Cities.
Moreover, I do verily believe, that not only that which is related in this
history, but even much more is very true. For when I knew this B. Prince being
as yet but of tender age, and that I conuersed with him, I found by good
experience, that from his very childhood he was accounted a Saint, and
commended by all, as one of an Angelical life, and conversation; of which
thing I my self could (...) many examples. And now in this history there is
not only any thing repugnant either to says or good (...)ners, but it is even
written prudently, and with a ^eligious spirit, and abounds with examples of
sanctity. Verily, I am most confident that it will bring very much spiritual
profit, not only to religious men, out even to those that are secular, as
namely to Princes and Lords, unto all which this B. Father, has b^ne both a
Guide and Example. In testimony whereof I have written, and subs^ribed these
letters. Given at Brescia, in our Covent of S. Dominicke.

I THE ABOVE NAMED Fr. Siluester, whatsoever I have above testified, affirm it
upon my oath.

THE READER OF THE BEnedictine Monks of Cassino.
I D. Paul Cattaneus Monk of the order of S. Benedict, of the congregation of
^assino, or of S. Iustin^ at ^^dua, Reader of Philosophy, and Cases of
Conscience in the Monastery of the SS. Faustinus, and Iouita at Brescia, being
sworn do testify that I hau^ read the life of that Blessed Prince ALOYSIVS
GONZAGA Marquis of Castilion, and afterward Religious of the Society of JESUS,
written by that most Reverend F. VIRGILIVS CEPARIVS a Divine and Preacher of
the same order; and that I have compared it with all those authentical
instruments and Registers, from whence it was drawn; and that I have found
whatsoever things are said therein, to be approved by sworn witnesses, and
those worthy of credit; And that it is so far from conte^ning any thing
contrary to good manners, that it is replenished with holy examples, and most
worthy to be published for the general profit of the faithful. For out of
that very motion of mind, and fruit which I my self took therein, I do easily
persuade my self, that it will take no less effect with whomesoeuer shall
read it. And also I my self, who knew him many years in the world before he
gave himself to religion, am able to testify, that he was by the common
consent of all esteemed a holy young man; that he was commended; and that many
of his admirable acts, were ordinarily in the mouths of men, as of one
remarkable for Sanctity. And when he departed to enter into Religion, all the
people that were subject to his dominion stricken with the loss of so great a
Prince, gave themselves over to lamentations. In testimony of which things I
have written, and subscribed these letters with my own hand Given in the
Monastery of S. Faustinus.

I THE FORSAID D. Paul, confirm all these things under my oath.

THE PROVINCIAL OF the Capuchins.
THE life of the B. Prince L* Aloysius Gonzaga, Marquis of Castilion adorned
with all virtues and merits, religious of the holy Society of JESUS, which
hereafter is set down by that very Reverend F. Virgilius Ceparius Doctor of
Divinity, and preacher of the same Society, and with great diligence collected
out of the testimonies and authorities of sworn witnesses (as my self have
found in particular, comparing these with the same, and under my oath affirm
it,) is altogether worthy to be published, for the glory of God, who shows
himself so admirable in his Saints, for the example of Christian Princes, for
the edifiyng of religious and faith full people. This Prince worthy of all
glory, was borne (as I may say) holily; and whilst he lived, was adorned from
God with such, and so great gifts and benefits, that truly I am of an opinion
that three singular things may be recou^ted of him. The first, that, as once
was said of Saint Bonauenture, by his Master Alexander Halensis, Adam seemed
not to have sinned in him: so remote from all suspicion of sin, did he
retain his state of innocence. The other, that in his manners he rather seemed
to be like an A^^ell, then a man: so much did the spirit in him overcome the
flesh, the mind the sense. The third, that after a singular kind of manner,
that same saying of the Wiseman agrees unto him: Consummatus in breui,
expleuit tempora multa: Being consummate in short space, he fulfilled much
time. For in a short space of time, that he lived in this mortal life, he
attained unto that, which in many years for the most part, many Saints
scarcely arrived unto, and mounted unto that degree of perfection, which many
others have in vain attempted to obtain. For if that common proverb be true,
that, Communis vox populi, vox Dei: the common voice of the people is the voice
of God: for so much as this B. Prince is thought in the opinion of all, and
celebrated by the voice of all, as a Saint, by the Princes, by the Prelates of
the Church, by his Confessors, Masters, Tutours, Parents, the people of his
Dominion; it must of necessity follow that he was a great Saint, and that he
may very worthily, as in heaven, so also upon earth, be canonized for a Saint.
Whom I wish an intercessour and advocate for me, to the Divine Majesty. Given
at Brescia, in our House of the SS. Peter and Marcellinus.

I Fr. John Francis of Brescia, Prouincial of the Friars Capuchins in the
Province of Brescia, Preacher, and Reader of Divinity, have written and
suscribed with my own hand all these things, and with my oath do ratify the
same.

FATHER RECTOVR the Society of JESUS.
I JOHN Baptista Peruschus of Rome, Rectour of the College of the Society of
JESUS at Brescia, after the Reverend Fa. Virgilius Ceparius of our Society,
came to this our College of Brescia, to the intent that he might commit to
writing the life of our blessed Brother Aloysius Gonzaga, of the same Society,
have compared the same life written by him, with those registered Tables and
Monuments, out of which with great labor and industry it was taken; and being
sworn profess, that whatsoever is said therein, is found in Authorities and
Testimonies confirmed by oath. I do also testify, that the self same Father,
to the intent that he might procure those Instruments, and frame an
authentical history, travailed to all these towns of Lombardy. And so much
the more willingly do I subscribe to these things, for that I was familiatly
acquainted with B. Aloysius, both before he forsook the world, and also when
he was joined unto us in religion at Millan, and Rome; and many signs of his
sanctity, which the same Father recounteth in this book, I my self knew. And
I am well assured, that in the opinion of all them that knew, him and lived
with him, he was reputed a Saint. And after his death the fame of his sanctity
daily increased, and in many towns of Lombardy, wherein I have lived now many
years, it so far forth spread it self, that it cannot be imagined how it
should do more. In testimony whereof I have given this under my own hand
writing.

Ioannes Baptista Peruschus, who do confirm under my oath all the things above
related.

CLAUDIUS AQVAVIVA General of the Society of JESUS.
WE have granted leave, that this Book of the life of B. Aloysius Gonzaga of
our Society, composid by F. Virgilius Ceparius Divine of the same Society, and
by our selves, and many other our Deuines read and approved, be committed to
print, if it may so seem good to the most Reverend Father, the Master of the
Sacred Palace. For we hope that it will bring no small spiritual fruit, to
men both religious and secular, who shall read it. And for this respect we do
more willingly grant it, for so much as it appears unto us upon certain
notice, and our own proper knowledge, that this holy and Blessed young man,
was most accomplished in all kind of virtue, and of much edification in his
example. For he did not only so always live in the world that he gave
documents of virtue unto all, but also after he was by us adjoined to the
Society, he was evermore a perfect Idea of Sanctity, and so commonly reputed of
all who were acquainted with him, those few years that he lived amongst us. At
which time we discovered, that Almighty God was very much delighted with that
pure soul, and that he enriched her with many excellent natural gifts, out of
which there shined forth most holy works, and Angeticall manners. So he lived,
and so continually perseuered, till departing out of this life he passed to
Heaven; whither, relying upon firm grounds, we do verily believe, that this
holy soul, for the enjoying of eternal glory, and imploring the grace of God
for us, did immediately fly. Of all which things we most willingly give
testimony, to the intent that we may testify the truth, to the glory of our
Lord, from whom all sanctity flows, and unto whom be everlasting praise and
honor.

At Rome this 14. of July 1605. Claudius Aquauiua.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE LIFE OF B. ALORSIVS Gonzaga.
CHAP. I. Of his Lineage.
BLESSED Aloysius Gonzaga, whose acts and conversation we have here
determined to put in writing, was the eldest son of Ferdinand a Prince of the
Empire, and Marquis of Castilion in Lombardy, and of Martha Tana Santenia of
Chery in Turino, being both of them most illustrious and most excellent
personages. This Marquis Ferdinand the Father of our Aloysius, being sprung
from the same stock with William duke of Mantua, was from him but three
degrees removed, and bare rule in that foresaid coast descending to him by
inheritance from his ancestors, which is situated between Verona, Mantua, and
Brescia, not far from the lake Benaco. And his wife Martha being descended from
the principal familyes amongst those of Turino, had for her Father Baltazar
Tanus extracted from the Lord Santenes, and for her Mother one Anne, from the
ancient blood of the Lords Roborci, being a near kinswoma^ of Hierome
Roboreus the Cardinal, and that most reverend Archbishop of Turino.

The marriage between these parents of B. Aloysius was celebrated in Spain in
a manner after this sort. There lived in the Court of Philip the second, the
Catholic King, this Marquis Ferdinand, and in the same place Martha prevailed
much in grace and authority amongst the principal women with Isabel Valots the
Queen, daughter to Henry the second the French King, wife to the said Philip.
Upon this occasion the Marquis discovering those her excellent ornaments and
singular endowments of mind, became desirous to gain her for his wife. Which
when with mature deliberation he had determined, he so brought to pass, that
both the King and Queen should be certified of this his purpose. Their consent
therefore being had, and a convenient dowry assigned, with addition likewise of
Jewels, and other marriage guiftes, which the Queen in testimony of her
affection toward Martha bestowed upon her, the Marquis espoused her. But
whilst these espousalls are accomplished, and this whose business of the
marriage contrived, there fell out certain things of such remarkable sanctity,
that it sufficiently appeared what fruit in time they should bring forth. For
Martha, so soon as she knew from the Queen, that there was held a treaty of
this match, to the end that it would please God to bless the success thereof,
caused often to be offered a great number of Masses, to the most holy Trinity,
to the holy Ghost, to Christ, interposing the recitation of his bitter Passion,
imploring the assistance of the Virgin Mother, of the Angels, and other
Saints. Afterward when they had written into Italy to both their friends, that
they would be pleased to condescend unto this match, answer was oportunely
returned to the letters, at that time when all were employed in procuring the
ceremonies of the Iubily, lately diuulged at Rome. Therefore upon the day of the
Nativity of S. John Baptist, this marriage was fitly sanctified between them
both, with the mysteries of the blessed Eucharist, and the religious
participation of the Iubily. Upon which day Martha (as she her self after
recounted unto me) determined with all her endeauours, from that time forward
to apply herself to acts of piety.

Furthermore the Queen, when as at that time she was newly with child, and
could not as then forgo the company of Martha, whom even from her coming out
of France, she had used as a companion for her solace, resting confident in her
love, she forbad her public conversation with her husband, before her
delivery. It was done as she commanded. The day therefore being set down by
the Queen, whereupon there fell out commodiously the celebration of a certain
other Iubily, or plenary Indulgence, they iterating the sacraments of Penance
and the Eucharist, were piously (as becomes Christians) all sacred rites being
duly performed, joined in marriage, when as God was unto them most appeased,
and propitious. And now this is no less worthy of memory, that amongst the
nuptial rites, and festival pomp, the Decrees of the Tridentine Council,
which accidentally at that time were promulgated throughout Spain, began first
at this marriage to be put in execution.

After the marriage, the Marquis being licenced both from the King and Queen
to return with his wife into Italy, and to the co^fines of his own dominion,
was first before he departed from the court denounced the Kings most honorable
Chamberlain, and with all endowed with goodly revenues out of Campania and
Lombardy, during the life of him, and one of his Sons. And not long after
this, the same King made him General over certain Italian forces; which
degree of honor the most Noble of the Princes and Dukes of Italy, would take
to be unto them a great advancement.

CHAP. II. Of his Nativity.
AFTER they were arrived at Castilion, the Marquis his wife, so soon as she
perceived herself to be disburdened of the imploiments and encumbrances of the
Court, and had gotten leisure, and commodity to apply herself more seriously
to matter of devotion, according to her accustomed affection theru^to, and
according unto that which she lately resolved with herself in Spain, she bent
herself more carefully unto the same then ever heretofore. But her principal
desire was to obtain a Son, who in time to come might dedicate himself unto
God, in some society of religious me^. Which desire she did, not only
afterward, not lay down, but to the intent she might be made partaker thereof,
she did incessantly adore and invoke Allmighty God. That her prayers were not
in vain, the success it self may give us to understand, seeing that she
first became Mother to this son, who afterward being joined to the Society of
Jesus, both lead, and finished his life therein with singular sanctity.

Neither truly ought it to seem strange to any one, that a son of so great
sanctity, and with so holy an intention desired, should be given by God at the
request of his Mother. For often we read, in the lives and acts of Saints,
that God has concurred with such like desires. As namely when at the suite of
Anna, the Mother of Samuel the Prophet, (who was before void of all issue) he
gave a son, who afterward might be devoted to his Godhead. The same we read
of S. Nicolas Tolentine, who in like manner was given at the supplication of
his barraine mother. Likewise of S. Francis of Paula, who in himself, made
both his fruitless parents partakers of their desires: and so of others.
Verily I am of this opinion, that the selfsame God who suggested to the mind
of this Noble Lady to beg of him this boon, was both willing, according to his
accustomed clemency, to be prevailed withal, and to challenge likewise as his
proper due, this her first fruit. Comfortable unto this, it seems that it
was the pleasure of Allmighty God to make Bless. Aloysius first his, before he
had fully issued out of his Mothers womb: for nether came it to pass without
the special consent, and providence of Allmighty God, that when he was not yet
wholly delivered into this world, he should be washed with Baptism, and that
also the most Blessed Virgin Queen of Heaven, to whom even from his
childhood he was so much devoted, out of her especial favor toward him
should be assisting at his birth. For the Marquis his wife herself was wont to
recount it in this manner, that when she drew near to the time of her
childbirth, she was upon the sudden oppressed with such sharp pains, that
void of all hope of delivery, she seemed to be brought to the last period of
her life; when the Marquis sending for diverse Phisitia^s, gave them in charge,
that if they were diffident of the life of the child, they should at least by
baptism bestow eternal salvation on it, and endeavor to preserve the life of
the mother. They having in vain attempted all arts and remedies, for the
facilitating of the birth, gave over the safety both of mother and child, as
desperate and forelorne. This when the mother understood, in the midst of all
despair of humane help, determined to fly for refuge unto God, and his
Virgin Mother. Therefore sending for her husband into the Chamber, she desires
him to give her leave in this extremity, to make a vow unto the Virgin Mother:
when he had given his consent, she voweth, that if she escape this danger, she
would go in pilgrimage to our Ladies House of Loreto, together with her little
Infant if life befell it. Her vow being made, she seems to be out of all
present danger, and begins to yield birth to the child. Yet seeing that it
appeared unto the Physicians that she could not escape death, and the Marquis
insisted upon it earnestly, that they should at least provide for the safety of
the child's soul, the midwife so soon as she perceived the child so far forth
discovered, as that it might be capable of Baptism, falls first to christning
it, before it was wholly delivered. So the lives of them both were saved, and in
the child the grace of God, and that better, and Divine birth, out-stript this
mortal one, not without the singular favor of God, who would appropriate him
to himself, from the very bowels of his mother, with a strict kind of
vasallage. In which respect he was twin-brother to Mechtildes that holy Virgin,
as it is written in her life, Almighty God declaring, that it was his pleasure,
that to the intent he might at the very first sanctify her soul, as a temple
to himself, and prevent it with his grace from the very first instant of her
birth, in fear of like danger her Baptism should be hastened.

B. Aloysius was borne in the castle of Castilion, which is the head of that
Territory in which his Fathers dominion is placed, in the Diocese of Brescia,
Pius V. being Pope, the year from Christ's Nativity 1568. the seventh of the
Ides of March (to wit, the ninth of the month) upon a Tuesday, three quarters
of an hour after the three and twentieth, which is about sunset. The mother
presently takes him into her arms, signs him with the sign of the cross,
and bestows upon him a thousand happy welcomes. After this for the space of
an hour, he lay still without any moving, that no one could discern whether
he were living or dead. And afterward having given but one only cry, he from
that time forward rested, and tempered those babish cries, unto which other
infantes, for the most part, are so much inclined. And I believe, that this was
a presage of the mildness of mind, and suauity of conversation, which he
showed in the whole course of his life afterward. In the same year upon 12. of
the Kalends of May, and in like manner upon a Tuesday, in the Church of the
Saints Nazarius and Celsus, he was by John Baptista Pastorius Archpriest of
Castilion, with as much pomp as might be, initiated with the sacred rites
which are wont to be used in Baptism, and in memory of his Fathers Grandfather
was called Aloysius, or (which is all one) Lewis. He had Godfather William
Duke of Mantua, who sent Prosperus Gonzaga (a very Noble Gentleman and kinsman
to the Marquis) who might supply his place by proxy at the Christning. It was
entered into the Tables of the curate of that Church; in which I observed, that
whereas the christnings of others of the same age, are rehearsed in Italian, to
this his name alone (whether it was as an attribute to his noble descent, or
that it fell out by some divine instinct) there were adjoined certain latin
words, such as are not added to any of his brothers, and the event it self
does show that they did well agree unto him. The writing was in this manner:
Sit felix, carusque Deo ter optimo, terque maximo, and hominibus in sternum
viuat. That is to say; Happy and dear be he unto the thrice good, and thrice
mighty God, and to men, of eternal memory.

CHAP. III. Of his Education till the seventh year of his Age.
NOw, with what care and industry he was bred up from his very childhood, it
may easily be gathered by this, for so much as he being the head of his house,
was travned up, not only in hope of his Fathers inheritance, but of two vneles
likewise, namely of Alphonsus who was Lord over Castle Godfrey, and of Horatius
also, Lord of Sulphurino. For whereas they held their living by Fee farm from
the Emperor, and the one of them had none, the other no Male issue, their
estates were of necessity to deuolue to Aloysius, as heir general, and nephew
to them both. It was the special care of the mother, as she was herself of
singular piety, that her son should be inured from a very little one, to have
God and his Saints in great reverence. Therefore when he could scarcely speak,
she would reach him to make the sign of the cross, to prononce the most holy
names of Ies us and Maria, to learn without-booke our Lords Prayer, the
Angelical salutation, and other prayers. And she commanded the nurse, and
others who were employed about him either for service, or solace, also to do
the like. By which means he conceived so much reverence and fear toward
Almighty God, that even by the clear dawning of this his morning, we might
presage what the future splendor of his noone-tyde would be. This in
like-ma^ner did the mayds testify (who when at such time, as they attended upon
the mother, had also in charge to dress and undress the child) that they
found in him, being but then an infant, a singular, and religious fear of God.
They recount two things very welworthy of memory, to be noted even then in his
disposition. The one was, that in seeing the need of poor people, he was moved
with mercy to show himself bountiful toward them. The other was, that as
soon as he could withdraw himself to his home, he used often to hide himself
in corners, and after long search they should find him in some solitary place
close at his prayers. By which circumstance they gave a conjecture even then
what the future sanctity of his life would be. Neither want there those that
affirm upon oath, that they by the only embracing of him, have from
thence-forth been affected with such an intrinsecal sense of Piety, as if they
had entertained into their arms, some celestial Angel.

This his love, and affection toward God, and celestial things daily
increasing, did very much delight his Mother. But his Father being a
Martialist, who had undergone many martial affairs under the Catholic King,
did rather desire to have him instructed in his arts. Wherefore he being not as
yet above four years of age, he provides for him little dagges, gunnes, and
such other small weapons appropriated to that age. According unto this, when by
the designs of the same King, being to lead under his ensigns three thousand
Italian foot to Tunis, he mustered them in the field of Cremona, at the Greater
Cassall, which is a town within the Dukedom of Millane, he took him thither
with him, being but a child taken out of the women's hands, and the tuition of
his mother, when he was not passing four or five years of age. There those
days that the Companyes were mustered, he commands him to go before the
ranckes, armed with a light Brigantine, and carrying upon his shoulder a little
spear, after a military manner. And he was merueilously recreated, when he saw
the boy delighted in this kind of exercise. He having stayed certain months
at Cassall, as that age is apt to imitate all things which it sees done, whilst
he daily plays, and talks with the soldiers promiscuously, by little and
little he takes unto him military affections, and he showed by very pregna^t
signs to be affectionately carrryed toward that glory, whither his Fathers
encouragement, and example called him. The refore it often fell out, that
meddling both with other weapons, and especially with pieces of ordinance, he
did much endanger himself, had not God who reserved him to a more holy kind of
life, in a manner above the course of nature diuerted him. Surely of this a
testimony was given, when once in shooting off a small gunne, he foully
besmeared all his face with the hoat-burning steame of the powder.

Another time, when in the summer the Marquis about noone-tyde took his
repose, and he (which you would wonder at in one of so small age) having no
ones help thereunto, casting certain powder which he had gathered out of the
soldiers purses whilst they took their none-sleepe, into a little piece of
ordinance, which stood before the Castle-walls, and putting fire thereto,
escaped very narrowly from being ouerthrown with the violent recoyling of the
carriagewheeles flying backward. The Marquis being roused with the sudden
noise, fearing least some mutiny had been risen amongst the soldiers, sent one
to discover what unwonted insolency this was. When he had understood the whole
matter, he would have corrected his son, had not the soldiers (who were very
much delighted with the great-vndertaking spirit of the child) begged his
pardon. These and other preseruations of the like kind, he was wont after when
he lived amongst religious persons often to recount, as testimonies of the
singular goodness of Almighty God toward him, by whose assistance he had
escaped so great dangers. Neither as then was he quite void of scruple for that
little powder which he had so purloyned from the Soldiers, had he not
extenuated it with that comfortable opinion, that the Soldiers would most
willingly have bestowed it upon him, if he had asked it of them.

The Marquis being to go with his forces to Tunis, sends back Aloysius to
Castilion, where he continued the same course of life which he undertook at
Cassall. And as for the most part, these common soldiers are given to
licentious, and dishonest speeches, he likewise by consorting with them had
learned some such like kind of talk, which he not knowing the meaning thereof
did sometimes utter; as afterward he gave account to F. Hierome Platus, when he
inquired of him his whole course of life which he lead in the world, being now
consecrated to Religion. This, when upon a certain time Peter-Francis Turctus
had understanding of, (who as we have said before was Tutour to him in his
childhood) he did so vehemently inueigh against it, that as the self same
Tutour after affirmed unto me, he never after was observed to utter any other,
then honest and decent speeches. Yea, and more then that, when afterward he
heard any one speaking debausly, he would straight way with a modest
countenance, with his eyes cast down to the ground, or turned some other way,
either seem to divert his mind, or signify that the words were troublesome to
him to hear. Whereby we may understand, that he would never have used these
kind of speeches, if he had first known what their meaning had been. But in
the whole course of Aloysius his life, I find no sin committed by him, which
was more culpable, then were these words pronounced by him being a very child,
and ignorant what the things signified by the^ should be. Which so soon as he
understood that they were vicious, and disgraceful to his degree and calling,
so great a shamefastnes ceased upon him, (as he afterward acknowledged) that he
could scarcely persuade himself to unfold them to the Priest that was
inquisitour of his Conscience. Neither truly did the penitency of this fault
which seemed so great unto him, ever forsake him during his life. And as he had
committed nothing worse, that his conscience accused him of, so after he came
into Religion, to the intent that for the ouerco^ming and vilifying of
himself, he might show himself guilty of frailty from his very childhood, he
would often recount to certain of his familiar friends, these kind of
passages. It is not unlike, that God upon set purpose suffered this kind of
blemish to stick close by him, that whilst he thought that to be a fault in
himself, which in respect of the ignorance of his childish age, and of the
thing it self, is more probable was none, in the midst of so many heavenly
gifts, and virtues with the which his mind was afterward enriched from God, he
might have some matter of humiliation; and that, as S. Gregory wrote of S.
Benedict, quem in ingressu mundi posuerat, retraheret pedem; That he might pull
back that foot which he had newly set into the world.

CHAP. IV. How he behaved himself from the seventh, till the eight year of
his age.
But when he attained the seventh year of his age (which seems unto
Aristotle, and the holy Doctors, to be ripe for reasonable discourse, and even
for virtue, or vice) he converted himself with so much fervor to the service
of God, and did so wholly consecrate himself unto him, that he was wont
afterward to call that the time of his conversion. He could therefore to those
fathers who were the reformers of his life, unto whom he unfolded the secret
of his heart, that he esteemed this amongst one of the most especial benefits of
Almighty God toward him, that from the very seventh year of his age, he was
converted to God from the love of the world. Now with what an assistance of
celestial gifts, even now from the first time that he began to have the use
of reason, Almighty God did either prevent, or second all his endeauours may be
manifest heerby, in so much as four Priests, who in diverse places, and at
diverse times took his Confessions, even those which contained the discovery of
his whole life, both before and after his entrance into the Society, and
amongst these Robert Bellarmine that most illustrious Cardinal, who at his
death heard the confession of his whole life, all of them, allthough ignorant
of each others testimony, did with one consent set down in writing, that he
never committed so much as one deadly sin, or lost the grace of God which he
obtained in Baptism. The which thing is so much the more to be admired, for
that he passed the most unstable part of his age, not in Monasteries and sacred
Cloisters of Religious men, in which, in respect of the small occasions of
sin, or the supply of so great company of men devoted to God, both for holy
conversation and the help of ones mind, it is a great deal easier to preserve
the grace of God, then in a vulgar course of liberty; but he even from his very
cradle began to co^uerse in Princes courts. For besides that time in which he
was borne and bred up in his Fathers house, he spent many years after with the
Duke of Florence, the Duke of Mantua, and the King of Spain, being always
strictly tied to the near conversation of Princes and great Noblemen, and to
the promiscuous commerce of all men of what condition soever, as occasion
served. And yet in the midst of the delicacies of his fathers house, and the
prouocations of the Court, he preserved that integrity of life, which he put on
as a white garment in his Baptism, pure from all blemish and unspotted.
Wherefore most worthily did Cardinal Bellarmine upon a certain time, when in a
speech which he had with me, and diverse others, of the singular virtues of
Aloysius eue^ then living, by many arguments teach, that there never wanted in
this our Church (although distressed with a doubtful conflict) certain men of
excellent sanctity of life, who even whilst they lived, were confirmd in a
steadfast degree of grace, in the sight of Allmighty God, and namely adjoined
these words: In horum numero, quitam arcta atque indissolubili necessitudine
Deo sunt adiuncti, equidem, quem minime fugit quid in eius mente agatur,
Aloysium nostrum Gonzagam collocandum censeo. In the number of these which are
adjoined unto God with so strict and indissoluble a bond of frie^dship, surely
I (as one that is very well acquainted with the affairs of his mind) think
our Aloysius Gonzaga to be placed. Furthermore the same Cardinal in that
remarkable testimony authentically signed and sealed, added another certain
thing, which with those that are not altogether ignorant of the leading of a
holy and retired course of life, and that do prize the authority of this
witness, will move far greater admiration. For he affirms that B. Aloysius
even from the very seaue^th year of his age, led a perfect course of life,
every way accomplished with the exact rules of sanctity. The dignity of which
prerogative I leave to the estimation of the wise.

And it seems to have been the pleasure of allmighty God, that even the
wicked spirits themselves, should proclaim his sanctity of conversation, and
the glory already prepared for him in Heaven, when he was but yet a child. For
when as a certain religious man, of that order of S. Francis which they call
Friars Obseruants, being of excellent fame whersoeuer he travailed, coming to
Castilion, rested in a Monastery of his Order called S. Mary's, one mile from
the town, there was made great recourse unto him to see him, and request his
prayers. And for so much, as the report went that he did some things above
humane power, many possessed and vexed with devils were brought to him, that
they might be helped by his exorcismes. There, when this priest, in the sight
of a great assembly of people, together with diverse noblemen, and amongst
these, the child Aloysius, and his other younger brother, according to his
custom cast forth diverse execratios against the devil; those unclean spirits
cry out with a loud voice, and with a hand stretched forth toward Aloysius:
Videti sne illum? hie demum est, quem celum and multa inibi manet gloria. Do
you see that boy? he it is for whom heaven at the last, and much glory there,
is provided. That voice was carried in memory and diuulged throghout all
Castilion. Neither are there wanting those at this day, who testify that they
were present at the hearing of that speech. And although there be no credit to
be given to the words of Devils who are the Fathers of lies, notwithstanding I
could easily be persuaded, that they, to the intent they might be more ashamed
of their own madness, were compelled by divine force (as often at other
times) to declare the truth.

For so singular was the opinion of men, even at that time of this holy young
man, that in his life and manners, they did seem to behold the form of some
Angel descended from heaven. For daily at home upon his knees he recited those
prayers that are called the Daily Exercise, the seven psalms, the office of
the Blessed Virgin, either alone, or together with some other companion, and
performed other offices of piety. He was so accustomed in that sort to kneel
upon the bare ground at his prayers, that he would not suffer a cushion, or any
such like thing to be put under his knees; and this afterward did he solemnly
observe in the whole course of his life, as I shall after declare.

About that time he was vehemently handled with a Quartane Fever, for the space
of eighteen whole months, although, because at the first it was more extreme,
afterward it held him less in his bed. In the mean while he patiently endured
this infirmity, neither did he ever omit, but that he would daily say the
Graduall, and the penitential Psalms and other set-prayers. Notwithstanding
sometimes when as he was more weak then ordinary, he sent for some of the
maids that waited upon his Mother, that so they might help to say with him for
his ease. These are the foundations which the B. Aloysius laid of Christian
virtue, when he was but seven years of age, that it ought not much to be
merueiled at, if afterward it brought him to so great a height, as we shall
declare herafter.

CHAP. V. He is brought by his Father to Florence, to apply his studies.
WHEN the Marquis Ferdinand having staid more then two years in the Spanish
Court after the voyage to Tunis, returned into the territories of his ^owne
Dominion, as soon as he found Aloysius, the head of his house, full of modesty
and piety, having laid down his accustomed military ardour; he did both admire
that his (...)re towardliness, and prudence beyond his (...)ge, and in like
manner rejoiced very much (...)hat he was provided of an heir, so fit to
(...)ouerue the people, that were in his subjection. But he being now eight
years of age, had far different designs in his mind, and had taken unto him
thoughts of a certain higher degree of virtue. Neither did he doubt upon a
certain time to make the^ known unto his mother, whom when he had often heard
say, that if she should be blessed with diverse children, it would be a most
acceptable thing unto her, to see some one of them addicted to religion, he in
secret speaks unto her in this manner: Mother, says he, you have affirmed,
that it would be a thing acceptable unto you, if you might have some one of
your sons, who might sort himself in some religious family: surely I am
confide^t, that God will reward you for this gracious disposition. And another
day, when he had iterated the same words, he added, that he hoped also that he
should be that son. His mother although, for so much as he was her eldest, as
one disliking this speech, brake it off, and commanded her son, together
with this his discourse out of her presence, notwithstanding she laid them up
in her mind, and for that she saw him much conuersa^t in the exercise of piety,
she believed that it would come to pass, as he had said: allthough (as he
afterward confessed when (...) was entered into Religion) he had at that time
no certain resolution of one side or other, but only followed his own custom^
of pious life.

Whilst these things pass, it is much bru^^ abroad that the plage increases
throghout all Italy. For fear thereof it seemed good unto the Marquis, to
remove himself together, with his whole family to Monte-Ferrato. Whilst he
resideth there, he began to be afflicted with grievous torments of the gout.
Wherefore by the advice of the Physicians he determines to go the Bathes of
Luca, and to carry with him Rodulphus another of his sons for the cure of a
certain infirmity which he had, and in like manner his son Aloysius, with an
intent, that at his return he might take Florence in his way, and there leave
them both in the Court of Francis Medices the great Duke of Tuscany, either to
the intent, that he might continue that friendship which he had begun with him
in the Court of the Catholic King, or for that they might be the better
accommodated for learning the Tuscane tongue. Therefore in the beginning of the
Summer the year 1577. he went directly toward the bathes, when he departed
from his wife very much complaining, that her children of so tender years
should be so far separated from her. From thence, after that he had made
sufficient use of the waters, he went toward Florence, whither when he near
approached, and understood that the gates thereof were diligently guarded with
watchmen for fear of the plague, he betook himself to Fiesoli the place
where his familiar friend James Turcius kept his residence. In the mean while
he commanded notice to be given to the Great Duke, that he came with intention
to salute him. Having received an answer, he enters the city, and is
entertained by the Duke, with remonstrance of singular affection. This Duke
when the Marquis presented unto him his sons, was so much delighted with that
present, that he would have them lodged in no other place, but in his own
palace. But for that he was desirous to have his children instructed, not only
in Courtlike deportement, but likewise in the liberal studies, not long after
by the Dukes good leave, be bringing them home, bestows them in a town
called Angelo. Afterward before his departure, he appoints as Governor over
them, and all that family, Francis Turcius who now governs the house of John
Medices, a principal man, who was one of many years experience, and of great
fidelity, and prudence whilst he served him both in Spain and Italy. He
ordained for Chamberlain, Clement Ghisonius now Governor over the Marquis his
house who this day is Lord of Castilion. There was adjoined unto these, besides
the rest of the family worthy of their renown, Julius Brixianus of Cremona,
being a priest of singular devotion, who might inform them both in the Latin
tongue and in honest manners. Aloysius was now complete nine years of age,
when he was left by his Father at Florence, where he spent two years in
learning the Latin, and Tuscan language. Upon festival days he resorted to
the Court, and that he might be obedient to the Governor of his childhood, he
did sometimes dispose himself to some recreation. But he was so far from being
given to disports, that as Leonora Medices the Duches of Mantua recounted; he
being invited for recreations sake to the gardens by her, and her sister Mary,
who at this day is the Queen of France, being then both of them in a manner
children, was wo^t to deny, that he was delighted in passetimes; and that he
had rather busy himself in erecting little Altars, and in such like exercises
of piety.

CHAP. VI. He voweth to God his virginity in his childhood, and flies the
company of women.
HE had not long remained at Florence, when he made excellent progress in the
practice of heavenly things, in so much as afterward he was wont to call
Florence, the mother of his piety. And especially he conceived in his mind so
much observance toward our Lady, the most B. Virgin Mother, that as often as
he entered into speech of her, and reuolued in his mind the most holy mysteries
of her life, he seemed even to melt with celestial joy. He was very much
incited herunto both by the singular reverence which the common people of
Florence do exhibit to the Image of this B. Virgin, which in that City is
worshipped by the name of Annuntiata, and in like manner by the reading of that
little book which Gasper Loartes, a Priest of the Society of JESUS, wrote of
the mysteries of the Rosary. In the reading of this book, when he perceived
himself to be inflamed with a desire to do something that might be grateful,
and acceptable to the Queen of Heaven, it came into his mind, that nothing
could be performed, more pleasing, or better accommodated unto her, then if
out of a desire to imitate her chastity (as far forth as lies in humane power)
he should by vow oblige, and consecrate his virginity unto her. Therefore when
upon a certain time he prayed before that Image which I spoke off before, to
the intent that he might likewise turn it to the honor of B. Virgin, he
voweth unto God that he will for ever preserve his virginity entyre and
inviolable; which vow he did always after so religiously, and exactly
perform, that even thereby it is manifest, how much it was ratifyed with God,
and with how especial love the Virgin Mother took him into her charge and
tuition. For they upon whom he relied as ghostly fathers, and namely Cardinal
Bellarmine, in that testimony, which he confirmed by oath, and much more at
large Hieronymus Platus in those papers written in latin, do affirm, that both
the body of Aloysius whilst he lived, was free from all sense and motion of
lust, and his mind of all obscene cogitations and representations, which might
in the least manner impuge this his vow, and purpose.

Which thing being beyond the compass of all humane strength and industry, it
sufficiently appears to have been given by God as a certain peculiar gift,
at the request of his most Dear Mother; which of how high a nature it is, he
may estimate, who shall call to mind, that S. Paul (whether he spoke of
himself or some other) did thrice beseech our Lord that he would take from
him, the stinge of the flesh: That S. Hierome in the wilderness seeking to
rebate the same, did often strike his naked breast with stones: That S.
Benedict casting away his garments, wallowed himseife all in the briars: and in
like manner, that S. Francis tumbled himself naked in the winter-snow: That S.
Bernard plunging himself up to the neck in an yey poole extingnished this
impetuous ardour: That certain few Saints which almighty God pleased to endow
with this singular gift, have obtained a rescue from this tyranny. And if
there have been any, they have arrived unto it by daily prayers and tears.
Such did S. Gregory that Great in his Dialogues, recount Equitius that holy
Abbot to be, who when in his youth he perceived such kind of fires to be
enkindled in him, did not cease to petition Almighty God with long and frequent
prayers, till he sending an Angel, delivered him from all such kind of
allurements and infla^mations, as if he had been but a newborn infant. In
like manner Cassianus relates, that the Abbot Serenus when by frequent fastes,
prayers and tears, he had obtained of God cleanness of mind, did undergo
another as great a business, that he might also procure clea^nes of body; and
that it was at last effected by the ministry of an Angel, so that after that
time, neither sleeping nor waking he was stirred with any the least motion. To
conclude S. Thomas a man nearer to our memory, who obtained the name of
Angelical Doctor, when he had with a burning fire-bra^d driven from him a
certain lascivious woman, and that an Angel afterward had girded him with a
certain girdle, was himself also made partaker of this truly Angelical
benefit.

Neither was it out of any natural frigidity, or stupidnesse of senses that B.
Aloysius had all his members so peaceable, and obedient, and the secret
cogitations of his heart so pure, whom they who were familiarly acquainted with
him, do all jointly affirm to have been of a sanguine complexion, full of
spirit, sharp, and industrious in the ma^naging of his affairs. Let us
therefore confess it to have been a divine, and unusual gift, proceeding from
the singular favor of the Virgin mother of God toward him, whom from that
time forward in the whole course of his life he entertained for his mother with
a certain tender kind of love, and piety, and reposed in her a great hope in
the prosecution of all his affairs. Notwithstanding the singular vigilance
which himself used in the severe moderation of his senses, was of no small
moment for the maintaining of this so excellent a benefit. For although nothing
of this kind did very much trouble him, notwithstanding out of his love of
virginal, and holy chastity, he began even from that day to stand upon his
guard ever more, and to survey, and observe all his senses with a certain
exquisite care: And especially, to restrain his eyes always from all vicious
allurements, and chiefly for that cause to go in public with them continually
fixed upon the ground: but he did so much, throughout the whole course of his
life, avoid the familiarity, and company of women wheresoever he conuersed,
that you would think he had with them a kind of natural antipathy. In so
much, as that he could not suffer himself to behold them.

At Castilion he received his mothers commands, and returned an answer in
very few words, to those Noble women which sometimes she sent from her company
to his chamber to deliver some message unto him, and he would talk with them
no otherwise then through the door half shut, with his eyes cast upon the
ground, least he should behold them. But that is not a thing much to be
marueyled at; For he would not so much as endure to speak to his mother her
self, without witnesses. Therefore if at any time, whilst he was conversant
with her, in the Chamber, or in the Parlour, others in the mean while should
chance to withdraw themselves, he would likewise presently take some occasion
to depart, and if he found none, he would blush with a modest kind of
bashfullnesse. So singular was his solicitude and carfulness. He being asked
upon a certain time, by a certain learned man who observed it, why he had
this auersion from behoulding any woman, and even his mother herself? least he
should make known his virtue, he rather ascribed it to his natural
bashfulnesse.

Besides other things which were agreed on between him and his father this was
one; that he should command him in all things, but only in the visits of
women. That in other things he would be, as is duty was, at his disposing.
Therefore the Marquis after that he perceived him so constant in this purpose,
not to trouble him, he was allwais observing to his will heerin. He himself in
like manner would affirm, that he had never beheld certain noble women who
were very near of kin unto him. And this his custom was so well known, that
in jest he was oftentimes by his familiar friends called, the Women-hater.

CHAP. VII. At Florence he makes great progress in a more holy course of life.
MOREOVER, when he was at Florence he began more often to purge his conscience
by cofession, then he had as yet done at Castilion, with a certain priest of
the Society of JESUS, designed unto him by his Governor, who at that time
governed the college in that City. When he came first unto him to confession,
having much and long before, both meditated and prepared himself at home, he
conceived in the presence of him so much reverence, bashfulnesse, and
submission of himself, as if he had exceeded all mortal men in the multitude
of his sins. He is scarcely kneeled at his feet, but he falls into a sound,
and of necessity being taken up by his governor is carried home. Afterward
returning thither he discovered all the sins of his life past: of which thing
we have often heard him recount, after he was joined to the Company of
religious men, that he rested satisfied in that confession which he made at
Florence of his whole life. For so much as this was the beginning of knowing
himself, and undertaking the course of a more strict kind of life. For then he
began carefully to discuss every one of his actions, and if he found any
imperfection therein, he would wholly employ himself, in searching out, and
pulling up the very roots thereof. First of al therefore he observed himself,
to be somewhat of a choleric nature, to be sometimes easily transported with a
certain kind of stomach, which though it did not break forth, notwithstanding
it vexed his mind with some grief and indisposition. He gave himself therefore
to consider of the foul deformity of anger, which he said, did manifestly
appear and discover it self, when the mind being recalled to his former
tranquillity, he might perceive that a man whilst he was possessed with anger,
was in some sort besides his senses. When he had discovered that, he determined
in time, to come to bend himself to the repressing and supplanting of that
corrupt disposition of his mind. At the last, by the assistance of God and his
own great industry, he did so absolutely overcome it, that he seemed afterward
to be void of all motion of anger.

Furthermore he perceived that oftentimes in company, some one word or other
fell from him that might tend to the defaming of others. And allthough, as he
himself afterward confessed, of what quality soever that sin was, it was
scarcely at any time so great, that it might be numbered amongst those, which
for their slenderness are accounted venial; notwithstanding for this cause he
was displeased with himself, and to the intent that he might not any more be
compelled to accuse himself, of any such like fault to the Priest, he did
eschew the company and discourse, not only of other friends, but even of those
which were most familiar unto him, and began very much to addict himself to
retirement and solitude, where he might neither speak, nor hear any thing
that might cast upon his conscience any the least spot. Some did ascribe that
to-too much scrupulosity and severity: But he doubtless made but small account
of what others thought. And from that time, all the course of his life after,
he did perpetually abstain from all kind of sport. Furthermore he was so much
affected to the obedience of his superiors, that his Governor denied, that
ever he omitted any command of his, how little soever it was. And which is
more, if at any time he saw his younger brother Rodulph take in ill part the
reprehensions of his master, either of manners or learning, he would with a
check exhort him to submit himself to government.

He had such respect over his servants, and in such sort commanded them, that
he made them ashamed not to obey him. For so much as they deny, that ever he
commanded them imperiously, but even in these forms of speech: Nisi tibi
molestum est, licet hoc facias: si tibi commodum est, hoc abs te velim: Amabo
te, hoc mihi effectum da. That is to say: If it be not troblesome unto you, you
may do this: if co^modiously you may, this would I have you do: I pray thee
dispatch this for me. Which when he said, there ever appeared so much
sweetness in him, that he showed himself much to be moved with commiseration
over his servants. By this behavior he did much oblige the minds of them unto
him.

He was of so singular modesty, that he blushed in even behoulding his
cha^berlaine when he apparelled him in the morning, and in putting on his
breeches, he would scarcely thrust his toes out of the bed-cloathes, so fearful
he was to discover any naked part. He was present every day at Mass, and upon
festival days at Euensong. All that time he had known nothing as yet of the
conte^plation and meditation of celestial things, applying himself only to
the reciting of his vocal prayers. Therefore every morning by break of day, he
recited those which are contained in the daily Exercise, and the other which I
spoke of before, humbly and attentively. Notwithstanding allthough in very deed
he had not as then determined in his mind to abandone all the goods of Fortune,
nevertheless he was fully resolved, that if he did retain the^, he would be
take himself to a most innocent, and exact course of life.

And with this gravity of manners was B. Aloysius endowed being but of that
age, and had attained to those degrees of divine Philosophy, which those often
times are far short of, who have spent many years in the discipline of a more
severe life.

CHAP. VIII. Being recalled back to Mantua, he determines to renounce the
Marquesate, and to lead an Ecclesiastical life.
BLESSED Aloysius had now lived at Florence for two years, when by his father
(unto whom William the Duke of Mantua had then given the government of
Monte-Ferrato) he was commanded together with Rodulph his younger brother to
live at Ma^tua. Thither therefore, by the great Dukes good leave, he betook
himself, in the month of November the year 1579. when he was 11. years of
age, and 8. months. There whilst he prosecuteth his custom, which he began at
Florence of exercising a pious life, with no less grave advise then he had
before begun it, he determines to renounce the title and commodities of the
Marquis of Castilion, with the which he was now by the Imperial authority
adorned, and to resign the^ over to Rodulphus his younger brother. And although
he did now of late certainly resolute to abstain from marriage,
notwithstanding at that time, his indisposition of health, by reason of the
straightness of his water, gave no small confirmation to this his new
resolution. For when he feared least that malady should increase, it seemed
good unto him by the advice of the Physicians to endeavor to consume those bad
humors by abstine^ce, which were the matter of his disease: unto which
abstinence he gave himself with so much rigor, that it is strange, how he
could escape death. For if sometimes at supper he did eat but one whole egg
(which seldom times he did) then he seemed to himself to have feasted very
royally.

This severe abstinence he observed, both all that winter which he remained at
Mantua, and all the sumer following at Castilion, though dissuaded now by the
Physicians and all others, not so much for his health, as it was generally
thought, but (as he, after he was adjoined to the religious Society confessed
to Hierome Platus) for devotion sake. For although the love of his health did
at the first drive him to that so rigid a course of diet, by degrees
notwithstanding he turned it into a custom, and out of that love which he bare
to Almighty God, it began to be a pleasure to him. But as it prevailed in
driving away that disease which was growing upon him (as one who al his life
after was free from it,) so did it very much impair the whole state of his
health otherwise, for with that slenderness of diet he did so far forth weaken
his stomach, that afterward when he most would, he could not take meat, and
if against his appetite he took it, could he by any means retain it.
Therefore whereas hertofore he had been somewhat corpulent, he was always
afterward of a lean habit of body: moreover his former strength being decayed,
in place of that natural vigor there succeeded a very great weakness that
utterly corrupted the whole state of his body, which notwithstanding brought
this fruit to his mind, that for this respect he was destitute of many sportes
which if he had been of entire health he could not have avoided.

Therefore he did seldom go forth in public, unless he went to some Church,
or religious house, where he did often discourse of celestial things. It fell
out also once when he went to see Prosperus Gonzaga his Cosen, and a prime man,
that in the entrance of his house, going into a private Chapel, he applied
himself for a certain time to his devotions, but afterward he so discoursed
with him, and with the rest of his familiar friends, with so much fervor, and
subtility of divine things, that even then all of them esteemed him to be a
holy man. The rest of his time for the most part he spent alone and at home,
sequestered from the company of men, sometimes reading those histories of Saints
which Surius collected, with which he was very much delighted, sometimes
reciting his set-prayers, and in frequenting other acts of piety. The which
acts he did so daily increase, that whereas out of his affection to that quiet
kind of life, he grew by little and little weary of all humane conversation, he
at last determined, that yielding up the honors, and riches of Marquis to his
brother Rodulph, he would deuote himself to the Church; not out of any hope to
obtain Honors therein (which, being by many often offered him, he had alwais
most constantly refused) but for that he might in that kind of life bestow
himself wholly, more freely and quietly in the service of God. When he had
determined this in his mind, he began earnestly to importune the Marquis that
he would give him leave, being discharged of Court employments, to apply
himself unto the study of learning. Notwithstanding he concealed from him in
the mean while, his determination of following an Ecclesiastical course of
life.

CHAP. IX. Returning to Castilion he obtaynes from God an excellent hability in
mental prayer.
THAT which for the most part the Princes Go^zaga's do every year, to wit, the
winter being ended they retire themselves from Mantua into diverse places, till
the su^mer-heates be past; the same does the Marquis command Aloysius by
letters, and that he should with his younger brother return to Castilion, as
thinking indeed that his natural climate would be more wholesome to him, then
that of Mantua. Neither did his hope deceive him, for he was much amended with
the pleasantness of that place, situated upon a fair hill, most pleasant to
behold: and I do not doubt, but, especially by that cure which his mother
would have applied to him, he might have been wholly recovered, if he could have
persuaded himself to have remitted any thing of that rigor of life: unto which
he began to give himself at Mantua. But he doubtless being more solicitous of
the health of his mind, then of his body, was so far from any relaxatio^ of
those endeauours of piety, unto which he had accustomed himself, as that he
did rather straighten them. For he added unto that strictness of diet which he
had imposed upon himself, with great rigor, continual solitarines, in which
he shrouded himself for the love of divine things, avoiding all humane
society.

Whereas therefore he daily separated, and estranged himself from the common sort
of men, who are only drawn with these mortal respects; God according to his
singular goodness in rewarding those who faithfully serve him, did vouchsafe
to declare, how gratefully he accepted this mind, so pious and so desirous of
his honor, with which a youth but of twelve years of age did with so much
innocence of manners cosecrate himself unto him. Therefore for so much as to
that very day he was instructed by no man, of the manner of meditating upon
celestial matters, nor had any use thereof; it was the pleasure of God that
without humane help, he would himself instruct him with his own inspiration.
For having once most fitly prepared his mind, in respect of the excellent
purity thereof, for the receiving of heavenly riches, he brought him to the most
hidden treasures of his guiftes, and powered upon him with a full hand (as they
say) his endowments. For when as he had enlightened his mind with a certain
celestial light, which exceeded in clearness all human capacity, he taught
him a way of meditating, and pondering upon the Almighty power and greatness
of God, far more curious and high, then it could have been done by the precepts
of any mortal man. When he perceived, that this so easy an entrance as it were
to the plentiful pasture, and cheerful food of his soul, was so bou^tifully
laid open unto him, by way of serviceable gratitude, for this his love showed
toward him; he remained whole days trasported in thinking sometimes of those
admirable things which fell out in the working of our salvation; other
sometimes in meditating upon the titles, and attributes of Almighty God, when
in the mean while he was surprised with so great joy, that he could by no
means moderate his tears. So as with them he often moistened not only the
garments which he wore, but even the floor of his chamber. Therefore for the
most part all the day he was close shut up, least if he should have gone forth
any whither, he might either have lost that sense of piety, or being found by
any one to have wept, might have been hindered from prosecuting the same. This
when his servants observed, they would often through the chinkes of the door
descry what he was doing. For oftentimes they saw him kneeling before a
crucifix for diverse hours together, with his eyes fixed upon it, with his
arms sometimes stretched out, sometimes placed before his breast in the form
of a cross, when he shed so many tears, that the very sobs and groans might be
heard through the doors. And sometimes they perceived him to remain unmoved,
with his mind abstracted from his senses, even like a statue, with his eyes not
so much as once cast down. At which time his Governor, and others that were of
his chamber, do affirm, that he was therein so alienated from all sense, that
neither with passing through his chamber, nor with making any other noise, they
could divert his mind. When the fame of these things had spread it self
abroad, not now his familiar acquaintance only, but they also who were none of
the Court, being admitted to the same chinkes, and made eyewitnesses of the
same things, could never sufficiently admire them. Oftentimes also did the
domestical seruitours hear him, in going up the stairs, say upon every
staire an Ane Maria. But now both at home, and abroad, whether he was carried
in coach, or went on foot, he never cast off his mind from the meditation of
heavenly mysteries. In which exercise of piety, as I said before, he made use
of no Master but the holy Ghost, who endued his mind with this divine guifte,
as it were with a precious ointme^t. And although he now observed a certain
manner of meditating, notwithstanding he had not as yet learned to perform it
in method and order, neither did he sufficiently understand, what places he
should especially choose for it. Therefore at that time he fitly light upon a
certain little Book of Peter Canisius, a Divine of the Society of JESUS, in
which certain heads of meditation, were after a certain methodicall manner,
set down. Thereby he was not only more vehemently enkindled toward the love of
Divine conversation, but also understood what course he should insist upon in
meditation, and what times he should observe. Although then truly he confined
his meditations within no certain limits of time, but according to the
copiousnesse of the subject, and according as his mind was put on forward with
divine impulsions, he either made them longer or shorter: but in such sort as
that he never departed from them, but either with his mind illuminated with new
lights from heaven, or with his will inflamed with new ardour, or with his
whole heart steeped in new sweetness.

CHAP. X. The beginning of his love toward the Society of JESUS, and of his
zeal of souls.
HE was wont afterward to recount that this selfsame little Book, of which I
made mention, together with the Indian Epistles did very much win his mind to
the Society of JESUS. The Book truly, for that he said, he did very much
approve, and relish the order of things therein, and much more the spirit by the
impulsion whereof it was written. And the Epistles, for that by them he
understood how much God cooperated with the fathers of the Society of JESUS in
reducing nations to Christ in those climats. Therefore he stirred up his mind to
the imitating of these excellent enterprises for the saving of souls which
cost God so dear, though it should be with the expense of his own life.
Neither did he cease, even in that his so tender age to endeavor to help the^
according to his power. For that cause also he went every festival day to the
schools of Christian Doctrine, and labored with infinite fervor himself also
to instruct children in the rudiments of our Religion, and to give them
precepts of faith and innocent manners. The which he did with so singular
modesty, and love of humility, that he avoided not the familiarity of any boy
though he were under his own charge, and least of all those that were poor,
and did most earnestly excite the minds of all the behoulders to the love and
worship of God. Furthermore if he understood of any discord amongst the
servants of the Court, he endeavored to make them friends. In like manner, if
he heard any, either cursing or speaking against God, or his Saints, he
reprehended the. Those which he knew in the town to be of depraved manners, he
did with great clemency exhort, and seriously solicit that they would correct
and reform themselves. He could in no sort endure that Almighty God should be
offended.

He observed it as a solemn custom, that he would intertaine no other
discourse but of divine matters, and that with so great gravity of words and
sentences, that when about that time he went with his mother to Dertona, to
salute the Duches of Loraine, a very noble Lady, who together with her
daughter the Duches of Brunswike took her journey thither, he did with
speaking astonish all that Princes pages. Therefore they jointly affirmed, that
whosoever had heard his voice discoursing so excellently, and so wisely of God,
and had not also scene his face, that he would have seemed unto him a man ripe
in age and wisdom, not a child.

CHAP. XI. By the exhortation of Cardinal Borromeus he begins to frequent
the sacred mysteries.
THESE things were done in the year of our Salvation 1580. wherein Charles
Borromeus, Cardinal and Archbishop of Milane, a man of excellent Sanctity, was
by Pope Gregory the thirteenth created Apostolic Visitour, over all those
Dioceses which were in his province, and came to Castilion, whilst he visited
the Dominion of Brescia, with only seven men, which he had chosen out of all
his retinue, least he might become troublesome to the Ecclesiastical men which
he came to visit. Then, whereas he performed many other things, excellently,
and altogether with an Apostolic spirit, he in like manner in the year
aforesaid, the 11. of the Calends of August, which is S. Mary Magdaleus day,
being vested in his Pontifical robes, in the Church of the Saints Nazarius and
Celsus, which is the chief of that town, made a very fruitful sermon to the
people: and although the Princes sending diverse messengers unto him, did very
much importune him, that he would be pleased to take his intertainement with
them in the castle; notwithstanding he could never be persuaded to rest in any
place, otherwise then with the Archpriest, whose house was near adioining to
that holy Church. When B. Aloysius being now but of the age of 12. years, and
four months, resorted thither unto him for the tendering of his duty, it is
incredible how much joy he conceived by the only behoulding of this child,
being even like one of the Blessed celestial Angels, gracious in the sight of
God; and he spent so much time with him, in long discourses of Divine matters
privately in his closet, that it moved great admiration to all them that waited
before the doors. Questionless it was an infinite contentment to this good
Cardinal, to behold this tender plant, in the midst of the thorns of
diverse secular Courts, without the industry of any mortal husbandman, by the
only inspiration of heavenly breath, flourishing with so comely vigor, and
brought up to such an height of Christian virtue. The holy child in like manner
very much rejoiced, that he had gotten a man, unto whom he might confidently
declare himself, and of whom he might request an explication of those things
which seemed obscure in the pursuit of true virtue. For whereas he had heard
much of the sanctity of this Cardinal, which was very much spoken of, he did
earnestly ingrosse (as it were delivered by the oracle of God) all his words
and precepts which he delivered, of the keeping, and following of a settled
form of huing.

B. Charles asked of him, whether he had ever received the blessed Eucharist or
no: which when hedenied, the Cardinal who had now perceived the integrity of
his mind, and his maturity of wisdom, together with his understanding of
heavenly matters drawn from God, did very seriously exhort him not only to
receive it, but also to frequent it. Furthermore in a short discourse he set
down unto him an easy form, both rightly to prepare himself, and piously to
receive this fountain of all divine bounty. Besides this, he did seriously
exhort him, that he should often, and diligently peruse the Roman Catechism,
set forth by decree of the Tridentine Council, at the command of Pius V. the
Pope, which book in respect of the elegancy of the Latin tongue, this
Cardinal did so much esteem of, that rejecting Cicero and other profane Latin
authors, he thought it only fit to be explicated to youths in the Schools, to
the intent that thereby they might both reap piety, and a copious Latin tongue.
Neither did he doubt to put this in practice in the Seminary at Millane. But
when by use it self he found, that it fell not out according to his desire, he
did by commau^d as it were, revive the old authors again. To conclude when he
had given his benediction to Aloysius, and had showed other testimonies of his
great good will toward him, he gave him leave to depart.

This Blessed child omitted not to commit to memory the admonitions of so holy
a Cardinal. Therefore he began afterward with great contentment to peruse that
Catechism, both for that it was replenished with excellent learning for all
manner of sanctity, and Christian instructions; and also because he was invited
to the reading thereof by the counsel of so excellent a man, whom according as
he well deserved, he did with all dutiful respect honor. And likewise he was
very importunate by the authority of so worthy a perswader, to incite others to
the reading of the same book. He also began to enjoy the divine Eucharist, to
which before he came, it is incredible how diligent preparation he used. For
first of all least he should suffer any unseemly thing to rest in his mind,
which might be offensive to the eyes of God, whom he expected as a guest,
verily he made a careful and exact discussion of the course of all his life
past. Afterward he comes to accuse himself to the Priest, whom he did edify
with so excellent testimonies of a penitent and humble mind, witnessed with his
tears, that he seemed rather to come unto him as a master, then as a guilty
person. And doubtless, if he were culpable of any thing, that was nothing of
fact, but of omission only, as he supposed, of his duty. For whereas he
persuaded himself that he never came, even with that immortal light which God
had set before his mind of aspiring daily to higher degrees of virtue,
questionles he seemed always unto himself a loyterer and a truant.
Furthermore, during all those days, which went before the prefixed time of
this his heavenly banquet, the memory of that only took place, both in his
mind, and speech. He made search what others have excellently written thereof,
he did with himself meditate thereof, that he might be made partaker thereof: he
did daily so offer up his prayers, that his familiar friends would say, that he
seemed even to expostulate with the very walls, so often did he, now in this,
now in that corner of the house, set himself down upon his knees to pray.

But what the feruorous piety of his inward mind was, when he was first
received to the divine banquet, and how much his will was inflamed with love,
was only known to God, who beheld the hidden secrets of his heart. Surely I
could never find any mortal man, who was ever able to relate any thing of them
unto me. I only remember, that I have read this one relation in his public
acts, that he in receiving the Eucharist, had all the powers of his soul
recollected, and very attentive, that he was wont to be replenished with
plentiful delicacies, and that he was openly a notable example of piety to
all. Having taken this divine repast, remaining upon his knees in the sight of
all the people he continued in the holy Church. After that time he did not
cease often to receive the holy communion.

Moreover, this is a thing of very good memory, which I have heard both from
his mother, and from others who did often observe it; that truly from this time
he had in so exceeding great veneration the Blessed Sacrament, that daily when
he was present at holy Mass, after that the Priest had in express words
consecrated the body of Christ, being with infinite force of piety, dissolved
into tears, he would moisten the very ground under him. In the same manner he
stood affected, all the course of his life after, saving that only upon
festival days, when he himself was refreshed with that sacred ba^quet, he
powered out tears more abundantly.

CHAP. XII. Going to Monte-Ferrato, he undergoes a great hazard of his life:
there he conuerseth with Religious men.
IT was told unto the Marquis Ferdinand, who at that time lived at Casall of S.
Euasius, where the palace of the Governor of Monte-Ferrato is, that Aloysius
truly seemed to be somewhat recovered of his former infirmity, but that he was
so broken with frequent fasts, and those scarcely to be supported by any
mortal man, which he undertook of his own accord, that his stomach being
destroyed, he cold scarcely either take or retain his meat nor concoct it, and
that it was not likely to go any better with him, for so much as his own
courses were opposite to his health. The Marquis who placed his chiefest
contentment in the life and health of this his son, being hopefully
persuaded, that if he had him in his own power, he might find some remedy for
his disease, or at leastwise that some providence might be used, that it might
grow no further, he sends for Aloysius, together with his mother and
Rodulph, to come unto him. They therefore in the end of the summer of that year
1580. betook themselves to their journey from Castilio^ toward Monte-Ferrato,
wherein Aloysius did undergo a manifest danger of his life. For whereas the river
Ticino being very much increased with often shewers, was upon necessity to be
passed at one of the foardes, in the midst of the very stream of the water,
the coach wherein Aloysius together with Rodulphus and their Governor went,
was broken in the midst. The forepart thereof wherein Rodulphus was, being
joined to the horses, although not without some labor and danger, was drawn
by them, to the further bancke, whether the other coaches had now arrived: the
hinder part, which carried Aloysius and his Governor, being by the violence of
the current carried far off, had brought both their lives into doubt, for
whether the stream had overthrown, or swallowed it up, Aloysius must of
necessity have perished in the waters. But verily it was the pleasure of God,
according to the singular care which he had of this child, to provide, that
this part of the coach should by a great trunk of a tree, which the force of
the waters had brought into the midst of the river, be a little while
supported, whilst they that were landed upon the other bank, sent a man
skillful both in the Country, and the water, who riding into the river upon a
horse, brought forth Aloysius behind him, and thither afterward returned to
fetch, and transport his Governor. Having escaped this danger, assembling
their company together, they went to the next holy Church, humbly to thank
Almighty God, by whose beneficial favor they had avoided this so
distressefull accident. In the mean time, the fame went that they were
drowned. His mother being gone before in the foremost coach, hearing this
message, full of grief and fear, came back a great part of the way.
Furthermore this rumor had spread it self even to Casall, to the Marquis his
own ears. He sends away a man in post have to discover the business, neither
afterward took any rest till he knew the truth of the matter. But shortly
after, the arrival of his wife and children disburthened him of all care and
grief.

B. Aloysius remained at Casall in Monte-Ferrato above half a year. During
which time he both diligently applied himself to the learning of the Latin
tongue, wherein he profited indifferently well, and moreover advanced himself
further toward perfect virtue, by the most innocent and Saint-like
conversation of those holy Fathers, who first took their denomination from S.
John Beheaded, or according to the more vulgar report, from S. Barnaby, in
whose Church at Millane, they first had their Origin. Whereas he used the
familiar company of these men, and accustomed in their Church to frequent the
Sacred mysteries of penance and the Eucharist, he did daily enkindle unto
himself a new light, to more firm proceedings in celestial discipline. And
as by his excellent endeavors he did every day more then other deserve at Gods
hands new ornaments; so did he disclose unto his mind new lights of eternal
learning, and evermore with new instinct, as it were with certain spurs
driving him away from transitory things, excite him by degrees to the desire
of greater, and greater sanctity.

Therefore although his Father endeavored to offer him diverse occasions of
recreating and delighting his mind, to the intent that he might remit somewhat
of that his so earnest pursuit of piety; notwithstanding he never suffered
himself to be any whit at all withdrawn from that duty, which he had
undertaken toward God. It was his chiefest recreation, for devotion sake to
frequent the Church of our Lady the Virginmother, surnamed de Crea, which near
to that place is held in great veneration, for the great concourse of people;
and sometimes to go to the Monastery of the Capuchins, and sometimes to that of
the Barnabites, and to confer with them both, of courses of piety: from whom,
in so much as he found so great agreement in their opinions, it seemed
impossible to withdraw him. He did chiefly admire that cheerfullnesse of
countenance, which for the most part he observed in the^ all; that contempt of
mortal things; those set-times both for prayer and the quire, hat quiet
throughout all their houses void of all noise; that equality of mind, either
living or dying.

CHAP. XIII. He gives his mind to Religion.
MAKING these observations, he by little and little addicted his mind to the
like kind of life. Then especially, when entering the house of the Barnabites,
he at leisure considered with himself the happy estate of Religious men, even
in that respect, for so much as abandoning all the goods of Fortune, to the
intent that they might the more readily serve God, they did as it were
necessarily submit themselves to his care. Wherefore, (as he himself afterward
related to me and others at Rome) he argued thus with his mind.

Do not thou see, Aloysius, how happy a Religious course of life is? These
Fathers free from all secular snares, are placed far of from all oportunities
of sinning. All that time which the common sort of men spend in the hunting
after casual riches, and deceitful joys, they bestow in treasuring up
immortal riches, and in these kind of gains, which together with being
infinitely meritorious in the sight of God, do tie him eternatly unto
themselves; neither have they any cause to fear, that those pious labors
which they undertake can ever be in vain. To conclude, Religious men are they
(whosoever else are) who in the leading of their life follow reason as their
guide; neither are they subject to the dominion of sensual desires. They sue
for no honors, they make no esteem of terrene, and transitory goods, they are
not stirred up with the incitementes of emulation, they gape not after any
other men's fortunes, being in that only service of God happy, whom to serve,
is to reign. And what wonder is it, I pray you, that they being allwaies
quiet, and merry, fear neither death, nor the Tribunal of God, nor the
punishments of hell, for so much as they have their minds guilty of no sin?
What wonder is it, that they day and night store up celestial riches, seeing
that being never otherwise employed then in acts of piety, they either always
work with God, or for God? The testimony therefore of innocence which their
conscience it self gives them, does beget in them an inward peace and
tranquillity of mind: from whence proceeds the serenity which we may observe
in their countenance, and also, that their confident hope of celestial riches.
And what thing can be more joyful, then when they call to mind whom they
serus, and in whose band they lead their lives? But thou, what do thou? what
think thou? what hinders thee from choosing this kind of life? See now at
last in thy mind, what rewards are propounded unto them by almighty God.
Consider how much leisure and commodity thou may have freely to apply thy
self to piety. If (according as thou have determined) transferring the dignity
of Marquis unto Rodulph, thou wit not depart from it, thou may perhaps see
many things which thou caust not approve of. Wit thou seem not to see it,
but then the conscience of thy neglected anty will not cease to prick thee.
VVnt thou reprehend it, but then thou wit be troblesome, or surely spend thy
speech in vain. What, when as being initiated in Priesthood, thou shall live
amongst Ecclesiastical men, do thou then at last confidently believe, that
thou shall be able to keep thee to thy vows? No, rather having professed a
certain more exquisite kind of virtue, then men of the world are subject to,
thou shall be perplexed with the same kind of dangers that they are. With the
same said I? yea verily the allurements to sin will more vehemently entice
thee, then those that are bound in wedlock. It is impossible for thee
altogether to avoid, but that thou shall flatter profane men in their opinion,
and to it conform thy manners, soothing them up in their corrupt desires. For
if thou suffer thy self to be detained in the world, thou must of necessity
for the inscharge of thy duty, have recourse unto, and obeige unto thy self
one Prince after another. Now if thou avoid the familiarity of Noble-women,
who are by kindred somewhat allied unto thee, thou shall incur the censure of
men. And if thou apply thy self thereunto, thou will questionles break that
thy principal vow. By the admittance of Piesthood, and Ecclesiastical
honors, thou shall plunge thy self into far greater imploiments, then now
thou art tied unto, and those more estranged from piety. If thou refuse them,
thou shall by thy own kindred, and allies be termed an idle fellow, and the
reproach of thy family: neither will they ever cease to persecute thee, till
they have thrust thee forward to the undertaking of honors.

But truly if thou embrace a Religious course of life, thou shall as it were
with one stroke cut in sunder all these bonds which hold thee. Furthermore
thou shall shut thy self out from all dangers; then shall thou lay down the
careful and earnest pursuit of all vain and frivolous humane endeavors. To
conclude thou shall place thy self in that state, where nothing may violate
the peace of thy mind, or hinder thy desire of serving God with all virtuous
industry.

These, and other such like considerations did Aloysius reuolue with himself
at that time, as appeared by his own relation, which had so established his
mind, and transported it from the senses, that his familiar friends might
easily understand, that he who had his cogitation so busily set a work, did
project some great matter with himself. No man notwithstanding was so bold,
as to ask him what his debatement was. To conclude, after he had often humbly
petitioned Almighty God, after he had refreshed himself often with the Blessed
Eucharist, that it would please him to vouchsafe him his light for the
discussing of deliberations of that consequence; supposing this resolution to
be inspired into him by God, bidding farewell to the world with all secular
affairs, he determined to be take himself to some Religious family, where he
would by vow observe, besides Virginity which before he had devoted to Almighty
God, also Obedience and Evangelical poverty. But for so much as having not as
yet passed the thirteenth year of his age, it was not expedient for him to put
his thoughts in execution; he neither assigned unto himself any family, nor
disclosed unto any one that which he had in his mind. But notwithstanding,
those Fathers having discovering somewhat of his intentions, became hopeful
that he would at last adioyne himself to their company.

In the mean while, he, least his manners might disagree from the purpose of
his mind, began more strictly and vigilantly to order the whole course of his
life, and amongst secular and Court-delicacies, to express in all virtue, the
conversation of Religious men; to retire himself longer to his chamber; not to
have any fire in the winter season kindled, or brought into the same, where
hitherto he was wont to have some in respect of the tenderness of his hands,
which were accustomed to swell and break with cold: in like manner abroad
never to come near the fire, and if for company of others it was requisite to
do otherwise, to take that place wherein he might be sensible of no warmenesse;
to take with signification of a grateful mind, those remedies which were
brought him by those of the house to allay the swelling of his hands, but
setting them a side to make no use of them; to do all things out of a love to
suffer adversity for Gods sake.

Moreover, he avoided all concourse of people, and much more did he abhor
Comedies, late suppers, and delicious bankets, to which he was often invited,
but never cold be persuaded by his Father sometimes even stomaking that his so
unusual desire of solitude. Therefore others resorting thither, he only
remained at home, and there spent his time, sometimes in holy meditations,
sometimes in communication of learning or piety, with one, or other grave and
learned man. And other sometimes he went to the Capuchin Fathers, and to the
Barnabites; and whereas he could no more be carried away with the pompes, and
pleasures of the world, he inioyed their holy discourses.

Upon a certain time, his Father took him in his company to Millane, that he
might behold the transportation of all the horses of that province, whereat it
was requisite that he for the discharg of a certain office which he managed,
should together with many other principal men, be present. Whereas therefore,
for so much as this was a thing rare and thought very well worthy the seeing,
there resorted a great concourse of people unto it. Aloysius, who least he
should incense his Father, commanding this precisely out of his authority,
could do no otherwise but go, yet made use of this new art, to wit, he never
suffered himself to be set in those principal seats, from whence the whole
pomp might co^modiously have been seen: and which is more; as far forth as he
might, he endeavored, either still to sit with his eyes shut, or turned some
other way.

To conclude, I may very truly affirm, that he passed over his childhood,
without ever playing the child. For he was never found in that age, to have
done any thing that might savor of leuity. He never handled any dishonest, or
unprofitable books. He was much delighted to read the acts of Saints set
down by Surius, and Lippomanus. Of profane writers he for the most part read
those, who write of manners, as Seneca, Plutarke, and Valerius Maximus. He made
use of examples taken out of them, at such time, as he exhorted others to frame
the course of their life out of the precepts of Christ, or Philosophy. For he
sometimes uttered speeches, either openly with diverse others, or privately with
some one alone, so replenished with most wise sentences, so elegant, so
fervent, that all being astonished, would say, that his doctrine did far
surpass the capacity of his age, and that it was therefore derived from God.
That in like manner was the cause, why his kindred (whereas they were not
ignorant of his conditions, and beheld not without displeasure, so much rigor
of diet, and apparel, and contempt of all things which the world commends,
notwithstanding having in reverence his prudence, and singular virtue, and
never being so bold as to ask why he did so;) let him go forward with his
course.

CHAP. XIV. Being returned to Castilion with his Father, he leads his life in
great austerity, being very much addicted to Prayer.
AFTER the Marquis having performed his government of Monte-Ferrato went back
with his whole family to Castilion. Aloysius was so far from any relaxation of
that zeal of prayer, and sharp affliction of himself, that he did so much
more straiten it. A great marvel it is therefore, that he either was not
oppressed with some grievous disease, which might utterly have overthrown his
health, now long since much impaired, or that his parents in whose sight he
did these things, had not out of their authority forbidden him. For to that
spare and hard diet, which (as I said before) he used at Mantua, and never
after left off, he added many other entire fasts, as namely he observed three
set-fasts at the least every week; That is to say, upon Saturday, in honor of
the most blessed Virgin Mother; upon Friday, in memory of the passion of Christ
our Savior, upon which day being only contented with bred and water, in the
morning with nothing else but three morsells of bred dipped in water, and at
evening for his hungry resection, he lived upon one only cutting of bread, a
little tosted, and soaked in water. To conclude, upon wednesday sometimes he
abstained from all things, except bread and water; sometimes he observed the
received custom of fasting in the Church. There were added unto these other
extraordinary fasts, which of his own accord he imposed upon himself, as
often as either the time moved him thereunto, or that he perceived himself
drawn by the love of God, and ardour of piety. Furthermore he was so moderate
in eating, that some of his Fathers family maruelling, how he was able to
maintain his life, determined at unawares to him, to waygh how much meat he
took at one meal; and after, that by ballance-waight they had examined his
bread together with his meat, they affirmed by oath, that his usual dinner or
supper, did not fully amount to one Ounce weight. Which weight is so far from
supplying the ordinary necessity of nature, that we must necessarily confess
that which we have heard of other Saints, that his life was sustained by some
divine assistance, without which it seems impossible to live of so little
meat.

Moreover, it was ever his custom, to cast his eye upon that which he thought
to be the worst dish on the Table, and tasting a little thereof to leave the rest
untouched. But in the later ending of his time in a secular life, upon those
days that he did not fast, he would take no meat but by weight, saying that,
that was enough to maintain life, and that the overplus was to be refused as
superfluous. And these things that have been related of the course of his
diet, both others, and also he that was his cup bearer, and taster, and other
of his Table-wayters delivered upon their oaths.

He adjoined in like manner to this severe abstinence, other austere
punishments which he inflicted upon his body. Therefore every week he
disciplined himself three times at at least: but in those last years that he
conuersed in the world, he used it every day, and at last three times within
the space of the night and the day, till he imbrued himself in his own blood.
But for so much as at the first he wanted a whippe made for this use, he
scourged himself with such kind of tho^gues as they are wont to tie dogs in,
which by chance he found about the house; or with the ends of ropes, or as
some say, with an iron chain. They who for obseruancesake waited before his
doors, do witness that they have oftenseene him kneeling upon his knees and
scourging himself. In like manner when they made his bed, they found hidden
under his bolster certain scourges made of whip-cordes, with which he used to
discipline himself. Moreover his shirtes were often showed to his mother all
besmeared with blood which followed the stripes of the lashes. The Marquis
being certified of these things, did both at other times often inueigh
vehemently against him, and also once turning himself to his wife, uttered this
out of much bitterness of grief: This child seems to have a desire to make
away himself.

And oftentimes he covered with the sheets of his bed, some end of a board, or
other piece of wood, to the intent that he might give some disturbance to
himself in his sleep. But least his body should be free from perpetual
punishment, instead of a hair cloth which he wanted, he wore (a thing strange
and unheard of) next to his naked body, certain spurs, prepared to spur the
sides of horses, which did so fasten in his soft flesh their iron towels, that
they vexed him with a cruel torment. By which thing it sufficiently appears,
how wholly he resigned himself over to a more holy course of life, who being
but of the age of thirteen years and a half, borne in the midst of so
delicate and flourishing a fortune, by the instruction of no master, handled
his body with so great austerity. This holy child accompanied these forsaid
fasts, and other incommodities with which he of his own accord afflicted his
body, with the exercise of his mind, and especially with so great a custom of
prayer, that certain Officers of his Court, being at these public acts
solemnly sworn, denied that they ever came into his closet, but they found him
busy at prayer, and oftentimes before he would make an end thereof, they were
forced to attend long before the doors.

In the morning, after he was risen out of his bed, he spent a whole hour in
the meditation of heavenly things, which he did not measure by the running of
an houreglasle, but by the impulsion of his charity toward God, and the sense
of celestial swetnesse. Moreover, he was daily present at Mass, and
oftentimes assisted the Priest; with which office he was wonderfully delighted.
Furthermore, he sorted himself with the Religious men of the town, as a
singular example of edification unto them, at such time as they offered up
their public prayers, and praises unto God; the rest of the day he retired
himself to the reading of holy books, or to the consideration, and deep
discussion of the hidden mysteries of holy Scripture.

In the evening, before he took himself to rest, he bestowed two hours in
prayer with so much sense of devotion, that you would think it impossible for
him to observe any mean therein. His chamberlaines who waited at the doors,
that they might do him service at his going to bed, were so far from being
wearied with this stay, that they profited much by his example, in the way of
virtue. Therefore sometimes they beheld through the chinkes of the door, how he
be haued himself in prayer, other sometimes in imitation of their master, they
themselves became likewise humble suppliants to Almighty God. What should I
add any more? He was so frequent in his retirement, and cogitation of holy
things, that it could not be imputed to vauity, if a man should constantly
affirm, that he had his mind continually fixed upon God. Therefore often did
the Marquis complain, that he could very hardly draw him out of his chamber,
and he did recount to Fa. Prosperus Malauolta, that he had often seen the
place wherein he set himself to prayer, moistened with his tears.

Neither truly did he, when the care of any business called him out of this
priuacy, suffer his mind therefore to wa^der from that which he had meditated
upon. For whether he had in the morning meditated of Christ's passion, or of any
other subject, he did so deeply imprint it in his mind, that no employment in
the day was able to blot it out of his memory. What shall I say? for that he
did not think it enough to apply himself to prayer in the day and late in the
evening, but for that intent even in the night, unknown to all his servants,
his stepped out of his bed, and whilst they were a sleep, in nothing else but
his shirt, in the dark and silent night, in the midst of the chamber,
allwaies far from any resting place, he kneeled upon the bare ground, and in
the debatement of celestial matters, spent the better part of the night.

Neither did he use this only in the Summer, but also in the Winter season,
which time of the year, in Lombardy is very sharp with cold; with which he did
so tremble all his hody over, that he was somewhat diuerted from his prefixed
meditatio^s. Which he imputing unto himself as a fault, did so long exact of
himself with great violence, to become attentive in his mind toward God, til
at last, being as it were abstracted from his senses, he was never more vexed
with the torment of any cold. But nevertheless his body in the mean while,
its vital heat having forsaken all the members, would grow so stiff and
stark, that being no more able to kneel upon his knees, and having an
auersion both from sitting and lying, he would even sink groueling, upon the
bare and cold ground, and lying in that manner, he prosecuted the meditation
which he had begun. Wherefore it seemed unto me a strange thing, how he was
preserved from falling into some grievous disease, or from staruing or
perishing with the violence of the cold. Verily he himself when he was now
consecrated to religion did confess to certain of his familiar friends, unto
whom he did co^fidently relate these unadvised, (for so he called them) and
ouer-feruorous deeds of his, that whilst he lay so prone upon the ground, he
was sometimes so utterly destitute of strength, that being not able to spit
from him with his mouth, he was compelled to swallow it.

CHAP. XV. By Gods assistance, he escapes burning. His confidence in God, and
contempt of the world.
BY this endeavor of B. Aloysius, to have all the parts of his mind
recollected in his prayer, came that pain of his head, which did vehemently
vex him all his life after. But he out of a desire to suffer annoyances, and
especially such a like pain, as Christ suffered by his crown of thorns, was
so far from seeking any remedy for the allaying of it, that he rather took
diverse courses to nourish and increase it: and supposing it to be wholesome to
him, seeing that it did in a manner nothing hinder him from the mannaging of his
affairs, it brought into his memory the torments of Christ, and gave him
occasion of meriting some reward in Heaven. On a time it happened, that being
more sharply handled with that torment then ordinary, he went sooner to his bed
then he was wont. But afterward, as soon as it came into his mind, that he had
not as yet that day according to his custom, recited the seven penitential
Psalms, he forthwith determined never to close his eyes to sleep til he had
performed that task. Therefore he commanded the boy that waited on him in his
chamber, to leave the candle by his bed side, and so to go away. Having ended
those seven Psalms, being oppressed both with sleep, and the headache, he
forgot to put out the candle. The which being wholly consumed, the fire, when it
had taken one side of the bed without any flame, crept and spread it self so
far, til it had set on fire all the bedclothes which covered the bed, and one
mattresse stuffed with straw, and three with wool. Whilst the fire had much
wasted these things, Aloysius being awaked, so soon as he felt so great a
heat, and moreover was very much afflicted with the pain of his head, did at
the first suppose that he had been sick of a fever: but when he found that all
things else were no less hoate to his touch, he could not imagine from whence
the violence of that unusual heat should proceed: yet nevertheless he assaies
again to sleep, but all in vain. Wherefore when he was almost suffocated with
the increasing of the heat and smoke, he leaps out of his bed, and opening the
door calls upon the boy. He had scarcely set his foot in the entry, when the
flame breaking forth consumed the other part of the bed. Which least the whole
house should take fire from the same, the soldiers, who watched in garrison
about the Castle, being raised, did cast down out of the window into the
ditches which were underneath. Neither is it to be doubted, but that if he had
never so little deferred the going out of his bed, being especially in a little
chamber as I my self saw afterward and that shut, he might either have been
consumed by the fire, or else have perished by being choked with the smoke. But
questionless God, by an especial providence of his, did deliver from all
hurt, him, whom he had now designed for Religion, being not ignorant for whose
sake he was in this danger. Therefore all with one uniform consent ascribed his
preservation to God, and report also was brought to the Dukes themselves at
Mantua, that there had happened a certain miraculous thing to the elder son
of the Marquis: and I know not how long after, Leonora of Austria herself, did
in her presence desire to be informed of the whole matter by himself. He so
soon as he knew the matter to be diuulged, (perhaps even least it should be
know ne that his candle should be suffered to burn so near him) would very
much be abashed at that question. Aloysius was wo^t afterward, as one that had
now well experienced, in diverse chances, the watch, and care which the
eternal Providence had over his life, to prefer his prayers before all other
counsels, and to commit himself to the powerful disposal of Almighty God in
all Fortunes, and in all both his own, and his Fathers affairs: humbly
beseeching, that he would only favor (for in a manner in those very words was
he wont to commend his business to God) that which was best to be put in
execution. Neither did this hope, and confidence of the love of God toward him
ever deceive him. For he himself did once not fear to profess, (which surely
seems very strange) that he never petitioned God at any time in vain, were
his petition great or small: neither that he ever committed to his Providence
any business, how intricate soever it were, and desperately lost in other men's
opinions, which did not succeed according to his own hearts desire. So open was
always the Divine bounty to his prayers.

Out of this same daily conversation with God, seems that his excellency and
greatness of mind proceeded, despising and esteeming as nothing, whatsoever
the world possessed; then which endowment, he said none was of more value.
Therefore in the palaces of Princes, whilst he beheld gould, and silver, plate,
apparel, furniture, the obsequiousenesse of servants, and other things of
the like kind, for so much as he had a vild conceit of all these things, as
unworthy to be estimated so much in the judgment of men, he could scarcely in
the mean while forbear laughing. Wherefore he did often in the discourse which
he had with his mother, most confidently affirm, that be could not
sufficiently wonder, nor conjecture, what cause mortal men could alledg, that
they should not all become Religious: For it is more clear then the sun at
noone-tide, said he, that the commodities are more exquisite, which Religion
brings, not only to that future, but even to this mortal life, seeing that
the fiuitio^ of those which are esteemed principal in this life, is but short,
and the thirsters after them are punished with evils both living and dying.
His mother when she heard him discourse in this manner, although she easily
perceived, what intentions he had in his mind, yet for some respect she did not
at that time, so much as reply one word unto him.

And although truly, he did in a manner abstain from the society of all men,
yet when he gave himself thereunto, he did for the most part accompany himself
familiarly with Ecclesiastical and Religious men, who lived at Castil on. but
for so much as very many honest men, having been borne in that town, were
conversant in diverse holy Families, dispersed through other Countries, and
which did sometimes return to visit their own, these so so one as Aloysius
had notice of their arrival, he went unto them to talk of divine matters,
accepting also at their hands with a great desire, and sense of piety, meddalls
of Indulgences, Agnus-Dei, and other such like things belonging to piety. But
he conceived the most pleasure by the coming of certain reverend Monks of
Cassino, of the Order of S. Benedict, who when his life was called in question
at Modena, yielded unto him an excellent testimony of pious sanctity. Neither
was he less inclined toward certain Reverend Fathers of the Order of S.
Dominicke, who in the Summer time for their recreation came to Castilion, with
whom in like manner he conferred familiarly of matters touching his souls
health. Amongst these was the R. Fa. Fr. Claudius Finus of Modena, Doctor and
reader of Divinity, and a preacher of great fame in Lombardy. He both at other
times, and also a little before his death, before the Tribunal of the Bishop
of Modena, being questioned concerning that matter, answered upon oath in these
words, which in respect of the authority of that man, I thought good here to
relate.

CHAP. XVI. The testimony of the R. Fa. Claudius Finus Doctor of Divinity, of
the Order of S. Dominicke, of the sanctity of Aloysius.
I WAS well acquainted with the most illustrious Lord Aloysius Gonzaga, (to
whom belonged the inheritance of the title, and fortunes of the Marquis of
Castilion) not only by sight, but also by frequent discourse with him, when
together with my fellows I retired to Castilion, and to other places seated
in the dominion of his family. For very willingly his mother endeavored that
he should both confer with others, and especially with me. Verily I departed
from him astonished, and not without a certain pleasant gust of mind, more
inflamed in the love of virtue, in respect of the singular example of sanctity,
which shined in his manners, sententions speech, and gesture. All his familiar
speech in a manner tended to a certain exquisite desire of humble deportmen of
himself, and to the praise of those who separate themselves from those
things, which to blind mortal men seem so goodly and magnificent. Once also
he said unto me; There is no cause why we should insolently boast of our
ancestors, seeing that there is no other difference between the ashes of
Princes and beggars, but that those of Princes stincke more grievously. In his
tender age, he made no show of childishnes, being of notable modesty, often
with drawing himself from company, and in the mean while remaining silent,
musing, grave, and pious. Often he had in his mouth these speeches: O how
willingly would I burn with as much love of God, as might be worthy of so
great a majesty? my very heart melts with grief, when I see christians so
ungrateful toward him.

A token likewise of his modesty, and love of honesty, was that his
bashfulnesse, so full of candor, and sincerity, that if any one even in jest,
and merriment had but uttered any one word differing never so little from
modesty, he would with a decent blushing, and with a very modest sign of
grief, show a kind of commiseration of his error. In the mean while, whilst
he heard any one talking of the precepts of a more perfect life, or relating
of any who entered into any Religious Order, he seemed to compose his face to
greater serenity, and to put on another aspect. Sometime also he cried out with
a sigh: Good God, how much pleasure is there in those solid joys of Heaven,
seeing that we are so much delighted with the speech of them here upon earth?

Sometimes I went with him into the Church. There he showing the signs of a
mind most humbly and submissely worshipping God, did far surpass, being but a
child, the examples of men of riper years, and of long experience in the
profession of Religion. Sometimes being as it were in lamentation, other
sometimes his eyes being fixed upon some one of the Saints pictures, he
neither gave ear to those that called him, nor spoke to them, neither would he
without interposing some delay, yield the^ any answer; whereby it manifestly
appeared his mind was alienated from his senses. He did often affirm unto me,
that he bare a singular devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and that with the
only hearing of her name, his heart abounded with incredible joy. Truly I knew
him not after he had entered into a stricter course of religion, notwithstanding
I have heard, from diverse very grave men at Milane, Brescia, Cremona, Ferrara,
Genoa, Mantua, and else where, that he being joined to the Society of Jesus,
lived therein with great opinion of sanctity in the judgment of all men: and
many religious men of great authority do testify, that he in like manner dyed
in the same sanctity: and some were of opinion, that it was more safe to
commend our selves to his blessed soul, then his soul to God. Furthermore the
same of the miracles, prodigies, and other benefits which Almighty God works
for his sake, and of the celestial honor which is had of his Relics, is
diuulged far and near. These are the words of that Reverend Dominican Father.

CHAP. XVII. He goes with the Marquis into Spain, and is made Page of Honor
to James the Prince. And of the life which he lead in the Court.
IT was the year of Christ 1581. in the Autumn whereof Mary of Austria
daughter to the Emperor Charles the V. daughterin-law to Ferdinand the first,
wife to Maximiltan the second, mother to Rodulph the second who reigns at
this day, and sister to Philip the second the Catholic King, took her iourny
out of Bohemia into Spain. To do her honor, some Italian Princes, that were
obliged to that Kingdom, and amongst these the Marquis Ferdinand Father of B.
Aloyseus, were by that King commanded to atted her in passage out of Italy
into Spain. And whereas his wife Martha at the request of the Empress
accompanied him, they took likewise as companio^s in their iourny their three
children; one daughter whose name was Isabell, who remaining afterward in
Spain, ended her life amongst the principal maids of Honor to Isabella Clara
Engema the Infanta of Spain, Aloysius his eldest son being now of the age of
thirteen years and a half, and Rodulph being somewhat younger then he. In
this iourny which Aloysius made out of Italy into Spain, he never omitted his
usual custom of daily meditating upon divine matters, nor to make use of that
ardour of piety. Therefore he had always his mind busied in such likes cares.
It was bruited in the Galley which they went in, that they were in some danger
of falling into the hands of the Turks; here he inflamed with a sudden
desire, said: Vtinam, ita casus ferret, vt Martyrs fieremus, I would to God,
it would so come to pass, that we might be made Martyrs. Moreover his mother
recounted unto me, that he found amongst those rocks of the Sea, a little
stone distinguished with certain marks, which seemed to represent the five
most sacred wou^des of our Savior. But he whose whole mind was always set
upon piety, supposing the same to be manifested unto him by Almighty God, to
give him to understand that he should suffer the like pains that Christ did,
turning to his mother: See Lady, says he, what God has represented unto me,
and will my Father yet with-hould me from being a Religious man? After that he
did long bear an honor to that stone, for so much as it was a token of
Christ's passion.

After they came into the Court, the Marquis undertook his ancient office of
Cha^berlayne, Aloysius and Rodulphus being chosen for Pages of Honor, served
James the Prince son to the Catholic King Philip the second, elder brother
to Philip the third who at this day reigns Aloysius continued more then two
years in Spain, during which time he did very diligently apply himself to the
study of learning. A certain Priest singularly learned, read Logic to him.
And one Dimas the Kings Mathematician delivered unto him the description of the
Sphere. Besides these, he daily after dinner, applied himself to a certain
master, who read unto him natural Philosophy, and Divinity: In which he grew
so great a proficient, that when by chance at that time he took a journey to
A(...)a, where a certain student of Divinity had propounded certain questions
to dispute on, and F. Gabriel Vasques (whom after he heard explicating
Divinity at Rome) sat as Moderatour (...) at their request he being but the a
youth only of fourteen years of age, did with exquisite arguments, with
singular praise and applause of them that were present, endeavor to prove that
the mystery of the most holy Trinity, might be known by the natural force of
our understanding.

Aloysius being strictly tied to these employments of the Court, and of
learning, did easily perceive that there could remain unto him but little time
for the applying him self to mattets of piety, especially for so much as
sometimes he had not commodity eue^ to say those prayers which he used to do,
nor so often to frequent the Sacraments of Confession and the Eucharist. And
now that forward desire so speedily to renounce the commodities of Fortune, and
those same fiery darts thrown into his breast by Almighty God, wherewith
formerly his mind was so inflamed, began by little and little to languish.
Wherefore by the powerful instinct of God, setting light by the rumors, and
judgments of men, he determined to live in the Court it self, with as much
Religion, and Innocence, as possibly he could. For that purpose he choose for
his Confessarius Fa^ Ferdinand Paternus a Sicilian, of the Society of Jesus,
who at that time lived at Madrid. Neither after that did he ever omit, often to
purge his soul by Penance, and the Eucharist. Furthermore how purely and
uprightly he conuersed in that Court, abounding with all things which are wont
to infect the minds of men, the letters of the foresaid father may testify,
dated in the year 1594. the beginning of which, was in this manner

Most Reverend Father, I will resolve you in brief that which you request of
me. I have always found in Aloysius our brother, whom from his very childhood
I was acquainted within Spain, so singular a candor and innocence of soul,
that during all that time, which was for the space of some years, I was so far
from finding him guilty of any mortal sin (the which he did abhor as much
as any man, neither did he ever commit any in all his life time, but even very
often not so much as touched with the least venial sin which might stand in
need of absolution; neither can these things be attributed to any slownes of
nature, or dullnes of wit, or understanding) as who even at that age, was far
liker an old man, then a youth both in gravity of manners, and sharpness of
wit and prudence. He was a great enemy to sloth and idleness. Therefore he was
always busied in honest exercises, but for the most part in reading the holy
Bible, in which his mind received great contentment. In like manner I noted so
great modesty in his speeches, that he never gave offense to any one so much as
in the least word.

By these words of this Father who had heard his confessions, and other which
hereafter I purpose to set down, it may very clearly appear, that he in the
very midst of Court-imployments, lived after a celestial and Angelical
manner. For it ought to be accounted a certain singular commendation, when one
conuersing in the court, is declared not to be guilty so much as of those
sins, the which although they are venial, yet have need of absolution.

In public he was so composed, and so modest, that he never so much as lifted
up his eyes from the ground. Therefore upon occasion of such like speech, he
declared when he was now a Religious man, that he was not able to find the way
without a guide, neither at Madrid where he lived certain years, nor at
Castilion where he was borne and brought up: which guide he was wont always to
make use of, both least there might any occasion be given of distracting the
thoughts of his mind, and also (as he said) that he might be attentive to his
meditations. Concerning this modesty and temperance of his eyes, I do purpose
truly to relate a thing very new and unheard of, which upon the testimony of
the Provincial of Naples of the Society of Jesus, whom he used as his familiar
friend, is confirmed by the public monumentes. Thus the matter passed.
Aloysius as it is said before, took his iourny out of Italy into Spain in the
company of the Empress, afterward whilst he remained in the Court, he went
almost every day with James the Prince, to salute the same Empress, and to
conclude, was put upon a thousand oportunities to see and behold her exactly:
Notwithstanding so singular was his modesty, that he confessed to that Father
which I spoke of, that he had not so much as once seen her face or viewed her
person. And who is ignorant, with how great a desire all men are possessed, for
the most part, of seeing and curious perusing, as often as occasion is offered,
all such kind of personages placed in dignity, and what great concourse of
multitude is made to behold them, in those places where they are to pass?

He began even then, to have in great esteem, ouerworne and old clothes, and
stockins with patches upon the knees, of which the meanest men are wont to be
ashamed. Questionles, he having this corrupt world in contempt, made but little
esteem what acceptance his deeds had with them who were slauishly subject
thereunto. For in like manner he would defer as long as he could the putting on
of those new clothes which were made by his Fathers command, and when he had
once or twice gone appareled with them, he did most gladly return to his old
rags again. Goulden chains and other ornaments, which the custom of that
Court does applaud, he avoided, saying that this was the furniture of them, who
proposed unto themselves, not the service of God (as he had resolved) but the
delights of the body, and of Fortune. For this respect he had great conflicts
with his ince^sed Father, who interpreted the modesty of his Son, to be the
disgrace of him, and his Family. At the last he yielded to the co^stancy of his
son; and that which for some respects before he could not approve, he then
began to admire. Notwithstanding although Aloysius did himself make so dear
account of poverty, he did nevertheless easily suffer, that his servants and
attendants, should every one be set forth in apparel according to their office
and dignity. His conversation with the Nobility of the Court, was so full of
gravity and Religion, that if they did but see him coming, or behold him even
a far of, they brake of their licencious and merry discourses, and composed
themselves to modesty. And for so much as it did manifestly appear, that he
did punctually observe, in all his words, and actions, all the exact rules of
honesty, and that he could not endure to admit unto his ears any indecent
word, whether it were in jest or in earnest, it was grown a common proverb
amongst the prime men of the Court: Marchtonem Castilionensem minorem, non
videri carne constare, that, the young Marquis of Castilion did not seem to
consist of flesh. He let slip no occasion whereby he might profit others. The
wind once did blow somewhat boisterously upon James the Prince whilst he looked
out at a window, being at that time but a little one, at which he being
childishly froward said: Heus vente, impero tibi vt molestiam mihi exhibere
desinas, that is to say, Hark Sir wind, I command you to cease to troble me.
Then Aloysius that stood near unto him, taking hold of this opportunity said?
Potes, Domine, homines tuis dictis obedientes nancisci, in elementa autem
solius Dei imperium est, cui and te parere oportet: you may (my Lord) procure
men to be obedient to your commands, but to God only does the government of
the elements belong, whom also it behooves you to obey. The King (as of all
other affairs of his little son, so) like wise being certified of this
command which he gave to the wind, and of the prudent answer which Aloysius
gave to him, judged it to be spoken both wisely and seasonably.

Whilst he remains in Spain, he by chance did light upon a book, which
Lewis of Granada set forth, of the course of meditating piously, and of fixing
the mind upon that only, being recalled from all other cares. He being
persuaded by the reading thereof, determined to meditate every day some sacred
things, at the least one hour, with his mind closely recollected, without any
manner of distraction. Therefore when he had set himself upon his knees,
without leaning to any supporter, he began his meditation, and (...) it half
an hour, or for example fake three quarters of an hour, in which time if
never so little other matter came into his mind, which diuerted him from his
intended purpose, accounting all that former time for (...), he began his
meditation again for another hour, and iterated it afterward so long, till
that some one whole hour he had been void from all distraction of mind.
Therefore sometimes it was ordinary with (...) to pass sieve hours in
meditating, and sometimes more. But least, that whilst he was busied in such
like meditations, any either of his friends or strangers should by
inter(...)osing themselves disturb him, he hid himself in obscure corners,
amongst piles of wood prepared for the fire. There whilst he holds on the
course of his piety, in conte^plation and appeasing of Almighty God, he could
never be found by any of the house, although they much and diligently sought
for him. For which, he was then very much reprehended by his Parents, when
some Noble men of his friends came to salute him. But he doubtless who did far
prefer the benefits, which in the mean while were bestowed upon him from
heaven, before those triuiall visits of mortal me^, despising all humane
respects, nothing fearing to be taxed of want of duty or ciuility toward men,
so that he might not incur the fault of slack piety toward God, never, to
become acceptable to men, did omit, or so much as interrupt those exercises of
Religion. This after it was noted by his friends, they abstained from such
thanklesse offices, and left him free from allvayne imploymentes, and secure
from all fear of interruption.

CHAP. XVIII. He determines to enter into the Society of JESUS.
BLESSED Aloysius had now spent two years and a half in Spain, when by the
instinct of Gods spirit, wherewith he was daily more and more inspired, he
thought it now a convenient time, that according to his determination made in
Italy, it was requisite to be take himself to some Religious course of life.
But to the intent that he might after serious deliberation resolve, what order,
amongst all others was best to be chosen, he applied himself with greatet
earnestness then ever before to beseech Almighty God, that with his celestial
light he would vouchsafe to thew, what was sit to be done in a business of so
great moment. Many things at that time did he reuolue in his mind, of which
some I have understood from his mother, unto whom he imparted them, othersome
he himself declared unto us after he had now entered into religion. But in all
things he aimed at nothing else, but the greater glory of God.

At the first therefore, as he was very much given to that severe course of
life, and affliction of his body, he seemed in his mind to be inclined, to
apply himself to the Discalceate Fathers which is an Order in Spain for
sharpness of life and austerity of habit, equal in name, and authority to
that of the Capuchins in Italy. And doubtless the lowliness it self of their
aspect, and rigor of their course of life, either in respect of their
retirement to solitary places of woods, and groves, of their being adorned in
the midst of great cittyes with excellent examples of holy life, does not a
little as for the most part it is wont to do encourage and inuit minds
desirous to accomplish that matter well. Put he departed afterward from this
his suit determination, either for that seeing himself (...) and weak, and by
reason of punishments of his own accord inflicted upon himself, broken in
his health, he might fear, least if he showed himself less able to comport
with it, occasion might be ministered to his friends to take him again out of
the company of the Religious: or for that he thought it an easy matter for him,
being accustomed to fasting, disciplining, and other corporal afflictions eue^
in the courts themselves, to insist upon these without any impeachment, or even
to add new ones unto them, in whatsoever other pious family he should choose to
live. Especially, seeing that his mother (whom he consulted withal in this
matter) was of an opinion, that it was impossible in respect of his infirm
health, for him to live even in the world, with such bitter punishments
wherewith hitherto he had weakened himself, much less, long to maintain his
life in any more strict course of Religion. And afterward he began to consider
with himself, whether it might be an enterprise worth his labor, for him to
enter into some family, where the ancient discipline had been discontinued, and
that he might restore it again, first to that Monastery into which he was
received, and after by degrees to the whole Order. This truly seemed very much
to concern the general good of the Church. But he contrariwise being not so
bold as to confide in his own virtue so much, began to fear, least if this
his project should not take good success, he might deceive himself, and
whilst he goes about to aid others, deprive himself of necessary helps. It
seemed therefore better unto him to choose some Religious Order, which was eue^
now standing in a flourishing state, relying upon its ancient institutions and
discipline. Whereas there are many of this sort shining in Gods Church, he made
little account of those, which without any study of contemplation, set
themselves wholly upon action, and accommodate themselves only to do good to the
bodies of others, which he said he did not so well relish. Next unto these
there came unto his mind, those Orders, which being wholly separated from the
society of me^ in woods or towns, only solicitous of themselves (of which sort
are most of the companies of the Monks) quietly endeavor to get the perfect
love of God, by singing unto him sacred hymns, and by the reading or
contemplating of celestial things. And from the life of these, he was so far
from being auersed, that he did seem even with some willing inclination to be
disposed theru^to. For what? he that in Princes courts and in the midst of
those troblesome noises of men, was able to recall his mind from them, and
place it in quiet; should he not more easily find the same, in the houses of
Religious men, being sequestered far from the world, and commerce of men? But he
who did not only respect that which might make for the quiet of his mind, and
the glory of God, but went in continual quest after whatsoever might be
auailable for the greater glory of God, thought that any talent which was le^t
unto him by Almighty God, and that he might lay out for the salvation of
souls, should by him as it were be buried in solitude, and made of noise.
Moreover as some affirm, and we hereafter will declare, he had read in that
book of S. Thomas of Aquine the Angelical Doctor, entitled the Sum of
Divinity, that those Religious orders are in the principal degree of dignity,
who bestow their labors and endeauours in teaching, preaching, and providing
for the salvation of souls. For so much as they not content with the
contemplation of wholesome things, do communicate unto others that which they
have sifted out by contemplation. Likewise that they come very near to the
similitude of that life, which the Son of God, the square and rule of all
perfect virtue, lead here upon earth. For neither was he always retired into
desert places, in the adoration of his Father, and contemplation, neither did
he always instruct his disciples, or preach to the people, but
intercha^geably; sometimes he ascended up to the mountains and solitary places,
to offer up his prayers to God, other sometimes he descending from thence into
the company of men, instructed the ignorant with excellent precepts for
eternal salvation.

Wherefore Aloysius, of his own accord, waining himself as it were from the
milk of ease and celestial delicacies, which he might have enjoyed in that
silence, and solitude of a Monastical life, determined to betake himself to
some Sodality, which employing it self in office, mixed and tempered between
action and contemplation, might both apply the study of learning, and accompany
the labor of bringing other men to salvation and perfect virtue, with the care
of himself. But for so much as there are many companies in Gods Church
assembled for this end, who every one after their proper manner and institution
live holily therein; he began to compare, amongst themselves, all their several
means, helps, and exercises, by the which they endeavor to obtain that end
which they propound unto themselves. After therefore he had long, and much
deliberated upon the whole matter, and had often made his prayers unto Almighty
God, it pleased him in conclusion to make choice of this, the lowest and latest
begun Society of all others, the which he thought to be decreed for him by God,
and most oportunely sorting to his ends.

CHAP. XIX. For four causes he made choice of the Society of Jesus.
BUT he alleged four causes which persuaded him, to prefer this Society
before all other families, and he said, that they gave him great contentment.

The first was, for so much as the Institutions thereof, being as it were in the
perfect vigor of a confirmed age, do hitherto flourish entire, and
unblemished, and never declined into any worse estate, by innouations.

Another was, for that therein a special vow is taken, whereby all power of
seeking after Ecclesiastical dignities, or of admitting them being offered
(unless the authority of the Pope himself be interposed) is taken away. For
truly he feared, least if he should adioyne himself to any Religious order
which would not refuse them, that being sometime drawn from thence by the will
of his friends, he might be preferred gratis to some degree of dignity in the
Church; which so long as he continued in the Society, he understood would not
in like sort be in their power.

The third was, for that he saw in the Society, many ways, and courses to
instruct youth in the fear of God, and the precepts of chastity, both by open
schools of good literature, and also by the constituting of pious Sodalities.
For whosoever does labor in cultiuating those tender plants, and in defending
them by the preservatives of pious exhortations, and the use of holy
Sacraments, both from the frost-biting of vices, and the lustful heat of all
exorbitant desires, him he thought both to merit much at the hands of the
Divine majesty, and to do unto him a thing infinitely grateful and pleasing.

The fourth was, for so much as the Society, with a peculiar endeavor
negotiateth the reducing of Heretics to the lap of the holy Catholic Church,
and the conversion of Gentiles, Indians, Iaponians, and Americans unto Christ:
Wherefore he was lead with a hope, that one day that fortune likewise might
betide him, to be sent for the salvation of men into those coasts.

Having made this absolute Election, the blessed young man did his endeavor to
be made as certain as possibly he might be, of the wall of God. He determined
therefore for this purpose, to receive the Blessed Eucharist, upon some
festival day of our Blessed Lady, that by her means commending it to God, he
might be instructed what his divine will was therein. A convenient day
approached, a feast of the memory of her Assumption into Heaven, the year
1583. and of his age the 15. and a half. When that day came, early in the
morning, having before prayed very long, and prepared himself with
extraordinary diligence, he was refreshed with that celestial meat. After this
when he insisted very much upon rendering thanks to Almighty God, and
beseeching him by the merits of his Virgin Mother, that he would please to
instruct him in that which might be most acceptable to his Divine majesty,
behold a clear, and manifest voice is uttered, which commanded him to become
a Religious man in the Society of Jesus, and (as he afterward declared to his
mother, and others after his entrance into Religion) that he should impart it
presently to his Ghostly Father.

CHAP. XX. He discloseth his vocation unto his Confessarius, and after to his
Mother, and his Father.
BEING thus certified of the will of God, he returned home, full of joy, and
desire with all possible speed to yield his obedience thereunto; and that very
day meting with his Ghostly Father, he related how the matter had passed; he is
very importunate with him, that he would deal with the Governors of the
Society, that they with all expedition would vouchsafe him admittance therinto.
The Father, when he had diligently discussed both the beginning and progress
of this his intention, at last gave this answer: that surely this advise
seemed to be very seneraigne, and given from God himself, but that it could
never be effected, unless the Marquis his Father consented thereunto, for if he
should prove repugnant, the Fathers of the Society would never admit his Son.
That it belonged unto him to delcare unto his Father this his intention, and to
petition him, with as effectual entreaties and arguments as he could, that he
would give him leave to put it in execution.

But he, whereas his burning zeal of consecrating himself to God brake through
all delays, that very day opened the matter to his mother. She took to great
contentment in this resolution of her sons, that she did exhibit humble
thanks unto Almighty God for the same, and very cheerfully after the example
of Anna, did present and dedicare him to his Divine Majesty. Moreover she did
first certify the Marquis of this matter, and whereas he was very much incensed
at the heating of this unexpected message, she did somewhat mitigate his
indignation. Neither did she ever after omit to favor and assist him in this
business. Wherefore the Marquis, not knowing with how serue^t a desire his wife
wisshed to have scare one of her sons to become the servant of God in some
Religious course, began to suspect, that she was partially carried with some
private affection toward Roauiph, and to the intent that he might set foot
into the inheritance of his Fathers Principality, she would willingly have the
other tied in Religion.

And not much after, Aloysius himself with great submission and reverence went
to his Father, and with a bold courage, and most apt speech denounced unto him,
that he was resolved to spend the residue of his life in Religion. Upon this
the Marquis being inflamed with anger, rebuking him with many hard and sharp
speeches, bids him avoid out of his presence; moreover threatens him that he
would cause him to be whipped naked. Unto which Aloysius modestly replied:
Vtinam eo me Deus beneficio dignetur, vt istuc eius amore perferam: O that it
would please Almighty God to vouchsafe me that favor, that I might suffer it
for the love of him. Having said this, he departed. The Marquis being deeply
wounded with grief, converting his furious anger against his sons Ghostly
Father though then absent, did, and said these things which a disturbed mind,
and headlong passion dictated unto him; neither for certain days afer, took
he any rest at all. So great a stroke did he think to be given to his
affairs, and to receive so much detriment by this his sons purpose. Some few
days after, sending for the Father whom his Son used to deliver himself to
in confession, he did vehemently expostulate with him, and complained, that he
had possessed with this mind, the eldest son of his House, upon whom reposed
the whole hope thereof. The Father answered, that some few days before that
time, Aloysius had imparted unto him this resolution, and that he himself was
able to testify as much: But yet he did easily conjecture by the course which
he held in his life, that at last he would intertaine the same. Then the Marquis
being somewhat milder turning himself to Aloysius who stood by, said, that he
should less have erred if he had chosen any other order. Unto whom Aloysius
gave so wise an answer, that it took from the Marquis all power of
contradiction. That may be understood by the Epistle which before I commended
of the Father his Consessarius; in which he speaks thus of Aloysius.

Concerning the admonishment given unto him from Almighty God for the entering
into Religion, two things very well worthy of consideration fell out. Priety I
never made mention thereof unto him, not withstanding I did ever presage in my
mind, by the carriage of himself, that which succeeded afterward. But
afterward upon the day of the Assumption of the Blessed Mother of God into
heaven, when he applied himself (as often he was wont to do) to the Sacraments
of penance and the Eucharist, about noone he came to disclose unto me, that
when he, in the midst of those Divine bankets be sought Almighty God by the
mediation of the Blessed Virgin, that he would vouchsafe to show what course of
life it was his pleasure he should set down unto himself, that he heard a
c(...)re and manifest voice, which commanded him to embrace a Religious
institution in the Society of Jesus. Afterward the Marquis his Father, whereas
he was vehemently vexed with this resolution of his son, and notwithstanding
perceived him so constant therein, spoke unto him in this manner, whrist I was
present: Truly my Son, I would thou had rather chosen any other order then
this, for then thou might have been capable of some dignity, which might have
added to the splendor of our family; of which thou must always rest destitute
in the Society, that abandoneth all Honors. Surely, answered the young man,
one of the causes for which I preferred the Society before other Religious
courses, was even this, for so much as I desired to intercept all passages to
ambition. For if I were delighted with any dignity, certainly I would enjoy the
title of Marquis, which Almighty God has conferred upon me as my birthright,
neither would I change a certainty, for an uncertainty. These are the words of
the Epistle it self.

His ghostly Father being departed, the Marquis musing daily upon this his
sons project, it came into his mind to suspect, that Aloysius upon set
purpose had invented this means, to reclay me him from gaming, unto which he
was incredibly addicted; for not many days before that, he had lost some
thousands of crowns. And that very evening wherein Aloysius had thus opened
his mind unto him, he had played away other 600. crowns. Which humor truly of
play was so distasteful to Aloysius, that oftentimes his Father being very much
engaged in play, he would retire himself into his chamber to deplore him. He
said in like manner to those of his chamber, that he did not so much
co^miserate his Fathers loss, as the injury which was offered toward Almighty
God. Therefore this his Fathers suspicion did not seem to be without a cause.
Neither was this the opinion only of the Marquis, but of all likewise that
co^uersed in the Court, who discovering the passages that were between the
Marquis and his son, infinitely extolled the prudence of Aloysius, who out of
fear of further losses, attempted to withdraw his Father from play. But when
as he being of a constant mind, and firm in his purpose, daily labored to
obtain leave, to perform that which he was commanded by instinct from God,
and made profession that he only aimed at the service of Almighty God; the
Marquis, especially when he reflected upon his life, which from his very
childhood, he had after an Angelical manner spent in the meditation of matters
of piety, was at last persuaded, that his son spoke seriously, and that this
intention was put into him by Divine inspiration. A greater proof was added
hereunto by the authority of the most Reverend Father, Mr. Francis Gonzaga
Minister-Generall of the Fathers Obseruant of the Order of S. Francis, who was
very near allied to the Marquis in kindred and consanguinity, who when at that
time he was employed in visiting the Provinces of his order in Spain, and at
the request of the Marquis had for the space of two hours, curiously searched
into Aloysius, was so far forth satisfied with his answers, that he assured
his Father, it was not lawful to doubt, but that this mind was given to him by
God.

And although the Marquis did plainly understand, what the vocation of God was
toward his son, notwithstanding he could not persuade his mind to resign
him ouerto him, but as long as he could he detained him with fair allurements.
This Aloysius observing as one impatient of delays, after the death of James
the Prince, who was taken away with a fever (whose funeral rites together with
the whole train of the Court, he performed in the Escuriall) being freed from
the necessity of serving the Court, he determined by a certain politic means
to try whether he might proceed with his purposes, or no. Therefore, when upon a
certain time, he came to the Fathers of the Society of JESUS, he wills his
younger brother Rodulfus, and other his familiar friends who were present with
him, to return home, for he did firmly resolve to remain there, without ever
going back to his home again. They, when they perceived this purpose of his
to be sincere and not feigned, departed homeward, and gave account to the
Marquis (then sick of the gout) of the success of the whole matter. He
sends unto him Doctor Salustius Petrocenus of the house of Castilion, his
Auditour, and commands him to return home with him. Aloysius gives
answer, that, what must be done to morrow, may be done to day. That it was a
great contentment for him to remain in that place; that he did humbly beseech
his Father, that he would vouchsafe him that solace. The Marquis having received
this answer, thought it an indignity to pass the matter over so, and should
otherwise become an obloquy to the Kings whole court. Therefore sending the same
man again to importune his return, he shows himself obedient, and
returns.

Another time, upon occasion of speech with Father General Gonzaga, whom I
named before, the Marquis besought him, by that their kindred, and common
friendship, that for so much as he did sufficiently understand, how much the
loss of such a son, who was able so wisely and religiously to govern his
people, would be against the welfare of his dominion, he would be pleased to
dehort, and dissuade him from this his intention of becoming religious;
moreover that in the world insisting in his degree, he might do that service,
which might be much for the honor of God. Whom the General answered in this
manner, that he would please to pardon him, if he were not answerable to this
his request, for so much as it was not correspondent to the Institutions of
that course of life which he professed, nor even to the duty of a christian
man. The Marquis urges that at the least he would deal with him, not to enter
into Religion in Spain, but that he would take his iourny back again with
him into Italy. And that there he promised him to make him partaker of his vow.
The Father General who well remembered, that he himself, when in the Court of
the same Catholic King he first applied his mind to be of the Order of S.
Francis, after that his parents had spent many dissuasiue words in vain, and
that they had gone about with that train of policy to bring him back into
Italy, to the intent that they might more oportunely, with all cunning means
supplant his purpose, that he at last refused to condescend unto them, and
changed his habit in Spain, said unto the Marquis that even this office could
not be done with a safe conscience, and that he himself did make a scruple
thereof. Nevertheless he denied not to do it. After this, he declared unto
Aloysius both the Marquis his request and withal his answer, and added
moreover that he was somewhat scrupulous to deliver these his Fathers
co^maundes unto him, although he promised to give him full power to dispose of
himself in Italy. The young man with his accustomed facility made answer to
the General, that he truly would most willingly in this matter give content to
his Father, neither was it any thing at all troublesome unto him, as who
foresaw all things that might fall out, and seemed so constant and stable, in
that which he had conceived in his mind, that being assisted by God, no human
force was able to wrest him from it. That therefore he had no cause to fear any
thing, that might happen unto him. The Father-Generall informed the Marquis of
all things, and to conclude all was so accomplished, that both their wills
concurred in one.

CHAP. XXI. He returns into Italy, and meets by way of Complement with all
the Princes thereof.
IN the year 1584. when John Andreas Auria, being of late by the Catholic
King made Admiral, with great power by sea bent his course with Galleys for
Italy; it seemed good to Ferdinand the Marquis, to tra^sport himself, his
wife, and his children thither by the same vessels. When he was there ready to
take ship, Father General Gonzaga having now accomplished his business, both
of visiting his order, and likewise other that he had in Spain, yielded
himself companion unto them in this voyage. I cannot sufficiently express in
words, how joyful and propitious a fortune Aloysius did repute it to
himself, that he might enjoy the society of so Reverend a Father, upon whom
so often as he cast his eyes, he might seem to behold an excellent mirror of
religious life, and severe discipline. And he afterward recounted unto me, that
he to the intent that he might reap profit by his example, did very diligently
observe all his manners and actions, and that he found him such a man, as might
excellently well maintain the name of General over the Friars Obseruant, and
that Office likewise, with great accomplishment of virtue, and with singular
documents of exemplar life. Furthermore, how true an opinion, and that grounded
upon solid reasons Aloysius in that iourny entertained of this man, did even
more clearly disconer it self, after that he was first made Bishop of Cefatu
in Sicily; and after of Mantua. For so religious and holy was his conversation
always in that degree of dignity, that it is now a thing evident, to all that
either knew him, or at any time had conversation with him, that he insisted in
the footsteps of those ancient Bishops, which were most remarkable for the
glory of sanctity, and that he might very worthily be proposed for a
maister-peece to all, who out of Religious Families are advanced to the
government of the Church. Wherein I would more in large my self, were it not,
that I might fear to offend the most modest and humble mind of so great a
prelate, who is even now living whilst I write these things.

The conversation of this man abounding so with honesty and innocence, made
that navigations both very pleasant, and short to Aloysius, whilst they
discoursed between themselves either of the various places of divine books, or
of the rules of a pure life, he aduising with this good Father of those things
which seemed difficult in that kind. They arrived in Italy in the month of
July in that same year, when Aloysius was of the age of sixteen years and
four months. Aloysius was hopeful to obtain his purpose very speedily by
the consent of the Marquis his Father, and therefore omitted not to solicit it.
But the Marquis denied to condescend thereunto, till that he had, together
with his brother Rodulph saluted in his behalf all the Princes and Dukes of
Italy. Whereupon he was to betake himself to this iourny. He did that with this
policy, for so much as he hoped it might by little and little rebate that his
zeal of entering into Religion.

Therefore Aloysius, together with his brother and a great retinue, puts
himself upon his way, and very officiously he complies with all the Great-ones
of Italy one after another. Rodulphus (who had not yet altogether exceeded his
childhood) went apparelled gorgiously, and accommodated as best might beseem
his dignity: but Aloysius suitable to his modesty, wore a plain suite of black
stuff, which they commonly call Flanders-Serge, being still an enemy to all
vain bravery. For whereas the Marquis had ordained to be made for him, certain
imbrodered garments, set forth in so costly a manner, that they seemed all
covered over with gould, with which being apparelled he went to present his
service to the Infanta of Spain, wife to the Duke of Sauoy, he could never
after, so soon as he had once set foot in Italy, be persuaded so much as once
to put them on. Sometimes also it happened at Castilio^, that he wore his
breeches very much torn, which least they should be perceived, and changed for
better, he covered them with his cloak; but there was a time, when going up a
pair of stairs, while he stoupeth to took up his beads that were fallen
down, he was noted by his Governor to be clothed with such old breeches, that
in some places they showed even his naked skin. Then said he: Domine Aloysi,
quid tandem agis? tibi tuoque generi probro non esse sentis? My Lord Aloysius,
what do you mean I pray you? are you not sensible of the disgrace that you do
to your self and your family? and without delay taking away those, he
commands him to put on others. He fearing I imagine, least the matter should
come to Marquis his ear, durst not use any contradiction.

Being upon his iourny, he busied his mind, either in reciting his prayers to
Almighty God, or in meditating daily some things of that nature; neither did he
ever omit either his accustomed fasts, or his evening prayers. As soon as he
came to his lodging, he retired himself into some private closet, and sought
for some picture of a Crucifixe, before which he might pray; if he could find
none, he either with a cole, or inck drew a cross for his devotion upon a
paper, and falling down before it upon his knees, he spent one, or more hours
in praying, and entertaining himself with piety toward God. So soon as he
came unto any town, in which there was any house, or College of the Society,
having performed the salutatio^ of the Princes, he forthwith went to see the
Fathers, and having entered the College, he first of all went straight to the
Church, humbly to salute the Blessed Sacrament, and afterward so long as his
leisure might serve him, he enjoyed the familiar discourse of the Fathers.

Whilst he went to tender his service to the Duke of Sauoy, two things
happened very well worth the memory. The one was when he lodged at Augusta
amongst those of Turino, in the house of the most illustrious man Hierome
Roboreus his near Kinsman, who afterward was chosen into the college of
Cardinals; and being there in a certain parlour in the company of many noble
young gentlemen, an old man of seauenty years of age, who was by chance
present began to cast forth certain immodest speeches. This verily did very
much disgust Aloysius. Therefore with great freedom he contesteth with the man
in this manner: Sir, ought you not to be ashamed, being a man so well borne,
and adorned with so good parts, both of Nature and Fortune, to speak of these
kind of things in the company of these Noble Gentlemen? Verily this is to
scandalize the^, and expose them to danger of sin, for so says S. Paul:
Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua: Bad discourses corrupt good manners.
Having said this, and taking a little book of piety into his hand, to the
intent that he might show himself to be displeased, he departed out of that
company, into another withdrawing room. So that old man being stricken with
shame, example of modesty was given to the rest. The other was, that when
Hercules Tanus his uncle, being certified of his coming to Augusta of Turino,
came to salute him, and earnestly entreated him, that to the intent he might
visit his neighbors, and gratify them all, he would vouchsafe to go to
Cherio, together with his brother, where he never yet had been, he
condescending to his inuitement took that iourny. But whereas for the greater
grace of these Princes his nephews, the same Hercules had prepared a solemn
feast, at which as the custom is, there was provision for dancing, Aloysius
at the first endeavored all that he could not to be present, afterward being
wearied-out with the entreaties of many, who alleged that all this
magnificence was ordained as a friendly remonstrance of the joy that they
conceived for his arrival, he suffered himself to be brought into the
Parlour, in which there was assembled a great concourse of noble men and women,
having first before, plainly professed, though he were present, yet he would
neither dance, nor do any thing else. This being agreed upon, he had fearcely
taken his place, but that there rises up one of those noble Ladies, and
inuiteth him to dance. Upon that occasion taking some displeasure, uttering
not so much as one word, as it were compelled by some necessity, he withdrew
himself out of the place, and never more returned. Not very long after,
Hercules having gone forth in vain to seek him, at last, when upon some other
business he passed through the Servants lodgings, he sees Aloysius hidden in a
corner between a bed and the wall, kneeling upon his knees at his prayers. At
which thing standing in admiration, not without some improuement in virtue, he
never presuming to interrupt him, left him to his devotions.

CHAP. XXII. His purpose is oppugned by diverse means.
HAVING performed these officious salutations, remaining confident that the
Marquis would stand to his promise, and dismiss him, he returns to
Castilion. But surely this hope did much fail him. For he would not endure to
hear so much as one word thereof, but rather, whereas he cold not be persuaded
by any means, that this his intention was entertained upon any good advise,
but upon some youthful forwardnes, which time it self would take of; he
endeavored by all possible means and industry to remove the young man from
this his first intention. Moreover other men of great account, who were near
allied to him both in kindred and favor, violently set upon him, with forces,
both vnthought-of, and unexpected.

And first of all William Duke of Mantua, who always bare a special
affection toward Aloysius, sent to him a certain Bishop, a man very eloquent,
to Castilion where he dwelt, who should declare unto him as from himself, that
for so much as he seemed to set naught by the life of a lay man, as tending too
much to liberty, and profaneness, that he should at least content himself in
their course, who not despising the commodities of Fortune, do likewise
perform the offices of the Church. That there would remain unto him in this
kind of life, more ability to perform excellent things, both for the glory of
God, and profit of men, then in that which Religious men, live in. That there
were not wanting men, neither in the memory of our ancestors nor ours, that
were singular in sanctity (in the number of which he thought Carolus Borromeus
that most Illustrious Cardinal to be one) who, as they did not abstain from
the wielding of businesses of the Church, so were they more auailable thereunto
then many that spent their time in Monasteries. Last of all, he promised unto
him all his endeavor and favor for the obtaining of some such kind of Honor.
This Bishop played his part very well, with great force of eloquence, and with
very exquisite reasons to persuade him. But Aloysius after that he had
prudently made answer to them all, most earnestly besought him, that he would
please to render great thanks to the Duke, for the love which he had always
showed toward him, by the impulsio^ whereof he had so much at this time
enlarged himself in his respect to him. That he, even as of his own freewill
he had stripped himself of all other Honorable advantages, which he might
have accepted from his House and Family, so that he did most willingly remit
unto the Duke, this preferment which he so bountifully did offer him. That he,
for that reason chiefly, was induced to wish the entering into the Society, for
so much as it rejected all kind of honors. For he had fully resolved whilst he
lived, to account God for his chiefest treasure.

Another attempt was made upon Aloysius by Alfonfus, his Uncle by the Fathers
side, unto whom he was next to succeed in the government of Castle-Godfrey,
who when he had proposed the like arguments that the Duke had, received the
like answers.

Likewise another man of great authority of the same Family of the Gonzaga's,
after many arguments urged for the infringing of his purpose, at last inclined
to the withdrawing of him from the Society, and to persuade him, that seeing he
determined to forsake the world, that passing over the Society, that lives in
the midst thereof, he should betake himself to the Capuchins, Carthusians, or
some other Family, far remote from these employments. Surely I imagine that
this he said with that intention, that if Aloysius had wauered in his mind from
a will to follow that which he had made choice of, that he would have taken
occasion to have taxed him with inconsta^cy, and so to have perverted his whole
purpose. Or truly (which he might more easily have done afterward) to the
intent that he might terrify him from other religious orders, as being not able
to brook them in respect of the weakness of his body, and health. Or to
conclude, for so much as, out of other Orders, he might more easily be reduced
to some degree of dignity in the Church. Unto these propositions Aloysius
answered briefly, that he truly knew not by what other means then by entering
into the Society, to estrange himself further from the affairs of the world.
For if he would signify Riches, under the name of the world, there did in the
Society flourish an exact love of Poverty, where it was lawful for no one to
have propriety in any thing. But if under the denomination of the world, he did
comprehend titles of Honor and dignity, that the Society likewise had no way
open unto them, as having taken a vow, whereby they profess, that they will
neither procure, nor so much as accept those honors which are offered them
(which oftentimes has been done by Kings, and Princes) unless the Pope
according to his power command them. So he put that noble man to silence, and
gave a sufficient testimony unto others, unto whom the fame of this matter was
diuulged, that he was constant in that intention which was inspired unto him by
God.

The Marquis likewise underhand sent others, to sound his mind, as chiefly
Ioanues Iacobus the Archpriest of Castilion (whose authority bare a great
stroke with Aloysius) who might persuade him not to renounce the titles of the
Marquesate, and the government of his Country. But Aloysius ouercharged this
man with so great weight of arguments, that he forsaking the embassy of the
Father, began to negotiate for the son, and indeauoured to make proof unto
the Marquis, that his mind had a peculiar instinct from God, to give over the
things of the world. And he conceived so extraordinary an opinion afterward of
Aloysius, when he made him partaker of his secrets, that he never after made
any end of extolling his sanctity. But the Marquis rested not yet satisfied
with all that industry, with which he had oppugned his son; and therefore he
most earnestly entreated, a certain Religious man, a special friend of his,
(who at that time flourished with the fame of a very eloquent preacher, and
afterward being made a prelate over a certain Church, died in that function)
that for his fake setting upon his son with all his forces, he would
discourage him from that his enterprise. He not so much of his own will, as
that he durst not shift of the command of the Marquis, undertaking that task,
performed it with as much mastery of eloquence as he could. But truly he lost
his labor. Therefore, when afterward he commended the constancy of this young
man, to a certain Cardinal of of principal name, he used in a manner these
words: They imposed upon me the performance of the Devils task, with this
young man. That being necessitated, I undertook with as much wit and industry
as I could: but I prevailed nothing at all: he stands immovable, and
unshaken: he cannot be penetrated.

CHAP. XXIII. The Marquis strongly opposes the vocation of his son: at last
he yields.
THE Marquis finding that the mind of Aloysius was no whit at all moved with so
many encounters, whereas being sick of the gout he kept his bed, to make
trial of him, sending for him, asks him: what now at last his mind was? he
truly answered reverently, and yet positiuely; that he both is, and always was
of a mind, to serve God in that course of Religion that he had spoken of. With
this answer the Marquis being vehemently enraged, with a menacing coutenance
and bitter words, bid him avoid out of his presence. Aloysius interpreting this
rebuke as a command, departed to the Monastery of Saint Mary, inhabited by the
Franciscan Brothers, commonly called the Socculanti, one mile from Castilion.
This Monastery is seated by a delicate and pleasant Lake, that takes its
beginning from certain waters, which sliding down from those fair hills are
restrained with artificial banckes, being built in that place, which in times
past to have been of great esteem, eue^ these things give testimony, to wit,
both certain vaults adorned with ancient checker-worke, and also certain
springs of wholesome waters, which in like manner with old work, running through
their channels underground, and about that house (which for the retirement of
himself, and his children was built by Marquis Ferdinand) discover themselves,
and break forth into a most pleasant well. Into this house did Aloysius
withdraw himself; whither when he had commanded his bed, his books, and
other necessaries of his chamber to be carried, he set down unto himself a
course of life far remote from the eyes of men, by often disciplining himself,
and spending all his time in prayer, whilst that in the mean while, no man
durst intimate these things to the Marquis least he should be moved to further
anger. Within some few days after, the Marquis, (who yet by reason of the
gout kept his bed) asked what became of Aloysius? So soon as he knew that he
remained in this Monastery, which I spoke of before, straight way commands
him to be recalled, and sending for him into his chamber, sets upon him with
many sharp speeches, and reprehendeth him, that without his command (to the
intent that, as he said, he might provoke him with greater contempt) he was so
bold, as to go out of his house. But Aloysius quietly, and submissiuely
answered, that he verily went thither, for that he thought himself therein, to
be obedient to his command, whereby he charged him to avoid out of his
presence. The Marquis proceeded in casting forth diverse terrible and threatening
words against him, and in fine commanded him to betake himself to his own
lodgings: then said Aloysius, Quia sic iubes, vado; Because you so co^commaund,
I go.

Entering into his chamber, shutting the doors, before a picture of Christ
crucified, he becomes an humble suppliant unto Almighty God, and there whilst
he imploreth of him, a constant and courageous mind in such adversity, his
tears flow plentifully: And with daily whipping of himself he secondeth his
tears. In the meane-while the Marquis, in whose breast the natural love of his
son, made war against his conscience, for so much as he both feared to
offer violence to the will of God, neither yet could he so far get the conquest
over himself, as to be deprived of so dear and virtuous a son, fearing
least he had contristated him too much with so sharp a chiding, somewhat
relenting for that which he had done, sending for the Lieutena^t of the town
who then waited in the outward Hall commands him to go see what Aloysius does.

He in the entry of his chamber, found his Chamberlayne, who could unto this
man, that Aloysius shutting the doors, forbad them to trouble him. But the
Lieutenant, when he said that he had order given him from the Marquis, that he
should observe what he was doing, comes to the door, and finding himself
shut forth, he boreth the same somewhat with his poyniard between the chinkes.
From hence does he behold Aloysius, with his back all naked and kneeling with
his knees all bare, before a Crucifix, weeping, and rigorously scourging
himself. The Lieutenant being moved with this spectacle, and melting with a
certain sense of piety, with his cheeks all bedewed with tears returns to
the Marquis, and said, that he would never go about to recall Aloysius from
Religion, unto which he was resolved to dedicate himself, if he did but
behold what thing he was in doing. At last being asked what it was that he had
seen, and why he wept so? he answered, that verily he had seen those things,
which no man could behold without weeping: and withal he relates the whole
matter to the Marquis being all astonished, and scarcely giving credit to that
which the man spoke.

The day after, at the same hour, upon set purpose, being certified what he
was doing, he commands himself to be carried in a chair to his chamber,
which was built upon the same floor with his, and through a certain hole
which was already open, he saw his son again weeping and executing voluntary
punishment upon himself. The behoulding of this thing did so move the
Marquis, that he stood there for a certain time transfixed with astonishment,
and as it were in an ecstasy. But afterward seeming to take no knowledge of that
which had passed, he causes a noise to be made, and the doors to be knocked
at. After this, entering in with his wife, he finds the ground besprinckled
with diverse drops of blood by his whipping, and that place where he had
kneeled, all moist-ouer with his tears, as if water had been spilt. This
spectacle, and the daily prayers wherewith his son importuned him, at last
compelled him to put on a mind, to give him leave, to put in execution that
which he desired.

Therefore writing his letters to Rome, he entreated Scipio Gonzaga a very noble
Gentleman (who then was Patriarch of Jerusalem, and after created Cardinal)
that in his name he would vouchsafe to offer his eldest son, that was (as he
termed him) the dearest thing that he had, and upon whom he had founded his
greatest hopes, to the General of the Society of JESUS, who at that time was
Fa. Claudius Aquaniua, son to the Duke of Atri, and withal to know his
pleasure, whither he would have him go to make his Nouiship. The General gave
such an answer as this business seemed to require, and for many causes thought
no other place fitter to be designed for his Nouiship, then Rome. This so
wished-for a message, did eleuate Aloysius with incredible joy, neither could
he contain himself, from giving infinite thanks by his letters to Father
General for so great a benefit; and as though he could find no words able to
equalize the greatness of his affection, he at last gave himself wholly unto
him. Father General meruelously delighted with his letters inflamed with so
great sense of piety, wrote back again, that he accepted him for his son,
and presently expected him.

CHAP. XXIV. Aloysius urges the renuntiation of the Marquesate.
AFTER this, he began to treat about renouncing of the Marquesate, which as
has been said else where, had heretofore been namely conferred upon him by the
Emperor. Therefore the Marquis being desirous, that he should impart the same
to his Brother Rodulfe, willingly consenting thereunto, called upon them to
hasten this business, and gave them leave to draw the writings of renuntiation
in what form they would. Whatsoever in that matter should seem good unto the
Marquis, should likewise be acceptable unto him, so that the thing being
speedily effected, and he dismissed of all mortal things, might betake
himself to Religion. Therefore the instruments were drawn in this form, that
Aloysius renounced all his Fathers dominion, and his rents in fee-farme, which
should have descended unto him by inheritance, and that of all his substance,
he should reserve unto himself in present, two thousand crowns in ready
money, which he might dispose of at his pleasure, and after that for every
year whilst he lived 400. crowns. The copy least any thing ambiguous or
subject to strife might rest therein, after it had been showed both to diverse
Lawyers, and also to the Senate of Millane to be perused, at last was sent to
the Emperors Court, without whose authority, for so much as all the free
dominion of these Princes, is held by free tenure from the Emperor, the
transferring of this Estate could not have stood good.

And that the Emperor might allow of the same, Leonora of Austria the Duches of
Ma^tua did very much avail, whose help Aloysius earnestly implored as far
forth as she was able, and truly in these kind of businesses she was wont to be
very willing. And that she endeavored in this behalf, it is recounted in her
life, which is put in print, in the third book whereof, and the fifth chapter,
these words are read. It happenned that a certain noble young man, a Marquis,
and the greatest of her family, resolved by Divine instinct, (notwithstanding
all that men could strive against it) to quit himself of the goods of Fortune.
When this gentleman was of necessity before to obtain of the Emperor, that
he might depart with his dominion held in Fee-farme, to his younger brother;
Leonora, unto whom he had recourse for this purpose, diligently wayghing the
whole cause, and discovering the towardinesse of him that desired to be
discharged of his fortunes, she did not only excite him that he should show
himself obedient to the calling of God: but also writing her letters very
carefully to Rodulph the Emperor, she obtained his suit. Hereupon it came to
pass, that this young man showing himself obedient to this so holy a desire,
a few years after ending his life, by that course which he had observed of
pious living, was transferred to the enjoying of celestial felicity.

CHAP. XXV. He is sent to Millane for the dispatch of certain business: and
what things were done there.
WHILST they stand in expectation to have this abdication authorized by the
Emperor, there fell out in the mean while to the Marquis a certain business
of great importance at Milane, in which seeing that himself was not able to
negotiate by reason of the gout, he determined to send Aloysius, in whose
prudence and judgment he reposed great confidence. Neither was he deceived
herein. For whereas there were imposed upon him many businesses with diverse
Princes, he accomplished and dispatched all according to his hearts desire.
Going therefore to Milane to perform his Fathers command, in the space of
eight or nine months, during the time he was conpelled to stay there, he did
with so great prudence and dexterity dispatch these affairs, although
difficult and perplexed, that they sorted to the same end that his Father
desired they should. Neither did he himself at this time rest void of taking
some fruit. For having as we said before finished his studies of Logic in
Spain, at Milane in the College of Brera of the Society of JESUS, prosecuting
the knowledge of natural things, and being of an excellent wit and sharp
judgment, he proved therein no small proficient. He was daily at the schools
both before noone, and after, from which if at any time his businesses hindered
him, that which in the mean while was delivered by the Master, he commanded
to be written out, to the intent that afterward he might study it at home. He
kept disputations, not only as an auditour, but also as a party, either in
defending his questions, or oppugning others according to the example of his
equals. Moreover whether he took in hand to prove any thing by argument, or to
refute it, as there always appeared in him a marvelous sharpenes of wit, so
was his modesty so singular, that, as it remains very manifest by his
masters testimony, he gave no show either in his gesture or speech of any
youthful liberty. For which respect all carried him both in their eyes, and in
their hearts.

Besides this, he did daily apply himself so diligently to a certain
Mathematician, whilst he explicated one Lecture in the same College, that, for
so much as he did not dictate the same, least by little and little he might be
surprised with oblivion, so soon as he returned home, did to a certain
Chamberlain of his dictate what he had heard, so promptly, so clearly, and so
happily out of his memory, that when that same Chamberlain, who at that time
was a Library Keeper showed me at Castilion those notes, which even to this day
he preserves as sacred relics, I could not sufficiently wonder, that he
never so much as omitted any one Demonstration, that he neither changed the
number, the measure, the reasons, the point, the line, to conclude that he
never so much as let pass any one of those words, with which those writings
abound, that were in a manner proper to this discipline.

He went to the School very modestly, with his apparel of black Florentine
cloth, which they call Rash, without any sword, silently, using no words even
to his nearest pages, and for the most part upon foot, although at home he had
great store of horses. One of his sports and recreations whilst he remained at
Millan was this, to converse with the Fathers of the Society, and to spend a
great part of that time, which was void of employment, in the College,
sometime with this, sometime with that Father in conferring of learning or
piety. His master in Philosophy observed, that he was wont to discourse with so
great reverence, and show of observance with all religious men, and those which
were placed in any civil or Ecclesiastical dignity, that he kept his eyes
always dejected, neither did he, unless it were very seldom, so much as be
hold their face.

Neither truly was he willing to converse familiarly with Priests only, or with
them that follow the study of learning, but with those likewise whom they
commonly use in the service of domestical affairs, and especially with the
Porter. And if he did sometimes lend him the keys of the Gate, whilst he went
for any one of the Fathers, he esteemed it as a great favor. Doubtless he
wittingly admitting of this error, persuaded himself that he was, even for
this little while of the same Society. And for so much as he understood that
every week upon Thursday (if no festival day fell thereupon) the Fathers of
the College, for the exercise of their bodies, and relaxation of their minds
from their serious studies, were went to go to a certain Village called
Chilalfa a mile and a half from the City, without the Case of Como, he by
break of day going into that quarter, leaving his servants for a little space
behind him, walking a while up and down either read some book of
contemplation, or, being in the Springtime, gathered violets, til he saw some
Fathers coming that way. Whilst they passed by him he courteously saluting
them, followed them softly, and with his eyes, which he continually fixed upon
them, beheld them as far forth as he could in their right way going before him.
Surely even the very behoulding of them, brought him so great contentment, as
if he had seen some celestial Angels; and thinking them most happy, for that
they had not such hind erances as he had, but that they might freely serve God,
he deeply sighed after their course of life. As soon as they arrived at the
Village, he went back the same way, to meet others, and in conclusion came
home very much recreated.

In the days, that they call their Carniuall, which by a certain more
lice^tious custom are precedent to the Lenten-fast, to the intent that he
might be absent from the plays and Theaters, and might in the mean while
maintain pious discourse, he hid himself in the College, often saying that
the Fathers of the Society of Jesus, were his spectacle, which brought unto him
greater delight then any mortal thing else. He spoke so co^temptibly of those
pleasures of vain men, that clearly it did appear, how easily he could be
without them. Once upon one of those days of Carniuall, when at Millane there
was celebrated a certain Knight-like exercise, with great concourse of the
whole City, and especially of the young Knights, and every one of them were
mounted upon brave steeds, and according unto every ones ability magnificently
trapped, he to the intent that he might have the glory of this world in more
cotempt, and might overcome himself, determined to be present. But although, as
I said before, he had the command of diverse horses, whereof one being lead
covered with a velvet foot-choth, did for the most part follow him,
notwithstanding then whilst they in this extraordinary manner rid through the
thronged streets, he attended only with two pages, was carried upon a lowly
Mule, setting the world no less at naught, then the world did him. This fact
of his was very joyful, and exemplar to diverse Religious men, who beheld and
noted it. In matter of piety he still held his solemn custom, neither did he
ever omit his usual manner of holy meditation. He loved to frequent places of
noted Sanctity, and chiefly the Church of our B. Lady, which is called that of
S. Celsus, being at that time much renowned through the fame of miracles. Every
sunday, and festival day at the Church of S. Fidelis, which belongs to the
Society of JESUS, whilst he addressed himself to the receiving of the B.
Eucharist, he gave forth so many documentes of a submisle and devout mind, that
he seemed to inspire religion, and sanctity into all his behoulders. Verily a
certain priest who at that time made a sermon to the people does affirm, that
he, as often as he desired in his preaching, to inflame his mind with more
plentiful piety, would but turn his eyes toward Aloysius, who was present
always right opposite to the pulpit, and moved with his only aspect, as of
some sacred thing, that he was filled with a certain celestial joy. So great
even then was the fame of his Sanctity.

CHAP. XXVI. The Marquis oppugneth him with new practices.
NOw were the Emperors letters brought whereby he was enabled to pass over all
his titles to his Brother. And he being of the age of seauenteene years, was
no further of from his hopes then that his Father should recall him home to
Castilion, when a sudden storm arising, he was driven from the haven which
he was in a manner possessed of into the maine sea again. For the Marquis,
whether supposing, that the desire wherewith Aloysius was at the first inflamed,
had now with daily delay waxed cold, or out of his Fatherly indulgence, whereby
he was detained from forgoing his son, being moved with humane reasons,
determines himself to go to Millan, to the intent that he might both by
himself and others solicit him, and finally make trial, whether being so
young a man, he had taken to him a matter of so great importance, by Divine
instinct, or no. So soon as he unlooked for, had arrived there, he demanded
of Aloysius, what now at last his mind was? And when he found him as resolute
and constant as ever heretofore, he be ga^ to be tormented with very great
grief, and after that he had thundered out the boiling rancour and indignation
of his stomach, he fell to deal with him in a friendly manner, and to let him
understand, that he was not so ill a Christian, that he would conceive offense
against God, or gainesay his will; but if he did but even observe the course of
reason, that he seemed unto him, not so much carried with the instinct of God,
as with some proper humor of his own: for so much as his very obedience
toward his Father, contained under one of Gods commaundments, and other
reasons appertaining to the honor of God, did persuade the contrary to that
which he had designed in his mind. To conclude with what arguments he could,
which either his love, or grief did suggest unto him, he attempted to prove,
that if he bound himself in Religion, he would become the blotter-out of his
house, for so much as he being taken away, is was of necessity to be ruinated.

More over he set before his eyes how well he was himself accommodated by
nature, and nothing flexible to be draw at from the course of an honest life.
That there was therefore no cause why he should doubt to retain the commodities
of Fortune, seeing that in the midst of them it was possible for him to
observe the course of Religious men, and moreover to move by his example the
people which God had committed to his dominion to obey the commandments of
God, and embrace Christian piety. That this questio^lesse might open also a way
for him to Heaven. That he should call to mind how much he was honored,
esteemed, and beloved of all the men belonging to his dominion; how earnestly
they expected him, and even as humble suppliants lifting up their hands to
Almighty God, did beseech him, that they might forthwith be committed unto him
to be ruled and governed. He reduced likewise into his memory, how great favor
he had already gotten of the Princes, with whom he had both acquaintance and
corresponde^ce, and who were singularly well conceited of him. And now he
objected unto him the feruorous disposition of his brother (unto whom if he
entered into religion he was to resign) being in respect of his unripe years
of no experience, nor as yet fit for government, and if he should get the
bridle in his teeth, in that headstrong spurt of his youth, that he would
become a prey to shame and disgrace. In conclusion he said: Have commiseration
upon me, poor distressed man, afflicted with continual torments of the gout,
and so weakened, that I can now scarcely wield my self, who now at last have
great need, and truly even now by thee might be helped in managing the
troublesome affairs of the Common wealth. But if for saking me, you shall go
into Religion, I shall be enutroned with businesses, with which being unable to
deal, I shall be oppressed with the miseries both of cares, and sickness, and
you will thus become accessory to my death. And having said this, his tears
gushed forth in great abundance, interming led with words full of grief, and
affection.

Aloysius, who with patience had given attention to his speeches, after that he
had humbly rendered thanks for the love and Fatherly care which he had showed
toward him, answered; that he, truly, had reuolued all these things in his
mind, or at least the greater part of them, and that he was not ignorant what
belonged to himself. And that if he were otherwise called then by God to this
course of life, that the^ truly he should not do well, in undertaking these
things which he had rehearsed, and moreover he should chiefly be necessitated
to obey and serve his Father, unto whom next after God he was most indebted.
That now, seeing that he was not incited to the courses and institutes of
Religious men, by any particular rashness of his own mind, but by the
inspiration of Almighty God, unto whose calling it be hooued him to give ear,
that he hoped the same God, whose Providence extends over all, would provide,
that all things should not only sort themselves according to the pleasure of
his divine Majesty, but eue^ both for the dignity and profit of his family, and
dominion; and that they could promise themselves no less from his infinite
goodness. The Marquis knowing well, that it was a thing manifest unto his
son, that this intention was given unto him by God, and that was the only
cause of his so firm resolution, perceived, that unless his mind were deprived
of this persuasion, he could never be drawn off from his purpose. Therefore he
made it his greatest business, that diverse men both Religious and Secular should
sound and true his mind, and the instinct wherewith he was moved, and that they
should draw the young man into the opinion, that he might think it agreeable to
the honor of God, if he should spend his life in the government of his
dominion.

All these when to please the Marquis, they had day after day, every one
severally commended this course of life, and with as much art of s^ each as
possibly they could, laying open the trobles of a Religious life, endeavored
to cast before him terrors, and by other means had made trial of his
constancy, in fine, confessing themselves to be cleared of all doubt, and
standing in admiration at the firm resolution of the young man, they
manifested unto the Marquis that this instinct seemed to be from God, not
without enlarging themselves much in his commendations. When these things were
recounted to the Marquis, and that there was so great agreement in all their
opinions, to the intent that at the last he might somewhat moderate his desire
of searching, whether this was the will of God or no, whereas the Gout suffered
not him otherwise either to go or ride, he commanded them to carry him in his
chair to the Church of S. Fidelis, which belongs to the Society of JESUS,
and there retiring to a certain private closet, sending for a Father of great
Name in that city, said unto him, that in so weighty a cause, in which was
treated the loss of his eldest son, and that of a son of so great worth,
he was certainly resolved to stand to his judgment, and to rest advised by his
opinion. But that he did first desire, that he would question with the young
man himself diligently in their presence concerning that which he had purposed
in his mind, and that he would take it into mature consideration.

Moreover, that he besought him, according to the excellency of his wit and
learning, that he would urge all effectual reasons that might be to dissuade
him. To conclude that he promised as far forth as he was able, to get the
conquest over himself, and would rest satisfied with that order which he should
set down herein. This Father to the intent that he might conform himself to
the Prince in this his request, took the matter upon him, and sending for
Aloysius in the presence of them both, began very seriously to sound him, spent
a whole hour partly in questioning him, partly in expou^ding whatsoever things
may be found out either by wit or subtility, for the trial and clear
discovery of the spirit of a man, and of the Divine motions and incitements of
his mind. And for so much as he had made choice of the Institute of the
Society, he set before him all those difficulties into which it was possible
for any one to fall, who placed his affection upon this kind of life. And he
accomplished all this labor of inquisition which he had taken upon him, so to
the life, that he seemed to speak from his very heart; and Aloysius himself
grew suspicious, as after he scould me when he was in Religion, that the Father
seemed not any thing to dissemble the matter.

Therefore, for so much as he did co^fide in him, and attribute much to his
authority; neither had there hitherto been any one, who, as if he had felt his
pulse before hand, did discourse thereupon so sitly to move his mind, and as he
said, so properly; he stood for a space with his mind suspended.
Notwithstanding in the mean time he answered with notable confidence to all
that was asked him, and so clearly dissolved all difficulties which occurred,
not only with reasons, but also with authorities of holy Scripture, and learned
men, in so much as the Father did not only rejoice to see him so constant in
his resolution, but also admired to see him so excelle^tly well read in the
books of God and Godly men. After this, seeing that all his answers were so
accomplished, and as it were derived out of the very bowels of the cause it
self, he began to suspect that he had read those things that are disputed by
S. Thomas in his sum of Theology, concerning religious Orders. Therefore in
conclusion he brake forth into these words. Aequum postulas (Domine Aloysi)
neque dubium esse potest quin sit vt dicis. Mihi quidem stimulos admouisti,
neque vllum preterea quaerendi locum reliquisti. My Lord Aloysius, it is no
otherwise then right that you require, neither is there any doubt but that it
is as you say. Truly you have moved me very much, neither have you left me any
scope further to complain.

These words questionles did very much recreate the young man, and did
sufficiently declare, that he was of another opinion, then he seemed to be,
when he for a little while took upon him the person of a triallmaker.
Afterward Aloysius being departed, the Marquis freely confessed that he was now
persuaded that it was Gods pleasure it should be so, and beginning to rehearse
the whole course of his life, so piously lead from his very cradle, in
conclusion promises that he will give him leave to betake himself to Religion.
A few days after this, he goth back to Castilio^, giving order that Aloysius
having solicited but one cause more of his which yet depended in suite, should
follow him thither, to renounce his principality. But Aloysius thinking every
hour which he spent out of Religion to be a thousand years, urged expedition.

CHAP. XXVII. Blessed Aloysius going first to Mantua, retireth himself to the
spiritual Exercises.
THE time drawing near, that Aloysius was to return to Castilion, when by
that which had happenned at Millan, he coniectured that some new storm hunge
over his head, before he departed from Millan, he sent very ardent letters to
the General of the Society of Jesus, wherein recounting the dangers which he
had gone through, he asked counsel what he thought was best for him to do, if
the Marquis should go about again to stop, or at least to defer his
entrance into Religion? whether it might be lawful for him, by his good leave,
never expecting his Fathers command, to fly into some house of the Society?
For now it was evident to every one, that he followed the instinct of God
herin. The general, although he took co^miseration upon the young man, and was
much urged with this difficulty, notwithstanding he judged that he should in no
wise attempt this without his Fathers consent; that he should therefore do his
utmost endeavor to do it by his permission. That, that would altogether be
most for the honor of God, and most conducible to him, and the whole Society.
It seemed good unto Aloysius to follow this Counsel.

Hereupon going from Millan, before he came to Castilion, he went to Mantua,
there partly for the refreshing of his mind, partly for the confirming of his
purpose, and corroborating his mind against that impetuous storm which as he
feared might come upon him, he became desirous to retire himself to the sacred
Exercises of B. F. Ignatius, in some College of the Society. It was then the
month of July the year 1585. at which time the Iaponian Ambassadors were
daily expected at Mantua: for they coming to Rome out of those foraine coasts,
that they might profess the Sacred Supremacy to reside in S. Peter's Sea, and
that they might in the behalf of their King, and all his subjects in those
countries converted unto Christ, submit themselves to the Popes Holiness, as
Christ's Vicar upon earth, and might faithfully promise to be under his
authority: and their whole Embassy being now performed first with Gregory the
13. in whose reign they came, and afterward with Sixtus V. the successor of
Gregory, who whilst they remained at Rome was made Pope, they went back-againe
to their Country: so as making their iourny by the holy house of Loreto, and
surueying a good part of Lombardy, in the month of July they came to Mantua,
where by William the Duke, and the Prince Vincentius with magnificent
preparation, and great honors they were entertained in very Royal manner.

When therefore there was a great concourse of people from all the bordering
Countries, to be hold these pompes and shows, and chiefly to see the
Ambassadors themselves, with whose only aspect, men being somewhat transfixed
with astonishment, waited upon them with a thousand happy welcomes: in the
mean while Aloysius preferring his retirement and solitude, before all other
sports and spectacles, went into the College in the extreme heat of Summer,
and hiding himself two or three weeks within the walls of a very strait
chamber, did with so seruent zeal spend all his time in holy meditation, that
he did not so much as suffer the least part thereof to ouerslip him, but that
either he said his vocal prayers, or meditated in silence, or perused some
book of piety. At that same time he was of so sparing a diet, that he could
hardly be perceived to eat any thing. Wherefore they that brought him his
dinner into the chamber, could never sufficiently admire, that it was possible
for a man to live with so little meat. there undertook to instruct him in the
Exercises, a certain Father, who for that he had for the space of five and
twenty years governed and taught nouices of the Society in the Province of
Venice, was very prudent, and of singular experience in those matters, and of
the whole course of contemplation. With him does he purge by confession, all
the spots of his forpassed life, with a certain particular sense of piety, and
an inward feeling of joy, leaving in the mind of his Confessarius marvelous
great admiration, and love of his rare virtues. Which he has both restified to
posterity by setting down in writing, and also by his oath at Nouellara upon
the inquirv made by order of Lepidus Bishop of Rhegio. For he being there asked
whether he knew B. Aloysius to be a young man of a ceraine perfect course of
life, adorned with many virtues and spiritual guiftes or no? answered in these
very words which I will here set down. I truly, Sir, not only by the relations
of our Fathers, but much better by a certain young man of great virtue, whom
he made use of for his private Chamberlain, for the writing down of his
lectures, and as it were for the companion of his studies, from whom I was
given to understand, certain notable things of the voluntary punishments which
he inflicted upon himself, of his frequent retirement, of the admirable
examples of virtue and sanctity given by this yonng man. There was likewise
another more certain way of informing my self of him, offered unto me about
that time, upon occasion of connersing familiarly with him, and applying my
industry in expounding unto him the sacred Exercises of the Society, in which
he (as he said unto me) desired to be instructed, to the intent that he might
more clearly discover the will of God in the choosing of a Religious life, for
so much as the Excellent Prince his Father the Marquis desired to be throghly
assured thereof. There it came to pass, that in the way of penance, I took
the confessions of his whole life. Upon which although I did long, and much
ponder, I could not call to mind any of them, which in my judgment could be
accounted deadly, but that therein appeared certain arguments of marvelous
sanctity, and of a life singularly well lead. Surely this can I affirm, that
by his confessions I entered into a certain great opinion of his sanctity,
innocence, and integrity, and for such a one extolled him unto all.

This Father departed afterward (I do not know upon what occasion) from that
College, and another succeeded him in this office of delivering the exercises
to Aloysius, and being often used in taking his confessions, did upon his oath
auerre, that his goodness, purity, his desire of worshipping God, and
despising, and bringing under himself, seemed unto him singular and admirable.
Moreover in that same place, were showed unto him the Rules of the Society of
Jesus, which having diligently read, he said, that there was no one of them,
from which by reason of the difficulty, his mind had any auersion. Being to
depart from thence, he desired to be granted unto him a copy of those
meditations, which consist of that history of the passion of Christ, to the
intent that being gone from thence, he might often make use of them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Aloysius being returned to Castilion, makes earnest suite to
have leave to enter into Religion. His course of life there.
TO conclude, he returns to Castilion, whither so soon as he came, he desired
truly to urge his cause, but least he should exasperate the mind of the Marquis,
he stood in expectance some few days, till he of his own accord might utter
some speech of it. In the mean while being admired of all the
Garrison-souldiers, and people, it is very stange to see with what recollection
and sanctity he perseuered to carry himself. For as often as he passed out of
the Castle, he had his eyes always dejected, but only when he saluted his
retayners, toward whom his courtesy was so great, that he went as it were
continually with his head bare. Coming with his brother into the holy Church
to Mass, their Form was laid with a cloth of state and cushions of velvet;
upon them Rodulphus according to his dignity was wont to lean. But Aloysius
both in the Church and at home, despising all cushions and carpets kneeling
with both his knees upon the bare ground, with his eyes dejected, first
attending unto Mass, afterward reciting his canonical prayers, or silently
reuoluing holy things in his mind, spent many hours. But upon festival days
and Sundays, upon which he received the sacred Eucharist, he spent so much
time in thanksgiving, that Rodulphus for his recreation, going forth to
exercise his body, and returning to accompany him home, found him still busied
at his prayers. At Euensong, from which he was never absent, for bearing to
sit, and continually kneeling upon his knees, he excited no small motions of
piety in the minds of them that beheld him.

At home he observed his accustomed manner of abstinence and prayer, and for
the most part being solitary in his chamber, he kept so vigilant and exact
silence, that very often he suffered diverse days to pasle without uttering
scarcely so much as one word: but if just occasion were offered of speech, he
gave way to necessity, or piety. Truly he was wo^t to assure us, that he had
spoken more words after his entrance into Religion, in one day then before in
many months: and that if at any time, he were to return into his Country,
that it should be altogether necessary to change his course of life for a time,
least he should scandalize them who had known him before in the world, and
might think that he was made more dissolute by Religious discipline. And to us
it was very well known, that he was most obseruant of silence, as who did
never break it, unless by his Superiors he was commanded to recreate his
mind by discourse, after his serious contemplations.

But now he had so much increased his voluntarily corporal afflictions that
for very faintness he was scarce able to stand upon his legs. In which
proceeding it cannot be denied, but that he exceeded all discret moderation,
and with the ardour of piety was transported beyond the bounds of prudence. But
questionless thinking himself able to brook them, he followed the fervor of
his mind for his guide, seeing he was destitute of any other. Therefore his
mother, both for other reasons, and chiefly for this, was a means to the
Marquis her husband, that he would give him leave to enter into Religion; for
that she said, if he should any longer be detained at home, they should in
short time be deprived of him. And that it could not possibly be, that
continuing that course of life he cold long subsist. But that if he might be
limited by Religious rules, that his Superiors would be careful to moderate
this superabundant fervor, and that he should become subject to their power.
Verily it fell out as she presaged. For he himself did openly confess, that
Religion proved not only wholesome for his mind, but even for his body: and that
he did acknowledge himself behoulding to them for their Charitable help, who
cast the bridle upon those his immoderate (as he called them) and headlong
endeauours.

At that same time, he more earnestly then ever heretofore, endeavored to
inform with precepts of piety his Brothers, being even then of tender years,
and to teach the^ the manner of praying, which that they might do the more
willingly, he rewarded them after their prayers with sugar-junkets and
cherished them with other blandishme^ts. But of all his brothers, Francis
seemed alwais to be most dearey unto him, who at this day is the Marquis of
Castilion, in which principality he succeeded his brother Rodulfus, the third
day of January, in the year of Christ 1593. toward whom that love of Aloysius
was caused, either for that he being now of an age capable of discipline,
showed forth signs of a certain quiet settled judgment; or for that he
presaged in his mind (as some suppose) how great a safeguard and ornament he
should become to his whole family and dominion. For his mother was wont to
recou^t that she on a time heared Francis being a very little boy prattling, and
festing with her foot boys, and that (...) and being stricken with fear she
looked out of the door, and with all said unto Aloysius, that she did much
fear, he all they should hurt that child, that then Aloysius did answer: Ne
dubita Domina matter, quin Francisco ad so tuendum satis sit futurum animi:
quanimo demitte in animum quod aico: Francisous demum erit qui Familiam nostram
suslentabit. Doubt not Lady-Mother, but that Francis will have courage enough
to defend himself: yea and which is more, remember well that which I say:
Francis at last shall be he, who shall sustain our Family. The Marquis his
wife laid up these words in her mind, unto which how punctually the event was
answerable, no man can be ignorant, who has but heard by relation, how
prudently he behaved himself in those former tragedies with which his family
was perplexed, and behouldeth the now flourishing estate into which by him it
is restored. Furthermore, for the predictions of things to come, Franciscus
Turcius his Tutour is a sufficient witness, that Aloysius whilst he yet
continued in the world, did unto diverse of his followers prophesy many things,
which fell out altogether as he said.

CHAP. XXIX. Another hinderance, and delay of the Marquis.
NOw, some days had passed, during which time the Marquis made no metion of
Aloysius his cause; so as he being very desirous to dispatch the business
determines to grow very earnest. Therefore taking a convenient time, with
befitting words he aduertiseth the Marquis, that it was now high time to put in
execution that which he had designed in his mind. Here the Marquis perceiving a
necessity to be imposed upon him, either of granting or denying what he
requested, deeply smothering his inward grief, denies that ever he gave this
leave, and moreover, that he would not give it, til his judgment had arrived to
more maturity, and that himself for performance thereof was of a more confirmed
age, such as is wont to be about the age of five and twenty years. Aloysius
being astonished at so unlooked for an answer, begins with prayers and
lamentation to beseech the Marquis by that love which he owes to God, to
suffer himself to be prevailed with all, in that which was both equity and
justice. But when as he being still more obstinate, precisely denies to give
way to his intreatyes, and in these difficult affairs takes time to consult,
full of grief he betaketh himself to his chamber to weep. He then took this
time, to commend the matter to God, and to ask Counsel thereof by his letters
of Fa. General: but the Marquis makes such have to vex and oppress him,
that whereas he was not able to stay for the Generals opinion, he chose that
which seemed to be lesser of two evils. The sum of his answer was this.

That although nothing in this life could fall out unto him more bitter,
nothing more opposite to the quiet of his mind, then this delay and hindrance
of that service, which he desired to exhibit to God in Religion,
notwithstanding to the intent that he might be obedient to his Father, unto
whom he was of his own disposition very desirous to be conformable in
whatsoever things he lawfully might, and in this very cause according to the
command of Fa. General he ought to be, as far forth as might stand with his
filial duty, without offense to God: that upon two conditions he would suffer
himself to be delayed from his purpose two or three years. And that, if one
of these two might not be admitted, that he would never be persuaded, for the
obtaining of his Fathers favor, to incur the displeasure of God; and, that
if he should be rejected by the Fathers of the Society, he had rather against
his Fathers will to wander as a banished man all the world over, then to depart
in the least degree from the square of a good conscience. The conditions were
these. The one was, that all that time wherein his entrance into Religion should
be deferred, he might reside at Rome, where he might both more commodiously
have recourse to Fa. General, and apply his study in learning. The other was
that the Marquis would now send letters to Fa. General, by which he would give
leave that his son that time being past might be admitted into the Society;
to wit, that after this, there might remain no difficulty.

These conditions being heard, which the Marquis perceived to be adverse to his
driftes, becoming more angry, when for two whole days he had obstinately
refused to promise the sending him upon any certain time, or to do any thing
else, at last being overcome with Aloysius his constancy, whose demand he saw
to be no other then just, and unless he should undergo some other course more
opposite to his liking, he feared to exasperate him too much, suffering
himself to be persuaded, he undertook to perform all his requests. Aloysius
immediately certifieth Father General of the whole business, relating the
conditions which in that covenant with his Father he had observed, and with
those very words he concludes his epistle, which might serve for an argument,
how much grief he conceived for the deserring of this so wishedfor a matter.

During that time, this holy young man even grew-old with grief, and with many
tears deplored this (as he called it) his sinister fortune, that he was borne
in so Illustrious a degree, and that truly the principal amongst his other
brothers. And contrariwise he had a holy Envy against those, who being
extracted from more obscure parentage, were freed from these impediments, which
against their wills would drive them from the entrance into Religion. But verily
that good God, who is wont to be a comfort to them that mourn, and to look
with pity upon them, that invoke him out of their calamity, cutting-off at
one blow beyond the expectation of all men, whatsoever impediments stood
between Aloysius and the enjoying of his desires, in an instant wiped away all
grief from his afflicted mind. For after they began to treat of his manner of
living at Rome, the Marquis thought that he were best to soiorne in the house
of Vincentius Gonzaga the Cardinal; and he had already entreated the Duke of
Mantua, that he would please by his letters to commend this matter to the
Cardinal, and he in respect of his singular love toward Aloysius, had easily
promised to do this office; when I know not what co^trouersy arising between
the Duke and the Marquis, who should have the priority in writing, neither of
them yielding to the other for certain causes, the matter stood still at the
same stay, neither was there any thing else done in it: but that this was the
special providence of Almighty God, was both manifest in it self, as also in
the free acknowledgment of Aloysius. For if the Duke to pleasure the Marquis,
had sent his letters to the Cardinal, he himself confessed, that for the very
receipt of this benefit, he should so much have engaged himself unto him, and
should by that means have fallen into such a kind of servitude, that for many
years after he should hardly have disengaged himself from the same.

This determination being dissolved, it came into the Marquis his mind, to
place him in the Roman Seminary, so that in some part thereof, designed for him
and some servants, as the dignity of his person required, being separated from
the commerce of the rest, he might according to the discipline of the Society
be instructed in good arts, til the prefixed day. But for so much at that was
opposite to the custom of that place, from which even to that very day no man
was ever exempted, sending unto Rome a certain man with letters, he labored
with Scipio Gonzaga a most Illustrious man, that he would be pleased to
negotiate this matter with F. General, and entreat that they might do this by
his permission. He performed very diligently whatsoever was in his power. But
having allegations made unto him, why this might not conveniently be granted,
contrary to his opinion, he certified the Marquis by letters, how the matter
succeeded. He being not as yet out of hope to obtain this suite, had a
determination to exhort Aloysius, that he would entreat Leonora of Austria the
Duches of Mantua, a woman well deserving of the Society, to request this favor
to be done her by Fa. General. Aloysius answered wisely, that this charge would
better befit any other then him. For so much as that request was contrary to
the resolutions of his mind, and to his reputation, as being in possibility to
move suspicion, either that his mind was altered, or his zeal remitted,
especially seeing that not long since, in obtaining leave of the Emperor to
renounce his inheritance, he had made use of that great woman's mediatio^.
Therefore this project went not forward.

CHAP. XXX. He mitigateth, and ouercometh the mind of his Father, with a
vehement protestation.
WHILST they deliberate of some other course, Aloysius, when he had confirmed
himself, renewing his ardour, betakes him again to those holy afflictions of
his body, his fastes, and his prayers, neither is he ever made partaker of the
sacred Eucharist, but he humbly beseeches Almighty God, that he would now at
last vouchsafe to take away those obstacles that cast such delays upon his
desires. And especially, when upon a certain time for this intent he had
bestowed four or five hours in continual prayer, he found his mind to be
carried, and incited with a certain instinct, that he should go unto the
Marquis lying grievously sick of the gout, and renewing his suite of being
dismissed, should endeavor all that he could to persuade with him. He
supposing that this motion was sent unto him by some peculiar instinct of the
Holy Ghost, goes from his prayers straight to the Marquis his chamber, and sets
upon him very seriously with these very words, being indeed very vehement
ones: Equidem Domine pater, in tua me potestate fore profiteor. De me statue vt
lubet: verumtamen tibi denuncio, me a Deo ad Societatem IESV vocatum esse.
Itaque dum hac in re mihi obsistis, Dei voluntati obsistis. Verily my Lord
Father, I do freely profess, that I will always rest at your disposing:
nevertheless this do I denounce unto you, that I am by God called to the
Society of JESUS. Therefore so long as in this thing you resist me, you resist
the will of God. And having said this, staying not so much as one minute of
time for any answer, he suddenly steps out of the chamber, leaving his Father
grievously wounded with unexpected grief. Then entering into consideration with
himself, and acknowledging, with how great vehemence he had hitherto resisted
his son, setting on one side Religion and fear, least he might draw upon him
the wrath of God, on the other reuoluing in his mind, that he should be
forsaken by such a child, so bitter grief invaded him, that, turning his face
to the wall, he powered out a great abundance of tears, and by continual
lamentations, sobs, and deplorements, became even noted of his whole retinue,
meruai^ing what new thing had befallen him.

A little while after, sending for Aloysius into his chamber he speaks to him
in this manner: Vulnus (fili mi) cordi meo inflixisti, qui te amo, semperque
amaui merito tuo, atque in te spes omnes meas, familiaeque nostre defixeram. I
am vero quoniam al^^ te, vt ais, Deus vocat, non equidem vltra te morabor. Vade
(fili mi) quo tibi collibitum est. Id vt been and feliciter ^ueniat, precor. O
(my dear son) thou have inflicted a wound upon my heart, who do, and always
have loved thee according to thy desert, and upon thee, built all both my own,
and our families hopes. But now, for so much as thou say that God calls
thee to another course, truly I will no more be thy hinderance. Go my son
whither thou will. I beseech God it may fall out unto thee well, and happily.
Which words he uttered with so great sense and remonstrance of love and
grief, that again he burst forth into great plenty of tears, neither could
any one mitigate them with consolation. Aloysius in brief giving thanks,
least he should increase his grief, betook himself from thence into his
lodging. There in private, prostrate upon the ground, with arms stretched
abroad, and eyes lift up toward heaven, he renders unto God most humble
thanks, for putting him into this mind, and for seconding the same with this
good success, and with so cheerful a mind; does he offer himself unto God as
an holocaust, that it seemd a thing impossible, that in praising of God he
should ever be satiated.

CHAP. XXXI. The grief which they of Castilion conceived for the departure of
Aloysius.
SCARCELY had Aloysius after so many entreaties, obtained this dismission from
his Father, but the fame thereof extended it self to Castilion, causing so
great grief to all that belonged unto him, that many with their abundant
tears witnessed the same. For in those few days which he stayed at Castilion,
before he could part from thence, as often as he went through the town, all
both men and women striving to see and honor him, filled the windows and
porches, and thereby with weeping eyes, gave so great a testimony of their love,
that even he himself scarcely refrained his tears. Moreover they extolled him
like some celestial man, and lamented their unhappy fortune, who were not able
to deserve the happiness of being governed by so holy a Prince. In like manner
some, who found more easy admittance to the Court, and were of more power with
him, weeping sometimes, go unto him, and speak in this manner. My Lord
Aloysius why do you thus forsake us? there is allotted unto you a province so
fruitful, subjects so respective, who do not only affect you with that love,
which by a natural instinct is ingrafted in every one toward their prince, but
are even carried with an extraordinary duty toward you. You are the love of our
hearts, upon you reposeth all our hopes: and now when we most expect, that you
would put your hand to the government of our public state, you are snatched
away from us. Aloysius smiling at these their speeches, said: But I profess to
you that I had rather purchase unto my self a crown in heaven. It is too great
a task for a man endowed with dominion and principality, to obtain his
eternal salvation. No man can serve two masters. God and the world. My utmost
ambition is to secure my salvation. Let that be likewise your endeavor.

He was much possessed with a desire as soon as he could to pass out of his
Country into the house of God. But he was compelled to continue some few weeks
therein, partly whilst he attends the return of his mother, who was gone to
Turino to salute the Infanta of Spain, then Duchess of Sauoy, partly whilst
he procures and urges his abdication, at the confirming of which Covenant, by
the express commaundment of the Emperor, they of the Family of the Gonzagas
who were next of his kindred, to whom that dominion (for fault of issue in the
Marquis his stock) was to descend by inheritance, were to be present. But for
so much as those great me^, had all for the most part their residences at
Mantua, the Marquis that he might be accommodated better to their opportunity,
commanded himself (though sick) to be carried thither. In his departure from
Castilion together with Aloysius, not only the Courtiers, both men and women
who were to stay there behind him, but also in a manner all the townes-men,
when they saw Aloysius carried in a coach, certain not to return any more,
whom they thought they should never again behold, filled all places with
mourning, and lamentation.

But for the most part, during all the next ensuing days, there was nothing in
the mouths of men, but his sanctity, and virtue, every one severally relating,
that which he had observed in him. Therefore now by their general consent he
was reputed eue^ a Saint. But that which moved most admiration to all, was,
that for the service of God, he had rejected the Honor of the Marquesate, and
that for the obtaining thereof, he had with excellent constancy and fortitude
withstood so many storms of his Father, and other Noble men, and brake his way
through them all.

CHAP. XXXII. He renounceth the Marquesate, and all his other Fortunes.
ALOYSIVS continued at Mantua almost two months, the most part of which time
he passed in the College of the Society, mantaining discourse with the Fathers
that lived there, and in frequenting the Sacrament of penance and the
Eucharist. By which means he did vehemently inkindle with emulatio^ the minds
of the city, through which the rumor was already dispersed, to what end he was
come, the affairs of Illustrious men being for the most part swiftly
published. Therefore with great veneration they beheld him, and confessed that
even his aspect inspired the^ with piety. But the cause of his staying so many
days in that City, was, for so much as it was declared before, in the
Instruments of his abdication that this was one of the conditions, that during
his life he should reserve unto himself the yearly sum of 400. Crowns, the
which he should have power to dispend in what he pleased, the Marquis after he
was informed by the Rectour of the College in that City, that it was not
lawful for any Religious man to have propriety in any thing, or to dispose of
the same according to his own pleasure, or to his own use, but that it all
belonged to the charge, and care of the Superior, and that the same law was
kept inviolable for the maintaining of the love of holy poverty, and that
therefore unto Colleges rentes were allowed only in common, out of which the
necessities of every one of them is provided for; knowing this, he began to be
unwilling to leave any thing unto Aloysius, for that he said when he made that
condition, his intent was, that the same money should be payable to Aloysius his
own hands; and now that he understood it was not lawful by the institute of
the Society, his desire was it should be cancelled. And Aloysius truly found no
difficulty in permitting this, who nothing passed for the form of the
abdication, so it might be hastened, but some Lawyers delivered their opinions
to the Marquis, that for so much as this abdicatio^ was done by the authority
of the Emperor, adding this condition thereunto, that it was a thing to be
feared, last that being taken away, the whole might be called in question.
Whilst therefore this matter is controuerted, and recommended to the discussion
of diverse learned in the law, in setting down their opinions, diverse days were
spent; when as Aloysius remained much weary of this delay, he at last with
great importunity obtained, that likewise this other impediment might be
removed, and that an Instrument of abdication might be made, withal requisite
cautions that they should think good.

That being dispatched, the second of November the year 1585. at Mantua in the
palace which takes its denomination from S. Sebastian, in which the Marquis
was present, Prosperus Gonzaga a very noble gentleman, who was nearest of kin
unto him, and other principal men whom it concerned, being assembled,
Aloysius by covenant drawn in form, releaseth from himself all the ornament,
and riches of the Marquesate. Those great men that I spoke of before do
declare, that whilst by the Clarke those long instruments were in reading
over, the Marquis by reason of that grief wherewith he was oppressed, was not
able to temper himself from weeping: but contrariwise Aloysius, who perceived
himself to have atteined to the utmost scope of his desires, was so much taken
with contentment, that the most Illustrious Prosperus affirmed, he never saw
him merrier then upon that day. Yet notwithstanding that very same day, in the
morning, a little before this abdication was made by covenant, some prime and
Illustrious men, who in the company of Prince Vincentius, who is now Duke of
Mantua, had come into the same palace, even whilst the Prince co^uersed with
the Marquis, became troublesome to Aloysius, laughing him to scorn, for that
he would enter into Religion, and endeavoring the most that they could, that
this renuntiation might not be made.

The Instruments being sealed, Aloysius disburdened of all the cares of his
fortunes and dominions, hides himself alone in his chamber, and throws
himself with infinite gratitude before the feet of Almighty God, for that he
had now at last vouchsafed him this wished treasure of holy Poverty. And, in
the mean while, his mind flowed with so many delicaeies and celestial
solaces, that afterward he was wont to declare, that he both often at other
times, and upon that day especially, did sensibly perceive the extraordinary
grace and comfort of God to be present with him. And truly it is a thing much
to be admired, that the Marquis Ferdinand, a Prince so renowned forhis
liberality, that he was almost reputed to be prodigal, showed so much
parcimony toward his eldest son, and such a son, so only dear unto him.
Especially, seeing that he himself was the only man that gave order, for the
reserving of 400. crowns to his own proper use. I should verily believe, that
God to the intent that he might exhilerate Aloysius, who whilst he conuersed in
the most famous courts of Europe, had always so great a love of poverty, did
of set-purpose suffer, that the Marquis should incline to that part which was so
contrary to his custom.

Having rendered thanks to Almighty God, he sendeth-for into his chamber that
venerable priest Ludouicus Cataneus, whom when he had requested to hallow with
his benediction, the cloth-garments which he had caused to be made privately
for himself at Mantua, according to the manner of the Society, he strippeth
himself of all his profane apparel, and even of his shirt it self, and silk
stockings, and being adorned with that sacred habit, upon the sudden he
entered into the Parlour where the Princes stayed for their dinner. They
astonished with the newness of the thing; could not with-hould from tears,
and chiefly his Father the Marquis, who though long endeavoring, was never
able all dinner while to keep from weeping. There Aloysius taking occasion of
this present matter, began wittily, modestly, and very well to the purpose to
discourse of the occasions, and dangers of offending the Majesty of God, with
which men plunged in the world do combat, of the vain frailty of the honors
of this life, of the manifold difficulties, with which the way of Princes and
great men to their eternal salvation is incombred, of the care which it is
requisite every one should have for the everlasting salvation of his soul, and
this with so great authority, and vigor of a celestial spirit, that those
Noblemen attended unto him with great show of reverence, and piety. And even
unto this day his speech is celebrated in many men's mouths.

CHAP. XXXIII. Having obtained to be sent to Rome, he goes by Loreto, and his
pious exercises in that Journey.
THE next day following after this, which was the third before the Nones of
November, he took his leave of the Duke of Mantua, and his Son, and some
other noble women there; and that evening at home, he humbly besought his
Father, and Mother upon his knees (for his mother was now lately returned from
Turino) that they would give him their blessing. Which whilst they do, how many
tears they showred down, and especially the Marquis his Father, may easily be
coniectured. The next morning he takes his journey toward Rome, with that
attendance the Marquis had assigned him, in which the principal was, that
truly Reverend man Ludouicus Cataneus, whom he took unto him in that journey
for the administering of the offices of piety, Petrus Franciscus Turcius his
Governor, John Baptista Bonus a Doctor, one chamberlain, and other servants.
Furthermore in this his departure, although he be held all weeping, it is
incredible, how small propensity of mind he showed toward his kindred. To his
younger brother Rodulph, unto whom he had given place in the Dignity of
Marquis, who followed him in Coach, even to the river Padus (where he took
ship for Ferrara) all that way and passage he spoke very little. To a certain
prime man in the ship, that said he was of a mind that Rodulph conceived great
contentment for that he was enabled to succeed in his dominion, he answered:
Non tanto illum sibi gaudio successisse, quanto ipse illi decessisset. That he
did not succeed him with so much joy, as he departed with it to him.

At Ferrara, having saluted Alphonsus de Este, Duke of that place, and his wife
Margaret Gonzaga his kinswoman, he bendes his journey to Bolonia. He desired
very much in this his journey to visit the holy house of Loreto moved out of a
peculiar piety to that place, and also with a desire to perform that vow which
his Mother in times past made for him at his birth. For although by the Iubiley
that was promulgated, for just causes power was given them, to make exchange of
that Pilgrimage for other good offices, which both of them had already
performed, notwithstanding he determined to satisfy that his mothers first
purpose, and his own singular zeal. His determination therefore was, first to
go to Florence to that great Duke Francis, and from thence to turn toward
Loreto. But when he came to Petra-Mala, in which place being in the confines of
Tuscany toward Bolonia, subject to that great Duke, he found, for fear of the
plague, a very strait watch kept. There, although his Companions declared both
the name and quality of the man, and the causes of undertaking this iourny,
notwithstanding they could not prevail with them to yield them passage.
Therefore upon necessity returning to Bolonia, from thence by his letters he
excused himself to the great Duke, that he could not as he wished tender his
duty, and service to him in his presence.

From Bolonia, by Flaminia he took his journey directly to Loreto, whither
after he came, it cannot be expressed, with how great delicacies God and his
most Blessed Virgin Mother entertained him. The next morning when in that
Sacred Chapel, he had five or sixth hours without intermission assisted at
the holy Masses, he did receive the Blessed Sacrament with incredible devotion,
and being inwardly penetrated with recognizing the benefit, which in that
place, (where so great majesty and sanctity harbored) all humane kind had
received, he became all drowned with tears, neither did it seem possible to
draw him from thence. But to the intent that he might have more leisure to pray
and meditate in that holy place all day, he refusing unto Fa. Rectour of the
Society who invited him to their College, that office of courtesy, be took
himself together with all his company to a common Inn. From dinner he
returns to that holy house, and for so much as it was now diuulged who he
was, and with what mind he went to Rome, he became remarkable to all, much
comforting themselves, to see a young man of that nobleness of birth, and
abundance of riches, that with more industry endeavored to be reduced to an
humble and needy state, then, for the most part, others do hunt after honors,
and riches. The next morning following, before his departure he was pleased
again at Mass to be refreshed with the sacred Eucharist, and to bestow some
time in his prayers. That being done he went toward Rome.

His course of life in his journey was in a manner this. In the morning so
soon as he rose out of his bed, for one quarter of an hour he prayed in
silence, afterward he recited the Canonical prayers, which are accustomed to
be sounge, about the Prime, Third, Sixth, and Ninth Hour, with Lewis the
priest, of whom in this kind of prayer, of which hitherto he had no use, he
desired to be instructed; he said likewise those prayers which we call the
Itinerarium, and then he mounted upon his horse. Many miles he travailed
somewhat remote from all his company, sometimes pronouncing the prayers of the
daily exercise, sometimes others, sometimes according to his custom, applying
himself to meditation and contemplation. Therefore upon horseback he was no
less attentive to offices of piety, the^ others that are sequestered in their
chambers. For this respect his companions, who well observed how much he was
delighted with solitude and priuacy, upon set-purpose, iournied some little
distance from him. When it was his pleasure to intertaine talk, sending for
unto him Lewis the priest, he conferred with him of divine matters. Whilst
their horses took their bait at noonetide, he likewise took some small
repast: afterward saying, together with the same Priest their Euensong, and
Compline he returned to horse, and to the way. In the greatest part thereof he
reuolued in his mind corporal punishments and afflictions, unto which as he
was much addicted, so his hope was that beco^ming a Religious man, he might
take his full scope in them: and sometimes he considered with himself the
affairs of India, and the conversion of Ethnicks, and he was set on fire with
hope one day to go by mission from his Superior into those coasts, together
with others, who in great number every year almost, pass out of Europe. Or to
conclude, with other such like cogitations he facilitated his way.

At the evening in his Inn, although, for so much as it was in the sharp
winter-season, he was even half frozen with cold; nevertheless he never
warmed himself. But straightway retired all alone into his chamber, and there
drawing forth, and setting before his eyes, the picture of Christ crucified
which he carried with him, throwing himself at his feet, he continually spent
two hours with God, intermixing so many tears, sighs, groans, and so great
seruour of mind, that his men, who without doors heard this lamentable noise,
gazed one upon another, stricken with amazement and hearty penance. Besides this
prayer, he daily for a great space together, chastised himself with stripes;
and then calling into his chamber Lewis the Priest, he read the Mattines, and
Lauds. Afterward he sat down to the table, and always abstaining from
meats of a more stronger nourishment, he sup^ed very soberly and sparingly. He
determined to observe upon Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday his accustomed
fasts; but the Priest when he perceived him to be broken and weakened with the
labors of his iourny, commanded him to abstain from them. Unto whose command
truly he was then obedient, but scarcely was he come to Rome, when he betook
him to them again.

When he went to sleep, he would nether suffer his bed to be warmed, nor his
apparel to be taken of. Therefore whereas he was not accustomed to wear
stockings of cloth til the time that he took upon him the habit of the Society
at Mantua, he was very much trobled every day with drawing them of. But once
when the priest taking commistration on him helped him, he sound his feet and
legs almost starued, neither even then would he make any use of fire, although
he very much urged him thereunto.

CHAP. XXXIV. At Rome having visited the Churches of greatest same, having
saluted the Pope and Cardinals, he is adjoined to the Society of Jesus.
AT Rome, when in the house of Scipio Gonzaga that most illustrious Patriarch
he had lighted from his horse, and a little rested himself after his iourny,
from thence he betook himself to the house of the professed Fathers of the
Society of Jesus, where he submits himself at the knees of F. Clandius
Aquauina the General, who had descended into a garden to meet him, and
professes himself unto him both a child and a subject, so piously and
submissely, that it seemed impossible to raise him up again from the ground.
Going from thence, he betakes him to salute certain Cardinals, and chiefly
Farnesius, Alexandrinus, de Est, and Medices who at this day is the great Duke
of Florence, of all which he is entertained with singular benevolence and
courtesy, and especially of Cardinal Farnesius and Medices, who were very
earnest with him to remain with them at their houses.

Having saluted all those Cardinals whom out of due respect he cold not
pretermit, he went to the seven most famous Churches of that City, and to
other places remarkable for sanctity, to offer up his prayers with incredible
piety. Through those ways which lead from one Church to another, he either
meditated divine matters in silence, or song sacred Hymns; but in the very
Churches themselves, by a thousand means adoring Almighty God, he declared a
mind pious, and devout to his Divine majesty. Having visited these Churches, he
went to Sixtus V. the Pope, that he might crave his benediction, and deliver
unto him letters from his Father the Marquis. He had scarcely entered into the
Popes Antichamber, when he was environed with a troop of Courtiers, whom the
report already dispersed of his intention had gathered together, even as it
were to behold some prodigy. Being admitted to the Pope, after according to
the custom he had kissed his feet, he delivers the letters from his Father.
The pope asks him many things concerning his intention of entering into
Religion, and chiefly whether he had sufficiently foreseen that laborious
course of life. So soon as he answered that he had long since premeditated,
and considered all things, the Pope commending his resolution and courage of
mind, bestowing his blessing upon him, dismissed him.

That same day which was Saturday, either for that the day before for
deuotionsake he had eaten nothing but bread and water, or for that this
selfsame day, that he had admittance to the Pope, he had remained fasting
till 3. hours before night, or for some other cause, coming home he began to
find some indisposition in himself, and therefore to fear least that might
prove a new impediment unto him. But this sickness proceeded no further. The
next day after, which was Sunday, in the morning, he was present in the Chapel
of the Holy Martyrs Abundius and Abundantius, which is under the high-altar of
that Church of the Society of Jesus, built by Cardinal Farnesius, and
participating of the divine Eucharist, he be took himself to the Quire to
hear a sermon: afterward upon the inuitement of the R. Fa. General, together
with Scipio Gonzaga that most illustrious Patriarch he dined with the Fathers
in the common refectory, and the Reader at table being silenced by Father
General, one of the Society preached out of the pulpit. The Patriarch was much
taken both with his modesty, and reserved behavior, and also with his sayings
and answers, and he said, that it seemed a thing strange unto him, that there
fell from this young man no one word in vain, but all diligently wayed, and as
it were examined by a certain balance. That also much moved the Courtiers,
who took special note of that, whereof I made mention before, that when in the
private Chapel of that Illustrious man he was present at Mass, after the
Priest was come to that part of the Mass, wherein according to custom he
elevated the sacred Host, to be beheld of the people that he powered out even a
shower of tears, and that he labored in vain to conceal it.

At last upon Monday, before the VII. day of the Kalends of December, which is
dedicated as holy, unto that Blessed Virgin and Martyr S. Catherine, before
noone, being of the age of seauenteene years, eight months, and sixteen
days, cheerfully, and with much joy, accompanied with all his friends, and
likewise that Illustrious Scipio Gonzaga, he entered into the Nouiship of the
Society of Jesus at S. Andrews in Montecauallo, at such time as F. Ioannes
Baptista Piscator, a man of excellent sanctity, as I shall declare elsewhere,
did govern the same, and inform the Nouices. There that most Illustrious
Patriarch, after he had said Mass, having made Aloysius partaker of the
celestial Eucharist, he together with Fa. General, who for that cause came
thither, took his repast.

In the very entering into the house, Aloysius turning unto those that had
accompanied him even from Mantua, exhorted them to do their endeavor to
possess themselves of eternal salvation. He rendered thanks to Doctor Bonus
for his courtesy, in accompanying him. The Maior-domo of his Fathers house he
requested, that going with his letters to Ligorno, he would in his name salute
the great Duke of Florence. The Chamberlain he desired that he would present
his duty to his mother. Lewis the Priest he besought, that in his behalf he
would impart these words to his Father, Obliuiscere populum tuum, and domum
patris tui. (Psalm. 44.) Forget thy people, and the house of thy Father: by
which he would give him to understand, that he from that very moment, was
willing to leave of all memory of house, country, people, and dominion now
already despised by him. Being asked whether he would have any thing else to
his brother Rodulph, he answered, that he should say unto him, that, Qui timet
Deum faciet bona: he that fears God shall do good things. Having said this,
he left them, very much deploring that they were bereft of so good a Lord, and
Prince. To conclude, unto that most illustrious Patriarch Gonzaga who had
employed great industry in opening him a way to the Society, with all his heart
he yielded thanks, and promised him his most fervent prayers for his safety.
Here that good Prelate, who was moved with the sweetness of his words, was
not able to refrain from tears, and there professed, that he had an holy
emulation toward him, who so well knew, how to make choice of the better part.

Aloysius having now dispatched from him, all both men, and other things which
estranged him from Religion, the master of the Nouices brought him into a
chamber, where according to the custom of the Society he should make trial of
himself, no otherwise, then if he had entered into some celestial Paradise,
exulting from the very bottom of his heart, he made use of this saying: Haec
requies mea in saeculum saeculi; hic habitabo, quoniam elegi eam: This is my
resting place world without end, here will I dwell, because I have chosen it.
And afterward being left there alone, he fell down upon his knees, with his
mind sugered with an inward kind of sweetness, with his eyes bedewed with
tears which divine love raised in them, and gave humble thanks to God, that
delivering him out of Egypt, had brought him into this Land promised by God,
flowing with the milk and honey of celestial joys. And then does he offer and
freely dedicate himself to his Divine Majesty, as a Sacrifice and Holocaust.
To conclude, he besought him to vouchsafe him assistance, that he might as best
became him, dwell in the house of God, persevere, and end his life in exhibiting
his holy service therein. He did not omit afterward to celebrate that as a
festival day upon which he entered into Religion, with anniuersary solemnity,
and he chose for his patroness Blessed S. Catharine, unto whom that day was
consecrated.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE LIFE OF B. ALOYSIVS Gonzaga.
CHAP. I. How excellently he performed the Nouiship of his Religious life:
FOR so much as we have declared, what a manner of man Blessed Aloysius was,
before he renounced the commodities of Fortune, and took upon him the course
of a more Religious life; time now requires, that we declare, with what
conversation and sanctity he lived amongst his fellows, after he was received
into their number. At which time, truly, although in himself he shined like a
candle, yet for so much as he was held within the confines of domestical
discipline, as a close bushel, and avoided the sight of men, less likewise
did their eyes and minds reflect upon his excellent virtue. For that being a
very young man, (when he had not as yet finished his study of Divinity, nor
could not by reason of his young years be initiated in Priesthood) he dyed:
and those few years that he lived by the will of his Superiors, that
boundless fervor, wherewith before being carried, he had passed all discreet
moderation, was brought to an absolute and temperate course of life. Wherefore
unto those that should measure his actions according to a certain external
kind of apparency, it may seem that after he betook himself to the
government of others, omitting those courses which he made use of in his
Fathers house, he lost the greatest subject of his commendations: but unto them
that have been longer practitioners in this celestial Philosophy, that with
the eyes of their mind cleared, and illuminated with divine light, shall
behold his religious life, it will manifestly appear, both how great a
proficient he was become in perfect virtue, by the guidance of his superiors,
and how inco^parably those things which he performed in Religion, do in dignity
surpass the actions of his former life. For being now made a Religious man,
for so much as he was enriched with more plentiful knowledge of Sacred
matters, he followed in his working, a certain more copious kind of light:
neither was there any action of his, how little soever, which he did not
garnish. both with the combination of many virtues, and with rejecting
whatsoever will of his, that was not altogether correspondent with the only
zeal of amplifying the Glory of God, and with abundant ardour of charity
toward him.

But amongst all that treasure of his most excellent virtues, which we shall
prosecute in this our second part, we may make observation of two certain
things. The one, for that being borne and bred-vp in principality, in like
manner being of tender and weak health, notwithstanding scarcely had he set
his foet with in the house of the Society, but that he accommodated himself to
their common custom of living, and their domestical discipline, so that he
seemed to differ nothing from the rest, neither did he ever suffer himself by
any of the Superiors, either to be entertained more curiously, or to be made
singular in any thing, although it was often offered him, especially when he
came newly from so differing a state of life: and in the house he condescended
so gladly and cheerfully to all, were they never so abject and base offices,
that you would have said that he to that very day, had never been accustomed to
other employments, but to spend his time in other men's service. The other thing
was that from the beginning he persuaded himself, that he might be said to
have performed exacty all the rules of Religion, who should omit none of all
those, which are decreed in the holy ordinances of that Institute, and that
should be most diligently conversant, in all the offices how light soever,
which are by command imposed upon every several day. Wherefore no man could be
more obseruant, no man more vigilant, in discovering all those things, which
either by the institute, or custom are daily commanded. By which means he
arrived to so high a pitch of perfect sanctity; that worthily he may be set as
a maister-peece of all exact and absolute piety, both before all Religious men,
who aim at any high degree of perfection, and especially before those men that
are of our Society. For which cause in this second Book, my purpose is, to
declare certain small, and internal matters, that our Brothers may have from
whence to draw an example, in all our domestical functions. Therefore in his
Nouiship it self he laid his deepest foundations of all his virtue.

For after that, as I determined to relate, he had entered into his first
Probation, all those days that he remained secret, his mind took great
contentment, in reading or meditating divine matters, although for so much as
his mind was always fixed upon God, there was in a manner no difference
between his reading and meditation. In the mean while, whether it were in
respect of the alteration of the climate, and his diet, or the affliction of
his body upon which he insisted, or by reason of too much intensenesse of mind
in meditation, his health began to decline. Upon that occasion it caused his
Superiors, to send him away somewhat sooner then ordinary. Which they did so
much the more willingly, for that having of late at Mantua undergone these
sacred Exercises, and having read over the Rules and Constitutions in times
past, surely he came not altogether ignorant of our affairs. Neither, truly,
having been tried amongst so many adverse chances, seemed it requisite to try
him any further. Having finished his probation, he is committed for a little
time to the cure of a Physician, til he was confirmed out of this
indisposition. His linen which he had worn in his journey, even til his
coming to Rome, when they were gigen to be washed, by the continual stripes
wherewith he had daily disciplined himself, were found imbrued with very much
blood.

After he was admitted into the fellowship of others, the Master of the
Nouices observed, that he went somewhat holding down his head. Therefore for
the breaking him of that custom, or for the exercising of a victory over
himself, he commanded that his nceke should be enclosed in a collar of
past-bord covered with cloth, to the intent that he might not carry his neck
otherwise then straight upward. This when he had been commanded to wear for
certain days, he obeyed with marvelous alacrity, and for that respect he
pleasingly smiled in company. All the other Nouices he did so much observe and
reverence, as if he had been the lowest of that family. Neither did he long
delay, but that he desired leave to be give him, to fast, to discipline, to
make use of haire-cloth, and other means to tame either his body, or his mind.
But when he observed, that the Nouices, did not use, as he hitherto had done,
to wear a corner cappe, which is the note of a Cleargy-man, nor their other
garments of so fine cloth, as that which he had caused to be made amongst his
friends, he very earnestly entreated the Superiors, that they would presently
give him leave to wear a hat like the Nouices, and such apparel as they
wore. And this he obtained. Moreover by their good leave, he changed his
Breuiary of Canonical prayers which was gilded both upon the leaves and
cover, for another more plain one. To conclude, to the end he might estrange
himself from whatsoever might smell of Aegipt, by degrees he stripped himself
of all things that he brought with him.

CHAP. II. He is exercised by God with a certain pensiveness; and in like
manner by the Devil.
IT is manifest both by the consent of holy Fathers, and also by the authority
of holy Scripture, that they who dedicate themselves to the service of God, and
live faithfully therein, are exercised, not by the Devil for punishment due unto
any sin, but principally by God, that he may sift and try them. Therefore God
is wont for a little time to take away from the^ whom he endoweth with the light
of Divine knowledge, that celestial sweetness of mind, which he is accustomed
to yield unto them who diligently perform his commaundments. S. Bernard (sermon.
de Cant. Ezech.) alleging in a certain speech of his, reasons to this
purpose, is of this opinion, that this is not done by God upon custom only,
but even necessarily. Almighty God did not long suffer his servant Aloysius to
be deprived of this kind of favor. For now at the beginning he found his mind
for a little space void of these co^forts. At which time he truly was not
unquiet or disturbed, or more inclined to any kind of vice, but only condoled,
that he had lost that sweet cheerfulness which even amongst his secular
friends he enjoyed. There remained only one remedy for the mittigating of his
grief, that as often as he gave himself to prayer, he found himself
altogether eased thereof. And not long after, all that cloud of sadness
being driven away, God, who to the intent that he might try him, and inflame
him with a greater desire of him, had for a little while hidden himself, shone
forth again upon his mind, and restored unto him his accustomed peace and
tranquillity.

At another time, the Devil that he might discourage his mind, and deiect him,
suggested this cogitation: And what I pray you, will the Society do with you?
He straightway perceauing that he was solicited by the Devil, made head
against him, and within the space of half an hour obtained the victory. He
affirmed afterward, that in all the time of his Nouiship he was only tempted
these two times. Therefore after this, his mind was always peaceable and quiet.
What wonder? soaring aloft above all human chau^ces, he assigned all to the
Divine providence; by which he seemed to aspire to that place, where he is now,
not to be shaken with any perturbation.

CHAP. III. His constancy of mind in the death of his Father the Marquis.
THIS did he sufficiently discover to the messenger that brought him news of
his Fathers death the Marquis Ferdinand, who dyed six weeks after his entrance
into the Society. At the hearing whereof, he was no more moved then if it had
nothing at all co^cerned him. Therefore the self-same day at the persuasion of
others being willed to comfort his mother by letters, in such sort he began
them, that he gave thanks to God, for that herafter there was no other cause,
but that he might say, Pater noster qui es in celis; Our Father which art in
Heaven. This seemed very strange unto all, and especially unto them, who knew
very well the entire love, affection and observance which Aloysius bare toward
his Father, which was so great, that abstracting from God and celestial
things, he denied any thing upon earth to be more dear unto him. Verily, he
himself confessed, that his Fathers death considered of it self, could not
but be a great grief unto him: but so soon as he remembered that it fell out
according to the will of God, it was impossible that that should seem
troublesome to him which was his pleasure. And this is which before I said,
that he was higher then all Fortune, for so much as he wholly depended upon the
will of God. This same so sudden end of his Father, gave Aloysius cause, to
take notice of that extraordinary love, and singular care, that Almighty God
had of him. For if the Marquis had died two or three months sooner then that
time of his abdicating his riches, or that his entrance into Religion had been
deferred but for three months, it might well have been feared, that either F.
General, supposing that, that family ought not to be deprived of so commodious
a head for the governing of its affairs, would have deserred the acceptance of
him; or that they of that Province according to their inflamed love toward
him, would have attempted the with-houlding him by force; or at least that he
himself fearing to commit this dominion to his younger brother being but even
the^a very child, would have thought it better, rather for some little time to
apply himself to the administration thereof. But what event that matter would
have had, that doubtless is best known to God. Now it was his pleasure who
had made choice of him, after that being delivered out of the shackles of
fortune, he had placed him in Religion, then at last to call unto him the
Marquis his Father.

Neither did the same providence of God show it self less obscure toward the
Marquis himself. For whereas he in his youth was much renowned in the war, for
his service upon horse back, and had spent all his time in purchasing to him,
and his, the honors and pomps of this world; so soon as Aloysius had now
betaken himself to Religion, he made such a virtuous alteration in his
manners, and with so fervent zeal applied himself to matter of piety, that he
became even a miracle to all his acquaintance. He utterly abandoned his gaming,
to which heretofore he was too much given. And every day at evening, when he
had commanded to be brought unto his bedside, wherein he say sick of the
gout, that picture of Christ crucified which Aloysius had left behind him,
before the same, together with Ghisonius, whom (having been of late Aloysius
his Cha^berlaine) he kept with him, he recited the seven penitential Psalms,
and the Litanies: Unto which he sent for his wife and children, and commanded
to answer. In his prayer so extreeemely did he weep, with such deep sobs,
and groans that it was an abundant testimony, of that penitential ardour,
with which his mind was inflamed. At last embracing the crucifix, and often
knocking his breast, with tears he prayed in this manner: Miserere Domine,
Domine peccaui, miserere mei: Mercy O Lord, O Lord I have offended, have mercy
upon me. And being astonished at this his unusual promptness of weeping, at
last he said: Non ignoro vnde hae lachrymae fluant: sunt hi Aloysii fructus:
Aloysius a Deo Opt. Maximo, vt hoc salutari dolor cor mihi suffigeret,
impetrauit. I am not ignorant from whence these tears flow: they are my
Aloysius his fruits: Aloysius has obtained of my good and mighty God to
transfixe my heart with this wholesome grief. After this he carefully, and
contritely after the manner of a good Christian confessed all the sins of his
former life, to Ludouicus Cataneus the Priest lately returned from Rome
(whither he had accompanied Aloysius) being carried to the Church of the
Virgin Mother at Mantua, as the selfsame Ludonicus the priest recou^ted unto
me. Neither did this fervent mind of his ever after decline.

But so soon as he perceived his disease daily to increase, he commanded
himself to be carried to Millan, to try there whether any remedy could be
given by the Physicians to his malady. Nevertheless within a few days he drew
near his last end. Therefore whereas F. Francis Gonzaga, being even them
General of his order, and by chance lived at Mi^lan, came upon a certain day
when he was in great danger, to visit him, and give him warning of his death
which now near approached, he himself easily suspecting what he would have
him to do at that time, of his own accord requested, that he would send unto
him some one of his order whom he thought most fit, to hear his confession.
He sent one: he was confessed. The day following the General returning,
exhorts him to make his will: he made it, and setting all things in order
which were needful, he comforted herin his lamenting friends, for that he said
there was more cause to rejoice, that it pleased God then to command him out
of this life, when he was so well minded. He departed this mortal life on the
Ides of February the year 1586. His body as he had commanded being brought to
Mantua was buried there in S. Francis Church.

Aloysius being by the General Gonzaga, of whom even now I made mention, and
by some of his other familiar friends certified of those things that happened
at his Fathers death, much rejoicing, gave thanks to God. He was wont to
recount that he was thus taught by his Father: That whatsoever man does apply
his mind to, in any course of life, or business, that he should perform that
which he takes in hand as diligently as he may. That whereas this was his
Fathers opinion, in things subject to fortune, it was much greater reason,
that he should stand so affected in Gods cause. Neither was he slow in showing
in his deeds themselves, how deeply he had imprinted this saying in his mind,
who did always with inflamed desire contend, that he might subject himself to
the government of reason, and make good the name and renown of virtue and
Christian prudence.

And that we may give a taste of some few things, which even then were both
admired and spoken of concerning him; first of all he so utterly laid down all
care of his kinsfolks, that he seemed even to have blotted out of his mind all
memory of them. Therefore being asked how many brothers he had, he was not able
to give any answer, before to himself he had reckoned their number. At
another time a certain Father asking him, whether he were any thing trobled
with the remembrance of his kindred? he denied that he ever had any thought of
them, but when he was willing to commend them in general to God; and that by
the benefit of God, he had his cogitations so far forth in his power, that
there was never any thing occurring to his mind, unless he were willing
thereunto.

CHAP. IV. Of his mortification in the time of his Nouiship; the custody of his
Nouiship; the custody of his senses.
HE had fortified all his senses with so diliget a guard, that having both eyes
and cares, he seemed neither to see nor hear, and with his body placed upon
earth to be conversant with his mind in heaven. Never whilst he was in
Religion, was he seen to take into his hand, any odoriserous thing, much less
any thing that was perfumed: and as often as in the Hospitalls he attended upon
sick persons, which he often asked leave to do, he applied himself to those
that were the most loathsome of all others, and he so easily endured that
filthiness and stink, that he showed no sign of loathsomenesse.

He likewise brought-vnder his sease of touching, by inflicting stripes upon his
flesh, by wearing haire-cloth; using often for his daily food nothing but bread
and water, and by imposing upon himself other corporal punishments and
vexations. All which he did very frequently use, vnlesie in respect of his
infirm health, he was permitted by his to use them less then he would.
Neither was any thing more grievous unto him, then that in this respect he
might not follow his own disposition. Once also he did confidently affirm to
a certain Father, that those punishments which he now used for the repressing
of the insolency of his body and mind, were nothing in comparison of those
which in his former state of life, he suffered of his own accord. That this
one thing was of great comfort to him, for that he knew Religion much to
resemble a ship. in which they sail, no less, who by the comaund of the
Governor sit idle, then they that sweat in rowing. That day which according
to the custom of the Church fast was observed, he had obtained of the Master
of the Nouices to abstain from all things but bread and water. But the
Master behoulding him when he observed that he did eat almost nothing that
was upon the table, taking him from that, to the intent that he might minister
some other matter unto him of ouercomming himself, sending for him unto him,
he commands him to return to the second table, and to eat of whatsoever
should be set before him. He did as it was commanded him. But then a certain
man who observed it, he being gone from thence, said in jest: Surely brother
Aloysius you have taken up a handsome kind of fasting, you eat once
moderately, to the intent that you may eat again: unto whom he answered:
Quid vis faciam? Prophet^ dictum cst: Vt iumentum fact us sum apud tc, and ago
semper tecum. What would you have me to do? It is the saying of the Prophet: I
am become like a brute beast before thee, and I always remain with thee.

As concerning his sense of hearing, he never accommodated his cares to them
that told new, or unprofitable things. Therefore if conveniently he might, he
turned the speech to some other subject: but if he that spoke were one of any
account, he sufficiently discovered by his silence it self, and the habit of
his countenance, that those things that were spoken were displeasing to him.

Whereas in that his freer course of life, as we have declared before, he did
severely moderate his eyes, he did discover amongst the Religious, even much
more evident signs of vigilance. The Nouices are wont sometimes every year
for recreation-sake to go forth into a certain vineyard. Often had Aloysius
gone to the same, when I know not upon what occasion they were sent to another.
After he was returned home from this, being asked: whether seemed unto him the
pleasanter? he said that he did very much merueile at this question, for so
much as hitherto he did think that it had been the very same; which
notwithstanding did very much differ from this in the way, in lodgings, and
other things. Calling to mind at last, he acknowledged, that in this he saw a
Chapel, and not the like in the former. When he had now for the space of
three months taken meat in the refectory of the nouices, he was yet ignorant
of the order which was observed in the tables. Therefore being commanded by Fa.
Minister to bring unto him a certain book which he had left in Fa. Rectours
seat, he was first to be informed, which that place should be, and where the
Priests did sit. At another time having likewise spent three months in the
nouiship, he told the Master, that he was troubled with a scruple, for that
not willingly, but accidentally casting his eyes upon a certain person that
sat in his company, he beheld, what he was in doing That he feared least that
might seem a token of curiosity, yea and moreover which you will more wonder
at, he added, that this was the first scruple that had befallen him concerning
the government of his eyes, since his first entrance into the Society.

He seemed altogether to have lost his taste, so void was he in perceauing any
taste in his meat, neither did he any thing care whether it were delicate or
vile, well seasoned, or unsavory. It was his only desire to take the very worst
of that which was set before him: and whilst he was eating to have his mind
always upon Divine matters. For but only at that time which he attended to the
reading, at noone he mediated of the gall which was give Christ to drink, at
evening of that most sacred supper and full of mysteries, wherewith last of all
Christ entertained his disciples.

He was so watchful in the custody of his tongue, that they who considered not
how hurtefull and slippery an instrument it often is, would judge him to be but
too extreme anxious and superstitious. Amongst his prayers which he used as
iaculatory in the midst of his other employments, even this Verse out of the
Psalm, was very frequent in his mouth: Pone Domine custodiam ori meo, and
ostium circumstantiae labijs meis. Puto Lord a watch over my mouth, and a
strong encompassing door before my lips. Also he often used this saying, in
the company of men: Qui non offendit in verbo, hic perfectus est vir: and se
quis putat se Religiosum esse non refraenans linguam suam, huius vana est
Religio. That is to say: who does not offend in word, he is a perfect man: and
if any one think himself to be Religious, not refraining his tongue, vain is
this man's Religion. And far more contentment was it to him to hold his peace
then to speak. Therefore it is incredible, how obseruant he was of that law,
which inioyneth silence to Religious men for certain times.

Being sometimes sent with some priest to walk abroad, for so much as he had
heard, that not always leave was given to talk with those that they went out
with, he determined to read a book of piety upon the way, which for this
purpose he had carried with him, and he so passed the same partly with
reading, partly with meditating, that he gave no one word to his companion;
who being delighted with this example, did himself likewise, letting him
alone, fall to meditation. But he loved silence so much either for that he
feared to offend God, or for so much as those celestial delights of his mind,
which he daily enjoyed, utterly extinguished all desire of comfort which may be
reaped by mutual discourses. Those men that are of the Society, are wont before
they go out of the house to acquaint the porter, whither they go: whereas
therefore the Nouices at Rome are wont often to be sent to the House of the
Professed Fathers, either to serve at Mass, or to hear Sermons, or holy
Lectours upon festival days, Aloysius asked of his Master, whether he had
spoken this word in vain, if (when to be understood it was sufficient to say
he went to the House) he should adioyne also, that he went to the house of the
Professed.

That hour which next after dinner and supper, was allowed for the relaxation
of their minds, and which is called the hour of recreation, for so much as
that time it is lawful for them to recreate themselves moderately with some
discourse; he would never talk otherwise then of God, and very often would he
break of his intended discourse, so soon as any thing came into his mind, for
which he thought good to conceal that which he had begun to utter, and having
paused a while in silence, he would never suffer himself to be persuaded to
disclose it.

Also as concerning his apparel, he requested that he might have those that
were the most worn, and old in the house. When as therefore by the commaundment
of the Rectour a new garment was put upon him, he conceived so much grief in
his mind, that it could not but appear, both to the tailour and others that
were present. Afterward expressing this his grief, it was answered him, that
that might even proceed from certain self soue, and a desire to maintain his
reputation and the opinion that others had of him. O^t of which words he took
an occasion, for certain days to sift into all his cogitations and as far
forth as he might to found the head and original of that troble which he was
sensible of, in the puttingon of his apparel. When he had most carefully
examined himself, he could never discover that he had admitted any such kind
of fault. Nay rather, although he found, when he first entered into the
Nouiship, that he had certain cogitations suggested, that might seem to have
relation to draw him somewhat too much to love himself, notwithstanding of
such vigilance was he, by the assistance of Almighty God, that he did not so
much as once remember, that ever he gave consent unto them. But to the intent
that he might be the more safe against this plague, in all points whatsoever
which for certain mone^hs he meditated of Christ's passion, he did most apply
himself to that care and cogitation, that weeding up by the very roots that
preposterous love of himself, he might plant in his mind a wholesome hatred and
despising of himself.

CHAP. V. He refraineth from the desire of honor; he explicateth wholesome
precepts to the poor; he earnestly desires to be reprehended publicly.
NOw he applied himself so much the more diligently to those things which are
wont to be used for the repressing of the desire of honor, by how much to men
of sound judgment, he perceived that those things seemed more profitable, and
more necessary, then the vexation of the body. Therefore in the use and practice
of making himself openly abject, and exposed as a laughing-stocke to men, he
proceeded so far, that he made nothing curious of doing it, either at home or
abroad. Oftentimes he desired leave to be given him to beg alms through the
city, in an old cloak, with his shoulder loaded with a wallet. Being asked
whether this were any shame, or troble to him? he answered, no. For setting
before his eyes the example of Christ, and his favor and the eternal reward
which he should deserve, that they were sufficient motives, to undergo all
these things, with a mind both willing and joyful: And truly, if he should
even weigh the matter according to the common judgment of men, that he could no
way understand, how it might seem grievous unto him. For said he: Either I am
known, or not known of them that see me* if they know me not, I have no
reason to pass for their judgment; for amongst those that are ignorant of my
condition there is no loss of estimation to be bewailed. But if they know me,
beside this wholesome example of mine that they make their profit of, they do not
only not diminish their opinion of me, but even so far forth increase it, that
the greater danger is, that my mind should rather think it insolently to be
gloried in, then grieved at. For whosoever, borne to a great fortune, shall for
the love of Christ cast himself down to poverty, shall even be honored of
them, who themselves think those things not to be contemned.

After the same manner when upon festival days in the streets of the city
and highwayes, by mission from his Superiors, he delivered the grounds of
Christian doctrine to beggars, and rusticks, such was his cheerfulness in
performing this office, and tender love toward all, that both the common sort
were edified by behoulding him, yea, and gave Prelates themselves passing by
chance, by in their coaches, would somtymes with a desire to see, and hear him
stand still. There was once a certain man whom he knew to have abstained from
confession six whole years, whom he did not cease to solicit, and encourage
with the incitement of a Divine spirit, and with ardent persuasions to exhort,
til being inclined to penance, he had brought him to a Priest into the Church
of JESUS, who might hear his confession and absolve him. The same office did
he often perform to others.

There was one thing wherein he confessed that he was somewhat troubled, when
openly in the Refectory, or Pulpit of the Nouices, he was reprehended of his
faults, not for so much as he any thing feared to be noted for a man void of
virtue, which made not any impression in him, but for that as he said, vices
were loathsome unto him. Therefore there was nothing that he did more often make
suite for, then that he might be publicly accused, which he confessed was very
profitable unto him. And although (as he had an absolute command over all the
motions of his mind) it had been very easy for him, so to have transferred his
mind from these reprehensions, that he might not so much as have heard them;
notwithstanding, as he said, to the intent that he might not deceive his
Superiors, and that he might merit more grace in the sight of God, he forbear
to do it. In the mean while, whilst he openly suffered himself to be
reprehended to his face, imagining that he suffered some adversity, according
to the example of Christ, he was elevated with joy, that it afforded unto him
plentiful matter of meditation for a long time.

CHAP. VI. The Master of the Nouices makes trial of his virtue. For many rare
virtues he is reputed holy by his fellows.
THE Master of the Nouices, after that he observed him to be so considerate in
all things, purposed upon a certain time to set upon him at unawares, to the
intent that he might make trial of him. He commands therefore the Presect,
that for some certain days he should be employed in sweeping, rubbing, and
preparing the refectory. And he gives order to the prefect himself that by
often blaming, and carping at him, he should daily exercise him. He, although
he played this his part, with all the vexing diligence he could,
notwithstanding never could he drive Aloysius, so much as once to excuse
himself, or to give any reason why he did so: therefore being stricken with
admiration of so great mildness and patience, he scarcely believed his own
eyes.

There came upon a certain time to the house of the Nouices to salute him, the
Patriarch Gonzaga. He at his departure calling aside the Rectour, asks of
him, how Aloysius demeaned himself? Unto whom he answered, that this he could
affirm of him, that there was no one in the house, unto whom he might not
serve as a pattern. To conclude, from the very first months of his Nouiship,
he was of so composed and sweet a behavior, so sparing of diet, so much given
to fasting, so apt to overcome with such severity both his body and mind,
especially when it concerned the contemning of honor, so diligently obseruant
of all the rules, were it in never so little matters, so despising of himself,
so affable to all others, so much reuerencing his superiors, and so obsequious
to their command, so pious, and burning with so much charity toward God,
lastly so perfect in all the exact rules of virtue, that he was not only
extolled in the mouths of all the Nouices, as a blessed Citizen of heaven,
and for such a one, with all observance esteemed in all assemblies, and
whatsoever he touched, or used, they would for piety-sake honor with kisses;
but even they that departed out of the Nouiship, would earnestly seek to
obtain those things that he had either handled, or used, as the relics of
some extraordinary holy man. Therefore the little Book, out of which in his
Fathers house, from whence he brought it, he was wont to recite his prayers,
and lauds to the Virgin Mother, much about this time being for deuotion-sake
taken away, is to this day preserved in Sicily. His Breuiary likewise of
Canonical prayers, being in like manner brought thither by him, is of a
certain preacher at this day held in the veneration of a relic; and was so
held by others from that time to this very hour: so soon was his rare
sanctity and excellency of Virtue, found out.

CHAP. VII. Of the things done by him at Rome in the house of the Professed
Fathers, whilst he continued there; his preparation to the Eucharist, and his
sensible piety toward the same.
THE Nouices of the Society are wont at Rome after they having spent two
months in the house at S. Andrews, and that it is apparent, they are entered
into a right course, nor altogether strangers in Religious Institutions, to
bestow some weeks or months in the house of the Professed Fathers which is
called that of JESUS. There, being secluded from the rest in a certain part of
the house, they assist at Mass, read at the table, and perform others
offices, even as they were wont to do in the Nouiship. Besides him, who is
chosen of their company, and called the Prefect, upon whom by by the Rectour
this charge is imposed, to dispose of the offices, that they be performed by
them that are interessed in them, rightly, orderly, and at those certain
hours which it is meet should be observed; there is also a Gouernourouer them,
some Father that is both grave, and expert in matters of contemplation, who
serves for their Confessarius, and Directour; and to conclude supplieth the
place of the Master of Nouices. Hither therefore was Aloysius sent by the
Rectour, when he had spent about three months amongst the Nouices. Which
command he accepted very joyfully, for two causes, both which had reference to
piety. The one was, that by the examples of the Fathers, who having spent
almost all their life time in the government of diverse affairs and businesses
of Religion, do there undergo the offices, either of the Church and House, or
do assist with their industry and counsel the chief Governor of the Society
(who keeps his reside^ce there) in the common government; and are of such
quality, that looking into their lives, as a mirror of religious virtue, he
hoped much to advantage himself thereunto. The other was, that for so much as
he was very devout to the most sacred mystery of the Eucharist, which always
caused, that in his Fathers house, he willingly served at Mass, he did very
much rejoice, that he was designed by profession to this office.

But that he was in his mind devoted so much to that holy Sacrament, it was so
evident to all that had any conversation with him, that when consultation was
had about making his picture, the device of many was, that he should be painted
adoring the sacred Host upon his knees. His will was inflamed with the
delights, and soule-rauishing favors, wherewith he was replenished in
receiving those sacred mysteries. Neither ought this to seem strange unto him,
who considers his integrity of mind, and the exquisite preparation which he
was wont to make thereunto. Together, with his receiving of one of these
bankets, he prepared his mind for the receiving of another.

And besides his other offices of piety, which he took time for, he
distributed every week in this manner: the three first days, to wit monday,
twesday, and wednesday, he consecrated to giving thanks to the three persons
of the most holy Trinity severally, for that last excellent benefit of the
Eucharist communicated unto him. In like manner the three days following,
thursday, friday, and saturday, he bestowed upon praying to thos^ three Persons
severally, that they would vouchsafe to enable him to come so prepared as was
fitting to this heavenly banquet the next sunday following. Often every week,
at certain set-houres he betook himself to the holy Church, or the Quire
thereof, and there adored the Blessed Sacrament* and spent sometime in offering
up his prayers to God. The day before he was to be made partaker thereof, that
only mystery found him discourse in all his speech and conversation, in which
there clearly shoneforth, a certain divine and ardent pleasure, where with
his mind was in the mean while replenished. This when it was well perceived by
certain priests, they did their endeavor, that upon Saturday before, at
those hours that they had leave to confer, they might hear him make
discourses, in exquisite and hidden sentences upon this inexplicable mystery.
And they said that they never said Mass with more plentiful piety, then upon
the Sunday following. Questionless Aloysius his discourses had moved, and set
on fire their minds. And this was a thing so ordinary, that as often as even
upon any other day besides Sunday, any one had a desire with efficacy and
inward gust, either to receive, or consecrate the Blessed Eucharist, the day
before, he would apply himself. unto him, and of set-purpose endeavor to fall
into speech of this matter. Upon Saturday in the evening, being possessed with
these cogitations, he betook himself to rest, upon Sunday betimes in the
morning so soon as he awaked, he reflected upon the same, then a whole hour
did he meditate of the admirable conjunction of the soul with God, which is
accomplished in the Blessed Eucharist. This being done, he went to the holy
Church, to hear Mass, at which he always kneeled immoueably upon his knees.

Having received the Eucharist, he retired himself into some corner, out of
which you might see him (after he had prayed long time, being as it were
alienated from his senses) with some difficulty raising himself upon his feet,
with a feeble pace; to creep out of the Church. But in the mean while he
inioyed a cheerful heart, ful-fraught with motives of divine love, and
celestial sweetness. The other hours before Noone betaking himself to holy
silence, he either recited prayers to Almighty God, or quietly conte^plated on
him, or piously read some what committed to writing either by S. Augustine, or
S. Beraard.

For this respect therefore, he joyfully went to the House of the Professed
Fathers, in which he found the discipline of the Nouices to be committed to
Hyeronimus Platus, a man in virtue and study of Divine things, and in the
science of all Christian Philosophy, singular; witness are his books, then a
little before set forth, and also others like unto them in argument, which for
so much as in respect of his untimely death, he could not finish, to the great
detriment of Religious men, they never saw the light. In these with an
admirable method and order he set down a course how to abstract the mind from
the deceitful illusions of fortune, how to tame and moderate a man's body; how
to bridle all the motions of the mind, and set them in order; how to extirpate
all vices and vicious habits; how to get all virtues necessary for a Religious
man, both to govern himself and converse with others: to conclude, how with
perfect charity to join himself with God. Having now finished but two books,
death bereauing us of him forced him to leave his work imperfect. Therefore
this Father, as being the most pious and prudent amongst the rest, after he
perceived Aloysius to be delivered over to his charge, according unto that
opinion, which from the very first day of his acquaintance with him, he
conceived of him, he was very glad. Furthermore, what from the very beginning,
his judgment was of Aloysius, is manifest by those letters, which, with his
own hand he wrote concerning those things, that happened at the coming of
Aloysius to the Society, to a young man of our Society, who at that time
studied in the College at Naples. Of which things, although before there has
been made mention, notwithstanding to the intent that by the testimony of so
worthy a Father they may be confirmed, it shall not be from our matter, to set
down those letters in this place verbatim. He writes therefore after this
manner.

CHAP. VIII. The letters of F. Hieronymus Platus, whereby is described Aloysius
his vocation to Religion, and his virtues.
Most dear brother in Christ. The peace of Christ be with you.

TRVLY I know not (my dear Vitellesco) what better I may answer to the
letters which of late I received from you, or more ac^^ptable, then if I
certify you of a certain No(...)e of our Society of great fame, who five days
since (namely upon S. Catherines day) came to our house of S. Andrew. The name
of this young man is Aloysius Gonzaga. He is extracted by the Fathers side from
a principal Marquis, not far from the dominion of Mantua, to the Duke whereof
he is very near allied, and upon him as being the eldest of that stock, relied
the next hope of succession. But so soon as it pleased God to challenge him to
himself, about some two years since, when he lived in the Court of Philip the
Spanish King, he addicted his mind unto the Society, and plainly manifested
the same unto his Father the Marquis, who himself likewise remained in that
Court. He after many trials made of him, at last yielded his consent, and not
long after retourning out of Spain, wrote to Scipio Gonzaga a most Illustrious
man of his kindred, who at this day is Patriarch of Jerusalem, that he would
be pleased to deal with our F. General, and in his name offer his son unto
him. But for so much as he was the eldest, as I said before, upon whom the
inheritance was to descend, it was requisite that iuridically he should depart
with his right to his brother: which, whereas it could not be done without
authority from the Emperor, there passed in the interim some certain months.
Yet nevertheless this whole matter being effected, when this good young man
was in hope shortly to land at his wished haven, his Father was his only
obstacle, who either out of his vehement love toward him, or out of the hope
which he reposed in him, or, as he now writes to F. General, for that he
thought his age as yet unripe for the undertaking of so great a matter,
suffered not himself to be persuaded, to give consent for his going, and
purposed to have delayed him some years more. But here the singular constancy,
and feruorous mind of this young man discovered themselves. For although he
honored his Father with inexplicable obedience, not withstanding he sought
infinite ways to solicit him, and incline his mind; and when he could not
obtain at his hands, this his good, and just suite, verily he sent unto F.
General his most ardent letters, whereby he besought his favor, that he might
come unto him without ever taking leave of his Father. When the General
denied this, the matter was deserred even til this time. But now, by what art,
I know not truly, having doubtless at last obtained leave, in Ecclesiasticad
habit, accompanied with about some ten horsemen, he came to Rome. His arrival
was so published, whersoeuer he made his iournies, and even at Rome those few
days, that he remained in the house of Scipio Gonzaga, it was already bruted
abroad, that he came to enter into Society, that when about the same time, he
went to the Popes Holiness, that by his benediction he might be fortified for
the prosecution of his intended enterprise, his intention being noised
throughout the Court, he was environed with a ring of such kind of persons, who
for so much as their chiefest cares and ambitions infinitely differed from his,
came to gaze upon him like some monster. To conclude, the next day after, being
monday, which as I said was dedicated to S. Catherine, he betook him to S.
Andrews, the same Patriarch accompanying him, who remained there that he might
diue with Fa. General.

But now believe me, of such quality are his endowments, that nobleness of
birth (which of late you understood how illustrious it was) is but the meanest
of all his graces. He is of so excellent a wit, that although he has not as
yet attained the eighteenth year of his age, and has been so long conversant
in Princes Courts, notwithstanding he is rarely-well read, hoth in Logic and
Natural Philosophy. But so prudent and considerate is he in all his speeches,
that (I speak seriously he makes us ad adonished. Thereof let this one thing
seru, you for a^ argum^nt, that the Marquis his Father had now already made use
of him, in the business belonging to his family; and in his epistle whereby he
recommendeth him to Fa. General, he affirm^th that he bestows upon him,
that, then which he never had any thing dearer, or of more hope at any time.
But in good-sadnesse all these are nothing in respect of his virtue and
sanctity. For verily he confesses that eue^ from about the eight year of his
age he began to fear God, and sufficient proofs thereof are, the v^hement
motions of piety wherewith he is agitated. For in time of prayer he abounds
with continual tears, and almost always he has his mind recollected and
attentive, which is both apparent by his countenance and also by his behavior.
Those that are of the same house with him declare, that he applies himself to
meditation four or five times in the day: and that he does as often in the
night, but they have no certainty what partitio^ he makes of his time, for
that now a good while since he would suffer no one to help him to bed, but
being shut up in his chamber, according to the proportion of his ardour and
piety, he gave himself over to the offices of a devout mind toward God. But
least you should think me too apt to amplify these matters concerning him, let
this which I shall tell you, serve for all, which is, that with once only
meeting with him, he did so much oblige unto him Fa. Andreas Spinola, and won
him into so great an admiration of his towardliness and virtue, that he
discoursing with me afterward of him, thought me (whom you see what esteem I
make of him) to have been somewhat too cool in his comme^dation.
Notwithstanding one, and the selfe-sanie is the opinion which F. General, and
we all, who are here at Rome, Millan, or Mantua, (where he lived for a
certain time) do hold of him.

Surely I am doubtful, whether I should say that which remains to be said,
least as it does mine, so it may diminish your comfort. Notwithstanding to the
intent, that I may excite you to pray for him, I will not conceal it. Know
therefore that he neither wants natural, nor celestial gifts, his health
only excepted, which is so weak, that even his very aspect strikes fear into
us. Moreover one or two days before he entered into the Society he began to
have some infirmity in his breast. He alleges this to have been the cause
thereof, whereby you may take knowledge of his love to piety. He says that he
had entertained this custom, that every Friday he would live with bread and
water only, that whereas he had observed the same, even the next friday before,
and after that the day following going to the Palace, to the intent that he
might have access to the Popes Holiness, whose sect according to custom he
came to kiss, having continued the within three hours of night fasting, was
exceedingly weakened. How soever the matter goes, if he (...) of any cure, by
commauna from Fa. General, whatsoever alligent and careful providence may
effect, shall be applied. And already they have set in hand with it. And
perhaps perhaps said I^^ nay verily without all doubt he shall recover better
being te^pered by the careful moderation of the Society, then if he should be
exhausted by that vnbridesed and headlong kind of seruour. Therefore pray unto
God for him, and make no question, but if he spare him (...), you shall see him
in time to come flourish with humarable exploytes both for the glory of God and
renown of the Society All the se things (although many I have omitted that
might have been wholesome for example) in such sort have I related to many, that
I might communicate likewise to you, this comfort which for the time has been
truly so great unto us all, that there is in a manner no talk of any thing
else: Nevertheless upon this condition, that you requite this joy which I have
brought unto you, with your prayers to God, that he make me worthy of the
sacred friendship, and imitation of so many excellent men, as he vouchsafes
daily to call to this holy Society, that he may as it were with so many jewels
garnish the same. God bless you From Rome the third of the Kalends of November
1585.

Your brother in Christ, and your servant, Hieronymus Platus.

When this Father wrote these letters, he was not as yet inwardly acquainted
with him, yet every one understands with how magnificent praises he extolleth
him. But so soon as he began to take his confessions, and to have speech with
him of Divine matters, and of the inward inclinatio^s of his mind, he demanded
of him an account of them all severally, which he committed to writing, as is
set down in the beginning of this book. And so much innocence, so much light
in the knowledge of Divine things, so much height of accomplished sanctity did
he find in this young man, that he reverenced him like one ranked in the number
of the happy Saints, and so often as he makes mention of him, he does always
adorn him with the same praises. But then especially, when discoursing with a
certain Father of celestial beatitude, he affirmed that the inhabitants of
Heaven, who are possessed thereof, do so farforth accommodate themselves to the
will of God, whom they know and behold, that they do after a certain manner
pass into him, in such sort, as that they neither love, nor will any thing but
that which God loves and wills; he added that it seemed unto him that there
appeared an example hereof in our Aloysius, in whose mind, said he, when those
heavenly Citizens see God most pleasingly to rest, they likewise obey this his
divine will, and employ themselves so wholly in adorning him with immortal
endowments and guiftes, in storing him with merits, and in patronizing him with
their commendations, that when I behold him so gracious with God and his
Saints, and replenished with all virtue, and splendor above the compass of
nature, they seem unto me eve by strife to overcome him with the passing
greatness of their benefits.

The same Fa. Platus, when upon a certain time he iournyed from Siena, and
commended the most excellent virtues of this young man, he affirmed to a
certain Father, that it seemed strange unto him, that according to that rare
sanctity, which he saw shine in him, he did not work many apparent miracles. I
remember that I have heard Cardinal Bellarmine declare, that it caused
admiration in him, that so unusual integrity of life, should as yet (as far
forth as was known) want divine miracles.

CHAP. IX. Therest of his acts in the house of the professed Fathers: the
custody of his eyes; and of his obedience.
A LOYSIVS stayed longer in that house then other Nouices are wont to do. Every
morning by break of day, having performed one hour in pious meditation, he
betook him to the sacred Vestry, neither would he from thence stir one foot
homeward, before he had with very prompt devotion, and celestial joy, served
five or six masses. So much commiseration did he take of his fellows, and
chiefly of two that seemed to be somewhat infirm of health, that he admonished
their Superiors, that they were but too neglectiue of their health, and that
they served too many Masses. The time which was between mass and mass, he
spent silently, (speaking not so much as one word to any one) in some corner,
sometimes closely meditating, or offering up his prayers to the Blessed Virgin
Mary, and other sometimes in reading sacred books. He went unto the
Sacristane, if he were to be admonished, or advised about any thing, with his
head bare, with his hands joined before his breast, and standing in his
presence, he spoke unto him with such reverence and submission, that he made
him often somewhat even out of countenance. He accepted his and his fellows
commaundes no less pro^ptly and carefully, then if they had been given from
Christ our Lord.

Upon Thursday, in holy-weeke the Sacristane gave order unto him, to take
charge of the tapers that were burning at the Sepulcher of Christ. When he had
long continued there, notwithstanding he never so much as once lifted up his
eyes, to behold the ornaments and furniture of that place, which with the
comeliness thereof had drawn so great a concourse of people to view the same.
Therefore his companion asking him afterward how he liked the Sepulcher, he
denied that ever he saw it. For it seemed to him a thing not lawful to do,
for so much as the Sacristane had laid another command upon him.

Moreover, he exhibited so much reverence and observance toward a certain
Nouice, who had some small jurisdiction given him over the rest, that he could
not even honor Fa. General any more. For he arose to him when he passed by
him, he put-of his hat, he gave him all kind of honor, until he, who for very
shame could not tolerate so much subjection toward him, complained to the
Superiors, who commanded Aloysius, to moderate his officiousenesse, which he
likewise did. Neither is it any marvel that he so much honored them, and was
so obseruant of their command, for so much as he did not so much respect him
that he obeyed, as him whose vicegerent he was, and took the voice of him
that commanded, for the voice of God, not of Man. Which he said that he did,
not only for this respect, that he might merit more grace at Gods hand, but
that it was even as sweet as honey to him, to think that Christ spoke unto him,
and gave him some occasion to do him service. He added that he was better
pleased to obey them who had a power inferior and subordinate to their
superiors, then those whose power was supreme and independent of any other;
and this (as he said) not so much for the love of humility* as out of a
certain kind of glory. For if the matter be considered according unto humane
judgment, surely a man would hardly be brought, willingly to submit himself to
the power of a man, especially if he had neither parity in birth, nor in the
guiftes either of nature, or fortune: but that it is a thing the most glorious
of all other, to subject a man's self to God, or which is all one, to him that
represents God. And that this does more evidently appear, by how much the
less part humane sense has in it, and by how much he that governs has
fewer ornaments, which may convert and entice men's minds unto them.

The fore-noone hours being spent, the Nouices that live in that house, betake
themselves by turns, some to read, one at the first, another at the second
table; othersome to undergo the offices of the kitchen. When it fell to
Aloysius his lot, that he also should apply himself to these services, he
behaved himself with like contentment in those, (though base ones) as if he
had been bred up in that place, or of such a condition, as if the love of those
employments had been by a certain natural instinct plausible unto him. When
he performed the part of Reader, he was considerate in reading, and nothing
hasty. But once it happenned, that there was made, I know not what, noise in
the Refectory whilst he read, so that he was not heard by others. That Nouice
who was substituted over the rest having gotten this occasion, made use of it
to reprehend him, for that by his default, the Fathers and brothers at that
table were deprived of the fruit of his reading; and this spiritual damage
(for so, to the intent that he might try him, he termed it) with many words
he exaggerated. Here Aloysius, such was his patience, would nothing excuse
himself, but craved pardon, promised amends, and afterward, to the intent that
he might redres^e the spiritual loss of that his ^ellow, he of purpose read
over again, that which he had read before.

F. Hieronymus Platus, who perceived him to be so much given to prayer, and
actions of the mind, to the intent that he might somewhat withdraw him from the
same, commanded that after dinner and supper, he should not only spend one
hour, as he was wont, but that he should moreover for the space of half an
hour, together with them that took their refection at the second table,
recreate his mind with discourse. He although he had taken his refection at the
first table, fulfilled this command. But the Minister being ignorant of this,
finding him amongst them that recreated in the other company, commands him
openly to acknowledge his fault in the refectory and to do penance for
breaking the rule of silece, beyond the appointed hour which next insued the
time of his meal. He performed that which was imposed upon him by way of
penna^ce, making no excuse, nor so much as ever mentioning this command given
him by his superior, and straightway according to his superiors first
command he went forward, to make himself partaker of this second recreation.
That being discovered, the Minister was stricken with admiration; and afterward
reiterated his penance, neither does he withstand, or allege any cause to the
contrary. After refection F. Platus sending for him, admonishes him, that he
had offended against his fellows, for that being but yet a Nouice, he had
been admonished twice for one fault. Moreover he asked him, why he had not
made known to the Minister, that he did it by leave from his Superior? He
answered, that it came likewise into his mind, that peradventure his concealing
thereof, might become an ill example unto others, but that he feared, least that
self-love might deceive him, in alleging as an excuse, that leave and
command of his superior whereby he was free from that rule, that he
perseuered, passing over the matter with dissimulation, that he did undergo
penance once again, and that if afterward the Minister had moved any further,
least he might offend any one by concealment, that he would have disclosed the
commaundment, that had been imposed upon him.

This was of great force to inkindle the minds of others, to see with how
prepared and patient a mind he suffered penance, with how great alacrity he
underwent whatsoever penalty, although undeservedly imposed upon him, either
for any fault or negligence of his, which two were never, or very seldom found
in him. Yea and very often it fell out, that for that which others had offended
in, he being by some mistake accused, would willingly, and without making any
allegation for himself, even as if he had been culpable, suffer the penance.
But this did not long lie hid, for so much as they that were in fault, when
they saw him do penance, with a kind of subiecting themselves, would make open
profession of the fault committed.

The rest of the day, he was wont to accompany some one Father, to the prisons
or Hospitals, whither it is the custom of the Priests of that house, that are
employed to that purpose, often every week to go; and in the mean time,
whilst the Priest bestowed himself amongst the prisoners or sick persons that
made their confessions to him, he would instruct the rest, of the points of
Christian faith, or of the manner of accomplishing the Sacrament of penance.
When he remained at home, he busied himself in sweeping of the house, and
other such like humble services. When upon a time, together with his fellows,
he foulded up certain linen in the garret, which being brought from the
washing place was dried there, it came into his mind, that he had read nothing
that day in S. Bernard, as he was daily wont to do. Therefore after a little
while he had done that thing which he was about, he was desirous to satisfy his
piety. And it was lawful for him truly, as likewise for the other Nouices, so
soon as they had bestowed sometime upon that kind of work, without blame to
depart. But he laid down this desire, after he had answered his cogitations in
this manner: D. Bernardus, si eum legeres, quid aliud te doceret quam
obedientiam? Fac igitur iam te legisse, and obedientiam adhibe. S. Bernard, if
thou sholdest read him, what other thing would he teach thee, but obedience?
Imagine therefore that thou had already read him, and practice obedience.

He did so carefully obey all the rules of how little account soever, that for
no man's sake of what dignity soever he was, would he transgress them. This
appeared, when the most Illustrious Cardinal Roboreus his kinsman, coming
into the Vestry of the Church, to see him, he excusing himself, said it was
not in his power to speak with him. With which excuse he being very well
pleased, would have no speech with him till it was permitted by Fa. General.
To conclude so perfect was he in the punctual discharge of his duty, of so
upright and wholesome an example to all, that all that were in that house lodged
him in their bosoms, and reputed him for a very holy young man. Having spent
two months there, he is recalled to S. Andrews.

CHAP. X. How he spent the rest of the time of his Nouiship, The purity of his
mind; and moderation of his Affections.
ALOYSIVS being returned to the house of the Nouiship which is at S. Andrews,
and having very much profited in the course of virtue, by the excellent
examples of the Fathers which he had seen in the house of the Professed, first
of all gave account to the Master of the Nouices, of all things which had
passed inwardly in his mind, during the time of his absence, afterward with a
more seruent mind, and care then ever hertofore, he gave himself to the
exercising of the Nouices functions. And so well and carefully did he perform
every point of his duty, that not only others were able to convince him of any
fault, but even he himself truly, who was wont most diligently to observe all
his own affairs, and not only to sift-out all his actions, but his
cogitations themselves, cold find nothing in himself worthy of reprehension.
That discovered it self very plainly, when upon a time he propounded unto the
Master of the Nouices a certain seruple to be cleared, which did very much
exercise him, declaring, that although he had employed all the diligence that
he could, in the narrow search of his mind, he could not find any thing in the
same, that might amount to a venial sin. And that this was it, which did
very much afflict him; for he feared least this came to pass, out of the small
understanding that he had of himself, and least by this means, those inward
dark mists should ouershaddow his mind, which he had often heard of, and truly
also read of, that might expose him to very much danger. And by this, how great
the purity of his mind was, may easily be gathered. To this were a great help,
the many endow me^ts of his mind, some of which I purpose to declare in this
place, least it may seem a thing incredible to some, that he could possibly
maintain so great integrity and cleanenesse of conscience.

First of all by daily industry, which from his very first childhood he had
bestowed, in subduing the affections of his mind, and thereby having gotten an
habit, had now arrived to that perfection, that neither his mind seemed to be
disturbed, nor moved with any sense of mortal things, no not so much as with
the first motions of any inordinate desires. Surely very many with whom he
conuersed when he was in Religion, have testified upon their oath, that they
have been so far at any time from finding him in any error that might bear
the show of a venial sin, that he never so much as discovered any the least
sign of a mind suddenly, or without the discourse of reason, stirred either
with anger, impatience, or any other distemperature. Which immunity from all
insolent affections, is so much the more to be wondered at, for that, as we
said in another place, it proceeded not from any dullness of nature, as who,
besides that he was now in his youth and of a hot sanguine complexion, was of
a subtle and perspicacious wit, above the capacity of his age. But questionles
this is to be ascribed to the special grace of God, and the habits of
excellent virtues, unto which, perpetual meditation, and exercise of bridling
and reducing himself to the square of reason, and celestial doctrine, had
brought him. This also may be added, that in all his actions he followed not his
affection as a guide, which often times precipitates a man beyond the bounds of
reason, but the light of a provident mind. Therefore he said, he that is
governed by his passions, is subject to many errors.

Neither truly in the meetings, and company of his fellows, would he ever, for
desire of victory, descend into any vain strife of words, but having
ingenuously declared what his opinion was, if there were any one that
contradicted him, he resisted him not, unless sometimes he thought good to
answer somewhat, in a mild manner, with plausible speech, and a peaceable
mind, for the patronizing of truth: but if the other persisted in a contentious
manner, he held his peace, as if the matter had nothing at all belonged to him.

Moreover, he did most carefully reject not only every indifferent desire, but
which is more, even every good and holy one that might never so little disturb
the calm, and quiet state of his mind, and awake any superfluous cares.
Wherefore his mind always enjoyed a certain perpetual rest and tranquillity,
which by continual use he had now in a manner turned into nature. Furthermore
it was a help unto him, then which none could be greater, for so much as he
did not only put before the eyes of his mind, Almighty God daily in all his
actions (for whose sake there was nothing that he undertook, in which he did
not labor with all possible diligence) but also for that he was consociated
with him by perpetual use of prayer.

CHAP. XI. Of his singular hability in Prayer, and familiarity with God.
IN which prayer he placed so much industry, as he reposed therein all his hope
of acquiring perfect sanctity. He was of opinion, that he, who was negligent in
prayer and recollection, could never obtain any absolute and continual
conquest over himself, nor aspire to any higher degree of absolute and
excellent virtue and wisdom. Which by his experience it self he did
sufficiently make show of. Therefore those imperfections of mind, in some that
profess Religion, those trobled and unquiet motions, that irkesomenesse of
themselves, he attributed to their neglect of the custom of sacred meditation
and prayer. This he said was a compendious and ready way to perfect virtue, and
this he desired to persuade all unto. For he made no doubt, but if any man had
but once tasted the sweetness thereof, he would never, suffer himsel^e to be
drawn from it again.

He did admire and commiserate the sloth of some men, who when being busied in
necessary employments, have had by chance sometimes no leisure to meditate
according to their wholesome custom, do by degrees take up a habit of
intermitting this divine exercise, even when they do most abound with time and
opportunity. But he had so, with his whole affection given himself thereunto,
that the sum of all his delight seemed to be comprised in that time which he
applied to prayer, or meditation. And by those things which he had found in
himself by long use, he gathered many very excellent precepts of the right
course of meditation. Therefore F. Robert Bellarmine (who is now in the number
of the Cardinals) when in the Roman College he explicated to diverse students
there, the Chapters of meditations, described in that little Book of
spiritual exercises of the Society, having delivered any excellent docume^t of
orderly meditating, was wo^t to add, that he learned this of our Aloysius.

He prepared his mind very diligently, reading for a quarter of an hour, or at
the least for half a quarter of an hour, certain points which the next day
after he would meditate upon. So soon as it was day in the morning, he did his
endeavor, that he might be prepared for meditation, a little before they rung
to the beginning thereof. In which time, he labored to compose his mind being
recollected to a calmness, and to free it from all care, and whatsoever other
inordinate desire. For he said, that it could not possibly be, but that the
mind should be otherwise set on work, and refuse to imprint in it self the
image of God, unto the similitude whereof he ought most to conform him in
meditation and contemplation, whilst in the mean time it is inthralled with
the solicitude, love, or desire of any other thing. I do remember that I have
heard him, when to that purpose he made use of this similitude: Even as the
water being wafted with the wind, does, either by reason that it is trobled,
not show at all the shape of that man that stands by it: or if it be clear
it does not show all the members continuate with the body, but represents
them as it were severally cut in sunder, and disseuered: so he said, that a
man's mind, who in his contemplation combateth with contrary blasts of
perturbations, or is turmoiled with affections and desires, can by no means be
aptly or rightly prepared, to preset the image of God, or conceive any
similitude of so great a majesty, as he meditateth upon.

The bell to prayer being rung, with as great reverence as he possibly could,
he fell upon his knees in his poor oratory, and with so great industry of
mind, least he should be distracted with any other care, did he watch over
himself, that for this respect he would not so much as give way to the
necessity of spitting. He gave himself wholly to the cogitation of those things
that he had proposed to meditate; and his vital spirits, together with his
blood resorting upward toward his higher parts, through the intensiue working
of his mind, so great a debility and cold surprised his nether limbs, that his
prayer being ended he was not able to stand upon his feet. Often likewise it
happened, that after he arose from the same, his mind being for sometime
alienated from his senses, he did not so much as know the place that he stood
in. Which then chiefly came to pass, when he considered in his mind those
attributes of God, as, his goodness, providence, love toward men, and
principally the infiniteness of all these, for then was he furthest abstracted
from his senses. In his prayer he had so great a gift of tears, and powered
them out so largely, that it was necessary his Superiors should take some
course to moderate them, for fear least by their abundance his head and eyes
might receive some detriment. But by no remedy, could they ever prevail.

But that which is most admirable, of which both others who took his
Confessions, and also Cardinal Bellarmine is witness, that his mind was never
wont to be any whit distracted from his determinate prayer: which how great a
gift of God it is, every one may easily conjecture, by that which he himself
experienceth in his own prayers. This so certain power of bending his mind
upon holy matters, he did not only obtain by Gods favor, but by this
likewise, that by long meditation, and use he had made the force of his mind
even so prone and obedient unto him, (whereby he comprehended and painted lively
in his cogitation even those things that were a far of) as that there was
nothing, but what was accommodated to his purpose, that ever came into his
mind. And upon that cogitation which he had undertaken, so earnestly in the
time of his recreation, did he fix his mind, that he never reflected upon that
which others either did or said, and thereupon he never incurred any danger of
diuerting his mind by any thing whatsoever. And although in the house of the
Nouices, and in a manner according to that example, in the Colleges, all the
lodgings are perused, whereby it may be discovered, whether all according to
their appointed hours, be at their prayers or no, notwithstanding so long as
he lived in Religion, he never perceived any one that came in this manner to
behold him. Which is a notable sign truly, how far at that time he was remote
from all sense, and how attentive to his meditation.

It is decreed by a rule, that every one of the Society, both at the time of
his first entrance as a Nouice, and all his lifetime after, every sixth month
to disclose to his superior not only his sins, but also the gifts, graces,
and virtues which he has received from Almighty God, and to conclude all the
secrets of his conscience: which is to the intent that he, whose part it is to
govern others with his Counsel, having by this means an understanding of
all, may in a Fatherly manner, restrain those that ^alle the bounds of
moderation, may reseew unwary persons from deceipts, which in a stricter course
of life do often fall out; finally that he may prepare a way, to go forward in
a perfect course of life, to all that are committed to his charge. And this was
that, whereby many of B. Aloysius his virtues were laid open. For out of a
desire to obey this rule, and to direct himself according to that prescript of
his superiors, he did with great candor and sincerity detect unto them, and
those his Fathers of a better life, how God behaved himself in his heart. That
must be very diligently observed, least it may seem strange unto any one, that
he declared very many of his virtues. For his desire of obeying his superiors,
and this rule, brought him unto this, being accustomed otherwise to speak very
sparingly of himself. When as therefore once he gave account to the Rectour of
the inward state of his mind, who asked him whether in prayer he were not
sometimes distracted in his cogitation to other matters? he answered
ingenuously: that if all his extrauagant cogitations, which within the space of
those six months, had hindered his mind, either in prayer, meditation, or
examining his conscience, were put together, that all those impediments, would
not amount to the time, that one might recite one Aue Maria in.

In his vocal prayers that depended upon his pronunciation, he found greater
difficulty, not truly for that in those his mind wandered upon any other
matter, but because he could not so readily, and fitly apprehend the meaning of
the Psalms, or other things which he recited. Therefore he said that then the
case stood so with him, as it does with a man that stands before doors that
are shut against him, who neither could enter in, nor would go any whither
else. But that otherwise in this kind of prayer also, he abounded with
exceeding great sense and pleasure of celestial things; especially in reading
the Psalms, by which he put on certain pious affections of mind, wherewith
they are plentifully stored. Which truly sometimes were so earnest, that
scarcely, and not without some violence he uttered his words. Therefore when
according to his pioty, he had a custom to recite the Canonical prayers in
the time of his Nouiship according to the manner of the Priests, he bestowed in
his Mattines at the least a whole hour.

As for that which belongs to the matter of meditation, he did very much
insist upon the consideration of the torments, and bitter passion of Christ our
Lord. and reaped thereby divine consolations. The memory thereof he daily renewed
by pronouncing at noone a certain brief Ant-hymne, and by thinking upon
Christ crucified. Which he performed with so clear sense of piety, and
attention of mind, that he said, he daily had before his eyes manifesily, the
sanctity of that time, which upon good Friday in holyweeke is solemnized. How
much spirit, and celestial solace he reaped by meditating on the sacred
Eucharist, has been spoken of heretofore. He worshipped with a certain
singular observance, and gladly meditated upon, the holy Angels and especially
his Angell-guardian. At which time how notable sentences Almighty God suggested
to his mind of those incorporeall spirits, witnesses that his no less long
then elegant meditation of the Angels, which F. Vincentius Bruno has reduced
into the second part of his meditations, and Doctor Andreas Victorellus has
very commendably cited in his learned book, Of the Custody of Angels. Which
truly, wholly, as well the words as sentences, is B. Aloysius his offspring. For
Father Vincentius himself declared that he, for so much as he was not
ignorant, that Aloysius bare a particular devotion to the holy Angels,
endeavored upon set purpose, that he should set down in writing what his
opinion was of them. There is under my custody a certain sheet of paper,
written by B. Aloysius his own hand, which of late I found amongst others, in
which distinctly he notes these things of the Angels.

Certain offices of piety toward the Angels in general.

Imagine your self to be sorted amongst the nine quires of Angels, mutually
praying unto God, and singing that Hymn: Holy God, Holy and Powerful, Holy
and Immortal have mercy upon us: which Hymn moreover you shall ninetimes
iterate, and join your prayers with theirs.

To your Angell-keeper you shall chiefly three times in the day commend your
self. Morning and Evening reciting this prayer, Angele Dei, etc. and about the
mid-tyme of the day when you betake your self to the holy Church, to offer up
your prayers before the Altar.

Persuade your self that you ought in the same sort to follow the conduct of
your Angel, as some blind man who being ignorant of the difference of ways,
confideth in all things to the providence of him that leads him by his
staff. These were the very words of himself.

To conclude, it seems a thing that may be very truly confirmed. That his
Religious life was no otherwise, then a certain perpetual practice of prayer.
For by reason of the use of so many years prayer, and abstracting of his mind
from his senses, he had obtained such a kind of habit, that hersoeuer he was,
what thing soever he did, his mind was rather upon those things which he
conceived only with his understanding, then upon those, that he apprehended
with his senses.

What shall I say? he was now come unto that state, that he scarcely made use
of his senses themselves as of his eyes for seeing, or of his ears for
hearing; so wholly had he turned himself from them to the inward parts. In
these only he reposed, these were his delights, from these if the respect of
any profit did withdraw him, although he put in execution all things which the
matter required, notwithstanding he was as much trobled in mind, as if some one
of his limbs had been our of joint. Wherefore nothing was more easy unto him,
then to be all the day, with his cogitation fixed upon God, though it were even
in the midst of bodily occupations, to have his mind recollected and to hold
it still to one and the self, same object, nothing more difficult then to
distract it. Verily he himself once confessed, that how much difficulty others
have (as they themselves say) to fix their minds upon God, he had no less in
recalling it from God. For so long as he endeavored to countermaund his
thinking upon God, he combatted with vehement force, seeing that he was
necessitated to wrestle with himself. With which violent and impetuous
conflict, he more impaired his health, then with his daily consideration it
self of God. In the day time, though he was never so much entangled in
business. God never abstained from replenishing his heart with very plentiful
delectations, and those truly not short, but such as continued sometimes more
then an hour. Which verily did so fully possess his mind, that redounding
into his body, did enkindle it with a certain celestial ardour, which did
sufficiently discover it self by the very redness of his countenance. And
sometimes his heart, being surprised with that joy, did with so thick and speedy
a motion pant, and appear so plainly through his breast, that you would say it
would even leap forth.

These so many internal joys, with which his mind was nourished, had so
bereft him of all care of his body, that he began every day more and more to be
weakened and wasted, and the grief of his head which should have been
mitigated, grew greater. When therefore his superiors, that had the government
of him, observed that it could not be, that in so much vehement labor of mind,
he could long continue with life, especially his health being hertofore
disturbed with voluntary afflictions, they forbad him all use of fasting,
abstinence, disciplining, and all other severe punishments: moreover they
enlarged the time of his sleep, and contracted that of his prayer, taking
first away half an hour, and afterward also the whole hour; for bidding in
like manner the frequent custom of those his short prayers which he was wont
to use in the dispatch of his businesses; and to conclude denouncing unto him,
that how much less time he spent in prayer, so much the nearer should he come
to the will of his Superiors. Besides this, to the intent, that he might be
the further sequestered from his mental meditations, they endeavored to
detain him in diverse manual works, and finally to procure by frequent
admonitio^s, to persuade him, that how much the more diligently for his healths
sake, he tempered himself, so much the more he added to Gods glory.

Neither was there any great difficulty, to induce him to be of this mind, and
to frame him after their own wills, as who was most obedient and ready unto
all things. This that he might clearly make show of, this chance happened. A
certain Father had brought him into hope, that he would obtain for him of Fa.
General, that he might daily spend one hour in meditation, which as I said,
was forbidden him by the Master of the Nouices. He when he perceived him to be
somewhat too desirous of this leave, and feared least that being not obtained,
he would be much troubled, supposing that this too much vehemence of mind, was
opposite both to that moderation and equality of disposition, which subjects
ought to have toward their superior, as also to that command which was
imposed upon him; seriously did his endeavor, to work him off from that
conceit, and reduce him to his former tranquillity and indifferency. That one
thing most gauled him, that he did not sufficiently perceive, how it might be
in his power to perform the command of his superior. For although he
labored, to divert his mind from the cogitation of divine matters,
notwithstanding by stealth, and at unawares, it resorted to them again, and
was absorpt. For even as a stone naturally seeks to the middle of the earthly
globe, so he as if by a certain natural instinct he had rested only in God,
being violently rent from him, was thither again snatched, as it were to his
proper center. Therefore upon a time being perplexed in mind, that he could not
be obedient to the will of his superiors, he said, to a certain Priest, that
he was somewhat familiar withal: Verily I do not know, what I should do: Father
Rectour forbids me to attend to prayer, least by overmuch busying my mind I
should hurt my head; but I am more grievously wearied and vexed, with recalling
my mind from thinking of God, then if I should endeavor daily to think upon
him. Which truly by use is as it were connerted to nature, neither is it now
any labor unto me, but rest and solace. Notwithstanding I will strive as well
as I may, to accomplish that which he commands me.

So soon as he saw that all kind of prayer was forbidden him, in exchange
thereof, he would often ascend into the Quire of the Church to adore the Bless.
Eucharist. There so soon as he had but fallen upon his knees he would straight
way rise, and least by some cogitation he might be abstracted from his senses,
or reflect advisedly upon God, he would speedily convey himself from thence.
But this diligence little auailed him. For how much the more out of his love of
obedience he labored to fly, so much the more earnestly did God pursue him,
and interest him in him, and cherish his heart with all celestial illuminations
and delicacies. Which he perceauing, least he should violate the commands of
his Superior, would actually refuse, and with a submisse mind speaking unto
God, would say: ^^cede a me Domine, recede a me: Depart from me sweet Lord,
depart from me. Likewise it was no small business for him, to turn his
corporal senses to the performing of their offices. For so soon as his mind
was once rapt with God, he neither had use of eyes, nor ears.

In this sanctimony and height of virtue, he conuersed even till the end of
October of the year 1586. in the house of the Nouices at Saint Andrews, to the
great admiration of those Superiors, that directed his mind, and to the great
fruit and edification of his equals; who to the intent that they might better
themselves daily by his communication and example, did with great complacency
thirst after his company.

CHAP. XII. Of the notable Sanctity of that Master, under whom he made his
Nouiship, and whom he did seriously imitate.
AT what time B. Aloysius made his Nouiship at Rome in the house of the Nouices
at Saint Andrews, in Monte-Cauallo, there governed that House, and exercised
the Nouices, F. Ioannes Piscator of Nouara, a man of admirable sanctity, and
placed in an excellent degree of Christian Philosophy; of which his so many
scholars, and children in a more divine life, being so rarely virtuous and
good, who glory to have had so great a master for their guide, do yield most
certain testimony. This diuinely-happy man was in the mortifying of his body
with daily abstinences, frequent fasts, sharp hairecloth, and disciplines,
together with continual watchings very rigorous. Which although he did
endeavor to do as privately as he might, notwithstanding it could not all
together pass concealed from so many his Children, who had their eyes
steadfastly fixed upon him, with a desire both to observe and imitate him.
Whilst he sat, stood, or went, in such sort did he accommodate his apparel,
countenance, and his whole exterior habit, that he appeared a notable
spectacle of modesty. His countenance was always cheerfully serene: his mouth
was composed to a moderate and pleasing sinyle, which was able to mollify
whatsoever behoulders troubled mind. He was never seen to alter his color
upon any accident were it joyful or sinister, never to lay a side the
tranquillity of his aspect, never either dejected with grief, or to much elate
with vain mirth. He always kept one and the self same tenor, as an index of
his subdued affections, and of that inward peaceable calmness, which he
perpetually enjoyed; whereupon he never discovered so much as the least sign of
an impatie^t or angry mind. He thought himself more despicable then all the
world besides, he had a very humble conceit of himself, whatsoever he did he
reputed himself vile.

It is an incredible thing to declare what an inflamed affection he had to
prayer. And how much by the benefit of God, he prevailed therein, this may serve
for a testimony, that sometimes in the night, when others took their rest, he
was found in the place of exhortation seriously praying, when by divine power
elevated the height of some handful from the ground, he hung in the air. This
did that Father who succeeded him in that office testify unto me, and it was
committed to print in the letters of the Society of the year 1591. in which,
where there is discourse of the College at Naples, there are celebrated many
of this man's virtues.

He observed very carefully the precepts of a Religious life which are set
down by S. Basil. He was so far in love with the Collations of Ioannes
Cassianus the Abbot, that he had them almost all without book. But with all
his mind he endeavored to prosecute in his actions, those precepts which he
saw given by those ancient Fathers remarkable for sanctity.

It is scarce credible, how considerate and sparing he was in his words.
Therefore there was never any word of his, hurtful to any one, nor otherwise
then exemplar unto all. There was no man of a more sweet conversation; his
discourse he seasoned with witty and pleasant conceits, keeping himself with
in a Religious moderation, for which he was meruelously beloved of all. Toward
the poor that love by begging, and chiefly those that are restrained by
shamefastness, he was so merciful, that to cloth them, he is read to have
taken off his own garments. Now in the government of those that were subject
to him, facility tempered severity: and with admirable art, to gravity he
joined affability, and the contempt of honor. So he became venerable unto all,
troble some to none. He burned with charity toward all. But of the Nouices,
such was his care and solicitude, that he may well be reputed to the all a
Father, a Mother, and a Nurse. He would for a little while dissemble their
faults, til he had co^formed their minds according to his own desire. For no
vice, or offense would he seem austere to any one: he would never discover an
offended or incensed mind, nor any change of his former opinion of the guilty
person, nor any reservation of a severe, and secret judgment of mind against
him. But rather admonish them sweetly with some excellent tokens of
benevolence, sometime with some pretty smile, which might serve as a
loue-signe, to ^elpe their bashfulnesse, and to give them to understand that
their error did not seem so heinous in his sight. Moreover he would encourage
them, comfort them, dismiss no man from him but sweetened with some pleasant
speech, or stirred up with some exhortation. He would with such charitable
facility apply himself to so many diverse dispositions, that well might that
saying befit him: Omnibus om^ia factus sum, vt omnes Christo lucrifacia^: I am
become all things to all, that I may gain all to Christ. For having
sufficiently experienced, that it is a thing preposterous to draw all by one
way, he pointed out unto every one which way he might journey to perfect
virtue, as might best stand with his health and capacity.

He would not have his Nouices be over solicitous to cast themselves into an
affected composition, either of countenance, or body, which shortly after their
Nouiship they were to put off again; but he procured, that they should put on
that kind of modesty, which they were willing to maintain all the course of
their life in Religion. Likewise that they should lay for their foundation,
solid virtues, and despising of themselves. He desired that Nouices, should
reverence and think as truth required, of those that were now their ancients
in religion, as being wont to say, that there was as much difference between
Nouices, and those that now in Colleges did apply themselves to good arts, as
between those that learn their first A. B. C. and those that have arrived to
the learning of Philosophy.

I have been very well acquainted with many of my fellows, who passed their
Nouiship under him, whom I found all of them to have a great opinion of his
sanctity, and their judgments full-fraught with praise of his manner of
government. Verily toward every one he was very charitable, mild, facill, and
(which is most to be esteemed of) he hadled the matter so impartially with them
all, that every one of them thought themselves to be only and entirely beloved
of him, neither could suspect that any one was either more esteemed, or more
vehemently affected. Wherefore he was exceedingly beloved again, and he was an
assured refuge to them all in whatsoever their necessity. He delivered the
course of a Religious life to his Nouices rather by his example, then either by
his words, or exhortation. For nothing did he inioyne others which he did not
first fulfill himself, neither did he ever commit, that by any one he might be
noted, to have declined from any manner of duty, how little soever it was.

Many things somewhat miraculous are both spoken and written of him. As namely
that with his only aspect he put forth a fire, in the quenching whereof many men
had lost both much labor and water. That he had a Divine instinct, in
beholding the factes of his subjects that were absent, and penetrating into the
secrets of their hearts, and their inward cogitations. Of which matter many
examples that fell out at Rome and Naples, are by very grave Fathers recounted
at this day.

It has been now reported from the year 1582. that the house of the Nouices
being once very much distressed for want of daily victuals, he retired into his
chamber, besought Almighty God to ease the same, and chat there came unto his
door an Angel in the habit of a young man, and when having sent for the
Father he had delivered into his hands a certain sum of money, which might
relieve their present penury, that he suddenly vanished out of their sight. For
respect of these things he was of all held in great estimation of sanctity.

Therefore at Naples, when being upon his departure out of this life, he had
received his sacred viaticum, he endeavored to abolish out of the minds of
those that were present, this opinion, who in that his last passage had an
attentive eye upon all his sayings and doings, whom they reputed to be in the
number of the Saints. But how much the more he endeavored to co^ceale the
excellency of his virtue, by so much the more did his singular modesty, and
contempt of glory, by the showing of so remarkable an example, in his very last
farewell given to earth, and entrance into Heaven, discover it self.

This Father so dear to God, Aloysius with a principal reverence and love
observed, not only because he was his Superior, for which respect he held him
as the Vicar of God, but also for so much, as he saw him adorned with virtues,
perfect and accomplished with all the exact rules of religion, and looking into
his life as into a mirror, he took a pattern thereby. Therefore curiously did
he note all his words and deeds, and desirous to be corrected and instructed by
him, he communicated with him all the inward state of his mind. And it was very
pleasing in like manner to this good Father to converse familiarly with
Aloysius, whose mind he perceived to be singularly pure, most fittly disposed
to receive the discipline of celestial things, and replenished with all
virtuous and divine endowments. Which virtues truly and endowments, if he
before his death might have commended to posterity, we should not have been so
ignorant of many other things concerning B. Aloysius.

CHAP. XIII. Aloysius goes with the same Father to Naples, and gives
excellent documents of virtue, whilst he remains there.
WHEN as therefore about Autumn in the year 1586. this Father being assaulted
with a certain disease did spit blood, and Fa. General with hope of
recovering his health determined to send him to Naples, he asked, as it
happened, Aloysius, whether he would go with him to Naples, or no? unto whom
Aloysius without any further reflecting upon the matter, answered that he would
very willingly. When afterward the time came, that this Father should depart
from Rome, it was Fa. Generals pleasure that three Nouices, that were the most
infirm in their healths, he should take a long with him, to make experience
whether by the change of air they might be bettered in their healths. Amongst
these was our Aloysius, for whose grievous head-ake a remedy was sought.
Knowing that he was to go, he began to be trobled in mind, for that he feared
least by simply affirming, that he would willingly accompany the Father, might
imply some certain determination of the matter; for said he, Oportebat
respondere in Praesidum potestate futurum, neque vilum eo inclinantis, aut
abhorrentis animi signum dare. I ought to have answered, that it should be in
the power of my Superiors, and not to have given any sign of a mind, either
inclining or repugnant thereunto: Although F. General was moved not so much
with his speech, as with respect of his health which he saw so evil disposed.
Wherefore it seemed good to Aloysius, not only for ever after that, not to show
any propension to one part or other, but also to procure that others should not
affirm him to will, or not will any thing, but with a mind equal to all
things to depend upon his Superiors authority. Likewise making known to many,
the scruple which came into his mind, he assured them that it was very
troblesome unto him, to do any thing according to his own will. But so soon
as the iourny was manifestly decreed, being questionless very joyful of such
company, he said to one of his fellows: Sibi hoc iter gratu^ futurum, quode P.
Piscatoris dictis as factis rationem discere percuperet, qua hominibus
Societatis iter instituendum esset: that this iourny was grateful unto him,
for that he desired very much out of F. Piscators words and deeds to learn a
course how men of the Society ought to order their iourny.

They departed from Rome the 26. day of October of the same year. After they
were come so far, as that they were loosing the sight of Rome, Aloysius turning
toward that City, with singular love and sense of piety recited that
Ant-hymne, Petrus Apostolus and Paulus Doctor genti^ etc. and the prayer of
those two Apostles, Deus cuius dextera etc. F. Piscator for so much as he
vomited blood, was according to the advice of Physicians carried in a litter.
And whereas of those three Nouices one of them was ordained to accompany him,
the other two to ride together, Aloysius as far forth as he might, contrived
that he might be that his companion in the Litter, preferring the fruit of
continual and most pleasing conversation with his Master of a religious life,
before the complying with them. But the others, for that they judged this
recreation to be requisite for him, as being somewhat more infirm in health,
suffered him to enter into the Litter. Yet he in that commodity, found out a
means to disaccomodate himself. For having wrapped up his gown as round as a
ball, and sitting upon it, he was carried no less uneasily in the litter, then
if he had been upon horse back.

He passed all this iourny in reciting, together with this Father, the
Canonical prayers, and in long discourses of Divine matters. In which he asked
many questions of him, and endeavored to store his mind with very many
precepts of pious living, and excellent sentences which he gathered from him.
And this good Father not ignorant that he cast his seed into a fertile ground,
very willingly enlarged himself unto him, and delivered the mysteries, and use
of that celestial Philosophy, which he had attained unto, in so many years
whilst he instructed Nouices. In the Innes it was his whole practice, to yield
to his fellows all things that were most commodious, with incredible love and
observance toward them and to take unto himself the worst of every thing.
Having finished this journey, he assured his fellows, that by conuersing
familiarly, and maintayning long discourses with that Father, and observing all
his actions and manners in conuersing with secular men, he had profited more in
those few days then by living many months in the house of the Nouices.

They arrived at Naples on the Kalends of November. At which time, when by the
Masters of the College, there was renouatio^ made of the studyes of learning,
it seemed good to the Superiors, that Aloysius, who as we have said before had
learned the one part of his philosophy, before he gave over the world, should
now study the later part thereof which remained: and he with all his heart
betook himself to this that was commanded him. The Father who at that time
governed the college, being accustomed to handle himself sharply and
austerely, so soon as he found, that this young man stood likewise so
affected, took great contentment truly, and began to give him leave, somewhat
more frequently to execute these matters, then as yet at Rome he had done, he
being very much ioyed, and denouncing himself most fortunate in that respect.

At Naples there appeared in him singular modesty, prudence, love of his own
contempt, and obedience of his Superiors, and finally of all sanctimony.
Neither did any one make any mention of him, but with a discovery of the
estimation of his virtue. Verily his Master in Philosophy, when he had notice
of his acts lately performed in the Diocese of Naples, gave his testimony of
him in these words.

Aloysius was a man very well known unto me, being one that seemed to
contemn, and think very submisly of himself: To give place unto all, to omit
no occasion were it never so little, whereby he might tolerate any assront from
another man. To be incredibly severe toward himself: to be very much employed
in offices of piety, in his prayers, and in familiarity with God. Most
obseruant of the rules of Religion: no man more affected to the purity of
conscience. There was added to the praise of his pure life a sharp, and
generous wit, but such as was void of all insolent desire of praise. Which
things, truly, I am so much the more assured of, for so much as I did not only
know him by the relation of others, but was even my self an eyewitness of
him whilst he was one of my auditors at Naples, that he gave an excellent and
perpetual example of these good parts. Therefore in regard of his singular
actions, both I and others of the College of Naples entertained a very great
opinion of his virtue and sanctity. But above others F. Ioannes Baptista
Piscator, a man of approved prudence of mind, and innocence of life (who after
he had dictated to Aloysius the first exercise of his religious course, and
assisted him in his holy penance, ended his days) reputeth no less of him;
and in a certain discourse which he had with me, declared that he observed in
him an extraordinary kind of sanctity. These are the words of the Master. Some
others, who ^t that very time lived in the same College, do testify by other
writings, that he at Naples, did what he could not to be known; that he often
applied himself to the familiarity of the household servants; and that he did
his utmost endeavor as much as he might, to dissembl^ and hide the splendor
of his Descent. Therefore when news was brought, that Gouzaga the Patriarch,
was made Cardinal, he seemed no more to be moved, then if it had nothing
concerned him: yet notwithstanding it is sufficiently manifest, that above all
his kindred he was beloved of him, for so much as he had put to his helping
hand in opening him a way to Religion.

The superiors placed Aloysius in that part of the house which was designed
for the Nouices, in a chamber the largest, by much, of all the rest, together
with man chamberfellowes, to the intent that many might reap profit by the
excellent example of his virtues; but for so much as in the night he was
ouerwearyed with watching, it was requisite that he should recompense that which
he lost in the night with his morning-sleepe. And yet other his companions, who
were to rise before day, were an impediment that he could not so much as then
take his rest. By which, when his Superiors perceived his health to be
impaired, they were willing that he should be placed in a chamber alone by
himself, where they thought he might more commodiosly repose in quiet. But
that likewise was under a great chamber, through which there was a passage to
diverse lodging chambers, in so much as this which Aloysius lay in, did almost
always resound with the noise, one while of one, an otherwhile of another,
that went to and fro, and was much less fit for that which was desired, the^
the other was before. Having discovered this thing, he rendered thanks to God,
and did in such sort accept this occasion of suffering some adversity, that he
accounted it as a benefit.

And surely that it ought so to be accounted, is even thereby manifest, for
that allthough the Superiors did with all vigilant care cherish him, yet
notwithstanding very many things some did observe, not without admiration,
which truly were not usual, but might worthily be attributed to the divine
providence, suggesting matter to his desire of obedienee, the augmenting of his
merit, and the purchasing for him a more glorious crown. As when once he went
out of doors with his gown extraordinary short, and not only bare and torn,
but also so old, that it had all changed color almost; such a one as the
Superiors themselves would have commanded any one else to have left of for
decency sake: yet in him, they seemed never so much as to take notice of the
same. Morouer it often fell out that same winter, that he went together with
his other fellows to to the house of the professed Fathers to sing Euenso^g,
when it was rain and stormy wether: once when the Minister of the college
observing every one in the porch, commanding others to their cha^bers would
not suffer them to stir one foot out of doors, who were not so infirm in
their health as he was, of him as it seemed he never reflected, which if he had
done, without all question he would have laid upon him the same commandment.

Moreover, although in the College of Naples there is used so much care and
charity toward the sick as in no house of the Society more; notwithstanding
there was a time when Aloysius, being at once sick both of an inflammation and
a fever, with which he was troubled a whole month, and though he had very
diligent seruitours, yet he wa^ted all one night the sheets to his bed, which
I verily think never happened at any time to any one of the Society, that has
been sick in the College. But in this man God suffered it, to the intent
that he might do a thing acceptable to him. It is very strange how patiently,
and with how much serenity of countenance he always sustained that disease,
although it was accompanied with most grievous torments, and those continual,
carrying himself in his communications with those that came to visit him with
great facility and submissnesse. So soon as he recovered out of that, finding
that, that climate did not stand well with his health, and that furthermore the
pains of his head did daily increase, by the will of Fa. General, when he had
conuersed at Naples, by the space of half a year, he took his iourny toward
Rome, the seventh of May the year 1587.

CHAP. XIV. Of his course of life, when he applied himself to the study of
learning in the Roman College. He publicly defends certain positions in
the whole course of Philosophy. He applies himself to the study of Divinity.
THE return of B. Aloysius to Rome brought exceeding much joy both to all the
young men of the Roman College, and especially unto those, who whereas they had
known him in the house of the Nouices at S. Anarews, did hope that they might
reap no small fruit, by the excellent examples of his virtues, and religious
manners, neither was it less comfort unto him, that he might further continue
the course of his studies, where the chief government of the Society resided,
and where was the chief College and School of all good arts. Those things
which hereafter I shall explane, even to the blessed end of his life, I
profess my self to have been a spectatour, for the most part of them all. For
so much as at the very same time, I together with others who lived in the same
College, was familiarly acquainted with him, and even from that time (as I
related in my Proeme of this history) I began seriously to observe him, to the
intent, that I might commit the selfsame things to writing.

Therefore proceeding at Rome in his former studies of Philosophy, he discovered
in a short time how excellently well learned he was both in Logic and
natural Philosophy: and so great a proficient was he in that knowledge of
humane wisdom, that by the mutual consent of his Moderatours, he was judged
most fit to dispute publicly according to the custom upon his propounded
Conclusions. Therefore after he had set down in print his opinion concerning
all those points in Philosophy, which are wont to be delivered in schools by
the Masters, about the sixth month after his entrance into the Roman
College, he defended the same publicly against the arguments of all that
withstood him. But for so much as it pleased the most illustrious Gardinalls
Roboreo of Monteregale, and Gonzaga to be present, and hear him dispute, it
was performed in the greatest school, and not in that of the Divines, as for
the most part it was wont to be by other men of the Society Applause was given
him by all that were present; but chiefly it gave great contentment to the
Cardinals, who did very much admire, that in so short a time being so infirm
of health he had profited so much in knowledge.

Now for so much as we have made mention of this disputation, we may adioyne
thereunto two things. The one, that before he entered into it, he for some space
debating with himself, whether to the intent he might depresse himself, he
should upon set-purpose answer unskillfully; when out of his own opinion he
durst not determine upon either part, he asked counsel of F. Mutius de
Angelis, who at that time professed Philosophy in that College, a man
excellent not only in learning, but also in virtue and the use of celestial
matters, with whom he was wont to have frequent discourse of Divine things.
And whereas be truly prudently dissuaded him from this thing, alleging reasons
therefore; notwithstanding in the midst of his disputation Aloysius was
assaulted with that desire of despising himself. He paused a little being
doubtful in mind, til the reasons of the Father took place with him, and
laying down that cogitation, he determined as learnedly as he could, to solue
the arguments of those that opposed: neither did he perform otherwise, then he
determined. The other was, that when as in regard of his love to Humility, he
could not endure to hear his own praises, notwithstanding there was truly, a
Doctor of great note, who being about to oppose his conclusions, made I know
not what Preamble, of his praises, the kindred and progeny that he was
descended from. He was so much abashed at this praise, that as many as were
present, being not ignorant how much he abhorred from it, took commiseration
upon him, and before others the Cardinal of Monte-regale seemed much to be
taken therewith, when he observed his ingenuous bashfulnesse, and modest
shamefastness. But he did always after, so meet with those things, that this
Doctor disputed of, that he seemed to be somewhat angry in mind.

Having finished his studies of Philosophy, he was next brought to Divinity, in
which he had many Masters, both Italians and Spaniards, men famous both for
learning and wisdom, who had many years discharged that office. These did he
exceedingly reverence and honor: of them he never spoke otherwise then with
great respect. He never dissented from them in opinion or judgment. He never
taxed them for their method of teaching or dictating, never for their short or
long discourse of questions, or any other thing of that kind; he never showed
any forward inclination toward new or unusual opinions. He built only upon
the writings of S. Thomas of Aquine, whos^ sanctity of life he did not only
with singular piety imitate, but also loved dearly his order of teaching, and
perspicuity, and his doctrine exempted from all danger of error.

Aloysius was of an excellent and penetrating wit, joined with a singular
gravity of judgment; the which both we perceived, and his Masters themselves
commended, of which one of them doubted not to affirm, that he never was
careful to premeditate, what he should answer to them that asked, or disputed
against him, when there occurred any intricate question, but only to Aloysius
Gonzaga. He accompanied this wit of his, with industrious study, as much as
might be permitted him, either in respect of his health, the weakness of his
forces, or the will of his Superiors. He never set to his study, before upon
his knees he had made some adoration of Almighty God. He bestowed not his
study, in turning over, and considering the books of diverse authors, nor in
any one Commentary else, but those only that were his Masters. If there came
into his mind any reason contrary to that which was taught him, which of
himself he was not able to refute, having noted the same, he did afterward at
the breaking-vp of the schools, when all others had propounded their
questions, ask his Masters opinion concerning his difficulties. But sometimes
when he had gathered many things, which seemed to have some doubt in them, he
took some time which he hoped might be least troublesome to his Masters, and
went to their studies to require their answers. Whilst he asked their Counsel,
he used no other language but Latin, neither would he stand otherwise then with
his hat in his hand, till by command they made him put it on. So soon as his
Master had souled his doubts, straightway he betook him to his study in his
chamber. He never meddled with any book but by the permission and persuasion of
his Masters. In which thing how much he stood upon their word, you may even
perceive by this that follows. F. Augustine Justinian his Master, when he
had explicated unto him in his study a certain difficulty about predestination
which he asked him, having explaned unto him the seventh Tome of S. Augustine,
and pointing-out with his finger, even almost to the end of his book De bono
persenerantiae, he commanded him to read, what that holy man had written
there of the same argument. He read-through all that page which was pointed out
unto him, neither would he so much as turne-ouer the leaf to read those ten
other lines which upon the other side ended the book; questionless, for so
much as he was not commanded to go any further. And yet those lines which were
on the other side, Iustinianus himself had not observed.

Both at home, and in the school, as often as by the Bedell he was warned to
those kind of exercises, he either argued against, or answered others: and for
the same, if any of the rest should be less accommodated, he professed, that
to supply their place, he would be at his disposal.

He disputed sharply, but modestly: he would never in his speech exasperate
any one, no^ stomach them, nor raise any clamor, nor interrupt him that
answered, but give him space to declare what his mind, and opinion was. The
doubt and obscurity of the question being take away, he did ingenuously assent,
and make an end of the controversy.

Before the bell did ring to Schools, and in like manner before he returned
home again, both before and after noone, he daily frequented the sacred
Church, to adore the most holy Eucharist. In his going and returning from the
schools, he was of so modest and composed a behavior, that he inflamed with
the love of piety, even strangers who being studious of learning, stood to
behold him in the Court next to the schools. And especially a certain Abbot
that was a stranger, having in that Academy performed his course of Divinity,
being allured with the love of his Modesty, frequented the school for no other
cause then to behold him; neither did he ever in the Schools take his eyes of
him. And this ought not much to be admired at: for the Provincial of the
Society, which is amongst the Venetians, did affirm there, before the
Tribunal of the Patriarch, that that saying seemed fitly to agree to B
Aloysius, which S. Ambrose wrote upon that place of the Psalm, Qui timent te,
videbunt me, and laetabuntur: pretiosum est (inquit) videre virum iustum:
plerisque enim iusti aspectus admonitio correctionis est, perfectioribus vero
letitia. They that fear thee, shall see me, and be comforted. It is a precious
thing (says he) to see a just man, for unto most men, the beholding of a just
man is an admonition of correction, and to the more perfect it is a joy.
Doubtless such like effects as these, did the aspect of this happy young man
produce in the minds of his behoulders. Therefore to him also sorted those words
that follow, Iusti sanat aspectus, and ipsi oculorum radij virtutem quandam
videntur infundere ijs: The aspect of a just man, heals, and the very beams
of his eyes do seem to infuse a certain virtue into them who faithfully
desire to behold him. All which, this our Aloysius made good in his very
countenance, and most dece^t habit of body, being very apt to move the minds of
me^ with a sense of piety and wholesome grief. Add herunto, that the only
behoulding of him, did not only admonish strangers and Religious young men his
companions, but even most grave priests of their duty. Therefore in his presence
they seemed to take unto them a certain gravity. Neither would they in his
company, rashly utter any licencious word, or do any action tending to leuity.
Whilst he went to the school, or from thence went home, whilst he remained
there, or was present at disputations, he was never discovered to utter so much
as one word to any one, were he domestical or stranger. So obseruant was he of
the rule of silence.

When his Superiors saw him vexed with perpetual sickness, and weakness of
body, they forbad him to write his dictates in the school, but to that end to
make use of a Scribe. Neither truly could he, who as yet had attained no
dexterity therein, keep touch, with the swiftness of his wrighting to the
voice of the Masters that dictated. He truly obayed, but supposing, that it
would be an unseemly thing, that money should be in the hands of them, that for
infirmity sake should employ another to write for them, or that they should
undergo any care in paying him his wages for his pains, for so much as he
said there was danger therein, that might expose him to violate the integrity of
his poverty, he avoiding that business, sent his writer to call for his hire
of the Procuratour of the College, whose office it was to discharge such
payments. His writings he willingly lent to any one that requested the^, and
asked not for them again, before they of their own accord restored them.

There was a time when Fa. Gabriel Vasquez his Master being scanted of time,
was not able to finish in the whole revolution of the year, his disputations
of the Trinity. Therefore delivering only those which seemed to be most
necessary, he left the rest to be written out by his scholars. The Superiors
command Aloysius that he take order, that his Scribe perform that. He, when
he had read over his Masters Commentary, omitting those things which were more
easy, commanded to be chosen out those, which were most hard and seemed to be
most useful. Being asked why he did so? he said: Qui a pauper sum, paupertatis
studio id sacio: neque enim decet pauperem, nisi in res necessarias sumptum
facere. For so much as I am a poor man, out of my love to poverty I do it: for
it befitteth not a poor man, to lay out any cost, but upon necessary things.
Notwithstanding in the last year of his studies, fearing least any one should
interpret this his continuance from writing his dictats in the Schools,
either to be out of some desire of vain glory, or superfluous relaxatio^, he
deals with his Superiors, that by their good leave he might write with his
own hand. Neither were reasons wanting, wherewith he easily persuased them to
that which he required. But whereas he, could not equal with the, swifenesse of
his hand, his Masters tongue, he attended for a certain space those things
which were said, and afterward set them down abridged. And after the schools,
reading his Schoole-fellowes writings, from thence he added whatsoever
necessary thing he had omitted. Which labor yielded much contentment unto him,
in regard of the love which he had of informing others, and exciting them with
his example. He would suffer no book to remain in his chamber, but what he
had frequent use of, saying; that it was not the part of a Religious man who
pretended poverty, to detain any book with him which he but seldom looked
upon, when truly with very little trouble to himself he might go to reap the
same at the common library. And at last he came to that, that besides the
sacred Bible, and the Sum of S. Thomas he would keep no other books with
him. If he had need to look in any place, ^ither in the holy Fathers or any
other writer, he betook him to the common library. He found afterward that one
of his fellows who had lately come to the College wanted the Sum of S.
Thomas. For whereas in that College besides the Fathers and Masters, there
were more then forty in number, who studied Divinity, there could neither in
common so many books of S. Thomas be accommodated to them, neither is there
leave given for every one to procure them, or keep them privately for himself.
Therefore Aloysius goes unto the Rectour: and earnestly entreats him, that it
would please him to give him leave, to lend to that his fellow the Sum which
was given him to use; for so much as he might make use of another that a
certain chaberfellow of his had, he did less stand need of this. And his
speech was so persuasiue to the Rectour that he yielded. This was a very
joyful thing to him, either for that this charitable office toward his fellow
was very pleasing unto him, or for so much, as he now perceived himself to be
become more needy, when he had none of his own, and of common books only the
use of the Bible.

So much came into my mind to rehearse of the studies of B. Aloysius. Now there
remains unto me to speak far more of his Christian virtues, with which at
this time he flourished. Which perfection of virtues truly, both that which was
apparent and prompt in his conversation, and also that which was secretly in
his mind, he was so wholly possessed of, that more then 200. Religious men of us
who being of our Society, lived in the same College with him, and were daily
familiarly conversant with him, are able to testify that he was an excellent,
lively, and breathing example of them to us all.

CHAP. XV. He makes his vows of Religion. He receaueth the lesser Orders.
ALOYSIVS had now spent two whole years in the Society, so that both he took
comfort in the Institute thereof, and the virtues therein contained. Therefore
bestowing some cetaine days in the sacred Exercises of piety, separated from
the conversation of his other fellows, upon the 25. of November the year
1587. which day is consecrated to S. Catherine the Virgin and Martyr, upon
which day likewise two years before this he had entered into the house of the
Nouices, in the chapel which is on that side of the College, which is
toward the Schools which are lately built, in the presence of many, F.
Vincentius Bruno* who at that time was Rectour) saying Mass, he according to
the custom vowed unto God poverty. Chastity, and Obedience, which his vows
the same Father received, and in like m^nn^r communicated him with the sa^r^^
Eucharist. In the accomplishing of these (...) much rejoiced, when he (...)
himself to be now truly a Religious man* and obliged unto God with more strait
bonds.

The year 1588. the 25. day of February, in S. John (...), Church, he was
initiated with the first tonsure, together with diverse others of the Society;
amongst whom was that B. F. Abraham Georgins a Maronite, who afterward when he
went out of India into A Ethiopia was slain, suffering Martyrdom for the
Christian faith. The last of February he was in the same place, in the company
of the same companions, made Ostiarius. The 6. of March, he was made Lector.
The 12. of the same month Exorcist: and the 29. of March he was made Acolytus.
This was registered in the book of the Roman College in which such like
things are wont to be set down. He endeavored afterward in the whole course
of his life to abound in all those virtues, which might be required, and
expected of a Religious Clergyman, which virtues I purpose to relate in this
place, since I am to speak of the Roman College, where both he for the most
part had a constant residence, and his virtues most clearly displayed
themselves to the sight and admiration of men.

CHAP. XVI. Of his humility: and his exercises for the obtaining thereof.
I WILL take my beginning from his Humility, which is the foundation of all
Religious and perfect Sanctity, and the keeper of all Virtues. In which
Aloysius did so far forth excel, that he preserved the same safe and sound, in
the midst of so great abundance of celestial graces and endowments: neither
was he ever in respect of them puffed up with pride. Nor truly to any other
virtue more affected then that we found after his happy death, some of his
manu-scriptes concerning matters appertaining unto piety, amongst which one
was, which he proposed unto himself, as a certain rule of all his actions, in
the end whereof he sets down certain means how to obtain Humility. That
writing for so much as it is but short, and cannot be otherwise then profitable
unto all, I will set it down verbatim, as it was written by him. Thus it was.

Certain means how to obtain Humility.

(...) it for a principal ground, that it is thy duty, whom God has created
for himself alone, to bestow thy self freely upon that Good God, for so much
as he has deserved no less at thy hands, for having created thee, redeemed
thee and made thee a member of a Holy samily. Out of which thou must conclude,
that thou ought not only to abstain, from every hainons sin, but even from
in afferent and unprofitable things. Yea and more to the intent that thou
may come the nea(...) always, unto God, thou must with all industry
(...)our, that no sact or design of thine, may take its origin otherwise then
from virtue.

Furthermore, to the intent that then may trace aright way unto God, make
good observation of these three other principles.

Of (...) this be the first, that both all other of the Society of IFSVS, and
thou as much as any, must of necessity follow the ensign of Christ himself,
and of all other Saints, who by his calling, have in times past served under
him. Wherefore thou shall so resolve with thy self, that look how much every
function, office, or business of thine, may correspond unto the example of
Christ and his Saints, so much the more it should be accommodated to thy
courses, and either embraced or eschewed. For this respect truly, thou shall at
thy best leisure, often reuolue in thy mind diligently, the life and excellent
actions of Christ, and with an attentive mind read over, and often apply to thy
information, those of the BB. Saints. So shall thou become plentifully stored
with examples of good life.

Let the second wherewith thou may direct thy affections be this. That thou
shall become so much the more Religious and pious, by how much the more
diligently thou shall govern thy life, according to eternal considerations,
and by how much the less according unto temporal; so that thou may love
nothing, desire nothing, take comfort in nothing, taste or distaste nothing, but
for piety sake; and that thou persuade thy self that this is the last end of a
Religious and pious profession.

Let thy third principle be, that when the Devil often sets upon thee with
the suggestions of desiring vain glory, and a magnificent opinion of thy
self, for so much as this part of thy mind remains vnsortified, thou shall
therefore bestow more, or rather continual industry thereupon, that with the
arms of Humility, and despising of thy self thou may combat there with
all, not for fashion-sake only, but even with intrinsecall vigor of mind.
Therefore prescribe unto thy self, certain laws, as it were privately
accommodateu to thy vocation, delivered, and confirmed by the practice of
Christ our Lord; by the observation whereof thou may labor in the careful
prosecution of this virtue.

Certain profitable means, for the obtaining of Humility.

Let this he the first advise, that we esteem truly this to be the must
co^gruous virtue unto men, in respect of their baseness and vitenesse. And for
so much as, non oritur in terra nostia (Job. 28.) it is no herb growing in
our garden, that it ought necessarily to be begged of him, a quo est omne datum
optimum, and omne donum perfectum (Iac. 1.) from whom is every good gift; and
every perfect endowment. Wherefore albeit that thou art proud, yet labor
notwithstanding with as much submission as thou may, to implore that good and
great God, through that infinite humility of Jesus Christ, who when he was in
the form of God, exinanited himself, taking upon him the form of a servant,
to the intent that he would not have thee altogether destitute of that virtue.

The other advise is, that thou fly for refuge to those Saints of the ourt of
Heaven, who have been at any time remarkable for this virtue. For first of all
think thu^ with thy self: If when they were co^uersant here upon earth, they
were so much favored of God, that they attained to so high a degree in this
virtue; now that they are much more gracious with him in heaven; that their
prayers also shall be of more moment and dignity: and for so much as they
themselves after they have arrived to the highest pitch of felicity, have no
want truly of this virtue of submission, beseech them that they would obtain
for thee that benefit. Furthermore consider this with thy self: Even as upon
earth all are naturally so disposed, that they most of all desire their
preferment, who labor in the same art and vocation of life that they do: as
for example sake, If whatsoever brave Leader in the wars be highty in favor
with any Prince, he principally endeavors to interest in his favor, and
adorn with military dignity, those who have given themselves to warfare: A man
famous in titles of learning, those who have applied their mind to learning: An
Architect, or Mathematician, those who desire to excel others in Architecture,
or the science of Mathematical discipline. In such sort do the Citizens of
heaven, they who chiefly excelled in the glory of any particular virtue, desire
earnestly to give their helping hand for the obtaining of that virtue, to those
that pretend most to the love thereof, and to assist them with their
commendations. Be not slack therefore, with great fervor to recommend thy
self to the mediation of the most Blessed Virgin Mother of God, who was so
much endowed with this virtue, as never any soul created (except the divine
soul of our Savior) was more. Next unto her, amongst the Apostles thou shall
choose unto thy self S. Peter who said of himself: Exi a me Domine, quia homo
peccator sum. (Luc. 6.) go out from me O Lord, for that I am a sinful man.
Next S. Paul, who after that he had been by God rapt into the third heaven,
thought notwithstanding so me^^^ly of himself, that ^e said: Venit JESUS
sal^os facere p^^catores, quorum ego primus sum (1. Tim. 1.) JESUS came ^o s^u^
sinners, of which I am the gr(...). Of th^s^ considerations one of them will
give th^^ to understand, of how great cons^ (...) their comm^n^^tion^ are with
God for the obtaining of this virtue; the other, how prompt ^ikewise, and
r^a^^y they are to the performance thereof.

These are Aloysius his words in that writing, by which it manifestly
appear^th, with how good a will he imb^ac^d the love of humility. In another
sheet which likewise is written under his own hand, and which he entitled
Pious Affections, he has these words.

Those desires which thou conceauest, thou ought^st not so to r^comm^n^ unto
Almighty God, as (...) in thy breast, but as i^ Christ's. For seeing that (...)
good things must of necessity be first in JESUS, before they can be in thee,
and are with far more prompt (...) propoun^ed unto his eterna^l Father by him,
th^^ by th^^: And having inserted certain other things, he says.

When thou fi^^^st in thy self an inclination to any v^rtue, thou ought^st to
imp^o^^ the assistance of those Saints, who are much c^mmended for the same. As
for example, for the obt^yning of humility, the and of S. Francis, S. Alexius,
and others: for charity S. Peter, and Paul, in like manner S. Mary Magdalen and
others. For as if one goes about to obtain any. military office of an earthly
Prince, he shall sooner carry it, if he use for his advocates the General of
his Army, and his Coronells, then if he have recourse to the Lord Chamberlain,
and other Governors of the household: So when we expect at Gods hand
Fortitude, let us endeavor to be recommended to Martyrs; when we would have
Penance, to Confessors; and so of a^l the other. Which words have the same
meaning, which the writing that we recited before, had.

He had a very humble conceit of himself; and that, that was in the inward
sense of his mind, he declared both in his words, and actions. He never at any
time did, or said any thing which might much tend to his own praise. Yea
rather with admirable silence concealed all that his secular splendour, kindred,
family, titles of the Marquesate, and others of the same kind. In like manner
those which were more peculiarly his, as strength of wit, accomplishment of
knowledge, and other things which might appertain unto his praise. Therefore
even at the very suspicion of his own praise, he blushed like a tender Virgin:
and whosoever had but a desire to see him blush, might by no means sooner put
him to it, then by praising him. Of this matter I will only allege two
examples, omitting many others. The one was, when as a certain Physician, who
came to visit a sick man, began to celebrate his praises, in respect of the
Nobility of the blood of the Gonzaga's, his near alliance likewise to the
Dukes of Mantua, and his kindred resulting from that Family he came of. For
truly, whereas he desired to have his fortune obscured from the sight of all,
being very much offended with this praise, he gave a remonstrance to the
Physician, how much it trobled him. And for so much as he took many occasions
to praise him in that manner, he was very much out of conceit with the honor
of his Ancestors: and when there was any one that did but rub-vp the memory of
these things in his mind, or scemed to make any account of him for any
endowment either of Nature, or Fortune, that questionless did so exulcerate
his mind, that nothing could do more. Therefore besides this one only grief
which he conceived, for praise, or honor attributed unto him for such like
causes as these, he seemed to have weeded out of his mind by the very root, all
other affections.

At another time, when in the Refectory, he had spoken out of the pulpit, very
prudently and fittly accommodated to piety, concerning the Purification of the
B. Virgin, and deserved praise was given him by all his auditors; so soon as
F. Hieronymus Platus began to his face to commend that his speech, he was so
much abashed, and seemed so much to be troubled with those praises, and to
eschew them as not belonging to him, (being so persuaded out of his singular
modesty) that it gave great contentment to all their minds. For by this his
modest bashfulnesse, he became very grateful and amiable unto all.

At home and abroad he would give place to all. If at any time he were sent
forth with any of his fellows who had the charge of domestical matters
(amongst whom sometimes the Cook of the Roman College was one) he would
offer place unto them; if they denied it, he would allege so many causes of
this his request, that they, least they should contristate his mind, could not
but obey him. But for this respect truly, he was reprehended by his Superiors,
who forbad him to do it any more, if it were for no other reward, but even for
that, least he should seem too little to reverence the name of a Clergyman,
and the dignity of Tonsure, to which he should rather be observing then to too
much d^iection of himself. At home he often laid his hands to the helping of
domestical businesses, put himself into the company of other simple men, and
this very willingly. In like manner when the bellrung to meals, for the most
part he sat him down at some table, which in the outmost corner of the
Refectory, was frequented by the Cooks, and other servants, as being near
their offices. He had command from his Superiors, who perceived him weak and
afflicted in his health, that he should sit at their table who were but lately
recovered out of sickness, that he should not rise from thence together with
the rest, and that he should in like manner abstain from some other labors.
He fearing least this might seem to be attributed unto him in regard of his
family, often went to his Superiors, and producing good reasons gave them to
understand, that there was no cause why they should account him as singular in
any thing, and at last obtained that he might together with the rest, follow
the common course of living. And some of his familiar friends entreating him,
that he would obey this the will of his Superiors, for so much as otherwise it
was to be feared, least he might fall into some disease he answered, that he
being a Religious man, should endeavor all that he could, to insist in the
same course of life, which others did that were joined with him in the same
Religion; and whilst he did not go against his obedience, he stood in fear of
no disease truly, that should be taken by undergoing those things which are
appropriate to the institute of his Religion. There are resident for the most
part in the Roman College some 200. men, or rather more, so as it cannot be,
that every one of the Society that studieth there, should be supplied with a
several chamber. Wherefore the Superiors, affoarding only particular lodgings,
to the Priests, the Masters of the College, and some others, who are either
somewhat infirm, or perform some peculiar office, the rest being distributed
according to their pleasure, into several companies, they place in diverse
chambers, which are furnished with many beds, and deskes to study at. Therefore,
whereas they thought good that Aloysius, in regard that he was somewhat sickly,
should lodge by himself sequestered from the rest, he goes to the Rectour and
persuadeth him, that it would be an example of better edification to others, if
he might use his chamber in common, with some chamber-fellowes. And for so much
as he reputed it a kind of magnificence, to associate any one that was a
student in Divinity, instead of them he suffered some man of a more inferior
rank to be ranged with him. He had requested that there should be committed
unto him the Prefectship over some company in the Semi^nary, for so much as
besides the abiection which they willingly suffer for Gods love, the Prefects
are afflicted therein with great incommodities, and subject themselves to a
grievous, and in a manner a continual servitude. But for so much as his
Superiors mistrusted, that his health would not be able to sustain so great a
burden, they durst not then give way to it.

He desired moreover, that having ended his study of Divinity, he might have
leave to instruct the Gra^mer-boyes of the lowest sorme, both for that he
desired to open a way for himself to inform that their tender age with the
preceps of virtue and Christian piety, of which office of the Grammer-Maisters,
he had a holy emulation, and speaking familiarly unto them, he was wont to call
them Blessed: and also, for that he had great delight to descend to those
things, whereby he might abase himself, and have no prerogative before others.
He often took upon him this task, and that he might dissemble his requesting
thereof, for the love of virtue and humility, he bore Father Rectour in hand,
that he was ignorant in gramer, and not sufficiently polished in the Latin
tongue: That he was altogether unable (unless he learned these things) to be
serviceable to the designs of the Society.

With the same art he set upon the Prefect of the inferior schools, to whom
now and then he brought certain little exercises composed by him in Latin,
according unto the capacity of that cla^^e. Questionless to the intent that he
having a taste of his study and proficiency, might lend him his helping had to
that, whereunto his mind was bent. Fa. Rectour to the intent that he might do a
thing grateful unto him, and might withal make trial, whether he was (as he
said) ignorant of the Latin tongue, joined unto him a chamberfellow, with whom
he might confer concerning the Latin, and it was discovered, that he had no
small insight in the same. Notwithstanding he returned again unto the Rectour,
and assured him that he had only gotten it by use, and that by this way truly
in which he had hitherto insisted he should never come to be exactly skillful
in the Latin tongue and in Grammar: and that it now remained expedient for him
to learn it by teaching others. Many times in some old cloak carrying a
basket, or a wallet, he would with great contentment beg for alms through the
City: and at home there was no office so vile and abject, which he was not
more fervently in love withal, then ambitious men are with honors or
dignities. Every monday and twesday it was his custom every week to serve in
the Kitchen. And he made it his chiefest work to wipe the dishes when they
were brought from the table, and to gather the scraps of meat, to relieve the
necessity of the poor. And when he might have leave (which he often had, by
importuning his Superiors to that end) he carried in a basket that selfsame
relief, out of pious charity appointed for the poor, to them waiting at the
College gate. Verily, he would every day in like manner when he came from the
schools, do some other contemptible work, as to sweep his chamber, or other
places that were appointed for him, to take away spiders-webs with a reed, or
some longpole in the Halles, or common parlors. Moreover for many years it was
his work to cleanse the lamps in the galleries and public schools of the
College, and to repair them by pouring in oil and putting-in wickes when
need required: which services did so much delight him, that when he openly
discovered the joy, which he was not able to conceal in his mind, they that
saw him replenished there withal, congratulated this his triumphant, and
soule-rauishing contentment; which joy he did now profess to have become as it
were natural unto him, and that of it own accord it did insinuate it self
into him, constrained by no industry or premeditation. Which things truly
although they nothing move the minds of those men that are of the Society, who
both themselves make frequent use of them, and see them daily frequented by
their companions: Yet it is manifest, that both of themselves and in respect of
the dignity of those men that employ themselves in them, they are of great
force to inflame the minds of men. To conclude this praise may truly be given
unto him, that he was a serious contemner of himself, and that he omitted no
occasion, whereby he might depresse himself.

CHAP. XVII. Of his Obedience, and observance of the Rules:
THERE was added to this his so great love of submisse Humility, that
like^ewise of perfect Obedience, of which that may be a sufficient testimony,
that it was a thing manifest to Aloysius, that he was not only free from
dissenting at any time from his Superious will, or from the least infringing of
their government, but that he did not so much as lean thereunto, in the least
desire or inclination, no not in that which passes in the very first motions
of the mind; unless perchance when by their co^maunds he was withdrawn from
his offices of piety. Although truly, not so much as then for the most part was
he moved, unless it was very seldom, and that motion that was, he did with
incredible diligence, and celerity compose. So it came to pass that not only
his will, but his mind also, and his judgment, agreed with that of his
Superiors. Neither did he ever ask, why this, or that was appointed, but
knowing only that it so pleased his Superiors, he inquired of no other cause
to approve of the same.

This perfection of Obedience sprung from that, that he certainly persuaded
himself that every Superior, was no less then the vicegerent of God. For
said he, for so much as we must yield our obedience to God whom we see not,
and that we cannot in his presence imediately receive his co^maunds, or ask
his Counsel, he gives us Superiors as substitutes in this his office, and
interpreters of his will; by means of whom, he certifieth us of all things
that he would have us do, for to these messengers of his will, he commands
us to be obedient. Bl. S. Paul was of this opinion when he wrote to the
Ephesians in this manner: (Ephesians. 6.) Obedite Dominis carnalibus, sicut
Christo, and vt ser^i Christi, f^^ient^^ vol^nt^t(...) Dei ex animo. Obey your
Lords made of flesh and blood, as you would do Christ, and as the servants of
Christ, doing the (...) of God with all their hearts. And to the (...) upon the
same p^int of Obedience (...) (...). Quodcunque facit^s, ex amino (...) si^^t
Domino. and no^ (...) us. Whatsoever you do, do it with all your heart as if you
did it to our Lord, and not unto m^n. (...) to be understood that ^ unto us
from God him(...) ^ as a messen(...). ^ by my (...)igh-Chamber ^ supreme
Court-officer, is by ^ to any of the^r ^ comma^n^ of that ^ Prince, and so or
lina^ so also a Religious ^ of ^^s superiors ^ unto him by ^ and re(...).

^ rose that his obser(...) ^ ^^ich he car(...) ^ questionless ^ of God, and ^
^he ^l^ce ^f ^^e int^rpr^t^rs of his will. ^herfore he (...) great content(...)
in that which th^^ (...). Neither ^, and auth^rity ^ h^ghest, the ig(...) ^
that were of (...), th^n those that were of eminent sanctity, and adorned with
other arts worthy of that function: For in that they d^scharged the office of
God, supposing no difference to be amongst them, he did with equal facility
obey them all. Moreover he was of this opinion, that he that did his endeavor
only to respect this one thing in his obedience, did rea^e thereby a double
benefit. The one, for that whilst he was obedient, nothing happen^ed unto him
difficult, or laborious, but all easy and very pleasant, as who understood that
he obeyed the will of God, whom to serve, he esteems to be an inestimable
honor and benefit. The other, that he accomplisheth the effect of true
obedience, and consequently that he may with assured hope anticipate the
rewards promised in heaven to those that with all their hearts are lawfully
obedient. But whosoever obeys him that commands, for this respect only,
either for that his commaundes are plausible unto him, or soothing to his
humor, or for so much as he that imposes them, is a man of excellent virtue,
and natural endowment, or bears particular good-wil toward him, he first of
all seems not to have merited, in the same manner that an obedient man ought,
neither does he obtain the direct form and natural mark of an obedient man,
seeing that he did not observe in his Obedience that one thing which the virtue
of Obedience does only respect. Moreover that such a one, so soon as he should
change his Superior for another that should be less furnished, either from
nature or good arts, or less affected to him, and should receive from him any
command contrary to his humor, must of necessity be vehemently tormented and
expesed to many dangers. To subject a man's self to another out of some humane,
and not a celestial respect, as we have said before, he accounted to be the
property of a base, and abject mind.

He feared, least that certain Superiors might very much hurt, those that
they bear rule over, who to the intent that they may accommodate themselves to
the infirmity and want of virtue or their subjects, in their governing and
commanding, serve their turns of causes, with which they exhort them to that
which they intend, out of these mortal things only. Wherefore his desire was,
that the Superiors of the Society, should confidently dispose of him and
others; and that either in the changing of their offices or lodgings, and in
other matters which were to be determined by them, that they should not allege
any cause of their subjects will, but the honor of God, and the amplifying of
his glory, and for that respect to ordain all things. For example sake, let
set them command in this manner: Visum est nobis ad obsequtum Dei pertinere,
atque ex citur matori g^orta fore si in illum locum te confe(...), aut hoc
ossictum susti^eas. Itaque vade, Deus id tibi fortunet. It seems unto us that
it appertains to the due service of God, and that it shall be to his greater
glory, if you betake your self to that place, or undergo this office. Therefore
go, God speed you well. When they do this, said he, the Superiors give a
remonstra^ce of their confidence, and excellent estimation, that they have of
the virtue and obedience of their subject, that they accustom him to the
embracing of the proper renown of Christian Obedience, and that they yield
them an opportunity of obtaining greater grace in the sight of God, by how much
the fewer inducements they use of humane reasons. But if these other arguments
and pretextes be sought after, the subjects inure themselves with following an
only shadow of Obedience, not the solid and express image thereof; they are
deprived of those goods that we spoke of; there is occasion sometimes given of
vilefiyng their government, especially if there be any facility for them to
understand or suspect, that there is some other cause, why they are removed out
of their office or place, then that which either in word, or writing is
pretended.

Moreover, he was wont to affirm, that his office of Obedience was so much the
more grateful unto him, for so much as he had found by experience, that by the
jurisdiction of his Superiors, there was declared a certain marvelous
providence of God over him. For oftentimes those things were freely granted
and imposed by his Superiors before he asked, with the desire whereof he was
formerly possessed, either out of his private piety, or by the instinct of God.
So once it fellout, that whereas he had meditated, upon those places unto which
Christ our Lord in his last punnishment was carried about, and thereupon was
surprised with a great desire, to go that day to the seven holy Churches to
offer up his humble prayers according to the custom, his Superior contrary to
his former use, before he either asked or hoped for any such thing, sendes for
him that very Loure, and commaundes him to go visit the seven holy Churches.
That brought unto him a double joy, both for that the same thing was in it
self expected, and also for that he discovered, how great a case Almighty God
took of him, even in those small matters. I might rehearse very many of these
like examples, but that it would be too long.

If being reprehended by him in whose power he was, he did so conform his
countenance and habit, that with his head bare, with his eyes fastened demissely
upon the ground, making no excuse, or reply, he entertained humbly, and
patiently whatsoever he said. Being upon a time reprehended by his Superior,
for I know not what (...) of his, in a certain matter into which he had often
fallen, by reason that he ^lwayes in a manner went with his mind alienated from
his senses, he was overcome with so much force of sorrow, that he suddenly fell
down in a sound: out of which so soon as he had recovered himself, he
throws himself at his feet with weeping tears, and with so much humility
imploreth pardon for the fault that he was accused of, that he was not able to
raise him up again.

The next allied to this his virtue of Obedience, was that his observance of
the Rules, unto which by the discipline of Religion he was tied: in the
observing whereof Aloysius was so carefully-diligent, that he might seem to go
beyond all others. For neither could he remember, that ever he had transgressed
any one of those rules were it never so little, though it were but even in
thought. And now so carefully and punctually did he obey them, as if by the
neglect of them, he might be brought into some great danger, and suffer some
grievous derriment. In which thing he took so great liberty to himself, that
he stood in fear of no person, Religious or Secular.

He went on a time, as sent by the Rectour, to salute Cardinal Roboreo his
kinsman, who desiring him to stay dinner with him, he said that he could not,
for so much as it was against a certain rule with which he was obliged. The
Cardinal delighted with that answer, never after urged or requested him in
any thing, but he made this exception, unless peradventure it be against your
rules. The same Cardinal signified afterward to Fa. Rectour of the Roman
College, that he used that caution, and that he adjoined that condition, least
he might commit some offense against Aloysius his tender conscience, and that
he might comply with that divine spirit which informed his mind.

Being asked upon a certain time by his chamber fellow (who preparing to write
letters wanted paper) that he would lend him a quarter of a sheet; fearing
least he should viola^e that rule which forbids the to give, or lend any
thing without the Superiors command, he dissembling that he understood him,
truly answered nothing, but straightway going forth of the chamber, went to
^a. Minister to ask leave that he might give to his companion of his paper,
and a little after returning, courteously calling upon his follow he said:
Poposcisti, ni factor, nuper a me ch^rt^^, cecam, simitique eam impertit. You
asked of me lately) unless I be deceived) some paper, lo here, and with that
he gave him some.

To conclude I know not how I may more plainly declare his careful observance
of the rules of Religion, then if I testify that he for the space of those
years, wherein he applied himself to Religion, did never neglect that rule,
which commands silence in certain times and places; nor that which
forbids in time of studies to speak otherwise then in Latin. Yet in this
kind to be taken tripping is a very easy matter.

CHAP. XVIII. Of his Poverty, Chastity, Speech, and Conversation.
NOw to Religious Poverty he was incredibly affected. In this he did more
delight and solace himself, then wealthy men do in the abundance of their
riches. For if in the liberty of his former fortune he was so far in love with
it, that as we have said before, even then he pleased himself with homely
attire; every one may easily conjecture how he behaved himself in the Society,
which he was accustomed to entitle the most proper house of poverty. Therefore
he always abhorred that, whereby he might seem to have the least shadow of a
man, challenging privately any thing, as it were proper to himself. He was
never clothed or apparelled with any thing but out of the common stock: he
never made use of any book, which he did think lawful to carry with him,
neither of watch, nor penknife, nor any other case of tools. And of those
things which belong to piety, he neither kept any to bestow upon others,
neither was he very much pleased when others bestowed them upon him. He never
suffered to be in his possession any Reliquary, or pair of beads of any
precious, or curious matter, nor so much as a private picture, or tablet. But
verily some one of the common pictures, which he found in the chamber, he made
use of, or truly he had at the most but one private to himself of paper, which
was of S. Catherine the Virgin and Martyr (to wit, upon whose birthday he
en^^ed into Religion) and another in like manner of paper that was of S. Thomas
of Aquine, whose doctrine he did studiosly imitate. And these, upon the
approbation of his Superiors, tired out by others importunities, and as it
were by compulsion, he accepted as gui^ts. What shall I say* for that not so
much as in his Breuiary truly which in the Nouiship, nor in his little book of
the office of the B. Virgin Mother, which he made use of in the College, he
never tolerated so much as any little picture, for a note, (as many use) to
distinguish his prayers.

And for so much as there were not wanting some, who according to their good
will toward him, not only offered diverse gifts made for the honor of God, but
even of their own accord having requested license of his Superior that he
might receive them, did in a manner thrust them violently upon him, if truly he
might, he refused them: but if without displeasing of them he could do no other
then admit them, he straightway carried them to his Superior, or at least
having gotten leave from him, so soon as the next occasion might serve, he
bestowed them upon others. It was his chiefest joy to possess nothing of this
world, to desire nothing, and to be sequestered from every mortal thing.

When in the beginning of Summer or winter, there were given unto them hats,
and other garments, he never complained of any thing for being too long, or
too short, too big, or too little: but being asked by the tailour whether they
were fit-inough for him, he said: Mihi quidem videtur: truly they seem so unto
me. He was infinitely pleased with every thing that was most poor, and in all
things that fell unto his choice he cast his eye upon the worst. And he was
wo^t to interpret in this manner that of our Rule, whereby it is decreed and
commanded, that every one (to the intent that he may the more overcome
himself, and may learn the more to profit in virtue) should be persuaded,
that of those things which are in the house, the worst shall always be given
unto him. Even as (says he) a beggar, who from door to door, beggeth alms
from other men, knows very well, that not the best garments, which are in any
man's house, but the most torn and old; and in like manner of other things,
that which is of the least value, shall be given to him: according to the same
example must we persuade our selves, that if we be truly in love with poverty,
those things in our house which are most contemptible, ought to be given unto
us. And he said that such was the efficacy of this word (persuadeat) that the
meaning thereof was, that we should certainly set down in our minds that it
should so come to pass, and that it was most expedient so to be.

Moreover, he did often declare to the Father who was wont to take his
confessio^s, that he esteemed is in the number of one of his beneficial
merits, that such often had been the will of God, that in the partition of the
things, which were given to every one to use, there happenned unto him the
worst of all others. This in respect of his fervent love to poverty, he
esteemed as a special favor from Almighty God. For with such modest shame
fastness did he behave himself in Religion, as though he did from his very
heart think, that out of commiseration of the Superiors, he had been taken up
into the house, as it were out of rags and sordid beggary. Therefore
whatsoever was bestowed upon him, he judged to proceed out of their singular
charity.

At the table truly, he spared to eat of that meat which he thought would be
hurtful to his health; notwithstanding least that some better should be
brought instead of it (which he nothing desired) he indeauoured upon set
purpose, to deceive the seruitours.

I need not rehearse any thing else of his chastity, but that he always kept
unspotted that inestimable treasure of his Virginity, both of body and mind, in
so excellent and singular a luster, which I declared in the sixth chapter of my
first book.

In his speech and conversation, no man was a greater lover of truth and
sincerity, no man could ever possibly discover more candor, or ingenuity.
Therefore there were none who could make any the least doubt of that which he
either affirmed, or denied. For he was far estranged from all deceitful
duplicity or dissimulation. He was wont also to affirm, that by tricks,
deceites, dissimulations, fallacies, ambiguity either of words or deeds, the
men given to the Fortune of this world, were bereaved of the mutual society
that ought to be amongst them; but that in Religion it was the ordinary poison
of Religious simplicity, the certain plague of youth, with which scarcely
could ever agree the spirit, that a Religious man ought to be endowed with.

CHAP. XIX. Of his Mortification, and the Afflictions of his body.
AS concerning that taming of his body, and bridling of his appetites which we
call Mortification, he was so desirous of evil treating the same, and suffered
himself to be transported so much further with that desire, then his strength
might comport with all, that had not his Governors restrained him, he might
seem in short time to hazard the cutting-of some years from his life.
Therefore unto some that said they wondered that he made no conscience, of so
often wearying his Superiors about this affliction of himself, he answered,
that he, when upon the one side he regarded the imbecility of his forces, and
upon the other side perceived his mind to be excited to give forth these
examples of piety, thought it the best course that he could take, to refer
the whole matter to his Superior, who was not a man partially interessed in
either of those two considerations. And that so it would come to pass, that he
only would give way to that which should be most pleasing to God, and nothing
else. He added that sometimes he entreated leave to do those things, which he
assuredly knew would not be granted to him. For when he saw he might not apply
himself unto them, as he very much desired, to dedicate this his desire to
God, and to manifest it to him that governed him as his Vicegerent, seemed for
many respects to be auayleable unto him. Amongst which, that he numbered as
one, that by the judgment of others he learned to be less ouerweening of
himself, for so much as reuoluing such things in his mind he might seem unto
them, in this respect truly, not sufficiently to know himself. And verily
sometimes it pleased God, that beyond the opinion of all men, he obtained leave
for certain things.

A certain man attempted very seriously to question with him, why, for so much
at he was so prudent in other matters, he set so light by the counsel of
Fathers of approved piety and authority, who so often had exhorted him, that at
last he should leave of, that so great severity toward himself, and
earnestness of mind in meditating upon divine matters? Unto whom Aloysius
answered in a manner in these very words: I perceive these counsels, which
you speak of, to be given me by two sorts of men. Of which, one sort is of
them, who lead their life in all accomplishment of sanctity, so perfect, that
nothing therein occurreth to my view, but it is both be autifull and worthy to
be imitated. And truly oftentimes I have been minded to obey these men's
aduises: but after I observed, that what they advised me, they themselves would
not practice, I thought my self rather bound to follow their deeds then their
counsels, which proceed only from their charity and indulge^ce toward me. And
some others there we who what they exhort me to, the same they make good in
their own courses as who are not much addicted to any practice of pennaut. But
it seems better for me to live according to the manners and example of those
pinus ones, the then the precepts and counsels of these other that I last named.

Moreover he yielded another reason heerof. For he said, that he very much
feared. least that if he should intermit the use of these afflictions, his
nature could not long be continued in the habit of virtue, but falling back to
her former state, would suddenly lose that her practice of patience, obtained by
so many years labor.

This also was his saying, Esse s^ fe^^um incuruum, atque ad Religionem
venisse, vt voluntarijs paenis atque supplicijs perinde ac m^^leis corrigere
tur. That he was a crooked piece of iron, and that he came into Religion, that
he might be made straight with voluntary pains and punishments, as it were
with hammers. But to them that said, that the perfection of Sanctity consisted
in the interior virtue of the mind, and that he should rather use violence to
his will, then his body, he answered. Haec oportet facere, and illa non
omit^ere. These you ought to do, and not omit those. For that this was the
custom of almost all, whose sanctity became admirable to antiquity, and in
particular of the first Fathers of our Religion, and before all others of our
B. Father Ignatius. And that he truly, both himself, as we read in his life,
spent much time in the offices of penance, and corporal vexation; and that
moreover he left written in his Constitutions, that he set down no methodicall
course to the Professors, and others that were placed in any stable degree of
the Society, either of Vigils, Fasts, Disciplinings, Prayers, and other
punishments, for so much as he confidently presumed, that they had made so
great progress in excellent sanctimony, and had so long with great comfort
been inured with these wholesome affections, whilst they well knew them not to be
hurtful to the pious functions of the mind, that they would rather stand in
need of a bridle, then of a spur.

Moreover Aloysius added, that the most fit time to exact these punishments of
his body was, whilst he was a man of entire corporal vigor, and in the
flourishing season of his youth. For in regard that his ouldage was likely to
be infested with diseases, would afford less strength for the performance of
those things. And that for that respect men of principal sanctity in their
extreme and decrepit age, look how much they had profited, in the pious
employments of their mind, so much for the most part they deducted from their
corporal punishments: but that they never altogether left them of. If his
Superior for bad him any of his bodily chastisements, the loss that he
sustained of that fruit, he recompensed with some other office of piety, as by
reading a chapter out of the little book of the imitation of Christ, by going
to the Church to worship the Divine Eucharist, or with some other such like.
Whether he stood, or sare, or walked, he omitted no time wherein he might vex
his body with some molestation. And whereas his Superiors when they saw him
somewhat debilitated, forebad him the use of all haire-cloth, disciplines, and
extraordinary fasting, he invented some means to exercise himself, which
might neither be repugnant to the will of his Superiors, nor oppo^ite to his
bodily health, and those he declared unto them. Of which sort this was one,
when for his accustomed exercise of speaking out of the pulpit, he requested
that he might speak in Spanish, supposing doublesse that for that respect all
would laugh at him And he obtained leave to do it.

To conclude you may have a sufficient scantling even by this one thing, how
much he thirsted after his own vexation, for that whereas he had so often
executed so many punnishmentes upon himself, without having any respect to his
health, very many denounced unto him that they stood in great fear, least when
he should come to the hour of death, this s^ruple might vex him, and that
peradventure he might pay in the pains of purgatory, for this his so evil and
indiscreet entreating of his body. Unto which doubt, in his last sickness, he
gave answer as after I will recount.

For the repressing of the perturbations of his mind, verily he needed no great
diligence, as which he had long since so subjected to himself that he seemed
altogether to be destitute of them. He bestowed his greatest industry, in
driving away the motions of his mind, and if he found himself any thing faulty
in that kind, he did not with overmuch deiection contristate his mind, but
throwing himself at the feet of God, and determining to expiate himself by
confession, he implored peace with him. Having done that, he rested with a
secure mind. And this he had learned of that Master of the Nouices, whom we
have spoken of. For he was wont commonly to counsel all, that it was a fit
remedy, against such sins which in our common course of life do steal upon
us, and which was both acceptable to God, and a confusion to the Devil, to
profess our baseness before God, lifting up for some little time our mind
toward heaven, with these or such like words. En, mi Domine, quam fragilis
sum, and miserabilis! quam procliuis adlapsum! Ignosce mi Domine, and gratiam
concede, ne idem peccatu^ iterum peccem. See my Lord how frail and miserable I
am! how prone to fall! Pardon me my Lord, and vouchsafe me thy grace, that I
fall not again into this sin! and after this to quiet our selves. This
therefore did Aloysius observe, and he said moreover, that to be too much
afflicted for such like sins as these, was a sign, that a man had no true
understanding of himself. For he that knows himself, could not be ignorant,
that his garden of it self was only apt to bring forth thorns and briars.

He employed all his solicitude in searching out the origene, and head of his
desires and cogitations, till such time as he had discovered, whether he was
guilty of any fault, or no, to the intent that he might disclose it to the
priest. But when he had once examined out the matter, he laid aside all care.
In his confessions he was clear, short, nothing anxious, and as F. Robert
Bellarmine who was his Confessarius affirmed, by the assistance of that Divine
light that was infused into him, and the sharpness of his wit, he did so
narrowly surucy every secret corner of his mind, that he was even as well able
to express, how far he proceeded, in every cogitation, or desire, or action,
so expressly, and distinctly, as if he had even seen all things with his eyes.
He loved very much to be publicly reprehended in the presence of his
companions, and for that cause he of his own accord used to notify to his
Superiors his faults in a piece of paper. But at the last, when instead of
rebuke he perceived praise to be attributed unto him by them, who found no
fault in those things which he condemned in himself, he put on a mind to
desire those reprehensions no more, for that he said, that they were rather a
loss then a gain unto him.

CHAP. XX. What he thought of the Spiritual Exercises of Bl. Fa. Ignatius: how
he exercised himself in them.
THE spiritual Exercises of B. Fa. Ignatius, he did not only much esteem, for
the respect that they yielded a most effectual means, to draw the minds of
men out of the filth of sin, to the love of an honest life; but for so much
as they were most apt to revive those raked-vp fires of piety, and the spirit
of God, in the minds of Religious men. Therefore every year at what time,
according to the custom, they might keep their longest vacations from the
schools, to the intent that he might apply himself to them, he entreated
leave for the space of some few days to be retired. And for so much as those
Exercises are distributed into four weeks, he framed unto himself certain
sentences, and precepts in Latin, agreeing with the arguments, which are
treated of, in every one of them, and the scope which is aimed at. But whereas
all his notes, which truly belonged to piety, where presently taken away, so
soon as he was dead, I could find none almost but these that belong to the
first week.

For the Exercises of the first week.

Inscrutable are the judgments of God: who knows whether he have yet forgiven
me the offenses that I committed in the world? The pillars of heaven have
fallen, and were broken: who will promise me perseverance? The whole world
lies buried now in the depth of wickedness: who shall appease the anger of
our omnipotent God? Most Religious and Ecclesiastical men forget their
vocation: how shall God suffer any longer so great detriment of his Kingdom?
The faithful with great repidity all the days of their life, as it were,
steal Gods glory from him: and who shall restore it? We be to poor secular
men, who defer their penance even till the point of death: woe also to
Religious men who euentd that moment have slept in their vocation! With these
kind of excitements, we must rouse our sluggishnesse, and renew our purpose of
repentance, and serving of God rightly, and immoueably.

True Penance is conceived with infinite grief for the contempt and ignominy
which I have showed toward God, who has so much loved me.

The same, so much urges us to bewail grievous sins, that even for all our
venial sins it exciteth great compunction.

It arriueth so far, that not only it acknowledges the mercy of God remitting
man's offenses, and worshippeth him; but for the honor of the Divine justice,
vehemently desires to undergo just punishments for all his sins.

Here God finding men well disposed, infuseth the hatred of themselves, by
which a purpose is stirred up and confirmed, sharply to take revenge of
themselves, even by external acts of penance, Laus Deo.

CHAP. XXI. His love toward God, his zeal toward his neighbor, his desire
of spiritall discourses.
HE burned with so great a love of God, that all times, and in all places, so
often as mention was made of him, he was so inflamed, that there appeared
certain signs thereof in his very countenance.

He excelled in singular charity toward others his neighbors. Moved
therewithal he often craved leave to go to the Hospitalls to serve the sick
persons. And when he came thither, he would make the fick-mens beds, help them
with their meat, wash their feet, sweep their floores, exhort each of the^ to
patience, and sacred confession of their sins. And at home in the College he
daily obtained leave to go visit the sick in the Infirmary. Therefore in this
office, with his daily diligence he exceeded all, without any partiality he
went to all to comfort the^ and if at any time in regard of the pains of hit
head, by his Superiors command he abstained from his study, he would busy
himself in the Infirmary, he would clease their knives and spoones, cover
their tables, to conclude perform all other due services, either to the sick,
or to those who were recovering out of their sickness.

Neither truly, according to that zeal wherewith he was vehemently inflamed for
all men's salvation, did he less readily undertake the care of their body, then
of their souls. Therefore if license might have been given him from his
Superior, conformable to that, which both in his freer course in the world,
and also in Religion he had always desired, he would have sailed into the
utmost coasts of India, to gain Ethnicks unto Christ. Moreover, he could not
as yet truly be employed; to labor for the salvation of foreign men. For so
much as that is peculiar unto them, who having ended the course of their
studies, and being ordained Priests, ordinarily are designed to the hearing of
Co^fessions, to the making of Sermons and Exhortations, and other such like
offices.

In the mean while he with great diligence; and various art, out of that
admirable prudence wherewith he was endowed from Almighty God, helped forward
their progress in the study of a more holy life, who were co^ioyned with him,
in the course and society of a Religious life. For whereas in his life which was
irreprehensible, there was set before them a most beautiful example, he
moreover asked the Rectour, whether he would be pleased to give order, that at
noone and night, those hours, which are allowed for their recreation, they
might no more intertaine talk amongst their companions of learning, and other
indifferent matters (for of vain and unprofitable it is never lawful for
the^) but of these only which were conducible to piety. There was perfect at
that time over matters of Piety in the College, F. Hyeronimus Ubaldinus, who
after he had forsaken a certain Ecclesiastical office which he had discharged
in the City, devoted himself to the Society of JESUS, and spent therein all
the rest of his life in notable sanctity. Unto this man also did Aloysius make
known his desire, after it was already approved by the Rector, and entreats
him that he would likewise add his labor to the perfecting of this that was
begun, and withal he offers up many prayers unto Almighty God, that he would
vouchsafe to bless it with good success. After this, having chosen out of all
the College some certain young men, all singularly well addicted to
celestial matters, whom he thought to be the fittest to make of his Counsel,
he calls them together, and told them that he did very much desire, to the
intent that he might profit his own mind, at such time as he had leave to
divert his mind somewhat from more grave imploymentes, and to apply himself to
company, that he might sometimes have conference with them of Divine matters.
Moreover, he daily, least that he might sometimes want fit matter for
discourse, would for the space of half an hour, read some little book of the
Precepts of piety, or some Saints Life. To conclude together with these
fellows he gives a beginning to this matter. Therefore if he came into the
company of those that were inferior to himself, he gave the first onset to
this wholesome discourse, which the rest meruailously stirred up with his
speeches, did with great joy second. Unto the priests and those that were
Superiors unto him, he propounded some question, and with a desire better to
inform himself, he asked their opinion. So did he begin these discourses of
Divine matters. Although truly, that was not needful; for so much as they,
when they saw him coming unto the^, assuring themselves that he was delighted
with no other talk, all of them, even the Superiors themselves, that they
might comply with him, breaking of all other discourse, if they had begun it,
turned to sacred matters. When he co^uersed amongst his equals, if truly they
were of them, with whom he had of late set down this manner of society, it
was no trouble to discourse of holy matters: but if they were others, he
doubted not of his own accord, to begin to treat of some point of piety, in
which they for so much as they were Religious men, seeing that they desired to
profit in that course, did willingly suffer themselves to be brought into the
same.

When any one came new from the Nouiship, or from any place else to follow his
studies, he either set upon him himself, or sent unto him some one, with whom
he had passed his Nouiship, or was near allied to in familiarity, and as far
forth as he might, he endeavored to help him, to conserve that ardour of
Religion which he had conceived in his Nouiship. Therefore he had no sooner set
foot in the College, but of his own accord he would insinuate himself into
his company, and denounce unto him, that truly if he purposed to remain
constant, and proceed forward in the pursuit of piety, that there should not
be wanting unto him good store of fellows, who would assist him in this
behalf: in the mean while, whereas he was familiarly acquainted with them all,
he named unto him five or six of their names, who went beyond the rest in the
study and use of celestial things. Moreover, those h^ admonished, that they
should associate themselves with him, and it succeeded according to his desire.

Furthermore, if he understood that any one of the College was somewhat*
defective in discharging his duty according to the dignity of Religion, he
endeavored by all the means he could, to win unto himself his affection, and
knowing then very well truly, what occasion of speech that would give unto
others, he daily, not only for many days, but even for many weeks together,
conuersed with him at the noone and night meetings. So soon as he had now
profited so much, in the study of perfect sanctity, as he required, that he
might not repent himself of his payne's taken, then truly by little and little
he dismissed that familiarity, for so much as he said, that he should be a more
upright example to all, if he conuersed promiscuously with all: afterward he
exhorted him, that he should sort himself with those that were the best, and
he rehearsed some of that quality unto him, and also gave order unto them that
they should keep company with him: that he well assured himself that he was
desirous to parti(...)te of ^ood matters: to conclude, after that he had done
with one, he betook himself to another. By these so excellent endeauours, and
pains taken, in a few weeks he was a help to many, and he inflamed the minds
of those to the love of God who seemed to have waxed the most cold. Therefore
you might have seen the whole Roman College, so much enkindled with the
burning zeal of a Divine spirit and piety, that there was not any one, but he
would acknowledge a certain singular will of God therein.

I do well remember that I have often seen with these eyes of mine, when there
were in that College above 200. men, in the heat of the So^mer days, at such
time as they had ^eaue to recreate their minds after their laborious studies,
in the garden, and walks, some by couples, and some by three and four in a
company walking together, and for so much as I knew the mynds of them all, it
is a thing that I am well assured of, that there was none of all those
companies, but they r conference was of God. You would say that they assembled
not to recreate their minds, but seriously to talk of divine matters, whereby
many confessed that they reaped no less, and some even more fruit, then they
did by their prayer it self. The which did chiefly fall out in that, for so
much as every one with incredible candor discovered those heavenly comforts
which they had recaued in prayer, as if one from an others light had lighted
his candle. And all these things were done with so willing and cheerful minds
of all sides, that there was no one of them, but he would have been sad, and
contristated in returning to his studies, if at any time by thaunce it had
fallen out, that in recreation time* he had done nothing which might have been
available to piety. These were, the conferences of those that went abroad to
walk for their recreatio^, these were their plays and pastimes in the
vineyard, such days as intermission was from the schools, unto which whilst
they went diuersely dispersed by two, three, and four in a company talking of
wholesome divine matters, it seemed that nothing could yield them more
contentment.

But now in the days of the longer vacations, which is September and October,
the young men which in the Roman College apply themselves to learning, are
wo^t, withdrawing themselves from the schools, to be sent to Frescati, to the
intent that there resting sometime from their serious studies they might
confirm their decayed forces. Hither therefore, by the Superiors good leave at
that time did they bring, some that little book of the imitation of Christ,
some the life of S. Francis, some of S. Catherine of Siena, some that of the
life of our B. Fa. Ignatius: some one would take with him those Annals of the
Family of S. Dominicke, some other, those of S. Francis. There were some that
took delight in the Confessions and Soliloquies of S. Augustine, and others in
the Sermons of S. Bernard upon the Canticles. There were some certain men, as
having made further progress in the knowledge of Divine things, who with no
small delight read over the acts of S. Catherine of Genua: there were some
others, whose minds more inclined to the despising of themselves, were much
conversant in reading the famous acts of those Blessed men Iacobone, and John
Columbine. Having read these books, every morning and evening by two or three
in a company, they went forth to the neighbowring hills to exercise their
bodies, and in the mean while they declared amongst themselves, those things
which they had read. Sometimes truly some ten, or a dozen of them joining
together, sat them down in the woods, and meaddows to discourse piously, and
that so cheerfully, so feruerously and with such sense of piety, as they seemed
eue^ to resemble the Celestial Angels. Therefore this extraordinary retirement,
was no self wholesome to their minds then their bodies, and every one was each
others mirror to behold himself in, and a spur to excite him to the pursuit
of Divine matters.

Witnesses of these things were so many their associates, who for so much as
they were both spectatours and sharers in them, they also took comfort in the
fruit thereof, and now, some in one Country, some in another labor in the
tilling of our Lords vineyard. Who, whereas they attributed the beginning of
them to Aloysius, as their principal author, upon him they cast their eyes,
him they highly extolled, him they piously embraced, to him did they apply
themselves, upon his directions did they daily depend. Which if they might not
do, they mourned, even as much, as if their passage had been intercepted from
having recourse to some holy thing, and which was singular available to their
salvation and perfection of virtue. It helped forward very much to their
general love toward him, that he was not always so sharpe-set upon rigorous
courses, but as time, place and persons required, he did with admirable
suauity, prudently and considerately, accommodate himself.

Therefore though in action he was intensely serious, notwithstanding in common
society, there appeared nothing harsh, or troble some in him, but marvelous
courtesy, cheerfulness and affability toward all. Sometimes he would cast
forth some sharp and witty flash: some other times he would relate some
pleasant fable, or pretty story for mirthsake; but never would he depart from
that modesty which becomes a Religious man. And this was the course and fruit
of B. Aloysius his life, these two first years which he lived in the Roman
College.

CHAP. XXII. He is sent into his Country for the appeasing of certain
grievous discords, which were between the Duke of Mantua, and the Marquis his
brother. How he behaved himself in this his journey.
HORATIVS Gonzaga Lord of Sulphurino being dead at Mantua, that region subject
to his dominion, which is in the protection of the Empire, was by right of
inheritance to have descended to Rodulph the the Marquis his nephew, as lawful
successor to the same, if the Duke of Mantua (whom he by his last will, and
testament made his heir) had not first laid hold of the same. That business
caused Martha, the mother of the Marquis of Castilion, leaving the government
of Castilion to her son Rodulph with her three younger children, to go to
Prage. There, when Francis who at this day governs, being the eldest of those
three children which I spoke of, being not past nine years of age, had in the
presence of the Emperor pronounced a good long Oration, he obtained so much
grace in his sight, that by the consent of his mother, he retained him amongst
his pages of Honor. There was afterward sent as legate from the Emperor, one
whom they call the Imperial Co^missary, who for so long time might as his
vicegerent govern the affairs of Sulphurino, till having tried-out the matter
he should adiudge it to the one, or other party. The cause being discussed,
sentence is given upon Marquis Rodulphs side, as next allied in consanguinity
to him that was deceased. Notwithstanding there wanted not certain hellish
instruments, who by false reports so much blowed the coals of this dissension
between these princely cosens, that offenses and suspicions daily increasing,
this trial about the right of Sulphurio, which hitherto had received only a
civil debatement, was accounted but one of their lightest dissentions: and now
so many were the accusations that were laid against Marquis Rodulph, that some
great massaker was feared. What shall I say? In so much, as both Archduke
Ferdinand brother to Maximilian the Emperor, and also other illustrious men,
had often attempted in vain to make agreement between them.

These matters being brought to the utmost danger, it came into the minds of
Eleonora of Austria, and Martha, the one the mother of Duke Vincentius, the
other of Marquess Rodulph, as being most desirous of peace, and willing to
take away the subject of this public mischief, that there could not be found
any more fit peacemaker then Aloysius, in these so doubtful matters. As who
was both always dear to the Duke, and of great authority with the Marquis,
whom by the granting over of his Principality, he had wholly obliged. Therefore
without the knowledge of both their sons, by mutual consent, they implore
the aid of Aloysius, who then remained at Rome. He to the intent, that he
might sustain no loss of that his tranquillity of mind, or that he might not
even for so short a time be enlarged from his Religious discipline, at first
did with great auersion of mind, with draw himself from interposing in those
troublesome contestations. But afterward having by his, and his friends ^rayers
seriously recommended the whole matter unto God, he asked counsel of F. Robert
Bellarmine his Confessarius. He, when he had also humbly dealt with God what
was best to be done in this case, made answer unto him in these words: Thou
may go, Aloysius, I do verily think thou shall obey God herein; me surely
thou shall. When he had received this voice, as sent from ^n oracle, he so
equally disposed his mind, that he was willing ^o be at the disposal^ of F.
General. In the meaue while Eleonora the Arch-Duches, presupposing what excuse
Aloysius would make at the first, for so much as she thought that next unto
God, that seemed the only means, to divert those imminent discommodities, and
with all that it was no way estranged from any Religious Institute, to
reconcile men of that eminent place so near of kin to him, (in that it is an
office of Charity) she dealt with Aloysius his Superiors, that they should
send him to Mantua. Therefore it was done as she requested: which in like manner
we read in the life of that Noble Lady.

Aloysius had now spent two years in the study of Divinity, and (for so much
as it was their Autumne-Vacation) lived with many others in Frescati, when Fa.
Robert Bellarmine coming thither, brings a command from Fa. General, that
he should return to Rome, and take his iourny with all speed for Mantua, and
Castilion. He staying no longer, then about the space of a quarter of an hour,
and left all us his companions grievously lamenting, for that we should so many
months want his company, and the fruit of his holy example. We all followed
him beyond a certain vineyard, which belongs to the College.

In our return Fa. Robert Bellarmine entering into commendation of this young
man's virtues and sanctity, not without a singular remonstrance of his great
affection toward him, declared many things, which very much moved our minds
with piety. There in particular he professed, that he thought, that the grace
of God was confirmed upon him. Morcouer he said, that he could not imagine what
other course of life S. Thomas of Aquine being a ^oung man could follow then
that which Aloysius did: which words whereas they were spoken in the hearing of
diverse men, and committed to memory, they were willing also to restifie them in
the public records. After he arrived at Rome, commanded by Fa. General to
betake him to his journey, he first went to take his leave of the Cardinals
his kinsmen. Here standing in the presence of Cardinal Roborco, and being
overcome with a sudden fainting-fit out of the debility of his macerated
body, he was laid down upon the Cardinals bed. He afterward reproved Aloysius
for his too much asperity in extenuating and vexing his poor body, and
exhorts him that hereafter he would take a more diligent care of his health.
Unto whom he replied, that he did as yet fall short of that, which his duty
required.

There was given unto him as a companion in his iourny, one of the
lay-brothers, a discreet man, unto whom was committed the care of Aloysius his
health; and command was given to Aloysius himself, that in all things truly
that belonged to his health, he should follow the precepts of this his
companion. Father Lodouicus Corbonellus, a grave man and one that had deserved
very well of the Roman College, not ignorant with how grievous headaches
Aloysius was vexed, persuaded him as earnestly as he cold, that to defend him
from the sun he would upon the way carry an Vmbrella. But he cold not
prevail with him.

That day in the morning that he was to take horse, a pair of boots was
brought into his chamber, which a certain man of great dignity had worn, and
that, when he was going to get them on, was told him by a certain person.
Aloysius hearing this, and fearing least they should be given him for that
respect, gave them to understand that he was no white at all delighted in them.
Therefore as he was drawing them on, he often looked upon them, as if he had
ought for some occasion to except against them. This his companion perceauing:
what fault is there, said he, in these boots, do they not fit your leg? when
he gave him no answer: stay, said he, I will take these away from you, and
bring you another pair that will fit you better: therefore carrying them into
the next chamber, wherein the riding furniture was kept, he changed them not,
but brings them back, only wapped up in another form, and wishes him to
try whether these perhaps may be fitter. Aloysius supposing that they had been
another pair, when he had put them on; verily, said he, these seem to fit me
very well. And afterward he made use of them.

He went from Rome the 12. of September the year of our Lord 1589. together
with Fa. Bernardinus Medices his very familiar friend, who was sent from his
Superiors to Millan, to interpret the Scriptures publicly. In all that
iourny he never omitted his custom of praying, examining his conscience,
reciting the Litanies, and performing other offices of piety. He never, whether
it were in the Inn, or upon his way maintained any other discourse, then of
piety and celestial things. It is very strange how piously and reverently
those hackney-men that rid in his company, attended unto his speech, laid
themselves wholly open unto him, never departed from his side, adored him like
some celestial man. Which you shall rarely discover in those kind of people.

He did in such sort refuse certain superfluous offices of courtesy of a
certain old man, which seemed unto him to pass the usual bounds of Religion,
and to be attributed to the condition of his quality or fortune, or to proceed
out of the immoderate love of a certain Father toward him; that neither by
that Father, nor by any of the rest, would he suffer his feet to be washed, as
the custom is to do to men of the Society when they come as travelers. Yea
verily he affirmed to a certain companion of his, that the private affection
of that Father toward him, and his so much officious delicacy, did in no sort
please him.

It was sweet unto him to see a far off Florence, the mother or his first piety
and celestial fervor. From thence, ieauing behind him Fa. Bernaraine Medices,
whom his kinsmen of the house of Medices, principal men of that City, for
some certain days kept with them, wet straight forward to Bolonia. So loone
as he came thither, presently he is surrounded with a ring of Fathers of that
College, with whom was already celebrated the fame of his sanctity, and
straight way he strikes into discourse with them of Divine matters. He stayed
there one whole day, which day whereas by the Rectours command, the Sacristane
was to take him to view the City, at his going out of the house he requested
him that he would lead him to no place, without it were to some Church, or to
some house remarkable for Sanctity: For in other he took no delight. He doing
according to his will, going to two or three houses, which were of most note in
that kind, brought him back-againe home.

When he came to a certain Inn, which is within the Dominion of Ferrara
between Bolonia and Mantua, the Inne-keeper allotted to them both a chamber
which had but one bed. Aloysius his companion admonishes this man privately,
that it is the custom of Religious men to lodge no more then one in a bed.
That he should therefore fit them with another bed. He denied this to be in his
power to do, for that he reserved the rest of his beds, for gentlemen, if any
pleased that night to lodge in his Inn. But then Aloysius wishes his
companion to rest quiet, who began to entreat more earnestly and to enter into
passion. Unto whom he replied: Verily, this Inne-houlder keeps his beds for
Gentlemen, as if we were but Clownes: And surely he ought to make some better
account of you. But Aloysius with a marvelous peaceable mind, and with a
pleasing countenance said in this manner: Be not angry my dear brother, for
verily you have no just cause, for so much as we profess poverty. If therefore
he repute of us according to our profession, there is no reason, why we should
except against him. But, late that evening, when as no man else came thither,
his fellow preua^^ed with the Host.

CHAP. XXIII. What he did at Mantua, What at Castilion, how dexterously he
carried himself in the business, that he negotiated.
BEING arrived at Mantua, forthwith he went to salute Eleonora of Austria, a
principal woman, grave of years, and famous for innocence of life, who very
much rejoicing to see him once again returned, entertaining him with great
love, passed sometime with him in familiar speech. From the selfsame Mantua
she certified his brother Rodulph of his arrival, and he immediately sent such
as should convey him to Castillion. Going thither he sent no messenger before
him, but so soon as he came to Castilion, meeting a man by chance he wills
him, to give notice to the Marquess that he was at hand. He diuulgeth this
report through all the streets of the town. Therefore an infinite multitude of
people, partly stood in the windows, partly burst out of their houses, and
upon every side showed arguments of unwonted joy and piety, in a solemn manner
ru^g their bells, thundered off their great ordenance: the citizens at his
passage by, humbly worshipped him upon their very knees: so famous doubtless
was the opinion of his sanctity. Of all which Honors it is an incredible thing
to say, how much he was ashamed. The Marquess descended to the very foot of
the Castle to receive him. He had scarcely stepped out of his coach, but a
certain man of that Dominion, relying considently upon the presence of
Aloysius, throwing himself prostrate at the feet of the Marquess, beseeches
pardon of him for I know not what fault. The Marquess requested Blessed
Aloysius, to bear witness, that he did freely pardon, and remit him of all
that punishment, which he had thought to have taken on him. Being entered into
the Castle with the Marquess, very many Courtiers and others, after their
accustomed manner styled him Illustrissimo, and gave him the term of his
Excellency, which appellations did both grieve, and shame him.

He found not his mother at Castilion, who was 12. miles from thence, in the
town called S. Martins, but being certified of his coming by a messenger that
was sent to her, the day after with her two children being very little ones,
she returning to Castilion, to that palace where she was wont to make her
aboade, which was somewhat distant from that which was the Marquesses, she
gives Aloysius to understand of her ariuall. When he together with his
companion was come unto her, he was rather entertained as some sacred thing,
then lovingly as a Son. For whereas, both her Motherly affection might have
urged her, and no one was present whom she needed to stand in fear of,
notwithstanding she neither kissed, nor embraced him, but preferring veneration
before her Motherly love, bowing down her head to the ground she saluteth him
at his first coming. And no marvel. For from his very childhood, she held
him for a Saint, and called him her Angel. All that day he bestowed with his
Mother, giving order, that his companion should be partaker and witness of all
those speeches which they used concerning the mannaging of that cause. But so
soon as he perceived, that his presence did somewhat abridge the mother from
her confidence in talking with her son, taking some occasion, he conueyeth
himself out of doors, and betaketh him to his beads. After a certain time
returning, he finds them both close upon their knees at prayer. In the
evening all being departed to their chambers, Aloysius demanded of his
companion, why he had parted from him unto whom he said, that it seemed unto
him a thing very uncivil, that whereas his mother living in a place so far
distant, had obtained leave of Father General to affoard her the company of
her son, that when he was present she might not enjoy him freely, and utter
her whole mind unto him. That therefore he would willingly be present, as he
commanded him, when he spoke with other Noble women, his mother only excepted.
Neither did Aloysius reply any thing to that his answer.

He continued diverse days at Castilion, in which he was particulerly informed
from the Marquess and others, of the business and dissentions that were
between him and the Duke of Mantus. In the mean time it is an incredible
thing to declare, what excellent documentes of virtue he gave still to them
all, every where upon all oportunities: he would never go through the town
but on soote, although it was always the pleasure, both of his mother and
brother that he should be attended upon with a coach, and so great was the
concourse of them that came to salute him that he was forced always to go
with his hat in his hand. He dealt promiscuously with every one, with such
humility, mildness, and submission, as if he had been an Underling to them
all. He never suffered himself to be served by any stranger. If he stood in
need of any thing, he rather requested his companions help. And from him truly
he would admit no office, but that which was necessary, offered upon the others
own accord, and in a manner against his will. For he was wont to serve his
own necessities, whilst others without any request of his, were moved even
from God to assist him. And had it not seemed good otherwise to the Superiors,
that he asked counsel of, he would not have lodged in his Mothers, or
Brothers, but in the Arch-Priests house.

So long as he remained at Castilion, he used great continency in all things.
Therefore he never asked any thing in his mothers house. What shall I say? when
he was oppressed with winter, and very could blasts, and had need to have
changed his garments, notwithstanding he could never be persuaded, that his
friends should provide them for him, but after that he had given the Rector of
Brescia to understand of his, and his companions wants, he received gowns, and
other necessaries from him, which others had worn before, for new ones he
would not. His Mother entreating him very earnestly that he would accept two
Mantuan shirts, of which one she offered to himself, the other to his
companion, he said, it was not in his power to accept any of those things,
which with so free a mind he had renounced. Nevertheless she ceased not to deal
with Aloysius his companion, that he would entreat him to receive them. He
comes to him in the morning, when he was upon the point of rising, and
offers him one of them, and when he refused it: your mother, says he, out of
her love toward God bestows this upon you, in way of alms. Aloysius hearing
the name of Alms, and constrained by the command of his companion, made no
further repugnance. In like manner his other linnens, which were given him in
the Roman College at his departure, being now almost worn out, his mother
could not obtain, his acceptance, of a small number of others, which according
to her tender love she had made for him, but he rather desired that his old
ones should be mended. At last his companion, necessarily pressing him,
rehearsing likewise the foresaid title of Alms, with much a do, compelled him
to take a very small part of them.

He never gave any command, either to those of the house or strangers, and in
that House he conuersed modestly and circums^ectly, like some Pilgrim or
Beggar, who for Gods sake had been received into some Hospital. When for the
dispatch of business he desired to meet with the Marquis, for so much as he
would not interrupt him at that time, or be summoned at any other time, he
stayed for entrance in the outward chambers. At his table there was no reason,
but that he might have been served after the manner of other men. But in his
mothers house, who desired nothing more then to be observing to her son,
challenging unto himself more liberty, he entreated that his cup might not be
served him upon a plate after the manner of Princes, but that according to the
use of the Society, it might be set by him, upon the table. Very sparing were
both his meat, and his drink according to his custom. Neither was he curious
of what sort they were, questionless the daily practice of refrayning his
appetite, seemed utterly to have taken away his taste. If his mo^her gave him
any thing that was good, or that she said to be better then other things, he
returning her thanks, after abstained from it. He was wont to say to his
companion: Deus bone! quam been nobis est domi nostrae? Mihi certe quilibet
noster, quamuis tenuis victus, maioris, quam dapes omnes, quibus hae mensae
onerantur, cibi esse videtur: Good God! how well accommodated are we at our
house? verily me thinks every dish of ours, how slender soever, seems to be
better mea^e, then all the dainties with the which these tables are loaded.

He would never suffer any ones help in putting on, or of his clothes; no, not
so much as that of his companion. The Issue which had been made in his left
a^me, he dressed so carefully, without any ones help, that his companion
coming in the mean time, and whilst he endeavors to teach him another way
how to lap it, putting his finger a little toward him, he straightway wished
him not to touch him. Such was his modesty, and so careful was he, not to
commit to any other, that which he was able to perform himself. In his
mothers, and if conveniently he might, in his brothers house, he made his own
bed: likewise he readily lent his helping hand to his Companion in the making
of his. But the servants of the Court observing that, were very careful to
prevent him with their diligence. He did so utterly neglect all care of his
health, that he never so much as took it into his consideration, but by the
admonishment of his companion. He was very much delighted with solitude. But he
had least auersion from the company of his mother, who both was a lover of
piety, and stood in some need of comfort.

In the morning, after that he was risen out of his bed, he spent one whole
hour in prayer; he was present at Mass, the greater Canonical prayers he
recited every day; his beads likewise, and these sometimes with his companion,
in such sort as that they answered one another after the manner as they use to
sing. If in the day time he could get any spare leisure, he would say to his
fellow, Fratereamus paulisper precatum. Brother let us go a little to prayer.
Before he gave himself to rest, he said the Litanies, and examined his
conscience. He confessed his sins to the Archpriest, and every Festival day
he went into the chief Church, which is that of the Saints Nazarius and
Celsus, to hear Masle, and receive the most holy Eucharist. At which time an
infinite number of people resorted, to behold him, not without signs of love
toward him, and grief for the loss of so good a prince. That day which he
first came thither, the Church was filled with so great a multitude of men,
that came to see him, that he was minded to have used some speech to them, and
to exhort them all to fear God all the days of their life, and frequent the
holy Sacraments. Notwithstanding he abstained, for so much as he thought to
begin first, from giving examples of virtue, from the house he sprung off,
composing first his brothers business.

He never gave any the least sharp word to his companion, he never showed
himself offended with any thing that he did, but he would rather give place to
his opinion, and with great mildness so order his mind, that it might agree
always with his judgment: he would give ear unto him in all things, that
belonged to his health: and his companion admired his sanctity, and was very
much taken with his candor and sincerity, which he discovered in all his
actions; in like manner with that his excellency of mind, whereby he made no
account of mortal affairs, and humane considerations.

In that time they had made many iournies together, as to Brescia, Mantua, and
other places, whither the dispatch of their business called them. There
sometimes upon the way Aloysius transferred his mind from those things which
he saw with his eyes, unto God, and entered into good long speeches of Divine
matters, of which, even when his fellow seemed to be wearied, or to cast in
some by-speaches, he would make no end. This appeared once, when he was to go
to Castle-Godfrey, to deal with his uncle Alphonsus, Lord of that place, whose
inheritance he had succeeded in, if he had not made choice of Religion. At his
departure the Marquess commanded certain servants to attend him, whom not
presuming in his presence to refuse, so soon as he was gone out of Castilion,
he sent them all from him, afterward it came to pass, through fault of the
Coachman who had lost his way, that they came to Castle-Godfrey two hours
after sunset, the gates being now shut. And for so much as it is a town very
well fortified, to which no entrance at that time of night was wo^t to be
allowed, the watchmen were particularly to be informed, who they were, and from
whence they came, and they must stay so long til the Prince himself was
certified of all. A long time after, behold the gates are set open, the bridge
let-downe, there issues forth a great number of Gentlemen, pages to the Prince
carrying torches. In the very entrance of the town a great company of armed
men standing upon both sides of the streets, guard him passing in the midst
of them from the gate, to the Princes palace. The Prince himself going to
meet him, received him with great joy and honor. And acco^panying him to his
chamber, which was all decked-vp in Royal manner, and furnished with
magnificent beds, he gave place to him for a time to refresh himself. There
Aloysius as being much estranged from these things, so soon as he saw himself
ouerloaden with so many honors, and brought into that lodging so richly
furnished, turning to his fellow he said: Deus nobis hoc v^spere sit propit^^s;
and quo tandem ob peccata nostra sumus delapsi* vi(...)n hac con^lauia, hos
l^ct^s? (...) tandem nobis melius ess^t, procul ab his obsea^^^s and
oportunitatibus, in cubiculis illis nostris ^^^is, vilibusque l^ctis ^acer^?
God be merciful unto us this night: and whither at last are we fallen sor our
sins? do you see these chambers, these beds? how much better I pray you, were
it for us, to lodge far-off from these obseruances and dangerous occasions, in
those naked chambers, and poor beds of ours? Therefore to one impatient of so
many honors all things seemed tedious, til having dispatched his business he
might depart.

Therefore the day after, he returned to Castilion, from whence having received
sufficient instructions of all things, to the end that he might dispatch with
the Duke, he passes to Mantua. There for certain weeks coming, and going he
made his abode in the College of the Society, yielding unto all so notable an
instruction of sanctity, that the Fathers that then lived there, to this very
day, do declare certain admirable things of his modesty, humility, contempt of
himself, observance and reverence toward others, his incredible gravity of
manners, which was joined with singular sincerity, and candor of mind in his
conversation.

He had his mind always alienated from these mortal things, and placed upon
God, as one straytly joined unto him, in so much as he neither did, nor said
any thing, but he seemed to have regard to him, as a witness and spectatour.
Therefore the Fathers beheld him as an excellent maister-peece of all virtue,
and having beheld him were more and more inflamed with piety. For from his very
countenance there shone so great a splendor of sanctity, that they affirmed
they beheld therein the express image of B. Charles Borromaeus the Cardinal.
There governed at that time the College at Mantua F. Prosper Malauolta, in
times past placed there by B. F. Ignatius the first founder and parent of our
Society. He having made good trial of this young man's sanctimony and gravity,
thought it not amiss for him to make a sermon to this College of Fathers upon
a certain friday; which office the custom is to impose only upon Priests,
and those well stepped into years and authority, but never to those that are
void of priesthood. He being somewhat bashful at first, notwithstanding obeyed
him, and upon those words of Christ our Lord: H^^c est praeceptum m^um, vt
diligatis inu^m, s(...) vos: This is my commau^d, that you love another, as I
have loved you, with so great fervor of a Divine Spirit and efficacy he
exhorted them to charity amongst themselves, that he ravisheth them all with
merueilous contentment.

He begins afterward to negotiate with the Duke the business that he came
about, notwithstanding he did not first attempt it with mortal men, before he
had commended it to God, in whose hands are the hearts of men, of whom he had
already besought that he would put a limit to those fearful businesses:
That, whereas it was manifest by public testimonies upon record, and by the
very event it self of the matter, verily at his first meeting with the Duke,
in the space of an hour and a half, having composed al differences, and
obtained all things which he requested, he put an end to that his imploiment.
And allthough the Duke had been by sclaunderers much exasperated with
indignation against the Marquess, and Aloysius who was nearer of kin to the
Marquess the^ to the Duke, might to one that should after a humane manner
consider the matter, have moved suspicion of a mind too partially inclined to
one part: Neither truly were there wanting causes to the Duke, by pretense of
which he might have rejected Aloysius his intreatyes, as who neither by
Princes, nor Noblemen, who likewise had mediated as peacemakers, would never
suffer himself to be swayed; notwithstanding after that he found in him so
Saintlike a disposition, and upright judgment of mind, never so much as
attempting any denial, he yielded, and promised that he trusting in his
goodness and equity, would do all things as it should please him to determine.

There were not wanting some who did their endeauou^ to hinder, or at least
defer this pacification, that ended so much to the honor of God: and amongst
other there was a man of grave authority, who persuaded the Duke, that for so
much as it was his pleasure to insist in this course, yet he should not
condescend to that Aloysius his request alone, but defer the matter so long,
till he might have the advice of those Princes who had spoken in this before.
To this man the Duke answered, that he was certaynely resolved even presently
to dispatch the business, and that he, what he did, would do only for Aloysius
his sake: for, out of any other respect he would never have done it. The which
moved great admiration to all men.

Aloysius received of Tullius Petrozzarius (a Gentleman of good worth) all
those articles which were objected by way of accusation against the Marquis,
and brought it so to pass that he purged himself of them all to the Duke; with
which Apology, when Aloysius had brought it, he gave ample satisfaction to the
Duke. Afterward Aloysius returning to Casti^on brought the Marquess to the
Duke of whom he was with great courtesy intertayned, and entreated that he
would please to dine with him, and spend the rest of the day in sports and
recreations. The Duke being instant that Aloysius would likewise dine with him,
he could not be persuaded thereunto, but returned to the College of the
Society. When he had said the same to the Marquis, he replied, that yet at the
least he should be careful after dinner to return to see the comedy. Aloysius
smiling, said that his companion would not be well pleased with that. At the
same time the Duke restored Sulphurino, and all the coast subject to the
dominion thereof, which hitherto the heirs and brothers of Aloysius do still to
this very day possess.

CHAP. XXIV. He persuadeth his brother the Marquis, to disclose his secret
marriage, to the intent that he might avoid evil example. At Castilion with a
Sermon he exciteth the people to piety.
THE Duke and Marquess being after this manner reconciled, to the great joy
and admiration of all, who held the business as desperate, he sets hand to
the taking away of another certain thing of evil example which the Marquis
had given to the world. For being en^nared with the love of a certain young
woman, borne truly of an honest family, and of parentage for their degree
sufficiently rich, but far unequal to his calling, he had commanded this
maid, who by chance was gone one day out of her Fathers house, to be brought
away in a Coach secretly, and that very well guarded on every side, to a
certain Grange-house of his, which he used for his pleasure. Furthermore
whereas blind and youthful fervor joined with great power, had thrust him
headlong into this disgraceful stain; notwithstanding so much prevailed in
his mind the fear of God and good education, that he determined not to enjoy
her sinfully, with Gods displeasure, but in lawful wedlock: and rather stain
his family with some little blemish, then plunged in mortal sin, and
continually void of Gods grace, to make shippracke both of the maids soul,
and fame. Therefore having obtained leave from the Bishop, to take her secretly
to wife the 25. of October the year 1588. before the Archpriest and necessary
witnesses, he was joined to her in marriage, and enjoyed her always after in
lawful matrimony. Bu^ for so much as he feared, least that by this alliance he
might incense his other kindred, and chiefly his uncle Alphonsus, unto whom he
was to succeed in the dominion of Castle-Godfrey, he concealed it, not only
from him, but from his mother also. She therefore as being ignorant of this
marriage, entreats Aloysius, that according to that authority which he had
with the Marquess, (as to whom he might ascribe, not only that his title of
Marquesate, and all his riches, but even this his amity with the Duke, and
peaceable state of his affairs) he would endeavor to effect, that he should
break of fro the familiarity of this Gyrle. Aloysius truly performed this
task very diligently. But the other framing one excuse after another,
endeavored to dispatch-away his brother, and protract time, but so
notwithstanding, that he promised to be ruled by him. Aloysius considering,
that what in present he did not, in time to come he should have no power to
obtain, put his brother in conclusion to promise him to follow his Counsel,
and for so much as he was straight way to go to Millan, that he would come
thither, enter into consideration of this matter, and finally be ordered by him
in all.

Aloysius having received this promise the 25. of November the year 1589.
took his way to Millan, and there falls to his accustomed studies, and
functions of piety. About January Rodulph the Marquis, to perform his promise,
him self likewise took his journey to Millan and timely in the morning upon a
festival day, when Aloysius, having received the B. Eucharist, was in the
Quire seriously giving thanks to God, he comes to the College: the porter
comes to him in have, and tells him in his care, that his brother the
Marquess was present, with a great attendance, and could not long stay.
Aloysius giving back no answer, continues two whole hours upon his knees
immovable, and then at last goes to the Marquess. He discloseth unto him
from the very beginning the whole course of that which had passed, and that he
was lawfully married to that young woman. It much comforted Aloysius to
understand that he was free from that sin, that had been imputed to him, and
from that suspicion of his living out of the grace of God. In the mean while
he said, that he would ask Counsel of grave and learned Fathers, what in that
case was requisite for him to do. The Marquis consenting thereunto, he both
write to Rome, and propounded it at Millan to be decided. Many were of opinion
that the Marquis, to the intent that he might take away the infamy^ of
fornication, with which to the public scandal he was charged, and quit
himself of that foul example, he must of necessity make open profession of
his marriage. This opinion of the learned he did with so effectual speech
declare to his brother, that he induced him to what he would, and he undertook
the charge of pacifiing his kindred. When they had determined this, Aloysius
persuadeth the Marquis, to purge himself of all the sins of his life past,
and to receive the divine Eucharist.

So soon as the Marquis was returned to Castilion, Aloysius also with his said
companion comes thither. When he arrived there the 20. of April, he said
that he had intended thither two iournies, the first for the world, and this
for God and his Church, meaning this business concerning the marriage. He
procured that the Marquis should openly declare to his mother, and other whom
it concerned, the whole matter, how he had behaud himself in it. And Aloysius
himself, to the intent that he might take away all occasion of evil example
that might arise herby, promulgated the same to the people. In like manner he
exhorted his brother that he should use that his wife, well and Christian-like.
Moreover by his letters he gave understanding to the Duke of Mantua, to both
the Card Gonzaga's, who were then living and other Princes of his kindred, and
besought them, that what the Marquis had done, for the defense of his soul
from the danger of a grievous sin, and preserving the honor of that young
woman, might not by any of them be taken in evil part. From all these he
received answer according to his desire. But chiefly he did his undeauour,
that he might approve, and commend this fact to Alphonsus his Uncle. Wherefore
after his death that dominion fell by inheritance to Rodulph, which after
Marquis Francis, who governs there at this day, exchanged with the Duke of
Mantua, for that of Millan. Therefore he does now by good right, and great power
govern at Millan, and that moreover is by the Emperor annexed to the dominion
of the Marquis of Castilion.

This marriage being published, Aloysius took occasion to labor, that many who
kept concubines, took them in marriage, and in like sort that many great
discords were appeased. Being entreated by his Mother, that he would make a
Sermon in the Great Church, he asked thereupon the counsel of his companion.
But then he made it upon a certain Saturday, in a Church of the Sodality near
to the Church of S. Nazarius: and although he endeavored to preach with as
much secrecy as might be, and therefore forebad any warning to be given by the
Sermon-bell, notwithstanding he found the Church filled with people. He spoke
elega^tly and piously, and exhorted them all, that the next day after, which
was Quinquagesimasunday, the last of their Caruenall, they would come to receive
the holy Eucharist. And with such ardour did they obey this his inuitement,
that the Priests and Monks were upon necessity detained all that night in the
hearing of Confessions. The next day in the morning there received the
Eucharist Aloysius his mother, his brother the Marquis, his wife, and other
people to the number of 700. Aloysius much to his comfort, and to the singular
example of all, served the priest at Mass, and those that communicated with
wine. From dinner they all returned thither to the explication of the Christian
doctrine.

The affairs of his family and brother being in this manner composed, he
intends his iourny toward Mi^^n the 22. of March the year 1590. When the
same year upon the (...). Day of March he was of the age of 21. years. And
for so much as in the sharp winters co^d of (...), his hands began to ^well
and break* that you might even see them running with blood, many taking
compassion on him, desired him to w^are gloves, or some warm muff^ over them.
But all inflamed with (...) of suff^ring hardness, and contempt o^ himself, he
could never be persuaded to (...) himself with any of these kind of (...)
(...)nces.

(...) to M^llan, he turns out of his (...) ^o (...), where so soon as he
arri(...) the College, one of the Fathers goes (...)ly to his chamber to
salute him, and according, as it is the custom of the Society toward those
that either go to, or come from travail, to embrace him. When he found him
there with an old clout wiping his shoes, that spectacle did vehemently set on
fire the mind of this man to piety and wholesome gri(...): for both in his aspect
there (...)-^orth a certain sanctity, and he saw (...) ^arn^stly busied in
this vile p^^ce of ser(...) ^^om he remembered that he had seen (...) past
(...) Parma, flourishing with riches and (...)oned with a great r^tinue of
servants. To conclude after he entered the College of the Society at Millan, he
said: E^ quantum mihi solatium praebet, quod me vide a(...) pedem denuo domi
nostrae fixisse; in quali nimirum ess^t, qui brum(...) tempore, ^ medio gelu,
quo prope diriguisset, in mollem calentemque lectum transferretur. Etenim tale
frigus a domicilijs nostris disiunctus sentire videbar: tali nunc ijsdem
redditus, sua^^tate fruor. Behold how much comfort it gives me, to see my
self once again to have set-foot in our house; doubtless no less then if a
man in winter time, should out of frost wherewith he was almost frozen, be
conveyed into a soft and warm bed. Verily such cold in my absence from our
houses did I seem to feel: such sweetness do I now enjoy, being returned
unto them.

CHAP. XXV. Of the excellent examples of virtue which he showed forth of
himself that short time which he lived at Millan.
AS the fire never cease burning, nor the light to illuminate, nor a precious
ointment to give forth fragrant odor* so B. Aloysius never making any end,
with ardent prayer to inkindle the minds of others, nor to show forth the
light of excellent examples, nor to diffuse the sweet odor of virtues, which
were enshrined in his breast, in every place was always constant to himself.
And as waters, whose natural course has long been intercepted, do afterward
break forth with greater force and violence; in like sort Aloysius being for
some certain months, whilst he negotiateth his affairs at Castilion,
detained from his accustomed chastisements and exercises, so soon as he had
once betaken himself to the College of Millan, he seemed in desiring, and
under going them to be in^atiable. Therefore before he was yet scarcely
refreshed after his iourny, he comes into the R^f^ctory in a thrid-bare
cloak, he accuses himself before his fellows of negligence of himself, and
to the great edification of them all he requires penance. And as it very much
delighted him to see this College excellently flourishing with re^igious
Discip^ine, and the young m^ no less laboring with inflamed minds in the
perfection of piety and religion, then in the knowledge and learning of good
arts: so in like manner, as many, as lived in this College, after that this
lively abstract of all absolute Virtue began to converse amongst them,
conceived excessive joy and comfort.

I must in this Chapter of necessity pass over in silence, many very
commendable things performed by him at Millan. For first, death has deprived
me of the benefit of many men, who had bynable particularly to have informed me
of the same. Amongst which one was F. Bartholomeus R^calcatus, who whereas he
was inwardly acquainted with Aloysius, and governed the College at Millan with
singular praise of sanctity, departed out of this life. Moreover for so much as
Fr^dericus Borome^s, that most illustrious Cardinal and Archbishop of this
city, has not as yet, as he promised he would, commanded a certain
instrument of his g^stes to be made. Therefore I will only declare a few things,
which partly by those who at that time lived at Millan, were afterward
registered in the public Records, partly from the Rectour of that College,
gathered truly with great diligence at my request.

Therefore B. Aloysius whilst he lived at Millan, following the studies of
Divinity, both in the forenoone and afternoon schools, was so conversant at
other exercises of learning, that he would seem in nothing exempted or
singular. And he used even as the rest to have a chamber-fellow, who always
looking attentively into his conversation, reaped much fruit of mind thereby.
There was given to him to use, the Su^me of S. Thomas neatly bound up with the
cover and leaves gilded, which when he by no means could be persuaded to have
in his custody, with tears he besought his Superior that he might change with
him for an ^^ld one. Which will of his he declared with so earnest an ardour of
mind, that for the mittigating of his grief he must of necessity be
co^descended unto. And this he did, out of his desire of having nothing
differing from that of poor people. Whatsoever leisure at any time he could
get from his studies, all that by the Superiors good leave would he bestow, in
the services of the Kitchen or Refectory. He would draw water for the Cook,
often wash the platters, po^s and other vtensiles, when he covered the tables
in the Refectory, to the intent that he might have his mind ^^edfastly set upon
God, and might merit more grace, he would impose upon every table a surname.
That whe^at the Rectour ^a^e, he would call the table of Christ our Lord. The
next unto it, of our Blessed Lady, the other that were next, the tables of the
Apostles, Martyrs Confessors and Virgins. Therefore as often as wi^h the
prefect he cou^^ed the table in the Refectory he said. Ex(...)us (...)
Saluat^^is, aut Dominae nostr^* Let us spread the cloth of our Savior o^ o^
our Lady, and after the same sort would he call the others. In which office he
conuersed with as inflamed an affection and forwardness of mind, as if in very
deed Christ our Lord, Our Blessed Lady the Virgin, and other Saints whom he
imagined himself to serve, had been to have site^^ at those tables.

It was very pleasing unto him in recreation time to keep company with the
Temporal Coadiutors, or go^ abroad with them, both because he loved that kind
of humility, and because he thought that then he might more freely discourse of
Divine matters, and he reioyeed to be a forwarder of all to celestial life. In
the company of others, if so be they sat, he would thrust himself into the
lowest and most incommodious place, where he could not so much as once lean:
if they stood in a ring, he attended to the talk behind othermens shoulders.
Which surely it was manifest he did not do, out of any court-custome or for
delicacy sake, nor out of any vain affectation.

There came thither unto him a certain man, who had been under his dominion,
to request I know not what, which belonged to his dignity of Marquis. Unto
whom he denied that he had ever any thing more to do with this world, or that
he had authority over any thing, which answer truly he gave with so much
candor and signification of an humble mind, as the man departed, not only
informed with an excellent example, but even astonished. There was observed in
him an excessive propensity to a greatefull mind, and that notwithstanding
sincere and nothing affected, out of which again and again, in a manner
without end he gave thanks for the least good office that was done him.

Being asked by one of the Society, whether it were a hard thing for a man that
was delicate, and magnific^nt to forsake these things that were subject to
Fortune he answered, ne fieri quidem posse, nisi Christus Dominus huic tali, vt
quondam illi, qui caecus erat natus, luto oculos imbueret, hoc est harum rerum
vilitatem, que long^ mayor sit quam luti, ab oculos po^^ret. That surely it
could not be done, (...) Christ our Lord should unto such a one, as ^n times
past he did unto him, who was (...) from his not(...), (...) his eyes (...)
with (...), tha^ is to say, (...) before his the (...) of th^se things, which
is far more then that of m^d. Ther^ ^led for re(...) unto him a certain man
(...) the Col(...) ^ so much ^ his mind ^ com(...) ^ of the P^alme: ^ and in
libro ^ Thy eyes have s^ene my ^ shall be ^ said although in s^^ing how (...)
w^ are from per(...) ^ some cause of ^ we must ^, when ^ vnper(...) ^ written
in the ^ who sees that imperfection that is i(...), not to the (...) that he
may (...) v^, (...) under our spirits, and to the end that he may draw the
greater good out of our de^^^^es. By the pious ex(...)ion of these words, (to
give you a taste of (...) c^lestiall spirit. (...) meruelously eased his grief
and encouraged his mind. In like manner he often did th^se things both at home
and abroad, by which he seemed little (...) his honor for Gods cause. In the
days of ^^rouetyde some of his fellow-students in learning, went into the
marketplaces and streets of Millan, and preached to the people that they found
about them. He obtained by suite from the Father rectour that he might be
associated to one of these his companions. Then did he go about the streets,
gather together a multitude, and entreat those wandering persons that he met,
that they would hear his fellows sermon, and so singular was his humility,
charity, and modesty in requesting them, that very willingly they followed him.
Upon sun-dayes and festival days, he freely and willingly expounded the
points of Christian Religion in public, and easily brooked the cold which at
that time truly was very sharp at Millan.

Once he knew ouernight that a certain companion of his, who after the custom
of Religion was to make his vows should go the next day after to beg through
the city. For this at that time was wont to be done by those of the Society to
the intent that they might humiliate and prove themselves. When therefore
A^^ysius had effected, that leave was given to accompany him, through
greatness of joy he was not able to contain himself, but the very same day,
when, as the custom was, all had made the examination of their consciences, he
went to the bedside of that his fellow, as it were to eua^gelize unto him this
good news. The next-day after whilst he begges from street, to street, he was
surprised with much more celestial joy. Therefore often did he as it were
triumphing utter these words as he went through the streets: Etiam Dominus
Noster Jesus Christus a^ hunc modum stipem conquisiuit. Even after this same
manner did our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ crave alms.

In like manner at another time going forth in a torn garment to beg, being
asked by a certine Gentlewoman, (who carried the show of a very light one)
whether he were one of those Fathers which resided at the Brerane College of
S. Mary's (in Millan) for there she said that she knew a certain Father. After
Aloysius said that he had his abode there: Alas (...) said she, that miserable
Father, behold whether he has betaken himself for his destruction? out of
which words of hers taking opportunity, to bestow upon her the light of better
doctrine, and to take away her error, he began with great efficacy of a Divine
spirit to discourse, that that Father was not miserable, as she supposed, but
happy, and that, he had not arrived to destruction, but to a perfect life. Nay
rather that she, that wasted her life, amongst the riches, and truly as it
seemed, in the manifould delicacies of this world, was in a miserable and
unhappy state of life, and in manifest danger, of everlasting destruction. With
which speaces she being moved, was indeed presently very much touched with
remorse for her folly, and afterward without delay reformed her manners.

It was his ordinary office to sweep down cobwebs about the College, which
truly he performed very diligently. Moreover he would observe whether he saw
any Senator, or man of account walking in the cloister and if he did, then he
would come forth suddenly with a long pole and a beesome tied at the end
thereof, to the intent that he might be esteemed by them, a man abject, and of
small reckoning, he would before their faces fall to sweep away cobwebs. Which
was so usual a custom with him, that as often as the Fathers saw Aloysius
going forth with his pole, it was unto them an argument, that some stranger of
authority, was come into the College.

Certain Bishops and other Prelates had determined to dine at the College.
The Rectour to give them occasion to take some knowledge of Aloysius,
commanded him to make a sermon at the table in the Refectory. To avoid this
task, for so much as it seemed to carry the show of honor, and desirous to
conceal himself, he wished to be spared from it, but daring not to withstand
the command of his Superior, verily he made a grave and learned sermon of the
office of Bishops. Afterward one congratulating for the happy success of his
sermon: he said that nothing gave him more contentment that day, then that he
was publicly noted for a lisper. For he could not very readily pronounce the
letter R. He often desired leave to have his faul^es published to his face in
the Re^ectory. Which truly in the Roman Col^edge, he had for a time
intermitted, not tollerating to be prays^d, when he desired to be reproved.
But for so much as his mind being always upon God, he never perceived himself
to be sa^uted of those that met him, being openly admo^shed thereof, he
condemned himself of pride unto many, and afterward he was most diligent in
this kind, and so endeavored to join his mind unto God, that nevertheless he
might not be wanting to this his office of courtesy.

He was unto all the College a singular example of submission modesty,
obedience, study, and Religious discipline. And for so much as he was had in
that esteem of them all, there was no man but was willing to in^inuate
himself into his familiarity out of the confidence that they had of his
virtue, and the fe^ling of his piety, although he himself most willingly
applied himself unto every one as he found him most fervent in the service of
God. Qu^stionlesse to the intent that conferring with them concerning the
offices of piety, he might in^erchangeably be partaker of that celestial
co^fo^t.

CHAP. XXVI. The letters of F. Bernardinus Medices of the virtues of Aloysius
observed at Millan. Also* Fa. A^^illes Galiardy his testimony of his manner of
praying without distraction of mind.
HE being departed out of this life, Bernardinus Medices, a man no less famous
for the virtues worthy of a Religious man, then for honorable parentage, and a
very familiar friend to Aloysius, writ in this manner to me from Millan:
Aloysius, our very good brother, confirmed unto me, that constancy and
pers^u^rance though but in small matters, was a thing with him much esteemed,
and that this to him that desired to profit was a virtue very n^c^ss^ry.
Therefore i^ all his actions, and in his daily course, he carried himself
always after one manner. He said that it was a thing full of danger to follow
a man's own affection as his guide. That the safest way was that which the
light of knowledge and reason showed. Wherefore he labored with his mind, that
he might in his actions come equal with the light of his mind.
Notwithstanding* he said that he was never able to proceed so far as that
showed him. For how much the more he endeanoured in actio^, so much the more
did his light* increase. He desired most ardently to suffer adversity, and he
said once unto me, that he could never find any more clear testimony of any
ones sanctity, then to see him be of a good conscience in the midst of
adversity, that is if to one that is innocent God objected great matter of
sufferance. He thought well of all from his very heart, notwithstanding he did
in no sort approve, of sins, the wickedness of which was manifest; but as
far-forth as was lawful, he made the best interpretation of them. He did with
singular respect and prudence admonish others of their errors, and in like
manner entreated to be admonished of his. In all his actions he declared,
piety, charity, and prudence. I never obserue^ in him any leuity all the time
that I was acquainted with him, no not so much as the very first motion of any
perturbation. Nothing in his manners that might be subject to censure. I never
saw him wittingly slip so much as in the least matter, never to neglect any law
of Religion. Surely he was in every kind of virtue singular, but in that
especially, that in so great accomplishment of virtue, he seemed to be singular
in nothing, which virtue truly, I judge to be of all the most eminent. And
these things came to my mind of him at this time.

At the same time there was a speech bruted through the College, that Aloysius
excelled in an admirable ability of prayer, and that whilst he prayed he was
never distracted from God: Therefore Achilles Galiardus, a man of singular
learning, and authority, often entering into discourse with him of celestial
matters, at last also he fell upon that course of joining the mind unto God
with perfect charity, which commonly they call viam vnitiuam, the unitive way:
and the Divines Theologicam mysticam, mystical Theology. There he did clearly
understand, that beside other guiftes which were very singular, with which his
mind was stoared from Almighty God, he was also after a certain incredible
manner close joined to God, that he did daily reap the fruit of Mystical
Theology, that he was conversant about those Diuinae Tenebrae of which the
Great Dionysius Areopagita speaks, that he embraced it, inioyed it, and
proceeded very far in the same. Therefore finding that so great virtues, and
those of so high a pitch, that scarcely mortal condition is capable of, had
taken so deep roots in a young ma^s mind, who had hardly passed four years
in Religion, and that he did even now truly possess that degree, which very
rare men, and those of perfect and mature religion were wont to attain to, no
otherwise then by a certain unusual assistance of God; he took therein both
infinite admiration and joy.

And for so much as, they that are so great proficients in this course of
joining themselves to God, do not without offering of some violence unto
themselves, descend to the procuring of other men's salvation, and for the most
part are conversant with God, deep fixed upon the contemplation of him and
estranged from the noise of men: he to the intent that he might make some
trial of him, said, that he did somewhat merueile that this his habit of mind,
was not somewhat suspected of him, as disagreeing with the institute of the
Society. For so much as the vocation thereof is by promiscuous dealing and
conversation with all sorts of men, to endeavor the salvation of souls. But
this mystical familiarity with God, by no pretext of good to others can be
brought to take charge of souls, but leaving the care of action unto other
men, chooses to it self the better part which rests in contemplation. To
this Aloysius answered, that he truly if he perceived such things to be
effected in his mind which he spoke of, he would eschew the following of them
as differing from his vocation Which answer did even much more astonish him.
For he understood that through an admirable benefit of God, he had joined both
courses the one with the other, so that neither that which consists in the
enjoying of God, did hinder the desire of action, nor this restrain the other
of contemplation: and that consequently he was placed in the highest state of
conversation with God, which is performed by love, and the perpetual
conformation of our mind to his will. To wit, the mind by force of love being
lifted up unto God, knowing with what zeal God burns for the salvation of
souls, being brought down from that height, in which through blessed
retirement it feeds upon the cogitation of God, is urged forward with the
spur^ of affection, to undertake the business and care of helping men's souls.
Therefore from that very time Achilles never ceased, to publish this so notable
a gift bestowed by God upon Aloysius, and that he confirmed thrice by writing,
and by oath.

CHAP. XXVII. Aloysius is foretold of his death by God. He is reca^ed by Fa.
General from Millan to Rome. In his journey at Siena he makes a sermon to
them of the Sodality of the Blessed Virgin.
THIS Blessed young man was now already, in respect of his so many virtues,
ripe for eternal glory; for so much as that Angelical life which he had
always lead upon earth amongst mortal men, made him worthy of that heavenly
mansion, and the society of Angels. Wherefore Almighty God declared that it was
his pleasure to send for him to enjoy the rewards which in so short a space as
that which he lived, he had with so much study and labor deserved. For when as
he lived yet at Millan, a little above a year before he departed out of this
life, in the time of his morning prayer when he bent the whole force of his
mind upon God, he inwardly infused into him a certain light, by virtue of
which he manifestly understood, that there remained but few days* more for him
to live; and moreover he received a command, that this present year he should
endeavor to live as perfectly as he could, abstracting his mind from the love
of all mortal things, that he should serve God, and with greater care then
ever heretofore adorn himself both with inward and outward virtues. His mind
being illustrated after this manner, he found in himself a merueylous change,
and that his affection was much further then at any time before, withdrawn
from these transitory things. This revelation from God, he concealed from all,
except Fa. Vincentius Bruno, and a few others to whom he made it known at his
return to Rome. In the mean time, even as he was wont to do, he employed
himself in the studies of Divinity. Although in respect that he perceived
certain inward incitements to be put into him, that moved him to set his whole
heart upon God, he was less able now to apply his mind and to take delight in
those things.

There ceased upon him a desire to return to Rome, where he had tasted the
first fruits of a Religious spirit, and that he might again visit so many of
his acquaintance, and associate in celestial matters. But for so much as he
determined to beware, least he should with his mind incline any more to one part
then another, and desired that the whole matter might be referred to the will
of his Superiors, he also kept secret this his desire. Notwithstanding it was
the pleasure of God that for the comfort, of so many young men, with whom in
the Roman College he had knit a sacred league of friendship; he should go
thither. Therefore Father General. so soon as he perceived, that all those
businesses, for the dispatch of which, he was sent into Lumbardy, were
effected, and that winter being ouerpassed, there was a fit time offered, for
making his iourny, especially for that the Rectour of the Roman College, out
of his desire of the spiritual commodity of so many young men, who were likely
to profit much by his presence and familiarity, did instantly importune it; he
at last determined to recall him, and order is given unto me, that I should
first certify him by letter of this decree. Upon the receipt of which message
he conceived so much joy in his mind, that fearing least he should exceed the
bounds of moderation, he requested of Fa. Bernardine Medices, that he would say
mass for him, and that he should humbly beseech almighty God, that if it might
not stand with his greater glory he might be frustrated of this his desire.
Receiving not long after a command from Fa. General himself, that he should
return, he sent letters unto diverse full of certain singular remonstrances
of affection, wherein he alleged the causes, wherefore he so much desired to
live at Rome. In those which he sent to me, he says in this manner. I believe
truly it is no hard thing to persuade you, h(...) much pleasure it is to me,
that I am designed for the Roman College, and that I may once again^ see there
my spiritua^ father and brothers. In the^ mean tim^ it shall be my hope to
en^oy that familiarity, which I am confident (by Gods help) shall be renew^^
between m^, you and other our familiar fri^n^es, (...)n with more fruit then
ever heretofore. I pray y^^ commend me particu^arly to them all. For unto the
whole Rom(...) Co^eage in general I ^o^ with my whole heart, soul, and mind,
and with a^l my aff(...)tion commend my self. He adeaged another cause, to a
certain Father who was once his fellow No(...), with whom discoursing of that
first message which he received of the d^t^rmination of his coming to Rome, he
speaks thus. Which with so much the more willing min^ I will obey so soon as
I sh(...) be recalled, for, if we may call any Country ours h^r^upon ^arth,
surely no other would I acknowledge but Rome, wh^r^ I was begotten to JESUS-
Christ.

The command being brought unto him in the beginning of the month of May the
the year 1590. he begins his iourny, and therein he followed the same course
of life which he did in his other. He caused to his companion celestial joy,
and went before them in his example. They, when they perceived, that as far
forth as he might, he desired to be silent for the most part and that he had
his mind as it were abstracted from his senses, they did their endeavor to
recall him out that continual meditation.

A grievous dearth of victuals at that time infected Italy, therefore both in
other places in the way, and especially upon the Apennine, which at this day
deuideth Tuscany from Lombardy, they found every where poor men famished with
hunger. At the sight of these a certain Father said unto Aloysius: verily God
has bestowed a great benefit upon us, that it was not his pleasure we should
be borne in so great want as these poor men. Unto whom he presently answered;
Maius vero est, quod in Turcarum ditione nati non sumus. But greater it is,
that we were not borne amongst the Turks. Aloysius thought himself too much
observed by these Fathers, and according to their charity toward him to be
used with too much curiosity. Therefore he met a certain other Father, and
declared unto him that he could be contented to make his iourny with other
companions, that would make no account of him.

Being come to Siena, he desired to receive the Eucharist in the Chapel of S.
Catherine of Siena; which he had the favor to do, with great sensible joy at
the Mass which a certain priest of the Society celebrated. Being requested in
the College at Siena, that he would preach to the young men that are in the
Sodality of the Blessed Virgin Mother, after he had promised to perform it, he
betaketh himself into the Quire. There before the Blessed Sacrament,
meditating for a little time, without ever looking into any book, and
afterward going back into his chamber, he compendiously sets down those
things which he had conceived in his mind. He made a sermon so proper and
effectual for matter of piety, that he put into diverse of those youths (who
were not ignorant of his place and quality) a desire to contemn their
fortunes, and embrace Religion. Many afterward earnestly entreated him to give
them copies of that sermon. And a certain preacher of the Society keeps to
this day, the very original Copy of this Blessed young man's own hand writing,
as a perpetual monument of his love toward him.

After that he came at last to Rome, he was received joy fully, and cheerfully
of all his companions of the Roman College in general, who seemed never to be
satiated with seeing him, talking with him, and enjoying his holy company.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the accomplished sanctity of B. Aloysius.
IT is a sentence of the Wiseman in the book of Proverbs, (Pro. 4.) That the
life of Just me, which he calls a path, is like that resplendant light, which
springing from the duskish light of the dawning, and white-shimering morning,
does still increase with one degree of clearness after another, til at last it
display a perfect glorious day, effected by the Suns arrival to the highest
point of heaven at noone-tide. Such was the holy life of B. Aloysiut. There
streamed forth of it even from the very seventh year of his age a certain
whiteness of innocence; neither did he ever after cease to acquire more and
more light, as proceeding forward from one virtue to another, daily still
growing clearer and clearer by new merits and new light from God; till that he
shined forth, with so great grace and splend our, that he was not only grown
to a perfect day, but even as the Apostle said of the Philippians (Phil. 2.)
seemed himself to be become a resplendant light in the world. But if truly he
showed himself such in any time of his life heertofore, certainly in this
last year of his life, he gave a conspicuous testimony of these things, to
them that lived familiarly with him. For there shined in him so perfect
virtues; and seated with his whole mind rather in heaven, then upon earth, he
lived as it were an extaticall life, and abhorring from the sense of all things
that were subject to Fortune.

So soon as he came to Rome, he said unto me, it is now a good time since I
buried my friends, there is no reason why I should take any further care of
them. It is high time now to think of another life. Not long after his
coming, he brings to Fa. Rectour all his writings both of Divinity and
Contemplation, and amongst them certain other Commentaries which out of his
own industry he had made very learnedly upon S. Thomas. The Rectour asking why
he so deprived himself of all his writings and especially of those which
perhaps he should have present use for? he said, he did it for this cause, for
so much as he perceived himself to be carried away with some particular
affection toward those things, as the offspring of his own wit: and for that
he stood not affected to any other mortal thing, he would also deprive himself
of those things, that from hence forward he might have his mind sequestered from
all.

Further more he had attained unto a certrine exact subtility in trying out the
offices of a perfect life, which were requisite to be not only committed to
memory, by all Religious people, but also put in execution. For there steals
upon all men for the most part a certain natural sweetness, of a rejoicing
and selfe-cherishing mind, as often as they perceive themselves to be
especially graced, and beloved of excellent men, and chiefly of them in whose
power they are, for that they by this evident testimony and sign declare that
they are well pleased with their demeanor: therefore oftentimes, some do not
only rejoice therein themselves, but also make mention thereof in the company of
their familiar friends. Aloysius was far of another mind. For so far forth had
he extinguished all love of himself, and was so far from desiring that any
man's mind should particularly adhere to him, that he would not endure himself
so much as with any peculiar love, or observance to be affected by the
Superiors themselves. If any one made a show to love h^^ more then any of the
rest, he would be so far from answering them with love, that he conceived
grief for the same. Therefore those that governed him, to the intent that they
might do a thing acceptable to him, they seemed no more to esteem of him,
then of any other.

Whereas in all companies he was wont to be very affable, likewise at this time
no man was more courteous, no man could possibly be of a more sweet condition,
with so immense and common a kind of charity did he embrace all. Therefore very
earnestly they had recourse to him in recreation time, to hear him discourse
of God, of celestial felicity, and of the perfection of virtue. Verily my
self, speak both by experience, and have been told by others, that many
departed from his company more inflamed then from their prayers. If he could
get any one unto whom he knew that he might confidently enlarge his mind in
private, he declared unto them such divine affections of his heart, that as men
stricken with admiration, he caused them both to sigh, and conceive a veneration
of so unusual a conjunction with God.

Whithersoeuer he went, he never laid aside the presence of God contemplating
all his actions. He was so inflamed with he love of God, that when either there
was mention made of him, by the Reader at the table, or by any other discourse,
straightway his mind flowed with celestial joy, and he would give an open
sign thereof, by the inflammation of his countenance, and the interruption of
his speech. This fell out both at other times, and also once at the table, when
he hearing certain things read of Divine love, on the sudden he sensibly
perceived, from his inward breast as it were, a flame to burst forth, by the
violence whereof he was constrained to forbear eating. Upon this occasion we
that sat round about him at the table took notice of it. And for so much as
we were ignorant of the cause, and feared least he was grievously sick, we
fixed our eyes attentively upon him, and asked him whether he were well or no.
He who at that time truly was not able to utter so much as one word, and found
himself to be taken with the manner, being so much the more out of
countenance, cast down his eyes, burst forth into tears, blushed, and swelled
so in the breast, that we feared least some of his veins might have broken, and
were all moved with commiseration of him. At last in the later ending of dinner
by little and little he recovered himself again. There were some who when
they knew these things, to the intent that they might see him blush, upon set
purpose, would in the company of their companions introduce speeches of the
charity of God toward mankind. Others contrariwise, least he should incur
some hurt, or troble in his body, endeavored to break of these kinds of
discourses.

Walking in the schools and cloisters, he had his mind so far abstracted from
his senses, that upon set purpose oftentimes passing by him to salute him, I
have take occasion to bring him to himself. There he said his beads to the
Blessed Virgin Mother, he frequently used intercha^gable offices of piety, one
while kneeling, another while standing upright: and yet nevertheless he
avoided that note of affectation in all his doings, which others, often doing
these things, would easily have incurred.

This year he designed unto himself one hour every day, for the reading of
sacred things. He seemed much to be delighted in reading the Soliloquies of S.
Augustine, the life of S. Catherine of Gen^a, the sermons of S. Bernard upon
the Canticles, and especially that his Epistle entitled Ad fratres de monte
Dei, which are found among the works of S. Bernard. He had so often read that
over, that he seemed almost to have learned it without book. In his reading,
he selected, and noted certain hidden sentences of piety, which after his
death we found written in his own hand.

In the month of November, the year 1590. having begun his fourth year in
the study of Divinity, the Rectour compelled him to have his chamber a part
from the rest of his companions. Then he brought to pass that he might lodge
in a certain small corner of the house, that was old, dark, low, narrow, with
one window only through the roof thereof, which being just over the stayres,
was able to contain no more then a poor bed, a wooden chair, a foot stole
which did s^rue him to lean on both at his prayers and study; and therefore for
so much as it was rather like a strict prison the^ a chamber, it was never wo^t
to be allotted unto any student. When F. Rectour sometimes visited him in that
place, he found him triumphing and re^oycing in that little cottage, as if it
had been in some ample Palace. And we were wont to say unto him in jest, that
as S. Alexius was willing to lodge under a pay^e slayres, so he also like a
poor man, above.

To conclude, so complete was he in all the parts of Sanctity, that many both
his Superiors, chamberfellows, and fellow students affirmed upon oath, that by
no one of them was he ever found so much as culpable of one venial sin. He
that heard his confessions, said that he never dismissed him, but he conceived
some new light by hearing his confession. Another Fa. in like manner being
sworn, affirmed, that he, who had layne two years more or less, in the same
chamber with Aloysius, whereas both of them were commanded by the Rectour of
the Roman College, that one should admonish the other, for Charity sake, of
their faults if he observed any, notwithstanding in that whole space of two
years, wherein he continually kept an eye over Aloysius, and was como^ned unto
him in all familiarity and friedship, he never observed any thing committed by
him, in which there might be perceived so much as a shadow of any sin.

The affections of this holy young man were very exactly composed: great
vigilance in comprehending his senses within his o^ne jurisdiction: very inward
society with Almighty God: A most ardent desire of bringing other men to
immortal salvation, and to advance his own companions to the supreme height
of all sanctimony. Finally, that I may declare in short, he was an example of
absolute innocence, and both at home and abroad so accounted. A certain
priest, that was a preacher, did so much reverence this his so exquisite
Sanctity, and stood in a manner in such awe thereof, that whereas he neither
wanted opportunity, no^ will, notwithstanding being hindered by a certain kind
of veneration, he always abstained from joining himself unto him, and from
particular application of himself to his company.

A few months before he fell into his last sickness, he found himself to be
ravished with an infinite desire of celestial beatitude: at which time he
talked often and very willingly of death. He was wont to say amongst other
things, that how much the longer his life was prolonged, so much the more fear
was he in, of his salvation. Therefore if there should happen unto him a long
life, and by the increase of years he should be likewise entangled with
greater businesses, and that he should be initiated in priesthood, he should be
even much more uncertain of it. The reason he gave was this: for that Almighty
God requires an exact account of priests, whose office is to say determinate
prayers, and celebrate masses; and that they who take care of other men's
souls, ought much more by penance, to cleanse their own; that they make holy
Sermons, that they minister the sacraments, and that they govern others: but
that now in the state in which he then was, when as he was not yet preferred to
any sacred orders, nor sustained any important businesses, and therefore was yet
freed from the occasions of diverse sins, he had a better hope of making a
good end; that therefore being of those young years he did nothing at all
fear death if it might so stand with Gods pleasure. Of this his desire
Almighty God made him partaker, as I shall declare hereafter in due time.

CHAP. XXIX. With great Charity he serves the sick in the Hospital. Thereby
he is infected with a deadly disease.
THE year 1591. was very contagious through a cruel plague, which famine
spread through all Italy, ensuing every where after that general dearth of
corn. Heerof at Rome dyed an infinite number of men, who out of hope of
relief had flocked thither from all bordering Countries. This common calamity
the Fathers of the Society of JESUS, did with all help and charity, partly out
of their own stock, partly gathered from other men's liberalityes, labor to
relieve. Therefore they did not only industriously apply themselves to the
Hospitalls of that City, but moreover, things being driven to extreme
necessity, by Fa. Claudius Aquauiua the General his order, they in time opened
away unto a new one. And Father General himself, even subjected his own
service to those that were infected with the Leprosy.

At which time B. Aloysius by begging victuals through the City very
cheerfully for those that were sick and needy, by his singular charity caused
great admiration to all that beheld him. But then especially, when
(understanding that a certain very noble Prince, who from his Childhood had
been friendly and familiar unto him, and whom he had perceived to harbor
some sparks of piety, came to Rome to negotiate some business with Gregory
that 14. then Pope) he desired leave of Fa. General to salute him in a patched
coat, with a wallet upon his shoulders. For first he said that his hope was he
would be bountiful to the poor people that lay in the Hospitalls; and further
for that he had always found him a great well wisher of his, it was requisite,
that with some pious office he should requite him. Moreover that he thought it
would not be amiss for the informing of his mind with a wholesome contempt of
all mortal things, to go to visit him in that poor habit. Having entreated
leave, he obtained both, as the Princes master of his household told me
afterward. For he brought away no small sum of money in alms for the poor,
and the Prince himself at the behoulding of him being moved with a laudable
grief, and stirred up with good thoughts, prosecuted this his humiliation with
speeches full of piety.

Moreover whereas he had earnestly insisted in this course of going to the
Hospitalls and serving the sick persons, he never rested from a certain holy
emulation, and alleging the examples of his fellows, unto whom the same was
granted, before he had obtained leave of his Superiors, who were very hard to
be entreated thereunto. He went therefore, and that very often together with his
fellows, among whom was one Tiberius Bondius. When some one admonished this
man, that he should take heed least he took some infection, he answered, that
he, who had before his eyes so bright an example as Aloysius, neither would,
nor could be terrified from that labor by any danger of death that could be
objected. This Bondius about that time, perceived a certain unusual fervor
of a divine spirit to be suggested unto him: they who knew him before, both
merueiling, and congratulating this his alacrity, and new fervor of mind. And
he himself first took his death by this disease, as we will straightway
recount.

Those that went to the sick persons were always accompanied with a Priest,
who might hear their confessions. And chiefly Fa. Nicolas Fabrinus a
Florentine, being at that time the Minister of the Roman College, a man of
great judgment and abounding in charity and other Religious virtues. He, whereas
he was inwardly acquainted with Aloysius, afterward when he governed the
Florentine College, committed to writing those things which happenned to
Aloysius both in the Hospitals, and in his last sickness. Verily it was a
horrible thing to see the dying men creeping to the Hospitals, stinking and
loathsome, and sometimes to behold them giving up their last breath in
corners, or fallen down dead at the foot of some pair of stairs. But truly
in B. Aloysius, and his companions, there shined forth a certain abstract of
that love; where with the inhabitants of heaven are joined amongst themselves.
For they would unclothe and shift the sick persons, wash their feet, make
their beds, lay them down in them, give them meat, instruct them in the
sacred matter of penance, and exhort them to suffer their pains patiently.
And the Father, whom a little before I commended, observed, that Aloysius was
always wont to be most about them, that were of the most loathsome, in such
sort, that he seemed very hardly to be drawn from them. Whilst they are thus
busily employed, in the service of these miserable distressed people, according
to their Christian Charity toward them, the plague, for so much as it was very
contagious, seyzeth upon some of Aloysius his companions: of which first, as I
rehearsed before, Tiberius Bondius, being piously enured by Aloysius, suddenly
departed. When he saw him now lying at the point of death, he said to a
certain priest that was his fellow student. Qua^ lib^nt^r me am cum Tiberij
conditiont commutarem, and, si Deoplaceretid mihi gratiae facere, pro co
mor^r^r. I would very willingly change my condition with Tiberius, and dye for
him, if it would please God to do me that favor. He said to a certain Father
that contradicted him, that he spoke it for this respect, for that he had now
some probable reason to confide that he was in Gods grace; what herafter he
should be, he knew not. And therefore that he was willing now to undergo death.

Neither was it long but that God heard his prayer. For when his Superiors had
forbidden him to return again to that Hospital, in which they now saw many
infected with grievous sickness, and he out of his love to sanctity made no
suite for leave to go thither again; there was liberty granted unto him,
that he might go to the Hospital of Consolation, in which for the most part,
there were none whose diseases were infectious. Nevertheless he presently fell
into the same disease, and betook himself to his bed the third of March, the
year 1591. With which disease so soon as he perceived himself to be
oppressed, supposing according to that knowledge that he had from God at
Millan, that it should be his last, he abounded with incredible joy, and showed
the same both in his countenance, and in all his behavior. And they unto whom
he imparted this revelation which he had at Millan, did by this his great joy,
imagine that he would shortly end his life. Neither were they deceived herin.
When he found himself inflamed with so great a desire to dye, he began some
what to fear, least the same might be too immoderate. Therefore to the intent
that he might he resolved herin, he asked counsel of Fa. Bellarmine who had
the charge of his conscience. But after he was given to understand by him, that
the love of death proceeding out of a desire to be joined with God, so that we
would be willing to rest in the power of God, was nothing hurtful; and that it
was a usual thing with many that flourished in sanctity, both in our memory,
and in times past; then truly he dedicated himself with his whole mind to
think of an eternal life. Such was the violence of his disease, which was
thought to be a pestilent fever, that with in the space of seven days, it
brought him to the utmost point of death. Therefore when he had carefully and
piously, as possibly he could, cleansed his soul by confession, he was by Fa.
Rectour fortified with his sacred Viaticum, and Extreme Unction, he reciting
with very great sense of piety his accustomed prayers, and they that were
present all weeping for the loss of so dear, and holy a brother.

But for so much as whilst he was yet in perfect health, many of his familiar
friends, out of their love toward him, did often reprove him, for so much as
he seemed with over much austerity both of body and mind to hasten his death,
and presaged that of him, which we read to have happened to S. Bernard, that
even at the very end of his life he would repent himself, of this immoderate
ardour. That he might exempt them all from this fear, having now received that
celestial Viaticum, his chamber being full of his companions, he requesteth
Fa. Rectour, that he would positiuely affirm in his behalf to them all, that
in this respect truly he was not touched with any the least scruple; but that
he was rather sorv that he had omitted many punishments, for which he might
easily have obtained leave of his Superiors. That if he had been obedient to
their wills, his conscience should rest free from all anguish. That moreover,
he had never done any thing according to his own will, but all things by their
permission. He added likewise this, that he was not troubled in conscience for
having at any time violated any one rule of his Religious course. Which was
therefore said by him, least he should leave in any ones mind, any offense or
occasion to take any evil example, who had seen him do any thing more, or
besides the custom of others. All which things very much moved their minds.

Father Provincial entering into him, he entreated him, to give him leave to
make a discipline: who saying, for so much as he was so weak, he could not
have strength to whip himself; yet at least, said he, p^r^^i^, that some ot^^r
do scourge me from the very head to the foot. The P. answered that neither
that was lawful, for so much as he that should whip him, would incur the
danger of drawing upon himself the censure of the Church which we call
Irregularity^ when he faw himself frustrated of this likewise, again he very
instantly entreated this one thing, that he might have leave to dye not in bed,
but laid on the ground. So great a love had he of torment, penance, and
affliction even when he drew his last breath. It was now in a manner likely
that he would that day, which was the seventh of his sickness, have ended his
life, upon which very day he was just 23. years of age. But it pleased God,
that breaking and mittigating the violence thereof, he would prolong his
sickness. Doubtless, to the intent that we might be informed with many
examples of virtue, wherewith he shined unto us, during the time that he kept
his bed.

In the mean while it was diuulged even to Castilion that Aloysius was dead,
therefore his mother, and brother had performed his obsequies, when a message
was brought, that he yet lived. The Marquess Rodulph his brother exulting with
joy, pulling in pieces a chain of gould which by chance he had about his neck,
gave it piece by piece to the standers by, when he received this message.

CHAP. XXX. A loysius his sickness grows unto a Fever Hectic, by which he
consumes by degrees. His excellent sayings, and doings at that time.
AFTER that first vehemence of Aloysius his disease had decreased, there
continued with him still, a kind of remiss Fener which they call a Hecticke,
which in the space of three months by little and little wasted him. At which
time many things of singular example were done, and said by him, but for so
much as it could not be that from so great and various a multitude of men; as
resorted to see him, all things should be gathered, I will place here those
things which I could come to the understanding of.

When he first fell into his sickness, he was palced in a bed, the couerlet
whereof was somewhat thick, together with a mat under him, which had been
ordained for a certain old man; Aloysius requested of his Superior, that,
taking away this couerlet, he might lie after the manner of others. But when
answer was made him, that it was not placed there for any respect to him, and
that it was rude, and fit for a poor man, whereby there was no danger that he
should infri^ge his Religious poverty, he was presently well satisfied.

In the beginning of his sickness the Physician had commanded, that he, and
likewise another who was sick of the like disease, should drink a very bitter
potion: the other did his endeavor, to the intent that he might avoid the noy
somenesse of his potion, to sup it off suddenly, using also other accustomed
helps; but Aloysius to the intent that he might make unto himself a wholesome
trouble, drank it up all, by degrees, as if it had been some very sweet
liquour, and gave no sign of ever perceauing any bitterness. The Infirmarian
in his chamber upon the table had placed, a little Sugar Candy, and juice of
liquorish to help him sometimes against the distillation of his rheum.
Requesting a little of that juice of liquorish, his fellow asked him, why he
did not rather desire some of the Sugar Candy? he answered, Quia alterum
pauperem magis decet. Because, the other is fitter for a poor man.

When it was given him to understand, that there was great danger of a plague
to ensue that year, he did not only manifest to his Superior, that, if he
recovered his health, he would be willing to serve them that were infected with
the same, but also requested leave of Fa. General (who came to visit him) that
he might make a vow to God to perform the same. Which having obtained, with
great contentment of mind, and with great edification to them that were privy
to that matter, and witnesses of that singular charity he showed by that fact,
he made the said vow.

Roboreus, and Gonzaga Cardinals, did often visit him whilst he was sick,
whom he entertained with fruitful speeches of the doctrine of piety, and of a
happy life. F. Rectour signifiing unto them that there was no reason that they
should come so often, and so incommodiously to themselves; that he would
undertake to certify them, how the state stood with Aloysius: they said, that
they could not be satisfied, unless they came themselves, for so much as they
reaped thereby very plentiful fruit to their own souls. Cardinal Gonzaga
being sick of the gout, commanded himself to be carried unto him, and seemed
not willing to be separated from his bed. Aloysius once entered into discourse
with him, cocerning the approaching of his death, and of the benefit of
Almighty God toward him, who took him to himself in that flower of his age.
Moreover he affirmed to the same Cardinal, (who according to his great love
toward him, was attent with great sense of affection) that he thought it was
part of his duty, to hold him as his Father, seeing he, above all that lived
upon the earth, had deserved the best of him, in regard that by his means it
was effected, that after so many conflictes and impediments, he came at last to
Religion. By those words the good Cardinal being moved to tears, answered,
that truly rather himself ought, notwithstanding the difference of their ages,
acknowledge him the parent and master of his piety. After this he declared
unto him, how great profit and clestiall comfort his words and examples had
always given to his mind. At his departure professing to his followers, that
the loss of that young man would be an infinite grief unto him, he said, that
he never departed from discoursing with him, but with his mind disposed to an
unusual kind of tranquillity, and that he did verily think that there was
never any of his family of the Gonzaga's that had been more fortunate. At the
same time there lay sick F. Ludouicus Corbinellus a Florentine, a man of great
descent, between whom and Blessed Aloysius there had been mutual love, and
in their sickness they often sent salutations one to the other. That Father
his sickness being now increased upon him, some eight days before his death,
besought the Infirmarian that he would bring to him into his chamber, Aloysius,
who now through want of strength was not able to stand upon his legs. And
this he did, for that he now held Aloysius for a Saint. The infirmarian seeing
this thing so acceptable to the man, he put on Aloysius his clothes and
carried him into the Fathers chamber. It is incredible how much this his
coming to visit him, did recreat the good old man, and what sincere
contentment, and motions of piety he conceived by behoulding him; After they
had talked together, they exhorted each other to bear patiently this their
adversity, and to obey the will of God. The old man said: farewell, my dear
brother Aloysius, it is now but a short ty me, that I have to live, neither
shall we see one another again. There is one suite that I have to you, I pray
you deny me not. Part not from hence I beseech you, before you have given me
your benediction. Aloysius being partly astonished and partly abashed at this
his petition, said that that was not fit for him to do, for to bless was the
office of a Superior, and that he was aged, himself young he a Priest, and
himself not so. But this old man, such was his pious affection toward this
holy young man, persisted again to vrg^ him by entreaty, and to beseech him,
that being now at the last cast of his life, he would not deny him this
comfort. He likewise entreated the Infirmarian that he would not take him away,
before he had condescended to his request. Notwithstanding this discreet young
man withstood it, and would not be persuaded, till he was compelled by the
Infirmarian. And then he found a way, by which he might both mitigate the
grief of the old man, and preserve his own humility. For taking up his hand,
and signing himself in form of a cross; he said, Deus D. N. nobis ambobus
benedicat: our Lord God bless us both. Afterward he sprinkled him with holy
water, in the mean while saying. Deus D. N. te mi Reuere^de Pater, sua sa^ct a
gratia accumulet, votaque omnia tua ad sui nominis gloria^ fortunet. Eum tu
vicissim pro me precare. My Reverend Fa. Our Lord replenish you with his grace
and prosper, to the glory of his name, all your desires. Pray likewise I
beseech you for me the same prayer. So he wishes himself to be brought to his
own bed, leaving him merueilously cheerful, and well satisfied* (...) was
also a great token of that same Fathe* pious affection toward Aloysius. For
allthough the Priests were wont to be allotted another place of burial
differing from other men, notwithstanding before his departure out of this
life, he made known to the Infirmarian, that his will was to be buried, in the
same place which should be assigned to this Blessed young man after his death.
Therefore by commaundment from the Superiors it was afterward done as he
desired.

There are some who recount, that Aloysius prophesied, that this Father should
depart out of this life before him. The which came to pass accordingly. For he
dyed upon the first day of June, being Whitsunday-Eue, at twelve of the clock
in the night, twen ty days before Aloysius made his happy end. Aloysius his
chamber was so far from the chamber of this Father, that he was the length of
a whole gallery distant from him, and so consequently could by no ordinary
means have understanding of his being in danger of death, and yet he imagined
that thrice that night he saw him. The which he related the next morning to the
Infirmarian almost in this manner. The window being open, and he coming
according to his custom to see him, and asking how he had passed the former
night? Truly but ill, said he, for after an unusual manner, I have been
troubled with dreams, or rather visions. For three times did I seemer to see
the good Father Corbinellus, perplexed with vehement pain, and first I heard
him speak unto me in this sort: It is now high ty me my deer^ brother to
commend me earnestly to God, and to beseech him that I may with a patient and
courageous mind endure the bitterness of this grievous, and dangerous torment,
wherewith I am vexed, for so much as unless I be he strengthened with his
special assistance, I am diffident, how I should behave my self therein. Being
awaked and supposing it to be a dream: It were better (said I to my self by
way of reprehenson) for thee to sleep: wherefore drive away these fancies. A
little after being but newly fallen a sleep, he appears again unto me,
importuning more vehemently then before, that I would assist him with my
prayers in that his so great extremity, which seemed to him almost
intolerable. Again I am roused out of my sleep, again I blame my own
restless disposition, and determine with my self to ask leave the next day
to expiate with some penance this my negligence in fulfilling the co^maunds of
the Physician and my Superiors, who charged me to endeavor to take my rest.
But behold after that the third ty me I had entered into a sleep, the same
vision appeared unto me, and calls upon me in this manner. Now, now, my dear
brother, I am almost arrived at the period of this my miserable life. Offer up
your prayers to God, that he would vouchsafe a happy success to this my last
passage, and our of his infinite mercy to bless me with the immortal glory of
the other life. There I will not fail to pray in like manner for you. That
thing did so absolutely be^eaue me of all sleep, that being stricken with the
terrors of these representations, whilst I often beat upon them with my
cogitation, the other part of the night, I was not able to take any manner of
rest at all. The Infirmarian hearing these discourses, dissembled the whole
matter, showed no sign of admiration, called them dreams, and fancies of the
mind, affirmed that Fa. Corbinellus was well, concealed his death. exhorted him
to lay aside all care, and dispose himself to rest. He then replied not so
much as one word more unto him. But at another time upon some occasion given,
he gave them to understand, that he was certainly assured, that he was not
only dead, but that he was even entered into heaven. Whereupon Fa. Pobert
Bellarmine asking him, what he thought of his soul, whether it were detained
yet in the fire of purgatory or no? Verily, he answered confidently, that
without any delay it passed from Purgatory. By which answer he coniectured,
that he had it revealed unto him from God. For whereas he was of his own nature
infinitely considerate in all his speeches, and sparing in the affirmation of
doubtful things, he would never, unless he had been certified from God, have
so clearly assured his Ghostly-Father, that he had now passed Purgatory.

All this time we all besought him, with as exquisite reasons as we could, that
he would pray to almighty God that his life might be enlarged, for by that
means he might come at last to heaven full-fraught with infinite access of
merits, and that he might render more profit to men, and principally to the
Society. But he to them all gave this one only answer, Melius est dissolui,
better it is to dye. Which he said with so great sensible affection of mind,
and with so great serenity of countenance, that it was a sufficient testimony,
with what affection he desired to be presently transferred to enjoy an
indissoluble conjunction with God.

CHAP. XXXI. He sends unto his mother two letters in the time of his
sickness, by the which he comfort her, and int^cateth her prayers.
HE sent in all this time of his sickness two letters to his mother. In the
beginning of the first, after that he had passed those first storms with which
she thought that he might have been oppressed, with the relation where of
comforting her at the first and exhorting her to the patient enduring of
adversity, he adds this which follows.

It is now a month, since I was in that state, that I received from God that
benefit of his by far, the greatest of all other, namely, that in his grace (as
confidently I persuaded my self) I should have departed this life. And I was
then fortified with the sacred Viaticum and Extremevnction. When it was the
pleasure of God to prolong my time, and in the mean time leaving me in a
remiss fever, to prepare me to death. The Physicians being ignorant what the
event of the matter will be, endeavor to procure the health of my body with
exquisite remedies. But it is my greatest comfort, for that I am persuaded,
that Almighty God does prepare, to give me far more entire health, then the
Physicians are able to give. Therefore in the mean^ time, that hope makes me
joyful, that within few months it will come to pass, that Almighty God will
bring me, from the land of mortal men, to that of the living; from the society
of men living upon the earth, to that of the Angels and citizens of heaven;
finally from the behoulding of things terrent and frail, to the sight and
contemplation of that good and great God, in whom all good is contained. The
same cogitatio^ may be unto you (most illustrious Lady in respect of that great
love which you bear to me, and for so much as you desire that which may tend
to my felicity, an infinite comfort. I beseech you to make me partaker of all
your prayers, and to give order that the same may be done by the Sodality of
Christian Doctrine, that this short time in which I must yet wrestle with the
tempestuous sea of this world, God by the mediation of his only begotten sons
merits, in like manner by the prayers of his most holy mother, and the Blessed
Saints Nazarius and Celsus, would vouchsafe to drown all my sins in his most
sacred blood, which with bitter torment he shed for our sakes, as it were in
the red sea; so that being freed from the fear of all my enemies, I may pass
into that land promised by God, to so and enjoy him everlastingly. The self
same God comfort you (Most honorable Lady.) Amen.

He wrote another letter somewhat longer a little before his death, when he had
now (as I shall after declare) knowledge from God, of the day upon which he
should dye, and pass to heaven. These are his words bidding farewell to his
Mother.

Most illustrious Lady, and my most honored mother in Christ. The peace of
Christ by with you.

My prayer is (Most Honorable Lady) that you may be always partaker of the
grace and consolation of the Holy Ghost. I remained yet in this region of
mortality, when your letters were delivered to me. But now this is to give you
to understand, that I must at last aspire to heaven, where I may for ever
praise God in the land of the li^ing. which journey, I did of late hope to have
performed before this time: but my feu^r truly, as I wrote unto you in my other
letter, when it seemed most to burn and rage, being upon the suddai^^
mittigated, it brought me by little and little over unto that Holy day of
Christ's Ascension into heaven. From that time my breast being oppresed with
great violence of distillation, my fever was so renewed, that I do now by
degrees approach, (...) to those sweet and dear imbracements of my ^^lestiall
Father, in whose lap I hope to (...) and everlasting rest. And so the (...)
that were brought thither of me, as I also wrote to the Marquis, do certainly
agree. But if it be the part of Charity, as S. Paul says, flere cum flentibus,
gaudere cum gaudentibus (Romans 1^.) to weep with them that weep, and rejoice
with them that rejoice, you must of necessity (my most Honorable Mother)
conceive most infinite joy for this, that God out of his bounty and favor
toward you, does design me true joy, and security from the least fear of
ever loosing the same. Verily (for I will freely confess unto you Most
illustrious Lady) when I ingulfe my mind in the consideration of that Divine
bounty, which is like an immense sea, without either shore or bottom, it being
as it were ravished, with the greatness thereof, seems unto me to err, and
misinforme me. For so much as he, in reward, of so short and small labor,
sends for me unto eternal rest, as who from his heavenly throne, calls me
to that high felicity, which I so negligently have sought, and promises me the
fruit of my tears which I so sparingly have shed. Take heed (my most Noble
Lady) and be very careful, that you offer not the least violence to this
infinite benignity of God: which verily you should do, if you should be wail
him as dead who lives in the sight of God, and is far more available in
recommending your affairs, then in this life he was. This shallbe no long
separation. We shall meet again in Heaven, and be united to our sweet
Redeemer, with all the powers of our soul, praising him, and for ever singing
forth his eternal mercies, shall enjoy immort all comforts. Neither truly do I
doubt, but that if excluding those respects which consanguinity suggesteth to
our mind, we would give place to faith, and that pure and simple obedience
which we owe to God, we should freely and with an open hand offer that unto him
which is his ow^^ And that so much the more willingly, by how ^^ch that which
is taken from us is more dear. For so we shall gi^^ ^testimony, that we
esteem that nothing is done by God, but with great wisdom, and for our
commodity. He takes from us, but that which he had bent us before, with no
other purpose, but to conserne it in a place more safe, and of more immunity,
that he may adorn it with those good things, which even we would wish unto
our selves. I have said all this for no other end then to comply with that
desire of mine which I have, that you (most Honorable Lady) and all the rest
of my family, account this my departure as a most acceptable benefit, and
vouchsafe, I beseech you, to accompany me with your blessing, whilst ^^ferry
over this little river, til I touch at that shore, where harbors all my hope.
Which so much the more willingly I do, for so much as there remains nothing
unto me, whereby I might more e^idently signify the lo^^ and reverence which as
a son, I owe unto you my mother. Finally thus I conclude, begging again most
humbly your blessing.

From Rome this X. of June, the year of our Lord 1591. Your most Honorable
Ladyships most obedient son in Christ. Aloysius Gonaga.

C^AP. XXXII. Of the preparation which Blessed Aloysius made for his death; in
a rapt he partaketh celestial joys, and foretells the day of his death.
IT is now time to declare, in how Christian-like, and holy a manner B.
Aloysius prepared himself, for that his last passage from earth to Heaven.
Whilst he continued in this disease, which verily was long, and as such are
wont to be, infested with difficult and grievous dangers, he never at any time
gave the least sign of a dejected mind either in word or gesture. He never
seemed to take disgust either in the observance of the Infirmarian, or in any
thing else that he undertook to do about him. And although in sickness a man
is more apt to discover his hidden imperfectio^s then at any other time,
notwithstanding he always made good his former patience. He was ever exactly
obedient to his Superiors, Physicians, and Infirmarians, and how a Religious
man should behave himself in sickness, although that be very troublesome, he
gave a very manifest example.

After he had betaken himself to his bed, he gave ear to no other discourses
at any time, but of divine matters, and of a blessed life. Therefore never any
one visited him, but, to comply with him, setting a side all other discourse,
hespake of piety. And if any forgetting this order, interlaced any other
speech, Aloysius recollecting his mind, would think with himself of some
other matters, till such time as they fell upon sacred things again. For then
changing himself, and returning to discourse, he made show not only to be
recreated, but eue^ exhilarated. Of this his custom, this reason he gave, was,
that allthough he nothing doubted, but that it was no way differing, from the
course of a Religious man, to speak in conversation, prudently of indifferent
matters for piety sake, notwithstanding at that time remaining in that state,
it was requisite, and he judged that God did expect it at his hands, as his
peculiar right, that of all his discourses, not only the form (for so he
termed it) to wit the intention of his mind, still regarding (as always it
ought) the honor of God, but even the matter it self of them should be sacred.
And every little moment of time, which Almighty God did vouchsafe him, in that
latter ending of his life, he did value a^ so high a prise, that he would not
willingly, bestow it otherwise, then in the discoursing of precious things.

He sometimes would request them to help him on with his clothes, and going
out of his bed, would creep after his feeble manner to the table, upon which
there stood the image of Christ crucified, which he embracing would kiss In
like manner he did to the picture of S. Catherine of Siena, and other Saints
wherewith his chamber was hanged. And for so much as one of the Infirmiers said,
that he needed not to rise out of his bed, for that he would bring the crucifix
and other pictures to his bedside. Aloysius answered, these are my stations.
Therefore he held on that custom so long as he was able to get out of his bed,
moreover, in the day time when the door of his chamber being shut he was
private, without the help of any one, he did steal out of his bed, and
between that and the wall cast himself upon his knees, and so long applied
himself to his prayers til he heard some noise at the door. For then he rose
up, as if he would return to his bed. The Infirmier for a certain time
supposing, that he had risen to perform the needs of nature, at last when he
found him often gone out of his bed, suspecting that which was the truth after
that he had once stolen upon him, and found him upon his knees, he forbade him
to attempt it any more. He, when he saw himself taken with the manner, verily
blushed, and after that, abstained from that which was forbidden him.

He often at this time asked Counsel of F. Robert Bellarmine concerning his
soul matters, who was his Ghostly Father. And one evening he asked him whether
he thought that any one did ever go to heaven untouched with the fire of
Purgatory? he answered, that verily he thought there did, being not ignorant
how much he might promise himself of Aloysius his virtue: And more then that,
I do confidently persuade my self, said he, that you shall be one of those who
free from Purgatory go straight to heaven. For whereas God in token of his
goodness toward you, has adorned your mind, with so many gifts and
endowments, as you have pleased to acquaint me withal, of which that is not to
be thought the meanest that it was his pleasure you should be always free from
mortal sin, verily I do assuredly hope, that he will add this, for the
accomplishment of all, that without all delay you shall speed to heaven. At
this same answer he was so much ouerioyed, that his mind being abstracted from
his senses, he was transported, to behold the bliss of that celestial cirty,
being discovered unto him by God. In which exces^e of mind, when he had almost
spent the whole night, in certain delights and solaces, which far exceed the
capacity of mortal men, he afterward assured the same F. that he accounted the
same, even scarcely like one moment. Likewise when he was in that exstacy, he
is thought to have had inteligence of the day designed for his death. For he
clearly discovered unto many afterward, that the eighth day from the Sacred
feast of Corpus Christi, he should depart out of this life. And that fell out
accordingly. But to a certain man, who with singular respect did frequently
visit him, he denou^ced the same, some few days before that feast. In the
mean time his disease began so far forth to increase, that F. Vincentius
Brunus, who was prefect of the sick, a man skillful in Physic, said that
Aloysius could not live til that day. Understanding, thereof calling upon one of
his c^panions, Aloysius said: Nes^is^e, quam f^lix ^^^tius venerit, intra
oct^^um diem mihi mor(...)esse? Amab^ t^, mecum vna, pro tam ex: miain me
beneficentia hymno Te Deum laudamus rec^tando, Deo gratias age. Know you not
what happy tidings are brought, I must dye with in these eight days? Let me
entreat you, to give thanks unto God together with me, for so singular a
benefit vouchsafed unto me, reciting the Hymn, Te Deu^ laudamus. That same
Hymn being very piously said by them both, not long after, he said to another
fellow-student of his, that entered into his chamber, even with his heart leaping
for joy: Pater mi, laetantes imus, laetantesimus. My Father we go rejoicing,
we go rejoicing. Which words being pronounced with such free cheerfulness,
forced groans and tears from them that heard them.

After this he thought good by his letters, to bid farewell to three ^athers who
were of principal^ account with him. Those were Father Ioannes Baptista
Piscator, the Master in times past of his Nouiship; and then Rectour at
Naples: Fa. Mutius de Angelis, being then in the same place professor of
Divinity; and Fa. Bartholomeus Recalcatus, Rector at Millan. By these letters,
written under another man's hand he declared unto them, that he (as he verily
hoped) was upon his way to heaven; that he did very heartily salute them, and
entreat that they would commend him unto God. But whereas in respect of his
weakness he was not able to subscribe, he willed them to guide his hand, and
instead of his name he drew a cross with his pen.

It was his care, to spend the eight last days of his life, in certain
singular offices of piety and Religion. And at the first when he had declared
to that priest his familiar friend, that he had certain understanding of the
day of his death, he entreated him, that he would daily come unto him, at the
third hour before sun set, to recite the seven penitential Psalms.
Therefore at that time, all other company being removed from thence, the image
of Christ crucified being at his request placed upon his bed, the priest
likewise kneeling upon his knees, pronounced those Psalms which I spoke of.
Sometimes when he came to some notable place, he would make a pause, and in the
mean while, the Blessed young man, with his eyes fixed upon the image of
Christ, would reuolue deeply in his mind those things which were read, with
evident signs, of a mind inflamed toward God, and with heavenly impulsions,
that drew from that Father excessive shoures of tears, which likewise brake
forth from him, but with a mild and gentle stream. The other hours, of the
day he requested to be read unto him some chapter out of the holy Scripture, or
the Soliloquies of S. Augustine; or the Sermon of S. Bern^r^ upon the
Canticies, or that Hymn, Ad perennis vit^ (...); or some one Psalm that he
made choice of, as, Latatus sum in his quae dict a sunt mihi, in ^omum Domini
^^imus. (Psalm. 121. Quema^mo^um aesi^^rat ceruus ad fontes aquarum, it a
^^s^^^rat anima mea at te Deus; (Psalm. 41. or some other of that kind.

So soon as that rumor was given out, that he had affirmed that within eight
days he should depart this life all began earnestly to lay hold upon some
occasion, to have some free speech with him in private, and to make suite for
his recommendation. But he with admirable promptitude of mind accepted all
their petitions to prefer in heaven, with sincere charity and a secure mind,
promised to negotiate with God in the behalf of them all, that you might
verily suppose, that he was assured short^y to arrive there. He discoursed as
familiarly of his death, as he was wont to do of his going out of one chamber
into another. Many Fathers came often to visit him, and likewise to do him
service. Amongst those who were most frequent with him, were, Fa. Marius
Fucciolus the Procurator General, and F. Hieronymus Platus, who himself dyed,
the next month after his departure. He once at his going out, of his chamber
turning to his companion said: Sanctus, mihi cr^de, Sanctus est Aloysius, vsque
eo, vt viuens etiam in Diuorum numero collocari possit. A Saint (believe me) a
Saint, is Aloysius, so far forth, that even whilst he is living, he may be
placed in the number of the Saints. He alluded questionles to that saying of
Pope Nicolas the V. who when he was to canonize S. Bernardinus of Siena, said
of S. Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, then living, and there present, that he
did verily think that Antoninus living, did deserve those honors no less,
then Bernardinus dead.

The last of those eight days, he did for the most part apply his whole mind
to the contemplation of Divine matters, unless perhaps sometimes, he spoke
interchangeably some words of sacred things, or between, uttered some short
prayers. For the space of the three last days, even to his very last breath,
he perpetually held close pressed to his breast, a certain brazen crucifix,
hallowed with the Popes Indulgence, entitled the Philippine, which he had
given him by a certain Father. Often did he profess his faith, after that
manner, which is prescribed in the Rituals, signifiing in the mean while, a
vehement desire of being consociated with God. Therefore he did often iterate
that saying: Cupio dissolni and essecum Christo. I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ. (Phil. 1.) Upon the Octaue-day of Corpus Christi in the
morning, the Infirmier entering into his chamber, and finding him no worse then
he was wont to be: said, but Aloysius, you are a live and not dead, as surely
by your own sentence you did foretell. When he persisted to affirm, that he
should dye that day, the Infirmarian going out of the chamber, reports that
Aloysius, who seemed to be better then he was wont other days, was constant in
his opinion, that that day should be the last of his life. Likewise to a priest
that visited him and said that now the eight day was past, upon which he had
given out that he should dye, and that now he might be raised up to a hope of
longer life, he answered, Nondum hodiernus dies totus prateriit: this whole day
is not yet past. He did also more plainly affirm the same to another, who
coming to Aloysius, and finding him grievously a^flicted with a certain
gauled place which he had gotten in his right hippe, both by reason of his
extreme leanesse, and for that he now for a long time had layne continually
upon that side, moved with conmiseration, said, that verily it was a thing that
did much trouble him, that they should be deprived of him; nevertheless, that
he did wish, that it would please God now at last, to deliver him out of those
pains: to whom Aloysius replied very seriously in this sort: Hac nocte moriar,
This night I shall dye. The other, adding that he did not seem to be in that
state, that he should be so near his death, Aloysius twice repeated the same
words: Hac nocte moriar: Hac nocte moriar: This night I shall dye.

CHAP. XXXIII. Being fortified with his sacred Viaricum, and in like manner
with a plenary Indulgence from the Pope, he rests quietly in our Lord.
THE whole fore-noone he passed with many times professing his faith, with
prayer, and with pious offices of adoration toward God. About noone he did
earnestly beg to have his sacred Viaticum, which he had requested even from the
very break of day that morning. Yet the Infirmarians nothing suspecting his
death, gave no ear unto him. But when as he made no end of soliciting and
entreating, they alleged, that for so much as he had once before in this
sickness received the same, that it seemed not meet for him to request it
again. Then Aloysius answered, that indeed of anoyling that was so as they
said, but not in like manner of the Viaticum. Notwithstanding, the Infirmarians
for all that, were negligent of the matter. Whilst he continued in this state,
Pope Gregory the 14. being as I suppose certified of his long disease by the
Cardinals his kinsmen, asking how he did, it being given him to understand,
that even at that present he was bound for Heaven, of his own accord sent unto
him his benediction, together with a plenary Indulgence.

This when the F. Minister of the College declared unto him, as being a great
lover of humility, he was no less sensible of joy for those sacred tokens,
then he was of modest bashfullnes, for that he understood that his Holiness was
so mindful of him, and continually he covered his face with his hands. The F.
Minister, to the intent that he might free him from this bashfullnes, told
him, that this needed not seem strange unto him, for so much as the Pope by
accident, had heard some what of his afflicted state of health.

Two hours before sunne-set, he intreareth that priest, who in times past had
been his fellow Nouice, (who to visit him had come from the house at S.
Andrews) that he would move Fa. Rectour to give him his sacred Viaticum. He
promised him that he would; and they said together the Littany of the most
holy Eucharist, Aloysius answering the priest with a clear voice; unto whom
at the last, with an extraordinary cheerful and smiling countenance he gave
thanks. Afterward F. Rectour came, bringing the sacred Viaticum: at which he
merueilously rejoiced, and in the receiving thereof, gave singular testimonies,
of a mind inflamed with piety, and the love of God, and raised up with strong
hope, to enjoy face to face, him, whom now under those veiles he received.
When they who were present in the chamber saw him behave himself in this
manner and heard those words, Accipe frater Viaticum, and those which follow,
they all burst forth into abundant tears.

Having received his Viaticum, the Blessed young man was pleased (according to
the custom of the Society, when they take their iournies into far countries)
to embrace all that were present, with singular love and alacrity. There when
every one took of him their last far-well, there were none of them that could
refrain from tears, none that could be withdrawn from his embracements all,
enamoured of him often cast their eyes upon him, with unspeakable love and
grief, and make suite for his prayers. Amongst these there was one, who with
mutual offices of love and charity, had plighted a great league of friendship
always with Aloysius. He coming privately unto him: said, that he did
confidently believe, that he should shortly enjoy his company, in the blessed
presece of God. Moreover, that he did beseech him, that whereas he had well
experienced that he had always in his life time, been careful of his
salvation, so that he would not in heaven be unmindful of him. In like manner,
that he would forgive him, if at any time, he had been negligent of his due
respect toward him. Aloysius truly made answer unto him, with a fervent
affection, that he confiding in the infinite bounty and clemency of God, in the
most precious blood of Jesus Christ, and the recommendation of his Blessed
Virgin Mother, did verily hope that it would shortly so come to pass. That he
did faithfully promise, and wished him to make no question, but that his firm
purpose was to negotiate for him. For if upon earth he did love him, he would
love him even much more vehemently in heaven, where charity is at her full. And
all these things did* he say, with his senses, so entire, with his speech, so
direct and suitable to the matter, that no man could imagine, that he should so
shortly pass out of this life.

At that same time, Fa. Provincial entering his chamber, spoke unto him, unto
whom he answered: Father, we are now going. And whither says the Father. To
Heaven answers he: then the Fa. replied; what even so, to Heaven? Yea verily,
unless my sins hinder me, said Aloysius, the bounty of God puts me in
hope to arrive there. Fa. Provincial turning to some that stood by, said with
a low voice: Hear, I beseech you, he speaks of his going to Heaven: but we
have, designed him for Fres^ati. Afterward he asking, whether they thought good
to dispose of his body to the ordinary place of burial, answer was made him,
that his sanctity seemed to require, that some particular honor should be done
him therein.

About some hour before sunset, I was attending upon him, and putting my hand
under his head, lifted it up, whilst he seriously fastened his eyes upon a
little Crucifix, whereto a plenary Indulgence was granted, to any that should
pray before the same at the point of death, when he lifting up his hand took
of his linen nightcap. I supposing that to be but some action of a dying man,
said nothing, but put it on again, when a little after he had pulled it off,
and I seeking to help him on with it again said, be contented brother
Aloysius, least this evening air hurt your head. Then he by a certain cast of
his eye giving me notice of the presence of Christ crucified: said, Christ^s
moriens capite operto non fuit: Christ, dying had not his head covered. With
which words he transfixed my heart with a pious and wholesome grief.

In the evening at that time which the A^e Mary-bell is rung, when in his
presence speech was had, who should watch with him that night, although he had
his mind busied in contemplation, he did notwithstanding entreat a certain
Father, who was near unto him, that he would once again affoard him his
company. In like manner to another, unto whom desiring to see his last
passage, he had promised to give warning in due time, as it were by way of
keeping his promise, he said, see you stay. The first hour of the night his
chamber being full of company, the Rectour, seeing him nothing at all to faulter
in his speech, although he himself had foretold that he should dye that night
gave no credit thereunto, but supposing (as it is wont to happen to those that
are sick of a fever) that he would continue some few days, gave order, that
after he was gone, all should depart and betake themfelues to rest, neither
would he suffer himself to be persuaded by any one, to give them leave to stay
there, for so much as he was of an opinion that he would not dye* otherwise,
that he himself would not go from him. Therefore charge only was given to
Father Minister, together with another companion in like manner a Priest, to
be carefully assisting about him. There is no man but may well imagine, with
what sense of love and grief we were separated, from a companion so dear unto
us all, whom we were certainly assured we should never more see living. But
he, who was nothing ignorant of our grief, to the intent that he might comfort
us, promised that he would be mindful of us in Heaven: entreated that in this
his last conflict, we would assist him with our prayers: and enjoined diverse of
them that which he would have them do for him after his death. So commanded by
the authority of F. Rectour, we all one after another departed from him weeping.

After he was left alone with those two Fathers; with his mind always raised
toward God, he did sometimes cast forth certain sentences of holy Scripture,
as that, In manus tuas Domine commenao spiritum meum. (Psalm. 30.) Into thy
hands (o Lord) I commend my spirit, and such like. There continued for some
space the same color in his cheeks, at which time, they who were present,
sometimes offered up their prayers for his recovery, sometimes sprinkeled him
with holy water, sometimes gave unto him the Crucifix to kiss, not without
some befitting admonitions to piety.

When he came to his last conflict of death, they discovered by the pale
wanness of his face, and by his sweat breaking out, drop by drop, that he was
in a great agony. But he with half dead speeches entreated them that they
would place him otherwise in his bed, for he had now 3. whole days layne in
the same posture with his body. But they fearing least they might hasten his
death, and with all supposing that this request of his might rather come from
some natural motion, then advisedly from himself, for so much as they
resolved not to meddle with him, they exhorted him to call to mind, that hard
and narrow bed, upon which in the midst of so many anguishes and torments.
Christ our Lord offered up his life, With which advertisement being admonished,
casting his eyes upon the Crucifix, when with words he could not, with gesture
signified, that he was even ready to suffer more for the love of God, and
seemed to ouerule himself in the quiet enduring of that pain: neither did he
ever after so much as once stir.

These Fathers, when they saw him neither able to speak nor move, they deliver
into his hand (having first given him their blessing) the hallowed candle;
which he in testimony of perseuering still in the practice of his holy faith,
laid fast hold of, and with that in his hand, seemed to utter the most holy
Name of JESUS, and at the last somewhat moving his lips, between the second
and third hour of the night, with admirable tranquillity rendered his blessed
soul to his creator. Wherein he obtained that favor, which he so much had
desired, that he might dye within the octaue of the most holy Eucharist, to the
honor of which he was always extraordinarily devout, or upon Friday, in
token of his pious mind toward Christ's passion. Therefore when the eighth day,
after the feast of the sacred Eucharist was ended, and the Friday morning now
begun, that very night, which is interposed between the 20. and 21. of June,
when he had lived 23. years, 3. months, and eleauen days, he changed this
mortal, for that everlasting happy life. And just so many years and months
old, was S. Lewis, the son of Charles the 2. the French King, of the order of
S. Francis, and afterward Bishop of Tolosa, whom this our Blessed Aloysius
resembled in very many virtues.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the obsequies, burial, and those things which happened to the
body of B. Aloysius.
VERILY those same two priests seem to have received a great benefit from
Almighty God, who were present at his death, that out of so great a number
which with so ardent desires made suit for that favor, they should especially
be chosen, to see a young man of so great sanctity, happily passing toward
heaven, which was to them so much the more comfortable, for that before his
departure, he had promised to commend them whilst they were living, unto
Almighty God. Fa. Minister was possessed with a certain quiet rest, and
celestial sweetness: his companion was surprised with a certain unusual
ardour and wholesome grief, and with a desire of honoring God according to the
instructions of B. Aloysius. Which mind of his abounding with many tears, he
retained, not only many months, but eue^ many years, if not so vehement as
when his grief was fresh and green, yet still more or less, according as
occasion required. But for so much as his piety incited him to tear away, for
himself, some of this Blessed you^gmans relics, reverence withheld him, that
he would not lay violent hold of any thing that belonged to his body, but made
sure for the latchets of his shoos, the pens wherewith he was wont to write,
and other things of the like kind, and preserves them even at this very time
that I write this.

The Infirmarians when they came to wash and take charge of his body, lifting
up before the same priests the sheets of his bed, found that brazen Crucifix,
which, as we have said before, he had continually held close to his breast for
three days together. When they stripped his body naked, they found a very
thick hardened skin upon his knees, which his perpetual custom of kneeling
upon his bare knees from his childhood had settled upon them, of which, some
cutting of some little pieces, keep to this day as a pious monument. One of
the Infirmarians, by the instigation of some that had him in great honor,
attempting to cut some little piece of his flesh, straight repenting himself
of his enterprise, took only away some little part of his skin, with which
he recounteth that a sick person being by his advise touched, was restored to
his health.

When he had but even newly given up his last breath, one of those Fathers,
which were present, certified some of those who whilst he lived were his most
intimate friends, that this our Angel was soared up to Heaven. Who being
inkindled with feruorous piety, threw themselves out of their beds, and partly
(for that they thought him already entertained in those happy dwellings of the
Heavenly citizens) they began to invoke him, partly they offered up their
prayers for him, which in the Name of friendship he had requested of them
before his death. The next morning being the 21. of June, so soon as ever the
rising-bell was but scaicely rung, the chamber where that sacred body was
placed, was full of company, and all falling upon their knees, either inuocated
God for his soul, or (which was the far greater part of them) made
intercession to him for their own. Moreover, happy were they that cold but
first lay hold of, with a pious affection, his shoos, his shirt, his shooties,
and other his garments. His nails, his hair, and some parts of his flesh were
cut of. From thence, his body was brought into the public chapel of the
College, all the hours before noone it was frequented by very many,
especially of those young men of his acquaintance, who before were not only
afraid to touch, but even to be hold a dead body, went to the bear, and
redoubling this word Sanctus Sanctus, strove to embrace, and kiss those sacred
relics. That very morning, all the Masses both in the College, and in other
houses of the Society in that City were said for his soul, although it was
done by most, more to continue that custom of the Society, then for that they
thought he had any need of them.

It is hard for them that were not eyewitnesses of this thing, to conceive in
their minds, how much his departure moved the minds of all those that lived in
that College. For no one was willing to speak of any thing but his virtue and
sanctity, whilst each one declared severally, what soever singular example they
had observed in him. But far more frequent was he in their hearts then in their
mouths, every one reuoluing in his mind, of how inestimable a jewel they were
deprived, what a loss that day they had sustained of his holy society.

About an hour before sun set, when the Dirige and funeral prayers were to be
said, the sacred body was brought out of the chapel into the great ^all,
where the Fathers and all the other fellows were assembled. There every one of
them, even the priests themselves by turns, before it was carried forth,
kissed his hand. Which kind of veneratio^ being wont to be exhibited only unto
priests, was attributed to the sanctimony of this young man, who was initiated
only in the Ordines minores.

This office being performed, his funeral went forward with a long train to
the sacred Church of the College, called that of the Annunciata, and there the
funeral prayers were celebrated according to the custom. After which there
was so great a concourse, of young men who were Students there, and of other
people who encompassed the hearse, to worship and take unto themselves of those
holy relics, that the Fathers being not now able to withstand them, were
constrained to shut the Church-doores against them. In the mean time; his
hair, his nails, his inward and outward garments, were cut; his fingers ends,
and two iointes of the little finger of his right hand were cut of. There were
present also certain Illustrious men, as Franciscus Dietrichstine, who at this
day is Cardinal of the holy Roman Church Benedictus and Philip Caietan, Iuli^^
Vrsinus, Maximilianus Pernestainius, a Bohemian Lord, who afterward dyed one of
the Priuichamberlaines of Pope Clement the VIII.

When he was there ready to be buried, it seemed good both to other Fathers of
great authority, and chiefly to F. Robert Bellarmine, that he should not be
buried after the ordinary, but coffined up after some peculiar manner. For so
much as having passed his life in so singular sanctity, they nothing doubted,
but how much the more careful he had been in his life time to obscure himself
from the knowledge of men, so much the more clear in time to come, would God
make his glory to shine throughout the whole world. But whereas in that place it
is the custom not to include men's bodies of the Society in coffins, but bury
the^ in some grave without any curiosity, the Rectour sent Father Minister to
the house of the Professed, to the intent that he might ask counsel of Fa.
Laurentius Magius, who that time was Assistent to Father General in the
procuratourship of Italy. He debating the matter with Fa. General, himself
commanded that it should be enclosed in a coffin: For so much as Fa. General
did for that cause, willingly dispense with this young man in that custom
since there was no one unto whom his sanctity was not very well known; that
it may even hereby appear, that he who like one of the inhabitants of Heave
was honored with an unusual kind of burial, did even then flourish with a
certain singular praise of celestial virtue. Therefore being put into a
coffin that was prepared for him, in the Chapel that takes the Name of
Christ-Crucified, which at the entrance of the great door is upon the left
hand, it was put into another vault, which is next to the public street, at
that side, at which the Gospel is wont to be read. For many days after at all
common assemblies, there was no other discourse, then of the virtue of this
holy young man. And they that lived in that College being now deprived of him
living, began to worship him dead. Therefore no day passed, but some one or
other went to his monument, and saluted him with long prayers. In which custom
very many perseuered many months, and even many years, whilst they spent
their time at Rome. Amongst these was Fa. loannes Antonius Valtrinus, who
though he had never been acquainted with him living, when a little after his
death coming out of Sicily, he had read those things which I had written of
his life, he burned with so much affection toward him, that he did not only
daily visit his tomb, but also strew it with flowers of diverse kinds, which he
gathered out of the garden, saying, that the very flowers did mourn for this
Blessed man, who had flourished with the endowment of so many exquisite virtues.

The body of B. Aloysius remained in that Coffin seven whole years, namely
til the year of our Lord 1598. when, least in process of time it might be
mingled with other bodies, by order given from. Clandius Aqua^iua the General,
his bones upon the 22. day of June the year 1598. were translated, from the
old Coffin into another lesser one, and in the wall of the same vault which is
next to the street, placed somewhat on high. There by permission of Father
Provincial, who himself was preset at the performing of this work, certain
parts of his relics being taken out, were dispersed into many cities of
Italy, and carried into Polonia, and India. Moreover Fa. Provincial took some
of them to himself, and gave other some to others. Neither will I here let
pass that the same Provincial did affirm, that his bones were found joined
together, in that modest fashion, with his head submissiuely bowing, in the
which for the most part he accustomed to be whilst he lived; which thing made a
notable impression of piety in them that beheld it.

But some years after, when God by the mediation of his prayers, began by the
showing of Miracles, to discover his sanctity unto men, the same Fa. General
ordained, that his holy bones taken out of that place of burial, should be
placed in another more decent apart from others. Therefore the 8. of June 1602.
it was brought privately into the Vestiary, and after again upon the first day
of July next ensuing, it was placed in a leaden Coffin, which was put within
the other wooden one, under the step of S. Sebastians Altar, which is in the
same Church. And although care was taken, that these things excepting those
that labored in the work it self, should be carried very closely from all
others; notwithstanding such was the pious diligence of the people in
searching, that they found, where that sacred treasure was of late bestowed. At
last the fame of his sanctity increasing throughout the whole world, and by his
intercession unto God many miracles being wrought, at the request of Francis
Gonzaga the Marquis of Castilion, the Emperors Ambassador, a most excellent
Prince, who thought that place too mean for him, Father General commanded
again that the Coffin should be taken up, and it being by order from the
Superiors opened, the Marquis made choice of some of the Relics for himself
and the Duke of Mantua. His head by command from Fa. General, was carried
into the Church of the name of JESUS, the rest of his body, was the 13. of May
the year 1605. with many torches, curious music attending upon it, brought
by the hands of the priests, to the chapel of our Lady of the same Church
wherein before it lay, and placed there in the wall upon the Gospel side
somewhat near to the Altar. They labored indeed to transport it very
secretly; but the Embasladour, together with his wife had no sooner entered the
Church; as in like manner the Duke of Poli, and other chief me^, but that
there flocked in so great a multitude, that it began presently to be filled.
And a long business it was to diverse Fathers, to yield those sacred relics
to them that importunately begged to kiss them, to honor them, and to touch
them with their beads, before they were buried in the place appointed. There
to this very day do those holy bones rest, and are adorned, with the picture of
the Blessed young man set over them, hung about with many Votiue Tablets, with
a lamp continually burning, and frequently honored by the people.

In the mean while we humbly beseech his happy soul, to obtain for us the
mercy of God in heaven, who here upon earth prosecute with honor the sacred
shroud of his body: and that he would vouchsafe to procure for us his grace,
that in time to come we may be so enriched with merits, that in respect of them
we may be worthy of those wards, proposed by Gods son after he had taken upon
him humane nature: unto whom together with the Father, and the Holy Ghost be
given all honor and glory world without end.

Amen.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE LIFE OF B. ALOYSIUS Gonzaga.
CHAP. I. Of the Letters written by diverse after his death.
AFTER B. Aloysius had passed to a better life, many Letters were sent to his
mother, that most Honorable Lady, which declared how great an opinion of
Sanctity he left in the minds of men after his death. Before others Fa.
Claudius Aquauina the General, did assure her that from hence-forward, she
might have recourse to him as to a dear and faithful patron in heaven, for so
much as it was confidently thought, that that happy, and divinely fortunate
soul, did even then enjoy eternal felicity; neither would he ever cease to
help and comfort him, together with the rest of his companions in Religion.

Father Rectour of the Roman College certified her, that Aloysius was passed
to a more blessed life, not only in his soul, but even in his countenance, and
whole body so quiet and composed, that he had excited a desire in all to
imitate his death, which was correspondent to his life, most holily lead, and
endowed with all kind of virtues. And that therefore she and the rest of the
same family should not so much grieve for his loss, as rejoice that one of
their kindred was transferred to the number of the Saints.

The self same testimony have many most Illustrious men given by their
letters. And especially Hieronymus Roboreus that most Illustrious Cardinal
wrote to the same Noble Lady in this manner. The last thursday in the night was
our good Father Aloysius transported to a more happy life; and such a hearty
affection of him, and opinion of his egregious sanctimony has he left unto
others, that those Fathers his companions being confident, that he shines
gloriously in heaven, have attended his death with no less admiration then
tears. This verily ought to be a great comfort unto you, and hope, that he
will negotiate with Almighty God for the concord and welfare of his brothers,
and the prospero^s fortune of all those of his family. Again I beseech you
leave off to grieve, for so much as your son resideth now in the Court of
Heaven, who as I hope will assist us with his recommendation.

To the same effect were the letters of Cardinal Scipio Gonzaga, which he sent
to the Bishop of Mantua his brother, and to Aloysius his mother. In these he
declares that Aloysius had now entered into a more blessed life, and that his
end was of so wholesome example, that he is rather to be honored with joys,
then bewailed with tears.

Moreover, how great the opinion of this same Cardinal was of the sanctity of
Aloysius, Pope Clement the 8. gave a most remarkable testimony. For he upon the
5. of August, the year 1604. of his own accord entering into discourse with
the Marquis of Castition the Emperors Ambassador of his praises, testified
that Scipio Gonzaga had often had speech with him of the singular sanctity of
this young man, and that withal he had confessed, that with even looking upon
him only, his mind had been transfixed with a wholesome grief, and that in
respect of a certain celestial innocence that he beheld in him, he was so
much stirred up unto piety, that he was not able to with-hould himself from
tears, Furthermore his Holiness when he recounted these things, and heard
other likewise of his sanctity of life, and miracles, even as it were weeping,
spoke with a sensible vehemence these words: Blessed is he whom I now verily
believe to enjoy immortal glory with God. Often have I wondered, when it came
into my mind, how possibly you could escape so great dangers as you have done;
but surely this is he that has preserved you, and brought peace to his*
family. You have a friend in Heaven in whose faithful tuition you may confide,
and who will defend you from all harm.

And conformable to this likewise, was the judgment, of that most renowned and
most holy Lady El^onora Arch-duchesse of Austria, and Duchess of Mantua, as it
appears by her letter which at that time she sent to Aloysius his mother,
which after this manner we read in the printed book of her life. When I
consider with my self (most Illustrious Lady) how bitter grief you must of
necessity conceive, for the l^ss^ of your son, and when I measure it by my
own, who although I was not his mother, nevertheless loved him always with a
motherly affection, I cannot but take compassion of you. And verity not of you
only, but in like manner of our whole family, the groans of which, speaking
morally, by any force of ours, without divine help, we cannot appease. But if
with more sound judgment we consider, that this most happy soul, having rent
her way through the blind veyle of her body, is soared up to eternal
splendor, to that fui^ period of glory, unto which, whilst she lived in this
wretched vale of miseries, she did with so full course hasten, where being more
nearly accommodated, she may with easier access, recommend our prayers to our
benign Lord, verily let us render praises and thanks unto our good God, that
having delivered him out of this rerrestriall m^d, he has bestowed him in that
his glorious City of Jerusalem: and reflecting upon our own commodity let us
mitigate our grief, for so much as of a mortal, we see him become a heavenly
man. etc. To this her letter the Author of her life adeth these words which
follow. The above named Aloysius Gonzaga, was the eldest son of Ferdinand,
Marquis of Castilion, who from his very cradle lived an Angelical life here on
earth. Rendering up his title and dominion of Marquis to his younger brother,
and betaking himself to the Society of JESUS, ended his life, about the 24.
year of his age. Well may that be verified in him which the wise man wrote,
Consummatus in breui, explenit tempora multa, placita enim erat Deo anima
illius, propter hoc proper a^it illum educere de medio iniquitatum. (Sap. 4.)
Being soon ripe, he was equivalent to those that are affoarded a longer time,
for his soul was acceptable unto God. For this respect did he hasten to
deliver him from the midst of iniquity: Eleonor a having had notice given her
of this young man's death, both spoke many things tending to his praise, and
often had this speech in her mouth: A Saint-like young man he lived, and like a
Saint he dyed. There are also those that recount that she moreover added this,
that this man should be the first who of the family of the Gonzaga's should be
canonized for a Saint.

Let us end this chapter with the letters of Thomas Mancinus a Noble gentleman
who for so much as he was present, when Aloysius his funeral Rites were
performed, he gives particular testimony of some things that happened therein.
For he says in this manner.

Most Illustrious and Excellent Lady. At this very instant do I rest doubtful,
whether I should co^passionate your grief, or congratulate Aloysius that
Blessed Fathers happy departure to a far better kind of life. For I cannot
sufficiently discern, whether should make a greater impression in a mothers
mind, this your particular loss of him, or that his inestimable and most
plentiful gain. Velily I grieve that we are bereft of the aspect of so
eminent a man, and that you must be liable to a grief, then which I make a
question whether any can be greater, for that in this his last sickness you
had no opportunity to see him, no not so much as once in the last closing up of
his life. But him surely I congratulate, as having with his excellent offices
of sanctity whilst he lived, merited heaven, whither, by the constant opinion
of all he did rather fly then go, so remarkable a feeling of his accomplished
virtue, did he leave behind him both to Rome, and the whole world besides.
Therefore being a young man, not passing 23. years of age, he arrived to that
degree of perfection, that if he had lived til Noe his age, he could not have
hoped for a higher.

Upon Thursday in the evening about the second hour of the night he rendered up
his soul to God, and yesterday in the afternoon in the College Church of the
Society of JESUS, which is called that of the Annunciata, his funeral was
solemnized, at the performance whereof I was present. Neither will I spare to
relate this, that there was not only great honor exhibited to his relics by
the Fathers of the Society themselves, but even the people who were present,
for veneration sake cut his garments: neither ought I to be accounted vain, if
I should add more also, whereof I hope you shall be certified, and perhaps even
by the Fathers themselves, who better know the matter. There is truly as yet no
miracle of his published, either for that there is none, or for that, if there
be, it is hitherto concealed; but nevertheless his veneration is celebrated
publicly, as if it were of some holy man that had shined with miracles. And
this day, which is Saturday, about 3. hours before sunset I am told, that
very many Illustrious men, request some one thing, or other of his which he
made use of in his life time. These merrily are the causes, which make me
doubtful, whether or no we ought to grieve for his end.

There is some one who has begun to set dow^^ his life in writing, and so
soon as it is finished, is to give a copy thereof to a certain Cardinal. He,
as at the news of his death he was very much stricken with grief: so was the
same very much ^^tigated upon the hearing of this his so great honor. Wherefore
the same Cardinal for both respects very earnestly desires some one thing or
other ^f this most happy Father.

This also I think good to certify you of, what Aloysius the very next week
before this, when we visited him, did with great joy foretell his own death,
and gave unto me two letters, which eight days since J directed unto you, he
entreating me that I would do my best endeavor, that they might certainly be
delivered; for so much as these would be the last that he should write to you
(Most Exc. Lady) and to his brother the Marquis.

To conclude, this did I resolve how soever to impart unto you by my letters,
to the intent that by this means J might both speak unto you, and comfort
you; with which solace maintain your self so long, till, as I desire some
other may write unto you more at large of (...) things. In the mean white set
a limit, I pray you, to your grief, and recommend unto this blessed Father (no
one of whose prayers can be in vain) the peace and quiet of your most
Excellent family. From Rome this 22. of June the year 1591.

And by these letters which hitherto we have alleged, we may easily
conjecture, with how great a Name of sanctity he flourished at that time when
he departed out of this life.

CHAP. II. The notable testimony which Robert Bellarmine, that most renowned
Cardinal, gave of B. Aloysius.
UNTO the letters of these grave men, which confirm the diuulged fame of his
most excellent virtue, I will now annexe the testimony of Robert Bellarmine,
that most Illustrious Cardinal, so often commended in this my history, of his
interior virtues. For he who had long time in the Roman College, governed
this B. young man's conscience, and had well experienced with how great
endowments his mind was enriched by God, at my request, under his own hand,
has set down in writing, whatsoever things he could call to mind of him, and
sent it unto me to the College of the Professed at Rome, from his house that
he had in the palace of the Vatican. And although even the single testimony of
any one Cardinal (such is the high estimation of that dignity) be of it self
in the Roman Court of Judicature of sufficient authority and credit, as
Panormi^anus, and other learned in the law have confirmed; and verily for my
own satisfaction, I would never require any more, then the handwriting of
such a man, remarkable all the world over for excellency of learning and
integrity of life: notwithstanding to the intent that I might confirm this
truth, and clear each one from any the least scruple herin, I have prevailed so
far with this most Illustrious Cardinal, that he himself made open profession
thereof before the Notary of the Apostolical chamber, and by oath confirmed the
same. And it was in this manner verbatim.

Right Reverend Fa. I will truly very willingly conde seen^ to you in all that
which you require at my hands, supposing that it is to the glory of God, that
those his gifts which he bestows upon his servants, should not be concealed
from the knowledge of men. I have often taken the particular confessions of our
most sweet, and holy brother Aloysius Gonzaga, and one general one in like
manner. which contained the particulars of his whole life, and he took great
contentment, to sorue me at Mass, to converse with me, and discourse of Divine
matters. Out of those his confessions, and that his conversation, I do verily
persuade my self, that I may very truly affirm these things which follow.

First, that he did never admit any mortal* sin, which truly for the whole
course of his life from the very first seventh year of his age I am
certainly assured of: of those first seven years (wherein he had neither that
knowledge of God which afterward he had, nor consequently could not follow it
in his life) I only go^ by probable conjecture. For neither is it likely that a
child either of so tender age, or designed for so great purity, did ever spot
himself with any mortal sin.

Secondly that he from the first seventh year of his age (at which time, as
he related unto me he bad convert himself from the world unto God) he lead a
perfect life.

Thirdly that he never at any time found any provocation to lust.

Fourthly, that he never for the most part, in his prayers and contemplation
(unto which he applied him s^^fe most commonly upon his knees nouer leaning
upon any thing) found any distraction.

Fifthly, that he was for obe^ience, humility, mortification, abstinence,
prudence, piety, and purity, even a mirror.

In the last days of his life, by seeing a certain representation of the
eternal glory of the Blessed, he was replenished with so excessi^e delight,
that whereas he had been vouchsafed the same for the space of a whole night, he
had not thought that it had amounted to the space of a quarter of an hour.

At the same time, Fa. Ludouicus Corbinellus being newly dead, when J asked him
what he thought of his soul, verily he answered me very confidently in these
words: He had passed Purgatory without making any stay there. I who very well
knew his disposition to be very considerate in speaking, and affirming
doubtful matters, assuredly persuaded my self that he had understanding
thereof from God. Nevertheless I abstained to press him any farther, least J
might minister unto him some occasion of vainglory. Many other things which
I could speak of, I omit, for that I am some what diffident of remembering the
direct particulars of them.

To conclude, J am verily of an opinion, that he went directly to participate
inglory with the Blessed, and I had always a scruple to pray for his soul,
fearing least I might offer injury to that grace of God which J knew to be in
him. But contrariwise I made no conscience of recommending my self unto his
prayers, in which J repose much confidence. Pray for me most R. F.

From my house at the Palace this 17. of October 1601. Your Reuerences most
loving brother in Christ. Robertus Card. Bellarminus.

CHAP. III. Many miracles of B. Aloysius. He recouereth his mother from the
point of death. He procures a happy delivery to a noble woman much endangered
in childbirth. He delivers a certain man from danger of loosing his sight.
IT was not truly my intention, when first I applied my mind to the writing of
this history, to make any collection of the miracles and benefits wrought by
God in diverse places, through the merits and recommendation of B. Aloysius
after his death, but only to relate his singular acts of piety and virtue,
which with Gods assistance, there is no one but may very well imitate. For
verily out of the commendation of his miracles, there will result no great
increase to the opinion of his sactity, especially in the minds of them, who
had any commerce or familiaty with him in his life time. For in the estimation
of intelligent and learned men, those celestial guiftes wherewith living he was
adorned, were of more account, then the power of working miracles. According
unto which a certain priest of notable wisdom, who having read the acts and
monuments of his sanctity, was entreated by the Superiors, that he would set
down his opinion of them, wrote expressly in these words. My judgment is, that
this your companion was a very holy man, and very worthy to be reduced into the
number of the Saints. For those gifts given him from God, seem to me of more
moment, then if he had raised the dead to life.

But to the intent that this ornament also may not seem wanting unto him, I
will here prosecute in some few chapters, those benefits of God, and miracles,
which after his death by public authority, I found registered in tables, and
confirmed by the oaths of sufficient witnesses. For those things which are
said to have been done whilst he lived, I will of set-purpose conceal.

The year 1593. when Marquis Rodulph (unto whom B. Aloysius had yielded up
his dominion) being dead at Castle- Godfrey, the which a little before was by
inheritance deuolued to his dominion, the townsmen had entered into arms; the
mother of the Marquis himself and of B. Aloysius, a most choice woman,
apprehended so sharp a grief, by troble of mind which she conceived thereby,
that she fell into into a very grievous sickness. Which within a few days
brought her into the utmost danger of her life. Therefore having received the
heavenly Viaticum, and Extreme Unction, it was verily thought that she would
shortly giue-vp her last breath, when behold being perfectly awake she sees
her Blessed son Aloysius, standing before her bed in a certain immortal
habit, and illuminated with much light, with w^ose presence and aspect she was
so much recreated, that whereas before being oppressed and utterly dishartned,
she could not so much as sheed one tear; behoulding now her delicious darling,
she was so far forth moved, that she wept sweetly, and entertained a hope, not
only to recover her health, but also to see again the flourishing state of her
children. After he was vanished out of her sight, beyond the opinion of all men
she recovered her health, and daily afterward became a happy spectatour, of the
successful increase of Marquis Francis his fortune, who at this day governs
the Marquesate. Therefore the first miracle done by this Blessed man after his
death, was the tender of this pious office to his mother. This admirable
vision, both the Marquis himself related unto me at Castilion, and the
Countess Laura Gonzaga Martinenga at Brescia, and also it was afterward
ratified by authentical writings.

A certain Noble Lady, very remarkable for piety, being in Childbirth,
oppressed with very sharp panges, and having afterward wrastled with many
bitter and mortal throbbes, when at last she had voyded forth a great quantity
of blood, all her natural vigor and strength being exhausted, was no way able
by any help of Physicians to yield birth to the child that now remained dead in
her womb, therefore she betook herself rather to provide for the health of
her soul then her body; when a certain gyrle in the house, much given to
piety, being not ignorant how much power B. Aloysius had with Almighty God,
imploreth his help, and voweth that if that Noble Woman, might escape that
imminent danger of death, she would come, and present a votiue Tablet at his
sepulcher. This vow being made, the Noble Lady lying in her bed, without any
detriment to herself, is delivered of the dead child, and at this very instant
whilst I write this, lives in perfect health. In testimony of this matter the
gyrle which I spoke of, brought a painted Tablet to this Blessed man's
sepulcher, which first of all others was hung up there. All these particulars
did I understand from the gyrle herself, whereof me^tio^ is made in the acts of
Piacenza, and others.

Anthony Urban of Siena, a youth of sixteen years of age, by trade a Tailour,
being distempered in his head, by the continual distillation of sharp and
malignant humors, was swelled in the face, and in his eyes so weakened, that he
could neither endure the air nor the light: moreover this young man afflicted
with a fever, kept his bed, where when for the space of a month he had
continually layne, there grew in his left eye a white weft or scumme, or a
little knob not unlike a pearl; which for so much as it began in the sight of
his eye, dispersing by degrees round about the same, did so cover it, that
taking away his whole sight, it made the young man stark blind of that eye;
and for that much to his grief that acrimonious humor beginning to diffuse it
self, he was constrained daily to groan and lament, it was much feared least
he might loose the use of the other eye like wise. The Physicians attempted
diverse times to apply several medicines. But in respect either of the violence
of the malady, or for that they were over late ministered to the young man, as
being neglected in regard of his poverty, instead of ease, they added to his
affliction. That being discovered, the Physician, when he had prescribed
certain other remedies, which he found took no effect, gave over the man as
incurable. Therefore this poor sick man being destitute of all humane help and
assistance, lay languishing in his bed, with that hard knob fastened immouable
upon the sight of his eye; the inflammation and pain of both his eyes, did
daily increase, the sharp humor did so much abound, that from both his eyes
it continually ran upon the bolster, and in the night that clammy and viscouse
matter, did so gum-vp his eyes, that it was very hard in the morning to get
open either of them. Neither did any crisis, or purgatio^, or euacuation, or
natural sweat, yield him any ease. And verily, having laid a side all hope of
recovery, he was every day worfe handled then other. By chance it fell out that
an uncle of his, being by his trade a potter, when as he saw in the hands of a
certain boy, the lively picture; of B. Aloysius in paper, and asked of one
that was in his company, whether he knew this Blessed man; was given by this
means to understand of diverse of his miracles, and importuned to advise his
sick Nephew to make some vow unto B. Aloysius. When he had condescended
thereunto, he gives order to a sister of his to borrow the picture of that boy,
carry it to the sick person, and persuade him to make that vow. There this
woman found herself immediately inflamed with piety toward this Blessed man,
and conceived a certain hope, that through his merits, he should be cured, and
that she seemed to have a foreknowledge, that it should be effected that very
night. Having gotten the picture, setting aside all delay, late in the evening
she brings it to the sick young man, and recounting what miracles he had
wrought, exhorting him to make a vow to him, she departs. When Anthony had
with a pious mind received the picture, full of vehement zeal toward this
Blessed man, and hope of recovering his former health, he raises himself upon
his knees in his bed, and houlding the picture in his hands he voweth, that if
by his recommendation he might receive his sight, he would daily in honor of
him, recite five Pator Nosters, and so many Aue-Maries: and reposing great
trust in that favor which he had with God, three times he signeth his blind
eye there withal in the form of a cross, and sets the same afterward
behind his head. When he had slept for the space of five hours in the night,
he thought in his sleep, that he was restored to his former health, and even
returned to his shop. Wakening about the ninth hour, when he found his eyes
void of their accustomed pain, thoroughly cleansed, and his eye-lyds opened, he
began to imagine that he was perfectly recovered. But so suddenly, was he
able to make no certain trial, by reason that he was in darkness. Therefore
calling upon his Uncle, he proclaimed that he did verily think he was
delivered out of his disease, for so much as neither his eyes did grieve him
any more, and that his eye-lyds were opened, without any trouble. So soon as
it was fair day Anthony when as he beheld the light, speaking to his Aunt, who
by chance came unto him: I see (my good aunt) I see, said he, I am sound and
whole. By this voice she together with her brother being called to his bed
side, find Anthonies eyes clear, and freed from their accustomed humors and
inflammation; and in like manner the hard knobbe which before did cover the
sight of his eye, was removed to the left corner of the same, now extenuated
and vanishing (and afterward wore a way absolutely) leaving no impediment in
his sight. For this so manifest a favor showed unto them, with all the serious
industry that they might they presently render thanks to God and B. Aloysius.
The young man himself, who before could by no means brook neither the air,
nor light, leapeth out of his bed safe and sound, goes forth abroad,
presents himself at Mass to give thanks unto God, and finally betaketh
himself not long after to his taylours trade. This miracle, after that,
according to the custom, audience had been given unto witnesses by the
authority of the Archbishop of Siena, was registered, and many Physicians did
testify upon their oaths, that he could not be cured, but by divine and
supernatural force.

CHAP. IV. A Gentleman of Rome, having made a vow to B. Aloysius, is cured of
the stone. Jn like manner a Gentleman of Luca is delivered from a malignant
fener, by hanging his relics at his neck.
A GENTLEMAN of Rome, being one both pious and learned, as often as ^he kneeled
upon his knees, was vexed with an incredible pain of the stone; neither could
he find any remedy therefore, albeit he soght it with great diligence. When he
had continued sotime in that infirmity, and one day applying himself upon his
knees, to the ^o^emnity in S. Marcell^s his Oratory, which is usually
celebrated for the space of 40. hours, he felt that torment very sharply, and
he found by inward suggestion to his mind, that he should for remedy thereof
have recourse to B. Aloysius. Therefore earnestly petitioning him, that he would
please to make intercession for him unto Almighty God, he voueth, that if he be
freed from these griefs, he would hang at the sepulcher of this Blessed man,
some monument of the miracle. The vow being made, immediately, much to his
comfort, all his pain and troble passes away. But for so much as for the
space of some months he deferred the execution of his vow, being surprised
with the same malady, and fearing least he might be thus punnished for
neglecting the same, getting a convenient time, when the festival day was
celebrated in Rome in honor of him, he placed the miracle at his sepulcher,
and was again speedily delivered of his pain. Neither was he ever after, (as
he himself affirmed unto me and others, for the adding to the glory of this
Beatus) vexed with those kind of torments.

Laelius Guidi^^ionus a gentleman of Luca fell into a malignant fever at Rome;
the same was accompanied with a very sharp pain in his head, and perpetual
want of sleep, disquiet, languishing of his pulse, imbecility of his strength,
mournful sighs, and those fetched from the very botome of his heart, which he
thought he felt pricked with a thousand needles; with the small pox also, which
when they had but scarcely broken forth, seemed to threaten the striking in
again, his hearing some what impaired, his ^oyce low and faint, and great
difficulty of breathing: All which whereas neither inward nor outward remedies
did mitigate, being held for desperate of the Physicians, making his confession
and receiving the Eucharist, he prepares himself for death. In the mean
while he is visited by some of the Fathers of the Society of JESUS, who
declaring the sanctity of B. Aloysius, and the benefits and admirable things
which by his mediation Almighty God had performed, promised that they would
bring unto him some part of his relics. He being excited with zeal toward
him, and expectation of his relics, began to be as confidently persuaded of
his own recovery, as if he had already received some pledge thereof from
Almighty God, supposing that the relics being but once hung at his ^eek he
should be cured presently. The next morning he of his own accord requested to
have them. The same day they being brought he did with fervent devotion receive
them, and when he had with them made upon himself the sign of the cross
imploring with all the affection that he might the patronage of that Beatus, he
hangs them about his neck. Immediately his malady is appeased. The Physicians
in the evening found the man well eased. The cruel fit, which they thought
would have deprived him of his life, did afterward wholly forsake him, his
torments ceased, his rest returned, in the night he slept soundly, after he
waked, he found himself free, and light-some. The Physicians the next morning
returning unto him, found not in him so much as the least footstep of the
fever, and, which caused them more to wonder, there remained even no dregs of
so difficult a disease in him. The whole matter was by authority of the
Magistrates registered, and placed in a painted tablet at the sepulcher of B.
Aloysius.

CHAP. V. A Religions Virgin at Florence, by the Relics of B. Aloysius, is
cured of a very trouble some Canker.
THE year 1599. when certain Religious women who live in Florence at S. Mary
de Ang^lis, had read the life of Blessed Aloysius, as it was at first set down
by me, they obtained some little piece of his bones, which to this hour they
keep with singular piety and honor. There was in that Monastery amongst the
younger Virgins, which being newly consecrated unto God, are held in more
strict discipline then the rest, one who was called Angela Catharina Carlinia,
who for four whole years, was tormented with a great grief over all her left
side from the crown of her head, to the very sole of her foot, but especially
her shoulders and arms were vexed with that pain. Doubtless that humor, or
distillation oppressed her, from which she feared some great mischief might
grow unto her, as afterward it came to pass. For in the year 1600. in the
month of January, by night being waked out of her sleep with a vehement
distillation and cough, under her left pap, she found as it were a certain
heavy burden to lie upon her, with a sharp pain, and the part affected, after
a certain sort gnawne: when she felt it with her hand, she found a thing as
hard as marble, of the bigness of an egg, which afterward was discovered to
be a Canker. Hardly, and with great grief did she move any part of her body,
she went bowing her head, but nothing was more bitterly painful unto her then
to lift up her arms. In the night she could by no means lie on that side, and
if by chance she turned herself upon it in her sleep, transfixed with pain,
she presently awaked. Oftetimes she was able to take no sleep, and whilst she
was eating so great was her trouble, that scarcely durst she take that which
sufficed nature. Nevertheless partly out of modest bashfullnesse, partly out
of a desire to suffer some adversity for Gods sake, ten whole weeks she
entertained this new torment in secresy. But when she began to take the
spiritual Exercises of S. Ignatius, which the holy Virgins of that Monastery
are accustomed every year to do; whereas in the midst of them her disease
increased, she was moved in conscience to conceal it no longer. Therefore she
discloseth to Maria Pacifica Tonalia, the gouernesse of her, and the rest of
the young Virgins there, the whole matter, who communicating the same with
Euangelista lucundia, and with Maria Magdalena de Pazzi Mistress of the
Nouices, they presently visit the sick woman's grief, and by their handling
thereof, discover that it was a Canker, which in like manner not very long
before had occasioned the death of a certain other Virgin of the same
Monastery. Her mistress reposing no confidence in natural remedies, betaketh
herself to implore the help of God, and finding in her prayers a certain
instinct, that by way of favor she should request of B. Aloysius to recommend
this matter unto God, she exhorts likewise the Virgin to do the same.
Moreover so soon as she understood how much was attributed to the sanctity of
B. Aloysius, for three days one after another, she with those Relics which I
spoke of before, signed her with the sign of the cross. And the first time,
all the pain went away, wherewith her flesh was outwardly tormented, the other
incommodities of her disease remaining. Therefore they determine to commit the
same to the charge of the Physicians, and to cure that by other remedies. Now
they had certainly resolved the very next morning, to set in hand with the
medicinal cure thereof, when this Virgin enflamed with a desire to see the
glory of Jesus Christ amplified with the honor of B. Aloysius, applies
herself with great ardour of mind to beseech him that he would not suffer that
day to pass (which was the 8. of April, being Saturday in Albis, as they call
it) without vouchsasing her this favor: that is to say; that she might be made
partaker of her health, not through humane helps, but by his recommendation.
And after that all the whole day, in her sacred meditations, she had implored
that benefit, at last toward the evening respecting only the honor of God and
his holy servant, she retireth herself secretly into her closet to her
prayers. There whilst she reiterateth that her suit, and remains constanly
fixed therein she sensibly perceived her mind to be replenished with confidence
and certain hope to obtain that which she desired. and with all she found B.
Aloysius inwardly speaking unto her mind these words: Prosiducia, quae tibi
mei, patrocinijque mei fuit, proque ardenti desiderio^uo flagras vt hominibus
Deus gloriam quam mihi contulit patefaciat, visum estei tui te voti compotem
sacere. In regard of that confidence which thou have had in me and my
patronage, and in respect of that ardent desire wherewith thou art inflamed,
that God would vouchsafe to manifest unto men the glory which he has bestowed
upon me, it has pleased him to make thee partaker of thy desire. These words
being said, a very great pain cease upon that part of her body that was
disaffected, which very cruelly tormented her. For it seemed unto her that even
by strong hand the Canker and all her other indisposition, was violently torn
from her naked breast. Having passed this sharp pa^ge, all the trouble of her
disease, and not only the Canker, but even the whole infirmity of her side,
which had now held her for four years did so clearly forsake her, that she
was altogether whole and in perfect health. But in receiving that her health,
so violent was her pain, that she was found by the rest of the Virgins, fallen
into a sound, and to their seeming, dead. Therefore she was of necessity to be
laid in her bed. In the mean while with a low voice according as she was able,
she called upon her gouernesse often, and declared, that she was now wholly
cured. Not long after being strengthened, she manifests the miracle, and the
whole matter as it passed. The other Virgins when they saw her wholly cured,
doubtless being very glad, render thanks unto God and B. Aloysius, who had
made intercession for her. To the intent that they may retain the memory of so
great a benefit, the holy Virgins of this Monastery, do keep fast the eve of
that day every year which is consecrated unto him, and they celebrate his
festival day by erecting an altar, and carrying about with pomp of those his
humble suppliants, his picture and relics. The same of this so great a
Miracle filled all Italy and the Duke of Mantua being certified thereof,
rejoiced with extraordinary cheerfulness. But Marquis Francis, who at this day
sustayneth that Dignity, gave unto a certain man of his Dominion, who first
brought this news, a very handsome house at Castilion.

Of all these things a public instrument was framed, those sacred Virgins of
whom I spoke, being by the authority of the Archbishop of Florence sworn, and
the testimony of two Physicians also interposed. The one of them was Hierome
Mercurialis, that renowned Physician to the great Duke of Tuscany, a professor
with great applause in all the principal Academies of Italy, as having
published most famous monuments of his wit. The other, one Andrew Torsius, a
Physician of great Name at Florence. They write in this manner.

J Hiero me Mercuriall, when I took into my consideration the disease of this
holy Virgin, was induced to be of an opinion, that it seemed to be a Canker,
which by Hipocrates in his 38. Aphorism, is said to be hidden, and a disease
impossible to be driven away with any the most effectual remedies. In
testimony of these things shave written this under my own hand.

J Andrew Torsius confirm whatsoever is before said, and that by natural
operation, that sacred Virgin could not so suddenly be reduced to her health.
For maladies of this kind (if truly ever they may be overcome) are not
vanquished, without long time, and very effectual remedies. In testimony
whereof I have written these lines with my own hand. This third of October 1600.

CHAP. VI. He delivers two of the Society, one of them from a malignant
fever, the other from the Stone. The later benefit happened also to one of
Turino.
MArcus Gustonius a Gentleman of Venice. being at Padua admitted of the
Society, when the year before he had passed his Nouiship, in the end of the
year 1603. falling into a malignant fever, accompanied with certain breakings
forth, he was within few days so grievously handled, that his tongue being
swel^ed, his mouth filled with putrified and thick matter, his teeth loose in
his head, he could scarce either open his mouth o^ speak: moreover his senses
often failed him. His disease daily increasing, the Physicians began to
despair of his health, and one evening, he was forwarned that the next morning
he should receive his sacred Viaticum. It came into the mind of many Fathers
that were then present and some absent, that it would not be amiss to advise
him, to make some vow in honor of B. Aloysius. And one of them who lived
elsewhere, by letters admonished the Rectour of the College of Padua of this
matter. And another who resided in that same place, when about five of the
clock at night, he had humbly offered up his prayers before certain relics
of B. Aloysius, had a strong impulsion from Allmighty God, to advertise the
Rectour of the self same course, beingen kindled with a hope, that the sick
person by Gods help through the merits of this holy young man, should recover
his health. Immediately breaking off his prayer for that time, he went to the
Rectour, and declared unto him what was suggested to his mind. The Rectour gave
his approbation, and withal commanded Fa. Minister, that the next day early
in the morning he should bring to him that was sick, those relics were that
in that Fathers custody, and moreover advised that he should make some vow that
might tend to his honor: but for so much as at that time the sepulcher of
Aloysius was not as yet frequented, nor any accustomed pilgrimage made
thereunto, he should give him leave, to go as an humble suppliant, either to
our Ladies house of Loreto, or whither else he most co^modiously might. The
Minister not staying till the next day, presently went to the sick man's
chamber with the relics, and according to the Rectours pleasure, advised him
to make some vow. The sick man receiving the relics with singular sense of
piety, and with fervent affection kissing them, being confident, that this
should become the only remedy of his sickness, did with flagrant prayers
invoke B. Aloysius, and made a vow according as he was counseled. And
without any delay, he finds himself eased, and so much better was he that
night, that the next day after being by the judgment of the Physicians free
from all danger, he stood in no need of his Viaticum, but for piety sake only,
he was made partaker of the Eucharist. All these things were registered before
the Bishop of Padua, and a votiue tablet in testimony of the benefit, sent to
Rome, to the Sepulcher of B. Aloysius.

John Justinian, a Gentleman of Genua, of the Society of JESUS, when he lived
in the Roman College, was the third of June the year 1^05. oppressed with
cruel torments of the stone, in the right side of the reins of his back, and
not long after the whole passage of his urine being stopped, he asked Counsel
of the whole College of Physicians. They prescribed him many remedies,
medecines of diverse kinds to be taken by way of potio^, fomentatio^s,
unguents, warm bathes composed with oils, morning and evening to ride in
coach, and other things both purgative, and lenitiue. All which things when as
they nothing auailed him, and that now for ten whole days he had made no
urine, his life began to be in danger, and the Physicians advise was that he
should have ministered unto him the holy Viaticum. The tenth day of his
sickness, in the evening, he puts on a resolution to procure for himself
the help of B. Aloysius. But for so much as he was not able to stand upon his
feet, he requested that he might be carried between he hands of two men into
the holy Church to the tomb of the Beatus. There kneeling upon his knees,
often kissing the ground, reciting some prayers, most earnestly beseeching him,
that he would obtain for him health at God hands, finally voweth, that if he
be made partaker thereof, he would for one whole year, every day, in honor of
his memory, say five Pater Nosters, and five A^^ Mary's: moreover that he would
every day whilst he lived at Rome, visit his tomb, and hang there also a
silver tablet. Being brought back into his chamber, he passed that night in
very great distress, for so much as he now perceived his body wonderfully
oppressed with the retention of his urine. The eleaueth day in the morning, he
swelled in his feet, and likewise in all his body, his pulse discovered no
motion, and his wind failed him. The Physician when he saw him, despayred of
him. He was warned by the Infirmarian to prepare himself to receive the
celestial Viaticum. Having this denounced unto him, the next night he
reiterateth his vow, and taking into his hand certain relics of Aloysius,
which he had received of the Rectour of the College, he kisseth them with
reverence, and applies them to the places where his pain was, upon his naked
body, making upon them the sign of the cross. Immediately after, the stone
parting from his side slippeth into his bladder, and afterward together with
all that abundance of water, which he had now held for the space of eleauen
days, issues out, and that vehement pain was mitigated, excepting that part
only from which the stone was separated, which during the time of 3. days,
somewhat grieved him, but mildly and scarce sensible. That very day beginning
to perform his vow, the next morning he went to honor the Sepulcher of
Aloysius, and to render thanks, being sound and in perfect health: and the 22.
of June, which is celebrated as the glorious day of his entrance into heaven,
he fastened at his Sepulcher a silver tablet, in memory of that health, which by
God, and his good help he had recovered, and finally under his oath he caused
all these things to be lawfully registered.

The greatness of this miracle was increased, by that which happenned to a
certain man of Turino, Philibertus Baro, a very Noble Gentleman, who being one
night vexed with bitter pains of the stone, as being one of singular piety,
betook himself to divine help, and for obtaining of the same, addressed his
prayers both to other Saints and especially to those Blessed men of the Society
of JESUS S. Jgnatius, and S. Xanerius, and in like manner procured their
pictures. But when as his pain from four hours after sunset, for the space
of some nine hours, was so far from remitting that it even increased, it came
into his mind, that he had heard, about a month before that time, that a
certain young man at Rome was by the prayers of B. Aloysius admirably
recovered from the like disease. Therefore putting on a hope, that he would
likewise assist him, whereas he had none of his pictures, he commanded that
certain letters written by the hand of the Beatus himself, which were of late
given him by a certain Father, should be brought, to that intent, that he
might apply them to himself for the mittigating of the grief of the stone.
But when after much search they could not be found, lifting up his mind to
Heaven, with as much fervor as he might, he inuocateth Blessed Aloysius. After
this, a light sleep steals upon him, wherein there seemed to appear unto him
the shape of a young man of our Society, rather of a tall, then low stature,
his face slender and lean, his nose aquiline, and somewhat long, who
approaching near to his bed, girded his reins, and his whole body round about
with a girdle. He who had never known Aloysius by his face, not withstanding
suspecting that it was he, awaketh. But whereas he vanished out of his sight,
whilst he raised up himself, and endeavored with veneration to embrace him in
his arms, he left a certain force and effect of his presence. For at the very
same instant he sensibly perceived the stone falling from his reins into his
blader, for which immediately he gave thanks to God and B. Aloysius. And some
ten hours before sunset, he voyded a sharp bloody stone, of the bigness of
a bean, and afterward, all his grief and disease wholly forsook him.
Whereupon he chose B. Aloysius to himself and his whole family as a proper
patron, and intercessour unto God, and is very confident, that in all fortunes
he is unto him a help and sollace. And to the intent that he might give an open
remonstrance, that he ascribes this receipt of his health to the extraordinary
power of God, he sent as a guise to the Sepulcher of Aloysius a silver tablet,
and upon his oath declared all these things before the Archbishop of Turino.

CHAP. VII. Upon an Child, twice forsaken of the Physicians, twice he bestows
health. He brings back to his senses a man raging-mad in a malignant fever.
THERE was one Johannes Baptista Philipinus a Roman, who had a son a very
young child, whose name was Johannes Franciscus. He being both miserably
consumed, and afflicted with a fever Hecticke, of which he had been sick for
the space of one whole year, and in like manner with a certain disease like
to a leprosy, which seizing upon his skin, and dispersing throughout his whole
body, night and day disquieting him, brought him to the utmost hazard of his
life. He took no other sustenace but milk, neither did any medicine of so
many which Phisitia^s had ministered unto him, ever succeed with him. There was
added unto these things, so dangerous a flux, that the Physician casting of
all hope of ever repairing that damage which his patie^t received by the same,
supposing his death to be unavoidable, forbear to come any more unto him. The
Father of this child being destitute of all Natural helps, flies for refuge
to Divine. Therefore having ready at hand a certain tooth of B. Aloysius, he
hanged it about the child's neck, who the self same day began to eat a little
meat, his disease to remit, and the swelling of his breast to fall, and finally
his fever, and all his other infirmity being driven away, to the Physicians
admiration, health succeeded.

Moreover, to the intent that this might be so much the more remarkable, it was
the pleasure of God that another miracle should happen to the same child. For
some two months after this, he fell again into a malignant fever, his neck
swelled, his throat was stopped with the smallpox, in his legs there grow two
carbuncles, so pestilent ones, in so much that the Physician viewing them,
presently gave over the Child as desperate, and counseled his mother, to
separate him from her as far as well she might, for so much as in them was
contained such vehement contagion, that they might deprive of life, within in
the space of 24. hours, whatsoever the most healthful man living. The Father
of the child betaking himself to the propitious assistance whereunto hertofore
he had recourse and making together with his wife, a vow for the health of
their child, made use again of those sacred religues. The next day in the
morning the Physician returned, enquired whether he were yet living: the
parents smited, he visited the boy, found that his fever had altogether left
him, and that the malice of his other disease was dissipated. Being astonished
with the strangeness of the matter, having signed himself with the sign of
the cross, departed, being of this opinion, that there was now no more any
cause to return again to this cure. In like manner an expert Apothecary who
the day before together with this Physician had beheld the sick child,
stricken with admiration, when he had lifted his hand to his forehead, put it
even as low as the very ground, to wit, (as he said) that by the proportion of
that cross, he might design the greatness of the miracle. But after
understanding being had of the vow that was made, no one doubted but the glory
of so great a matter was to be attributed to B. Aloysius. The child being
brought to his comb, the rablet according to their vow was placed there. Of
which things an isntrumental register was made, unto which two Physicians, and
that Apothecary gave their testimony.

Franciseus Crottus a Gentleman of Brescia, being grievously assaulted with a
sharp fever, within few days in a vehement fit, began to be distracted and
outrageous; now the Curate was speedily sent for, that he might annoyle him as
a man whose state was lamented of all, and if truly he returned to his senses,
he might purge him with the sacrament of penance. When the Curate came with
all expedition bringing the sacred oil, he found him not only besides his
senses, and speaking all things extrauagantly, but also by the violence of the
disease, agitated with such furious exorbitancies, that it was scarce possible
to keep him in his bed. Now his son persuaded his mother, that in the
behalf of his Father, she would be pleased to make a vow to B. Aloysius. She
falling down upon her knees vowed that if her husband might obtain his
perfect health, she would procure that Mass should be said in honor of the
said Beatus. She had scarcely pronounced all the words of her vow, but his
frenzy remitted. the sick person returned into his senses, with integrity of
mind confessed his sins, and so much afterward was his fever mitigated, that
the next day, he was found by the Physicians in good health neither did he ever
after fall into any relapse of the same. This vow being performed, there were
in like manner made thereof authentical writings, at Brescia.

CHAP. VIII. A woman of Brescia is delivered from a fever, and from a bloody
flux: another in like manner, from a fever, and a great laxe. A certain man
is preserved in failing from a great precipice.
IVlia Marinia of Brescia, an old woman of 75. years of age, after three
years of a menstruous bloody flux from her womb, being utterly exhausted, was
also set upon with death-threatning fits of a scorching fever. Two Physicians
of principal account in that city namely Bettera, and Grillus, being informed
of her disease, first by hear say, after they themselves being there of
ey-witnesses, concluded her malady, both of it own nature, and also in respect
of the woman's great years, to be incurable: for so much as her flux of blood
bursting forth with pain, was a certain sign of some ulcer lying secretly in
her womb, and that no remedy could prevent, but that a very trouble some
droply (whereof she already gave very manifest signs) would at last, with
swelling her seet and legs, be her end. But she by the advice of her Son,
that was Mansionary of the chief Church of Brescia, upon that day which was
solemnized as festival at Brescia, in the honor of B. Aloysius, making a vow,
imploreth his help, and within the space of three days, was delivered of her
fever, flux of blood, and all her griefes^ her feet in like manner and her
thighs in a few days their is swelling being assuaged, recover their former
strength. This thing, being testified at Breseia was registered, and her vow
performed.

A poor man at Rome was surprised with a fever, and the tenth day after, with
so violent a fit, together with so great a looseness and scouring, that he did
verily think his life was at an end. And for so much as he had nothing, either
to sustain his life, ^^^^couer his health, having in vain peritioned two
Hospitals to receive him into them for Christ's love, he took his iourny to
that Insirmary, which is in Mont Celio not for from the Church of S. John
Lateran. In his iour^y he turned out of the way to the Church of the
Annuntiata, where the body of B. Aloysius lies, and casting himself prostrate
before his tomb, with a most seruent mind: Behold me, B. Aloysius (said he) if
thou ^ilt vouchsafe me the favor that this my fever and flux may be appeased,
although I am but a beggon hither do I vaw to bring the gift of one Crown.
Having gone out of the Church, whilst he houldeth on his way, a little after he
perceived that both his fever and his la^e had for soken him, and all his other
hodily informities besides; neither did any of these ever return again.
Therefore after that by begging he had gathered together the sum of a
Crown, he performed his vow.

Franciscus Fabrinus, a Citizen of Rome, w^^ upon S. Matthews Eve he heard a
certain ^oyse in the night that was made upon the roof of his house, to
discover what the matter was, he mounted up upon a certain wall two perches
and a half high from whence he might take a view of the same. Where he found
his feet violently carried from under him, as it were by some one that
endeavored to strike at him, and his foot-hold failing him, he fell head long
with his head downward into the gutter of his house: And if he had fallen
directly downward, he must of necessity have stricken his head, upon a great
and broad stone, which lay before a certain gate, for upon that his hat, that
was upon his head, fell. But whereas in his fall he called upon B. Aloysius to
help him, being sustained with a certain force, even as ^f some one had put
his shoulder under him, he was carried some certain paces from thenc^, into a
large earthen vessel, in such sort, that his head falling into the mouth,
without ever striking himself upon the brim thereof, the rest of his body hung
in the air. And so great was the head long force of his downfall, that being
violently pitched into the vessel, he was not able, to wring himself forth,
nor so much as stir therein: neither cold any one hear him when he called for
help. Being environed with that distress, again he inuocateth B. Aloysius,
and upon the sudden it is wonderful strange, with how little ^^oble, without
any wo^d without swelling, without any pain at all* he crept out from thence.
Therefore ascribing his preservation, next under God, to B. Aloysius,
immediately throwing himself prostrate upon the ground, he honored, and
thanked him, and afterward as a monument of his grateful mind, and that
benefit received, he carried to his sepulcher a Picture representing how the
thing passed.

CHAP. IX The very touching of his relics drives away from the Earl of
Montemeline a fever: and from the Duke of Mantua anoth^r grievous disease. The
like favor was done to the Marshall of Polonia, praying before his picture.
ADRIAN the Earl of Montemeline, being sick at Perugia of a long and
difficult fever, could find no ease neither by the da^ly diligence of
Physicians, nor by any remedy whatsoever, though he took many and those very
excellent ones. After that he had been very sick for the space of fifty days,
one of the College of the Society, which is at Perugia, gave unto the Rectour
of that College, to carry to the Earie a little piece of skin, which he had
cut off from the body of B. Aloysius that night which he departed. Being
brought, it was hanged about his neck. And straight way his fever ceased, and
never after returned. This was registered in diverse Records.

When Vincent the Duke of Mantua came to Rome, according to the custom of his
ancestors, to kiss the Popes feet, he came likewise himself with great
reverence to the sepulcher of B. Aloysius his cosen, and accepted as a gift
from the Marquis of Castilion (then the Emperors Ambassador) a great piece of
his relics. And in his return toward his own dominion, he was first,
detained at Florence, and after at Mantua with a certain sickness, which he
was wont often to be trobled withal, lying whole weeks and months,
continually in his bed, vexed with most bitter torment. In his delinery from
that, how much favor he found from B. Aloysius, may well be understood by
those letters which within a few days after he returned home, he sent to the
same Marquis. And they were after this so^t as follows.

Most Illustrious and Excellent Lord.
Having gotten this occasion, of certifiing you of my prosperous return home,
which news J assuredly know (in respect of your great love toward me) will
bring no small contentment unto you, I cannot conceal this, that by the
recommendation of our B. F. Aloysius Gonzaga, I have at this time received some
favor. For being at Florence surprised with my accustomed infirmity in my
knee, so soon as I had made a certain vow to the self same Bearus, and had
with his relics, which I received of you, touched the place disaffected in
the figure of a cross, my grief seemed after an admirable (...), to be
^ittigated, and my (...) to ^ere ^^^y, ^or^ spee^i^y the^ usually it was (...)
after J ^rri^^d here, the same pai^^ seized (...) my side, which was a token of
some ^at the (...) danger. Having reiterated, and confirmed my (...), and
having again orderly applied the reliq^es, I am not able in words to express,
in how ^^^suall a manner it departed. Therefore I, who ^e^retofore was
accustomed to be vexed whole weeks together with very sharp pains, and
afterward to spend many days in confirming my health, am now wholly cleared
from all this. Which I do altogether attribute to the prayers of our Beatus, by
the mediation of which J do verily think, that God for his greater glory, did
as a fa^^^^ bestow them upon me. I was wi^^ing speedily to give you notice
hereof, and to communicate with you this my celestial joy, which J (...) well
assured will be ^^to you exceedingly comfortable. So soon ^s it shall seem
good unto his Holiness, our Sovereign Lord, to give way to the setting-vp of
Altars unto him, and making of vows, J beseech you give ^e understanding
thereof, to the intent that I may perform my vow, and may engraft and
propagate, in the minds of those (...) that are within my dominion, piety
toward him full of sanctity. With all my heart do I recommend my self unto
you, and withal kiss your hand.

From Mantu^ this last day of September 1605. Your Excellencies Co^^^, and
Servant The D. of Mantua.


Sigi^m^nd of Miseow^ki Gonzaga, Marque^ of Mir^^^, Great Marshall of the
Kingdom of ^o^onia, Captain etc. ^^most Illustrious man, some years since
addotted by the Duke of Mantua into the house of the ^onzaga's, was sent by the
King of Polan^ into Hungary, that from thence he might b^ing his new Spouse the
Queen of Polonia. He; when he came to the Emperor at Prage, received from
Guilie^mus San-clementius, Embastadour to him from the Catho^ike King (being a
very Excellent man) a short discourse written of the virtues, sanctimony, and
miracles of B. Aloysius Gonzaga, and likewise his printed picture in black and
white. When he continuing his journey through Bo^emia was present by break of
day at Mass in a rowne called Budroas, was oppres^ed with so sharp and
sudden a pain, and so grievous a disease, that he was compelled to betake
himself to his bed, and this was so much the more doubtful, for that the
force and nature thereof was unknown to the Physicians. This same extremity of
pain continued with him all that day even til the midst of the night. And
then seeing himself not able to take any sleep or rest, there came into his
mind that writing, which I made mention of; and somewhat recollecting his mind,
he began to peruse it, and now and then casting his eyes upon B. Aloysius his
picture, to implore his aid, with a seruent and forward mind. Scarcely had he
finished his prayers, but there ceased upon him a sound sleep, which lasted
til the next day was far spent Being awaked, he found his health wholly restored
unto him. Giving thanks to God and B. Aloysius, determining to send a gift to
his sepulcher at Rome, he houldeth on his journey prosperously. All this that
Noble Gentleman himself did testify upon his oath at Crocouia, before the
Bishop of that Diocese, and there the history of the thing, as it passed, was
published in print, together with an oration which was made at Lubliu^ in the
praise of B. Aloysius.

CHAP. X. Baccius a Doctor of Rome is recovered of diverse diseases.
FLAMINIVS Baccius a Doctor of Rome, and Companion to the Master of
Ceremonies, had fallen into a double quotidian fever; and withal a grievous
disquiet, and ringing in his ears, depriving him of all sleep, very much
molested him. When by no help of Physicians he any thing at all me^ded in his
health, and that in his 21. fit, he began to be infested with such torment that
made him incapable of any rest; after that the Physicians had prescribed many
medicines in vain, about the fourth hour of that night wherein he had the 24.
fit of his fever, all his servants being dismissed out of his chamber, his
bloudy-flux increasing with new violence, he often, and that in great quantity,
purged from his belly a bloody (...) stance. Upon this occasion being very much
terrified, despay ring of any help by natural means, and fearing least that
night would be the last of his life, he began carefully to consider with
himself of many cures both of his body and soul: the seventh hour of that
same night, he remembered himself of B. Aloysius, whose life and miracles
briefly set down, Joannes Paulus M(...)tius a very Noble Gentleman (chief
Secretary to the Po^e, one of the Council of the sacred ^ites and Ceremonies,
unto whom his Holiness bad given order to consult about his canonization) had
read unto him some three days before. Him does he earnestly invoke, that he
would vouchsafe in his behalf to appease Almighty God, and for so much as the
pain of his head, and weakness of his whole body, compelled him to lie upon
his back, spreading both his hands before his face, and covering the same,
with as loud a voice and as much remonstrance of piety as he could bewailing
his own estate, he inuocateth him in these words: O Bl. Aloysius Gonzaga, whom
God has advanced to so great glory, vouchsafe to put thy hands upon me, for
from thence do I assuredly expect health! O most happy young man, that art so
great a favorite with God, I most humbly beseech thee, in respect of that
favor, to grant this my petition, that seriously I may perform unto thee
those divine honors, which so fervently I have wi^^^^ to do. Scarcely had he
uttered these words, ^ut that he felt his face pressed down (as it were with
the hands of Aloysius) and in such sort crushed, that even his nose bended to
his face. In the mean while endeavoring to draw in his breath, he smelt a
certain subtle odor very grateful and sweet unto him, with which he was so
much recreated, that presently he slept, and waked not til the next day at
twelve of the clock, when he was called by a certain may'd of his. And then
he found himself pleasured from God with that benefit which he desired. He had
slept five whole hours, he felt no head ach he was vexed with no tormets, the
humors that were congested were dispersed and dissolved, his belly being now
bound gave him case, his fever was gone, finally there was nothing in him
disaffected but was confirmed. Therefore it was his pleasure, that it should be
diuulged to his whole house-hould, that by Gods help he was recovered, he
called for his clothes, and left his bed. In the mean^ time the Physician came,
and found him cleared from his fever, and his disease removed, and taking
knowledge of that which had happened that night, verily he was astonished; and
more certainly to discover the matter, he porused his water, wherein he said,
that there was no sign of his fore passed m^^^^y to be discerned, wherefore
together with the rest he rendered thanks unto God. The p^tient himself truly
was willing to go (...) mediately to honor that famous body* of B. Aloysius,
but the Physician, that he might make trial whether his fever would return,
willed him to stay two days at home, which being passed, he gave way to his
piety: and all these things being confirmed by his testimony, were registered.

CHAP. XI. A Gentleman of Florence is, delivered from an evil spirit by the
only touching of his relics. A certain young woman praying before the picture
of B. Aloysius, is recovered of lamenesse.
BENEDICT Rodulph a Gentleman of Florence, when for the space of seauenteene
months, he had been bewitched, was by all probability thought to be obsessed,
by a wicked spirit, and supposed to be in the power of the same, even til the
eleauenth year of his age. Therefore whereas before he was of a good babit of
body, fresh and beautiful, afterward he was pale, lean, maimed, crook-backed,
low, and moreover froward; and subject to anger beyond all measure. As often as
his mother gave him corection, his eyes would glow in a horrible manner: he
would often beat himself: knock his own head against the wall: wallow upon
the earth^ importune his mother to kill him: throw himself headlong into the
water, and go about by the other means to take away his own life: although
he was of a wit docible enough, y^^ very hardly would he learn the points of
Christian doctrine: whilst they passed by in solemn procession carrying, the
Relics of Saints, he could not be contained in the windows, he was trobled,
and when he grew somewhat bigger he would withdraw himself. Often he would
utter speeches above the capacity of his age: Sometimes likewise, being but a
little boy, he was thrust forward to obscene speeches and gestures. At the
first, knowing not the nature of his malady, he was put into the hands of
Physicians to be cured; but all this nothing auailed him. After it was
discovered that he was agitated with the furies of the Devil, sacred prayers
for his dispossessing were often used, and he was brought to the Church of the
Bl. Virgin Mother, which is of great fame at Sumano, not far from Pistorio, by
the concourse of many Communicants: but both these courses were in vain.

The year 1605* in the month of December, when he was vexed extraordinarily
with that wicked spirit, he recounted unto, his mother, that there manifestly
appeared unto him a representation of Christ crucified, two priests standing
upon both sides thereof, which wished him to be of good chee^e for that shortly
he should be delivered. His mother interpreting that those two priests were
those BB. men of the Society of IESV^ ^^na^ius and Xa^erius, sought the^^
relics, and could not find them. But so soon as she understood that a noble
Woman of great esteem, called Violanti of the house of Medices, had some little
part of the relics of B. Aloysius, she borrowed them, and hung them about the
neck of the child. Scarcely did they come near him, but he found himself
tormented with great violence, and with a loud voice cried out to have them
taken away, for that he said he found himself, all about burned with touching
them. But they that were present, held him by force, till a certain priest,
that was skillful in matters of exorcisme was sent for: whom they entreated
amongst his exorcismes to make use of those relics; by which means he was
dispossessed. For when the Priest amongst the ceremonies of exorcisme, had with
the relics of B. Aloysius at several times touched diverse parts of the boy,
and found no sign of the Devils being present in any of them, he imagined that
he had been cast forth; at last when he found him lying secretly in his left
arm near to his hand, laying the relics upon it, he compelled him to
depart, leaving the child as it were halfe-dead. Notwithstanding he rested in
great quiet and tranquillity, which in like manner he always after continued,
and does to this very day, whilst I write this. The child remained marvelous
devout to B. Aloysius, and besought his mother that he might betake himself to
his study, therefore she brings him up, that herafter being adjoined to the
Society; he may become as an adopted son of B. Aloysius. Of all these
things, writings were made, and signed by the authority of the Archbishop of
Florence.

Angel^ Bo^ho^^a a young maid of Bresci^ of the age of 21. years, was lame of
bot^ her thighs, in such sort, that her right thig^ had seven soars in it,
her left was di^inabled with a gross swelling even to her very foot. Therefore
she could not move herself, or go without two wooden crutches, set under
both her arme-pits. And even then very hardly, for so much as she was not able
to se^ her right foot upon the ground, and her shoulders with continual use of
them were strained in their joints. She had now halted in this manner some two
years and a half, when upon the Anniuersary day of B. Aloysius, by the advice
of a certain pious Gentlewoman, she betook herself to the Church of S.
Antony, in which the Fathers of the Society have a house of Residence, in which
was set up the picture of Aloysius, and scarcely was she come to the entrance
of the Church, when being not able for weariness to go any further, she fell
to the ground upon her knees, and turning toward the picture of the Beatus,
saying five Pater Nosters, and five Aues, she desired of him to be recovered of
her lamenesse. Moreover she made a vow that if she might be recovered of her
health* seeing that in respect of her poverty she had nothing else but her
crutches, she would in testimony of her health, by his mediation, received from
Almighty God, hang up the same at his picture. She went home again* that very
night those issues of her rig^t thigh began to fill up, and the swelling to
assuage: Therefore the next morning, finding herself somewhat recovered, she
went with one crutch only, the third and fourth day ^he stood in need of
neither. And not long after ^^e was so wholly recovered, that her right thigh,
which was before shrunk with the violence of her disease, extended to its just
length: wherefore she was of necessity to leave of her shoo which she wore some
three fingers thicker then the other. To perpetuate the memory of this benefit
bestowed upon her by God, she hung up her crutches in that Church, near to the
Picture of B. Aloysius.

CHAP. XII. Many miracles wrought in the Marquesate of Castilion by the merits
of B. Aloysius: whenvpon many votiue Tabiets were hung at his Picture.
NEITHER was B Aloysius less co^iou^ in pouring our his bounty upon the
inhabitants of Castilion, that were once the subjects of his dominion, which is
apparent by that public instrument, that very lately was made there, wherein
those benefits and miracles are expressed at large, which was abridged by the
Bishop of Castilion in these words

1. Celsus ^o^^urrus, a man infirm, who was not able to go otherwise then
upon a crutch, and that with great difficulty, that day which every year is
celebrated for the happy departure of B. Aloysius out of this world, took a
journey of three miles, upon horseback, to that holy Church, where his picture
is openly to be seen, There when he had vowed to offer up upon a certain day,
a burning lamp, thereupon he cast away his crutch, and departed as a man sound
about his business, and in short time was absolutely confirmed, which he, not
without very good cause did willingly attribute to the prayers of B. Aloysius.

2. Antonia wife to Joannes Baptist a Marmentinus a Notary, who was employed i^
drawing the instruments of the life of B. Aloysius, being one night oppressed
with sudden and very grievous pains of one of her legs, vowed that night,
that she would offer up a wax taper, and the form of a leg to the Beatus.
Presently she fell a sleep, and afterward waking was freed from all grief. And
made no doubt, but by the mediation of the merits of B. Aloysius it departed.

3. Margarite the wife of Alexander Melino, a very honest man, fell into a very
great swelling both of her hip and thigh, and was daily vexed with an
intolerable pain. And there appeared some arguments of breaking into an
issue, so that it seemed altogether to stand in need of launcing. She vow^d to
carry unto Aloysius the form of a sil^er thigh: immediately her pain by Gods
help went away, and her swelling by little and little dispersing, without any
part being either broken or launced, she was absolutely cured. Which she
attributed to the merits of B. Aloysius.

4. Camilla, the wife of Jacobus Ferrarius who had brought up B. Aloysius, when
as she had been held eight whole years with a Hecticke fever, visiting his
picture, she vowed to offer unto him his portraiture in silver, and without
delay, found herself recovered; her fever slaked, she became very well, and so
acknowledges herself bound to B. Aloysius.

5. The son of Joannes Jacobus Ferrarius was tormented with a very scorching
fever. He vowed thereupon a Statua to B. Aloysius, and presently he was wholly
recovered, and extolled the benignity of the Beatus.

6. Magdalen the wife of Anthony G^^latins, being tormented with a pain about
his heart, was very near her death. She made a vow to the Beatus, and straight
way as it were with a certain hand, she perceived all pain to be taken from
her heart, neither was she ever after sensible of that grief. She rendered
thanks to God, and B. Aloysius, whose patronage he had used.

7. Thaddens Sigurtadus, a Notary, wher^^ being surprised with an intolerable
grief in his right thigh, he was not able to move himself: in the night he
vowed unto. B. Aloysius the semblance of a thigh of silver. The next morning he
rose out of his bed in a manner freed of all his pain, and within two days
after wholly recovered.

8. One Andrew Stol^^n, was become deaf. About some eight days after, when he
had obliged himself by vow unto B. Aloysius, in the morning he found himself
healed, through his merits.

9. The same man when as being wounded in his breast with many blows of stones,
he vomited blood, made a vow to B. Aloysius, immediately the blood stanched,
and within two days he was confirmed, and professed himself to be behoulding
to the Beatus.

10. Bartholomeus Melliarinus had in the night a certain sudden swelling of
the bigness of a man's fist that grew under his ear, which hindered him from
swallowing any thing, and almost from drawing his breath. He made a vow to B.
Aloysius, and at the very same moment his pain intermitted, his swelling
assuaged, by break of day he came to me without any sign of disease, and
rendered thanks to the Beatus.

11. Franciscus Smarallius having a troblesome pain in his knee, was
grievously tormented, and in respect of the feebleness of his sinnewes not
able to move himself out of his bed, he obliged himself by vow unto B.
Aloysius. Forth with his knee breaking, he leaped out of his bed; and the day
after being altogether recovered, made a journey of 7. miles to Desenzano.

12. A little son of one Petrus Pilou^ being an infant of no more then 30.
months old, was towly deformed by the shrincking of his sinnews in the one
side of his body, and being troubled with a frothy foame in his mouth, was
given over by the Physician. His Father made a vow B. Aloysius, and straightway
it manifestly appeared that he was much better, and shortly recovered.

13. The daughter of one Dominicus Ferrarius, by reason of a swelling that was
in her throat, was able to take no sustenance. When afterward her Father had in
the night made a vow in her behalf to B. Alnysius, his daughter before day
rose out of her bed, and took meat without any sensible difficulty.

14. Lelia the wife of Franciseus Ghirddus, was so grievously handled, that
having no ability to take meat, she was in evident danger of death. But she,
about seven of the clock in the night, making a vow to B. Aloysius, found
herself about the tenth hour, wholly restored to her health.

15. Stephen Benedict a Doctor, being Oppressed with a troublesome
distillation, which no humane medicine was able to remedy, promising by vow an
offering of silver, by the recommendation of B. Aloysius obtained help, and
good health.

16. Hortensius Bonus seized with a redious disease, moreover being seized upon
with a bloody flux, was by the Physician deplored. He vowed unto B. Alaysius a
silu^^ statua, and presently was wonderfully eased: His disease ceased, his
flux diminished, he came forward very much in his health, and in a short time
wholly recovered it.

17. Gothardus Alexandrinus, having been trobled 3. months with a Tertian
ague. that very day which ic was to come, made a vow to B. Aloysius. And he
afterward never having any more fits thereof, was well.

18. Angelus the wife of Franeiscus Ceradello, being continually for 22. whole
days together, tormented with intolerable griefe^ about her heart, was in
fear of her life. Scarcely had she made a vow to B. Aloysius, but that her
pain remitted, and vanished.

19. A child of one Peter Bosius being of the age of 3. years, surprised with
sicklesse lay at the very point of death. His Father obliged him by vow unto B.
Aloysius, the next morning he took his meat, no otherwise then if he had been
in perfect health.

20. A child of one Bartholome^ (...) being but one year old, falling out of
his bed, was reputed little lesle then dead. His Father devoutly inuocated B.
Aloysius: In a moment the infant was well, laughed, and made means for the pap.

21. Antony Ferronius had bruised his back and stomach with a grievous burden,
neither was he capable of any rest at all. He went to the holy Church, and
making a vow to B. Aloysius, contrary to all expeotation departed from thence
perfectly recovered.

22. Joannes Lacobus Giroldus, being afflicted with a long and tedious fever,
so soon as he found the same increased, made a vow to B. Aloysius, and without
all delay it departed, and never after returned.

23. Joannes Antonius Morattus. having vsualiy been tormented with a pain and
swelling in his right tigh, knee, and foot, after he perceived the same pain
once or twice to be renewed, he offered up his prayers to B. Aloysius for his
favor, and presently found ease.

24. The wife of Julius Fainus, being not able to be delivered of her child,
was supposed by the midwife to be at the point of death. Having made a vow to
B. Aloysius, she was presently delivered both of the child and from all danger.

25. The wife of one Valerius Factorius, being sick of a difficult disease in
her throat, was recovered thereof the very day that she with her prayers
inuocated B. Aloysius.

26. Catharine the wife of one Ambrosius Notarius, was very much tormented with
a Sciatica, and had attempted all humane helps in vain. She made a vow to B.
Aloysius, and began to mend: she performed her vow, and yet notwithstanding was
not absolutely cured. To conclude, the fourth day the obtained a perfect
recovery.

27. Christopher Saxius was continually for the space of a whole year sick of
a fever. His mother one day made a vow for him to B. Aloysius: and the next
night following he was freed.

28. Baptista Fezzardus having his hand and arm disioynted and swelled, was
likewise in a fever, not without pain and danger of co^uulsion of his sinews.
Having made a vow to B. Aloysius, his pain was mittigated, his infirmity wore
away, and shortly he was recovered.

29. Martha the wife of Paulus Bettius, being in difficult labor of
Childbirth inuocated B. Aloysius, presently she was delivered, and obtained
her safety.

30. A child also of three years old of this Paulus Bettius, had been sick a
whole month, his neck being sore and swollen like a wenne; his Father making a
vow to B. Aloysius, he was made sound within two days.

31. Anthonius Serlius had been more then 3. years troblesomely afflicted in
his thighs; making a vow to B. Aloysius he found case, and not long after was
perfectly sound.

32. The wife of one Andreas Pedercinus was not able to bring forth the child
that she went with: she made a vow to B. Aloysius, and presently was delivered.

33. Petrus Cattaneus a very reverend man, and Priest of a certain
Parish Church, was incredibly tormented with a malignant fouer, an inflamed
phrensy, and a swelling pain and redness of his head, so that it seemed to be
scorched round about, and was now quite distracted of his senses. But so soon
as hi^ mother had made a vow for him to B. Aloysius, he returned to himself,
and enjoyed afterward good health.

34. Martha the wife of Ioannes Iacobu^ Fezzardus having been vexed for the
space of four whole months, with pain and very sharp aches in her feet, had
no sooner by vow rendered B. Aloysius propitious unto her, but that she began to
amend, and perfectly to recover her samenesse.

35. Martha the wife of one Joseph Balarinus, had both her own, and her child's
life (which she was not ab^e to be delivered of) very doubtful. But having
besought the assistance of B. Aloysius, immediately she was brought to bed of
her child, and that truly alive. Which was ascribed to the favor of the Beatus.

36. Joannes Maria Bertasius, being now for four days so tormented with an
exceeding great pain of his thigh, hip, and leg that he could scarcely go, at
last as well as he might he went to the sacred Church, he vowed that he would
supply the oil in the lamps, which burn before the picture of B. Aloysius;
immediately he departed away sound, and altogether freed, and acknowledged the
merits of the Beatus.

37. A sickness of the continuance of some seven days had brought a certain
young son of one Bartholomeus Castellinus so low, that it had left him no
otherwise then a breathing an^tomy. His Father vowed to erect a statua to B.
Aloysius, and straightway his son (which hither to he had not been able to
do) began to stand upon his feet, and walk of himself without help, and
within eight or ten days his flesh being repaired, he became healthful and
sound, and his Father performed his vow to Blessed Aloysius.

38. Francisca the wife, of one Joannes Maria Past^r, being astonished with a
certain fear, for the space of four whole days continued trembling and
crying out, seeming also to hear continually a combersome multitude following
her. She caused herself to be brought into the holy Church to the picture of
B. Aloysius, and from then^^ she departed free from all those troubles.

39. A certain infant of 13. months old, being the son of Bernardinus
Bosius, was seen by his mother falling with his face downward into the fire:
she vowed unto B. Aloysius a waxen image of the infant, and took up her Child
without any hurt of the fire, and this did she ascribe to the merits of B.
Aloysius.

40. The son of one Franciscus The odoldus, being a child of 4. years old,
grievously wounded by a fall, and lying continually for the space of two whole
days without any figue of life, in the night a vow was made for him unto B.
Aloysius, and by break of day in the morning he was found perfectly recovered.
Which his Father most willingly attributed to B. Aloysius.

41. Ioannes Paulus Segala, lay for the space of 17. days so tormented with a
pain in his back, that he was not able to move even the least part of his
body, nor to drink otherwise then through a pipe. This man when he had vowed
oil to the lamps of B. Aloysius, within 3. hours turned himself, his sinnews
were enabled, by break of day, he arose absolutely cured: not without very good
cause he testifies the same to have been bestowed upon him by the merits of
B. Aloysius.

42. Caecilia the wife of one Baptista Zelinus, had been for 6. months trobled
with a pain in her thigh, which being swelled and broken, her foot was in like
manner altogether weakened; wherefore she was not able to make so much as four
steps forward. She vowed a thigh of wax unto B. Aloysius, and being within the
space of four days recovered, she rendered thanks unto him.

43. Dominica the wife of Antonius Desenzanus, was afflicted with the gout,
which beginning from the very nails of her toes, by degrees creeping upward
seized upon her throat. She having made a vow to B. Aloysius, was within the
space of one hour, altogether delivered from that disease.

44. Rigo Regazzolus, having received certain wounds both in his left arm,
and under it upon the same side, had no disposal neither of his tongue, nor
senses, and did spit blood. A vow was made in his behalf to B. Aloysius;
immediately both his speech and senses returned, and waxing healthful by
degrees, in a short time recovered a confirmed state of body.

Infinite other benefits of diverse kinds, are received of many who come to
offer up their humble prayers before the picture of B. Aloysius. Before the
same, twelve lamps, maintained by the liberality of those people that resort
thither, besides a great number of wax tapers and torches, which continually
are brought, perpetually remain lighted. And at this hour there hang about
the same no less then 40. Votiue Offerings.

CHAP. XIII. Diverse other favors, and graces conferred by B. Aloysius his
intercession upon persons in sundry places.
ANOVICE of the Society of JESUS at Cracouia, having been now 8. days held
with a certain disease, at the persuasion of a companion of his, determined to
implore the help of B. Aloysius in his sickness. Therefore in the evening he
vowed, that he in the honor of him would be present at ten Masses, and would
recite as many pair of beads. The next day in the morning, much to his own
admiration, and of all those who lived in the same house with him, being wholly
recovered of his health, he arose out of his bed. This did Fa. Provincial of
Polonia solemnly confirm with his testimony, who was present when this matter
happened. Of another miracle wrought in Lombardy: In like manner of many, who
in the regions of his dominion found favor by his picture, the instruments
extant at Padua sufficiently record.

Of certain possessed persons, whom his relics helped, and how he appeared
to a certain secular man at Rome, and did him a rare favor in a certain
matter, we may read in the records of Venice.

Of a certain girl that was afflicted with a soar breast, which was the next
day to have been cut-of by the Surgeons, how by the assistance of B. Aloysius,
unto whom she had made (...) vow, she was found safe and sound by them that
came to cut it of: Moreover of a man, that was delivered from a desperate fever
by the only touching of his picture: In like manner of a Hectike fever which
was cured in another girl who was exhorted to go thither for devotion, the
records of Tiuoli give testimony.

It was diuulged even unto Jtaly that he appeared in Polonia accompanied with
B. Jgua^ius and Stanislaus, to F. Stanislaus Oborschius at his death, with whom
he had been conversant in his Nouiship.

Many others do recount his favors extended toward them, beyond all mortal
power: all which it would be too long to recount in this place.

CHAP. XIV. Certain favors of B. Aloysius done for the good of souls, by
driving away Tentations.
NEITHER truly is the number of them less, who by his mediation, and procuring
of God to be propitious unto them, do profess themselves to have obtained very
many helps of the interior and celestial safety of their minds. This may
very well be understood by those things which it has pleased Almighty God to
Vouchsafe in this kind.

A young man of Polonia, being even from his first childhood very much given to
continual prayer, fasts, disciplinings, and other afflictions of himself,
having lead a pious and intiere life in the midst of secular liberty, had at
C^aconia entered into the Nouiship of the Society of JESUS. He in his very first
entrance into a more holy life, began most grievously to be solicited to admit
wicked cogitations against God, the Bl. Virgin, and other Saints, which truly,
when he was most intent to the meditation of sacred things, and his prayers,
and whilst he enjoyed celestial comforts, would arise, and disturb his mind
with great conflicts, putting him suddenly out of all sense of piety. Often
did he beseech Almighty God to help him; often did he implore the aid of the
Virgin Mother, often the assistance of other Saints. But (for so much as
perhaps they had rather have this benefit ascribed to B. Aloysius his
intercession, whom with so devout a mind he had always served) his prayers
deserved not to be heard. Being now for the space of two months infested with
these troublesome suggestions of the Devil, when once by break of day he was
according to his custom tempted with the same in his prayers, it came into his
mind, to beseech Almighty God to help him, by the mediation of B. Aloysius
Gonzaga, whom he had read in his life to have assisted others in the like
danger. He offered up unto him his prayers, and besought him earnestly, that he
would free him from this trouble. And without delay, he sensibly found his
breast filled not only with hope, but even confidence, together with a certain
cheerfulness, so far forth as if all that his deiection of mind had been taken
away. Neither was he deceived in his opinion, for from thence forward he was
always free from the same. This thing he himself (to the intent that he might
propagate the glory of B. Aloysius) did of his own accord relate unto others,
and under his oath publicly professed.

A certain pious man dwelling in the Country beyond the Alps, had passed
very many years in Religion, and service of God, secured from all lust-full
tentations, when by Gods permission, with so great violence he began to be
infested by an imp^re spirit, that he was compelled all the whole year to
maintain battle, and combat with dishonest thoughts and imaginations, with
unchaste incitements and sensual prouocations; neither in the mean while had
he any comfort or rest. He treated his poor body with hunger, stripes,
hairecloth, and other asperities both of diet and clothing. It auailed him
nothing: often would he withdraw himself from the table, often from the
company of men, being constrained to be wayle and bemoane his own infelicity.
There throwing himself prostrate in the very dust, he perseuered with humble
prayers daily to petition Almighty God for mercy; finally finding no remedy
whereby truly he could hope for any comfort, and perceauing his lustful
desires to be nothing les^e inkindled, he was assaulted likewise violently with
that execrable opinion of imagining, that neither God, nor any of his Saints
took regard of our affairs, who being daily wearied with his importunate
prayers, yielded notwithstanding no comfort or relief to his unfortunate state.

In conclusion when he had so lingered out the whole year in this difficult
conflict, that he found no succor at all, he remembered himself of the holy
and innocent life of B. Aloysius Gonzaga, of which amongst other things he had
heard this especially, that through a singular benefit of God, he had his body
free from all unchaste motions, and his mind from all, even the least shadow,
of sin. Therefore he determined to have recourse unto him as his last refuge,
him he besought as earnestly as he might; finally he hung about his neck his
relics which by chance he had in his custody: scarcely had they touched him,
when upon the sudden, he was exempted from the fury of all those cogitations,
and there was rendered unto him a very pleasing and quiet state of mind: and two
years are now past, since that (being freed from all those manner of
tentations) he ascribes this so great a benefit to B. Aloysius, and by his
assistance continues it. Of all these things by public authority a Writing
was made, and a Donary-offering of silver was sent to his tomb at Rome.

I could rehearse others of like kind, which I have understood from very
credible testimonies, who do constantly affirm, that whereas formerly they had
been plunged habitually in a vice much opposite to chastity, after they began
to make suit for Gods help by the mediation of this his servant, either by
honoring his sepulcher, or carrying about them his relics or picture, or
determining to do some pious thing in honor of him, or choosing him for their
advocate and patron, those unclean ardours being as it were extinguished, they
never after polluted their integrity with any such like blemish. But for so
much as it is my purpose, to prosecute in this book those things only, which I
found recommended to public monuments, and that I cannot declare these things,
without drawing some note upon them unto whom they happened, I do willingly
omit them.

This only will I add, that if that saying of B. Aloysius be true, as very true
it is, which in his life time he maintained, that the Saints of heaven do
chiefly profess their help and assistance to us mortal men in acquiring
those virtues, with which they in their life time were adorned: seeing that he
did with so unusual a praise flourish, not only in purity and chastity, but
even in very many other virtues, as heertofore we have declared; without all
doubt, being now received into heaven, he will most willingly be exceeding
propitious unto them, who have recourse unto him, with a desire to obtain or
preserve those virtues.

And by these that have been related in this chapter we may easily conjecture,
that almighty God, who eue^ now before his acts are as yet published, has (by
his prayers, (...) to the intent that he may set forth the honor of his name)
done so many admirable matters, and vouchsafed so many favors; will for his
sake perform even many more, both in number, and in dignity more remarkable,
after that his life shall be put in print, and that his fame and veneration
shall more increase with the people, as ^^therto we see it does.

A MEDITATION OF THE HOL^ Angels, and of those especially, who are deputed to
the Custody of men. Written by B. Aloysius Gonzaga.
WE have said in the course it self of this our History, that B. Aloysius
committed to writing his meditation of the Blessed Angels, at the request of
Fa. Vincentius Bruno, who for so much as he was not ignorant, how much he
honored those celestial Wightes, and how singularly devout he was unto them,
imposed that task upon him. To the intent that to the good of others, there
might remain monuments of those so notable and sublime conceits, I thought
good to place here, this meditation, so that together with his life it might
be read by all. And thus it was.

THE GOSPEL. Matthew. 18. There came unto JESUS his disciples, saying: whom
do thou think to be the greater in the Kingdom of heaven? And JESUS
calling unto him a little child, placed him in the midst of them, and said:
Amen I say unto you, unless you be converted and made as little ones, you
shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble
himself like this little one, he is greater in the Kingdom of heaven. Take
heed that you contemn no^ one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that
their Angels in heaven do always behold the face of my Father, who is in
heaven.

THE PROPHECIES.
1. Who is as our Lord God, who inhabiteth the depths, and beholds all things
humbled under him, both in heaven and in earth? Psalm. 112. 2. Almighty God
exalts the humble. Job. 5. 3. I expected till the Thrones were placed, and
the ancient of days did sit, his vestment was white as snow, and the hairs of
his head like bright wool: a thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
times ten hundred thousand assisted him. Dan. 7. Apoc. 5. 4. He has given
command unto his Angels over thee, that they may keep thee in all thy ways.
Psalm. 90. 5. The Angel of our Lord shall put in amongst them that fear him,
and he shall deliver them. Psalm. 33. 6. Do not say before the Angel, there is
no providence: least perhaps God being angry against thy speeches, disseuer all
the works of thy hands. Eccl. 5.
THE FIRST PART OF THE Considerations, in common.
1 CONSIDER, by what means Christ our Lord according to that great love
wherewith he affects us his creatures, never cease to minister new occasions
unto v^ of obtaining his grace, and proceeding forward in virtues, that we may
at last arrive to that end, that is to say to eternal felicity, by him
prepared for us. And therefore it was his pleasure, that in his Church all the
mysteries of our Redemption should be celebrated, that by daily renewing the
memory of all those things which our Lord either did, or suffered for our
salvation, we might be excited to love and honor him, and in like manner to
conform all our actions to that most holy example of his life, which he has
left us.

And being not content with this thing alone, it was his will likewise, that in
the same Church there should be made a peculiar memory, of his most holy and
blessed Mother in particular, and of certain other Saints excelling before the
rest, and selected from others of that celestial company, to the intent that
they might be as our Patrons and Protectours, and might with their prayers
assist us in all our necessities, both corporal and spiritual, and might
withal minister occasion unto us of imitating their virtues and holy
conversation.

Moreover, he would also, that for so much as the Church, and all we, do daily
by the ministry of Angels receive from his divine Majesty, so many and so
great benefits, that there should be likewise had of them every year a solemn
memory. And certainly it was very convenient, that men should exhibit toward
them some signification of a graceful mind, seeing that they do so much desire,
and procure our salvation. For that cause therefore, does holy Church make a
memory of the glorious S. Michaell her Protector, and of all the other Angels,
and Archangels of the celestial Hierarchy, because all of them (as testifies
the Apostle) are administr^torij spiritus, helping spirits, laboring after a
certain sort for the salvation of all the Elect.

Those Blessed spirits do not disdain to submit themselves to the ministry of
men, being otherwise much their inferiors, in regard that they see that good
and great God, whom with so great desire and fervor they serve, so far forth
to have humbled himself, that even for man's salvation he took upon him the
form of a man. Neither also do they disdain to adopt, and admit man into
their own society, that of us, most base and vile dust-creeping worms, they
might build the walls of the Celestial Jerusalem, and that their ruins might
be repaired, because they adore as their superior, God himself, being made
man.

And consider here, with how great congruence holy Church does read this
present Gospel of the virtue of humility, upon the feast of this victorious
Archangell. For as proud Lucifer attempting to usurp divine honor, was cast
headlong from that ^igh throne of paradise into the bottomless pit of hell: so
humble S. Michaell with all that army of good Angels, subiecting themselves to
their creator, and through their zeal of his glory opposing themselves to
this proud serpent, were so much honored, and exalted to so high dignity.

This Gospel is likewise designed for the solemnity of all those Angels, who
together with S. Michaell, by the virtue of Humility, obtained the crown of
glory; that men might understand that this is the ineffable and eternal decree
of Almighty God, that no man should arrive to this glory which the Angels
possess, but by the way of humility, which they first traced. Yea and Christ
our Savior by the benefit of this virtue, acquired the glory of his sacred
body, as the Apostle says. Humiliauit semetipsum fact us obediens vsque ad
mortem etc. propter quod and Deus exaltauit illum. (Phil. 2.) He has humbled
himself being made obedient even unto death etc. for which God has also
exalted him. Wherefore it were a prodigious thing, if his faithful would think
to enter into the Kingdom of heaven any other way then by that which their
head has entered.

2. Consider the excellency of these celestial Courtiers, the Princes of
Paradise, which though our mind is not able perfectly to apprehend,
notwithstanding according unto that small light communicated unto us by their
ministry, we will endeavor in the honor of them to place before our eyes
some part of that dignity and glory vouchsafed unto them by our Lord. Therefore
3. things there are which are wont to illustrate the Court, or Army of a great
Prince. First, the Nobility of the persons. 2. their Number. 3. their Order.
All these 3. are principally apparent in these Angelical spirits.

First of all consider their Nature. For they challenge unto themselves the
principal place amongst those works created by the omnipotent hand of God,
that great artificer: they are spiritual substances: by their own nature
incorruptible, and of all other creatures the most noble: of so great
intelligence, that in the notion of natural things, they are exempted from all
error and ignorance. Likewise to this their so great light of Understanding,
they have their Will so firm and perfectly conformable, that it is not
possible for it, either to be assaulted, or overcome with any perturbation. But
if you contemplate their state, in which by the benefit of grace they now
remain, they without ever admitting any sin have obtained glory, and
eternal felicity. Moreover, they are essentially adorned with the habit of
Divine grace, which renders them most fair and gracious in the sight of
Almighty God.

In their Understanding they are endowed with the clear light of glory, whereby
face to face they behold their creator. And in their Will habituated with
charity, wherewith loving God with the love of perfect friendship, they are made
both the children and friends of the selfsame God. Now therefore my Soul,
contemplate the beauty of these celestial Citizens, who like so many morning
stars, yea even most clear suns, shine most gloriously in the City of God,
in which as in most clear mirrours, are the perfectio^s divine, as infinite
power, eternal wisdom, ineffable goodness, and most ardent love of their
creator. O how amiable, how pure, and innocent-white are these Blessed
spirits! How zealous of setting forth the glory of their Lord, how desirous and
solicitous of our salvation; and therefore most worthy to be by us peculiarly
loved and worshipped. For if honor (as the Philosophers say) be a certain
worship, which is due to some one in respect of the excellency or virtue which
he has in himself, and therefore (although all men according unto nature are
equal one to another) we are wont to exhibit most honor unto them, who excel
others in some kind of praise: how much rather ought we, being so vile and
abject creatures, in comparison of these celestial spirits, to attribute unto
them all honor and worship? seeing that every one of them, how little soever he
be, does far excel, the most noblest of us human creatures, in the abouenamed
endowments and excelle^cies. Moreover, if these holy Angels, being creatures so
much exalted above others in nature and grace, do submit themselves to the
honor of mankind, in respect that God himself has loved and honored the
same; surely much more convenient it is, that we (most contemptible worms)
should with all honor and devotion prosecute those, whom God so much honors
and exalts in heaven. For these are the beloved children, who always
contemplate the face of their Father. (Math. 18.) and those white and pure
Lillies, amongst which be takes his repast. (Cant. 2.) And those mountains
replenished with aromaticall odours, in which that heavenly spouse does walk
and recreate himself.

Secondly, next to the dignity and excellency of this celestial Court,
consider the number and order of the Courtiers thereof. And first as concerning
their number, it is so great, that it does not only exceed the number of all
men now living, but even of all those that either have, or shall be extant even
til the day of judgment. The multitude of these blessed spirits is resembled to
the sands of the sea, and the stars of the firmament, which the Wiseman says
are impossible to be numbered. (Eccl. 1.) And as S. Dionyse of Areopagita
(C^lest. hierar. c. 9.) affirms, the number of every order of the Angels is
greater, then any order of material things in the world. The Prophet said:
Millia milli^^ ministraban^ ^i, and decies millies cente^a milli^ assisteba^^
(...). A thousand-thousand ministered unto him* and ten thousand hundred
thousand assisted him. Where the Scripture according to her custom puts a
certain number, for an uncertain, and a number truly which may seem in the
opinion of men the greatest; to give us to understand, that the number of them
is only known unto God, and whereas with God they are numerable, with us they
are infinite and innumerable. And therefore we read in Job: Numquid est numerus
militum ^ius? (Job. 25.) May their be found any number of his soldiers? Of the
number of which the kingly Prophet also made mention, speaking of Angels:
Currus Dei december millibus multiplex, millia l^tantium: Dominus in eis in Sina
in sancto. (Psalm. 67.) The Chariot of God is ten thousand fold, thousands of
them that rejoice: our Lord in them, in Sina, in the holy place. The holy
Evangelist likewise, as it is in the Apocalips says, that he saw a great
multitude in the pres^nce of God, of all people and ^ongu^s and nations, who
were impossible to be numbered. I^ this number of the Elect, which we know shall
be but the least part of mankind, be so great, that it is not to be numbered;
how great do we think that of Angels shall be, who are ten times beyond the
number of all men put together? and most worthily has this celestial Monarch
so great a number of courtiers, for if as the wise man says: In multitudine
populi dignitas Regis, and in paucitate plebis ignominia Principis, Prou. 14.
In the multitude of people consists the dignity of a King, and in the
scarcity of subjects the ignominy of the Prince: s^ing that God is that most
excellent Prince, Rex Regum, and dominus dominantium, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; it was a thing most congruous, that in that spacious Kingdom
and imme^se palace of heaven he should have an ample Court, and a numerous
family. O my Soul, how much joy and solace would it yield thee, if thou
could but behold this multitude of so many noble creatures, so blessed in
glory, and in nature and grace so excellent! O that so happy a chance may once
befall thee, that thou may converse amongst those celestial troops, in the
company of so great Princes, the children of God, yea and even thy brothers:
for t^ose sublime and amiable spirits are not ashamed to acknowledge us men for
their brothers, for so much as their Lord, did not only not fear to be called,
but by taking upon him our flesh, certainly to become ou^ brother. O with how
hearty a good will would thou, amongst those Angelical voices praise and
bless thy Lord, for having received from him so great a benefit!

Thirdly, consider the admirable order deputed and designed by the Divine
providence to these Angelical spirits, either in respect of God, or of
themselves, or in comparison of other creatures of this world. For if you
consider them in respect of God, there is amongst them no difference* for all
of them with one unanimous consent, adore and reverence him, as their sole
Prince, and Lord of their celestial city. If amongst themselves, there is, in
so great a multitude, no confusion, an order most exact, a distribution most
admirable, agreeing to the diverse Orders of intelligences: One higher and more
excellent then another, according as God reuealeth unto them his secret
mysteries, and makes use of their ministry for the salvation of men.

And that we may descend unto particulars, the whole multitude of those
glorious spirits are contained under three Hierarchies, that is to say, the
highest, middle, and lowest. And every Hierarchy is distinguished into three
Quires, the highest, the middle and the lowest.

OF THE FIRST HIERARCHY.
The first of them contains Seraphims, Cherubims, and Thrones. Where by their
names you may easily conjecture the offices in which they are exercised: for it
is the property of God to impose names to his creatures conformable to the
offices committed to their charge.

Contemplate therefore first, the Quire of Seraphims, who as the secret, and
intimate chamberlaines of the King of heaven, answerable unto their name, are
not only replenished, and inflamed with charity, but like a spiritual fire, do
always burn with divine love, and therewithal do like wise enkindle, and
illustrate those Angels that are inferior unto them.

Then contemplate the Cherubims, so called for their fullness of knowledge, and
clearer light of understanding, wherewith they excel all other inferior
spirits, in so much as they see God more clearly, and know more things in him.
Wherefore they are as it were the Counselors of the celestial King, excelling
in knowledge and wisdom, which they also communicate to the inferior Angels.

Contemplate after this, the Thrones, who as the familiar and intrinsecall
Secretaries of God, are adorned with this title, for so much as they are as it
were the seats and thrones of the King, in which the Divine Majesty does after
a certain sort reside, and rest; which also they carry with them whithersoeuer
they go, as it were in a Pontifical Chair.

OF THE SECOND HIERARCHY.
Descend then to the second Hierarchy, which contains three other Quires of
Angels, that is to say Dominations, Virtues, and Powers, who are severally
designed to the universal government of these inferior things.

And first, contemplate the Dominations, who representing the dominion of the
supreme Prince, after the manner of Viceroys, have command over their
inferiors, and in Divine mysteries send them forth for the government of the
world.

Secondly, contemplate the Virtues, who with their power and vigor,
representing the infinite power of the Lord of Hosts, do manage all hard and
difficult matters, and to the glory of God do work admirable effects in his
creatures.

Thirdly, contemplate the Powers, who like Judges do represent the authority
and power of the high and universal Judge, and have the office to keep under
all aeriall powers, and to remove from men all impediments and hindrances,
least their way to their salvation be intercepted.

OF THE THIRD HIERARCHY.
To conclude, I descend to the third and last Hierarchy, in which there are
contained three other Quires, that is to say of the Principalities, Archangels,
and Angels. Contemplate first the Principalities, so called, for that like as
this lowest Hierarchy is appointed by God for the execution of his Divine
co^maundments, toward his creatures; so the Principalities who are the Angels
of the first Quire, for so much as they represent the prime Prince, are deputed
to the government of diverse Provinces, and particula^ Kingdoms. These also
even as they do in chief, receive commands immediately from God, so do they
commit the same to other inferior Angels, and afford likewise assistance for
the performance of them.

There follow likewise two others, to wi^ of Archangells, and Angels, who
according unto their names, are as it were Legates and messengers sent for
diverse causes from God into the world, who are also designed for the keeping of
certain places and men. Neither is there any other difference between these
two quires, then that to the Archangels greater, to the Angels lesser matters
are committed.

And this is the sum of that little, which we are able to understand, of that
divine architecture and order of the house of God. But if the conceit of our
understanding were able to proceed any further, and inwardly to penetrate into
the nature and function of every Angel, it would discover that they, as every
one of them particularly have particular offices and employments in the
heavenly Jerusalem, so likewise that they do with their peculiar order
meruelously adorn that universal blessed multitude of the celestial Court.
For even as we see that this our visible heaven adorned with so many stars, and
distinguished into orbs, according to the number of the planets, is moved with
admirable order, and exercises its influence upon the earth under it: so that
spiritual and invisible heaven, is after an order more admirable and divine,
adorned with the variety of so many Angels, as with stars, by which as through
so many orbs of Planets, (...) Lord of the vniurese, powers upon humane kind
the influence of all his spiritual gifts and graces.

Therefore consider now my Soul, that if the Queen of Saba (3. Reg. 10.)
hearing the wisdom of Solomon, and beholding the magnificence of his Kingly
palace, together with the number, and equipage of his servants that attended
him, being astonished with admiration, at the prudence of this most wise King,
as the Scripture says: Non habebat vltra spiritum, she had no longer spirit:
and said: Beati viri tui, and beati ser^i tul, hi qui stant coram te semper,
and audiunt sapientiam tuam. Blessed are thy men, and blessed are thy servants,
who stand always before thee, and hear thy wisdom: How much more occasion
should thou have, not only with that Queen to admire, but even with that
good Prophet to faint, through the desire and love of this blessed habitation,
if perfectly thou could understand, the dignity, excellency, and order of
the Court of that true Solomon, which with his eternal wisdom and art he
has constituted and ordained? What consolation, what joy, I beseech you, would
it be unto you, if after the course of this life, that felicity might likewise
befall you, that together with those celestial spirits you might be honored
with the title of Courtier to so great a Lord, whom to serve is to reign?
(Prospher ^p. ad Demet.)

O most holy and pure Angels! O how truly blessed are you, who perpetually
stand before the face of your God, and with such exceeding joy, contemplate the
face of that celestial Solomon; by whom you are adorned with so great
wisdom, enriched with so many prerogatives, and made worthy of so great glory*

You most resplendent stars, who so happily shine in the Imperial heaven,
infuse likewise I beseech you, into my soul your blessed influences, preserve
my faith unspotted, my hope firm, my manners blameless, my love entire
toward God, and my neighbor. I humbly petition o Blessed Angels, that you
would vouchsafe me your helping hand, to conduct me by that royal way of
humility, which you first traced, that after this my life I may together with
you deserve to contemplate the face of our eternal Father, and be bestowed in
the place of some star, that hertofore through pride fell from Heaven.

OF THE ANGELS IN PARTICVLAR* The second Part. OF S. MICHAEL ARCHANGELL.
BUT next to the contemplation of the Angelical Hierarchies, it well befitteth
us to contemplate something also, of that victorious captain of the celestial
army S. Michael the Archangell, who in respect of his transcendent zeal, and
fidelity, was by God constituted the Prince of all those Angels who are sent
into the world for the performance of diverse ministeries.

Moreover, this most Blessed Michaell was honored with this name, which is
interpreted Quis vt Deus? who is as God? For when proud Lucifer was stirred up
against God, and endeavoring to be esteemed equal unto him, this most
courageous Archangell, not tolerating so great injury to be offered to his
Lord, burning with most ardent zeal exclamed, saying Quis vt Deus? Quis vt
Deus? That is to say, Who is so bold, who so powerful that he should dare to
compare himself with God? as if he should have said: there is neither in
heaven, nor in the whole universe any Creature like unto our God. O most
puissant Michaell, most truly worthy of this name, blessed be thou among all
Angels, and worthy of all praise, and honor among men, who wast so zealous and
faithful in redeeming the glory of God.

This glorious Archangell was by God, not only in the triumphant, but even in
the militant Church endowed with many privileges. For first in the old Law, he
was made the Protector and keeper of the Synagogue, and in the new the Prince
and defend^r of the Church of God. This is that powerful leader and captain,
whose brave courage and fidelity the whole army of the good Angels following,
opposed themselves to the boldness of that virulent Serpent, and bruzing his
head, obtained the victory, and threw him headlong down from heaven, with all
his confederates. Moreover, how often soever there was need of celestial aid,
and that it was requisite to fight for the safety of the faithful people,
victorious Michaell was always ready at hand. For he in Egypt fought for the
people of God, when by many signs and miracles they were delivered out of the
servitude of Pharao. He it was who in that terrible night strocke all the first
borne of Egypt. He it was who for forty years together going before the
people of Israel as their guide and Captain, drowned in the Red sea the army
of Pharao pursuing them; afterward killed and defeated so many nations and
armies that stood against them* finally brought them safe and found into that
Land promised by God* Likewise, after the death of Moses, when the crafty
devil went about to induce the people of God, out of their respect to his
sacred body to idolatry, this courageous Archangell with an ardent zeal of the
honor of God and the safety of his people, stoutly opposed himself against
him, and put him to flight. To conclude, he it was that gave his helping hand
to the people of Israel when they were lead captive into Babylon, and the time
of their captivity being expired, removed from them all impediments of their
liberty.

And although in some places and actions the name of Michael is not always
expressed, sed, yet for so much as he was appointed by God as a Protector and
Keeper over his people, it may certainly be beliued, that he himself, or at
least some other Angels by commission from him did assist them.

Moreover, this glorious Archangell, beside that general protection which he
undertakes of holy Church, has also a special function deputed unto him, to
receive all the souls of the just, who depart out of this life into the other,
and delivering them from the deceits and oppositions of the devils, to present
them before the tribunal of Christ, that they may receive their reward given
them from God, in respect of their merits. Moreover, in the end and
consummation of this world, this most puissant Archangell, shall appear, and
combat with Antichrist, who by feigned miracles shall endeavor to pervert the
faithful, that he may defend the Church of God against that terrible
persecution. And after that he has obtained the victory, and bound the Prince
of darkness in the pit of the infernal abis^e, this self same Archangell
shall sound that dreadful trumpet, at the sound whereof all the dead shall
arise, and appear before that eternal Judge, to hear their last sentence,
where the just shall be adjudged to eternal glory, and the sinners to
perpetual punishments. Then shall there be no further time nor place for mercy
or grace, but only for the most severe justice of God* and all by the just
judgment of God shall be adjudged to that place, which every one whilst he
lived in this world deserved.

O invincible Prince and faithful guardian of the Church of God, and of
faithful souls, who always with so great charity and zeal, have been
present at so many battles, and obtained so many victories against thy
enemies, not with intent to gain any fame or estimation to thy self (as is
the custom of the Captains of this world) but to preserve and maintain that
honor and glory which we all owe unto God, and next to further the salvation
of mankind; come I beseech thee, and help my soul, which continually, so much
to her danger, is impugned with her enemies, the world, the flesh, and the
devil; and as thou wast a guide to the people of Israel through the desert, so
also vouchsafe to be a happy guide and companion unto me through the desert of
this world, til that thou^ have brought me to that happy land of the living, to
that blessed Country from which we are all banished.

O my soul, I pray God, that when that last hour of thy departure shall
ariue, that hour so full of danger and terror, when thou shall be compelled
to forsake this body of mine, so much of thee beloved, and all alone to pass
that narrow gate of death, through so many hideous armies of those infernal
dragons thy capital enemies, who will compass thee about, roaring like so many
hungry Lions, ready to snatch at thee and devour thee: I pray God, I say, that
at that very moment, this victorious Archangell, as he has been always ready,
in all dangers of faithful souls, may also vouchsafe to assist thee with his
honorable garrison, and fight for thee, and bring to pass that under the
strong shield of his protection, thou may pass securely through the midst
of thy enemies, to thy celestial Country. And if he before that most severe
Judge would undertake thy patronage, answering for thee and by his prayers
obtaining pardon for thy sins; and finally taking thee under his victorious
standard, would bring thee to that holy and blessed light, wherein he together
with all the Angels, and elected Children of the light, does shine, in the
everlasting joy and glory of their Creator; with how much solace and joy of
heart would thou depart out of this world?

OF S. GABRIEL ARCHANGEL^.
Next to the glorious Prince Michael, consider the dignity and excellency of
the prerogatives of the Archangell Gabriel, who though in the Scriptures he be
called an Angel, we ought not therefore to think, that he was of the lowest
order of Angels, who are peculiarly sent for the help and ministry of men,
but that he was above those Angels, to wit, an Archangell, and amongst the
Archangells, one of the principal. For as the mystery of the Annuntiation for
which he came, was not common, but the most excellent, and most worthy amongst
all those, which ever God did exhibit, so ought we to think that this divine
legate was one of the most noblest contained in that Hierarchy. This is the
faithful friend of the celestial spouse, who being made privy to that most
high secret of his Incarnation, did first of all publish it to the world. This
is that gracious Para-nymph who was mediator between that most high God, and
this poor humble Virgin of Nazareth, between the Eternal word, and our
humane Nature.

Now the better to understand the dignity of this Archangell, consider
severally the offices committed by our Lord unto him. And first of all, as some
holy men affirm, it may piously be believed, that he was particularly assigned
to the Blessed Virgin as her guardian. And as God had no other pure creature
neither in heaven nor earth, that was more noble, or did more fervently love
him then the Blessed Virgin Mary; so you may imagine, that as the Princes of
this world are wont to commit those things that are most dear unto
themselves, to the custody of those Courtiers that are most faithful, and most
addicted unto them: even so in that celestial Court, this glorious Angel
Gabriell was worthily accounted with the King of heaven, amongst his best and
dearest.

Consider moreover an other office of this Blessed Angel, which was to be a
Legate sent from the most holy Trinity, about a supreme business, and of the
greatest moment that may be, to wit, about the incarnation of the only begotten
son of God, and the redemption and salvation of the whole world. Therefore
very well befitteth him the name of Gabriel, a name full of mystery, which is
by interpretation Vir Deus: Man God: for he denounced unto the world Christ,
who was to be, both God and man. Furthermore this name of Gabriel more
properly, is as much as to say Fortitudo Dei, the fortitude of God, and this to
notify that mystery, which he denounced to the world, that is to say, a most
strong and triple cord, to wit, the most strict union of the Divine nature,
with the most holy body and soul of Christ, in one hypostasis, and person of
the eternal word, as it is written: ^uniculus triplex difficile rumpitur.
(Eccl. 4.) a threefould cord is hardly broken. He is called also Fortitudo Dei,
the fortitude of God, because by the benefit of his Embassy he communicated
unto us the divine fortitude, in this, that God together with humane nature,
took upon him likewise our imbecility. Whereupon men through the benefit of
this fortitude, became so valiant and courageous, that they did many things
which exceeded all natural fortitude and humane strength.

O Angel truly valiant, for so much as by thy Embassage thou did bring unto
men, not only Divine strength, but even Go^ himself the most potent above all
others, who taking away the spoils, and putting to flight, that strong armed
Monster, who so long a time had cruelly tyranized over us, rescewed us out of
servitude, and restored us to the liberty of the Children of God.

O^ S. RAPHAEL THE ANGEL. Also of our Angel Guardian.
IT remains now after that we have considered the zeal and illustrious facts
of the Prince Michaell, and the mystical fortitude of the Archangell Gabriell,
that we consider likewise the officious charity of the Angel Raphael, who for
so much as he is, as he himself witnesses, one of those seven spirits which
do continually assist in the fight of God, it is probable that he is one of the
principal Angels of Paradise. And after this we will consider, the many
benefits which every one receaueth from his Angell-keeper, both in his body,
and his soul. For this glorious Raphael both in respect of his name, and the
offices of mercy, which he performed to both the Tobies, the elder and the
younger, was altogether an express figure of those things which our
Angell-keepers do toward us.

And first of all, most fitly is the name of Raphael appropriated unto him,
which is by interpretation, Medicina Dei, the Medicine of God, of the effect of
that so spiritual a medicine which he gave to the younger Poby, as also of
that corporal one whereby he restored unto the elder Toby his sight. And does
not thy Angell-keeper perform the same office toward thee, both of a
corporal and spiritual Physician, as shall be spoken of herafter? Wherefore
that thou may the better understand the same, consider that there are three
states of humane life. The first is that in which a man lives whilst he is yet
i^ his mothers womb. The second is from the time of his nativity even til his
death, and the particular judgment of his soul. The third is that which a man
remains in, after his death. Therefore in every one of these states,
contemplate all those peculiar offices which thy Angell-keeper exercises
toward thee, conformable to all those actions of the Angel Raphael. As
concerning the first state, the Scripture recounteth, that the elder Toby when
he was determined to send his son into a remote Country, he was solicitous
how he might commit unto him a fay thfull companion. And behold before this
good young man departed from his Fathers house an Angel sent from God offered
himself in humane shape as a companion, and likewise a guide in his whole
iourny.

O immense charity, and more then Fatherly care of our benign creator, who
before thou did issue out of thy mother^ womb, before thou had any notice
of thy enemies, or the perils hanging over thy head, gave command to one of
his blessed spirits, who always behold his divine face, and to that self same
whom first he deputed as keeper to thy mother, that he should take thee into
his charge, and should begin in that tender state when thou were subject to
many dangers, to preserve thee together with thy mother; to the intent that
without any impediment thou might securely arrive to the grace of baptism,
and be enrowled in the number of the Children of God.

But what speak I here of that care and memory that God had of thee when thou
were but yet in thy mothers womb, yea from all eternity, before he had created
either the Angels, or any thing else, when as yet, the Abysses were not, the
foundations neither of heaven nor earth as yet placed, then (even then) O
miserable man, was he mindful of thee, and solicitous about thy salvation.

And although from all eternity he fore^aw thy unworthiness and ingratitude,
nevertheless out of his mere goodness, without any precedent merit of thine,
he did not only determine to affoard thee all that assistance, but even to
bestow upon thee all those benefits, which hitherto from the very first moment
of thy conception thou have received; and moreover that, which at the last thou
art to receive, which is the greatest of all other, to wit, thy eternal
beatitude. Moreover as concerning the second state of thy life, when thou
came forth into the light of this life, the sacred Scripture adds.

First, even as the Angel Raphael going together with Toby out of the house of
his Father, promised that he would be unto him a faithful companion,
throughout all his iourny, and that he would bring him safe to the place
appointed: No otherwise did God, so soon, as thou wast borne, associate thee
with one of these celestial Citizens, that as a singular guardian and tutour
he might undertake the patronage over thee, and might become thy advocate to
his Majesty in Heaven. For in this life we are all as Children, and have need
of a Tutour and Schoolemaister, who may as it were, lead us and vphould us by
the hand, least by chance our feet strike against some rock of sin, or that
we fall into some grievous danger: who may also take us into his arms, that we
may securely pass places of danger, and that we may no sooner observe a
danger, then escape it.

Secondly, as the Angel Raphaell guiding young Toby upon his way, suggested
unto him good Counsel, and in particular, he instructed him how he might
behave himself in marriage, to wit, not after the manner of carnal men, but
with a holy fear of God, and frequent prayer: so thy Angell-keeper does
continually instruct thee with good Counsel, and direct thee in all thy
actions: for he exciteth and moves thee to do many good works, which without
his help thou could not do, and this sometimes by alluring thee by the
examples of Christ our Lord and his Saints, sometimes by inflaming thy will out
of the consideration of Gods bounty and his infinite benefits, othersome times
also quickening thy Understanding, by the memory of thy future judgment, and the
pains of hell.

Thirdly, the Scripture goes forward to recount the benefits which Toby
received from the Angel Raphael both according to his own person, as also in
respect of hi^ temporal goods. For when he came to the river Tigris, and was
disposed to wash therein his feet, there rushed upon him a cruel fish to
devour him: but his Angel defended him, and reschewed him from that danger,
willing him that he should take the gall thereof for the restoring of his
Fathers sight, who was blind. Moreover the selfsame Angel did not only
redeem for Toby, that sum of money for which he was sent, but made him also
heir over all the wealth of his Father-in-law Raguel. Now what other thing do
our Angels guardians do, but watch connually, to yield us help in all our
necessities, no otherwise then a mother, that has always her eyes set upon
her little child, least it may perhaps fall, or incur some other mischief?
Think therefore from how many corporal dangers he has preserved you, which
might as well have befallen you, as they have done unto others, and also how
solicitous he has been in procuring for you all temporal goods, as health,
strength, and other necessary supplies, that you might according to your
calling, conveniently maintain your life, and in that state which may be most
accommodated to the gayning of your salvation.

Fourthly, as the Angel Raphael (as he himself says) did challenge unto
himself as his proper office, to offer up unto God the prayers and good works
of Toby; so our Angell-Guardian, exercises in the behalf of us, the office of
a Solicitour in the presence of God, offering up our prayers, and desires, and
whatsoever good works we do, and is always bringing unto us some one gift
or other of Divine grace. O that we could but see, with how great diligence the
holy Angels sometimes ascend, sometimes descend for our sakes, as they did upon
that ladder seen by Jacob the Patriarch: they ascend declaring our necessities,
and beseeching God that he would bestow upon us, his divine mercy: and they
descend bringing back from our heavenly Father his holy inspirations, good
thoughts, and other divine helps, and sometimes likewise some Fatherly
correction, that he may excite us, and that we may examine our selves, least
together with this world we be condemned.

Fifthly, as the Angel Raphael taught Toby the means which he ought to
observe in putting the Devil to flight, that he might have no more power over
him, against whom also this Angel fought in defense of the young man: So our
Angell-keeper no otherwise then a faithful Captain, unto whose charge is
committed some fortress to be defended against the enemy, does watch
diligently, least either by force, or fraud it be surprised by them. For these
Angels are those faithful watchmen, which our Lord says are placed upon the
walls of Jerusalem, to keep in the vigils of the night his flock, least that
infernal wolf our adversary, like a furious lion make prey upon our souls.
In like manner to these Angellkeepers belong those words of the Apoc^lips: Esto
vigilans, and confirma. Be vigilant and confirm thy self, for the
Angell-guardian watches for us against the devil, opposing against his
incursions, breaking and weakening his forces, and repairing again the foil
that is received, least again he attempt to invade, with the like boldness
and confidence. Likewise he strengthens us, sometimes by removing the
occasions of sin, sometimes by terrifiyng us from many sinne^ and offenses,
into which we should easily fall if we were destitute of his help; sometime^
also by corroborating and encouraging us in striving with tentations and
afflictions, and finally obtaining of our Lord fortitude that we may go away
with the victory.

Sixthly, as the Angel Raphael apprehending the devil, bound him in the
wilderness, least he should kill Toby, as he had done all the other husbands
of that woman: so our good Angel does singularly assist us in the time of
death, that at that hour he may defend us from the deceites and assaults of
the devil, when he goes about more greedily secking whom he may devour,
then at other times he is wont^ moreover, that he may preferue us from those
sins, unto which at that time we are wont to be most subject, as infidelity
and desperation; and that so being delivered from the miseries of this world,
we may pass freely to our celestial Country. Furthermore, after that the
soul has departed from the body, the same Angel accompanies her, comfort
and encourages her that she should confidently appear before the tribunal of
God* setting before her eyes the most precious merits of Jesus Christ, in which
she ought confidently to trust at the time of her judgment. And if for the
expiating of the relics of her sins she shall be adjudged to Purgatory,
there he often visits her, comfort her, certifieth her of the prayers of
pious persons that are offered up for her in the world, and finally bids her
be secure that she shall be delivered in time to come.

As concerning thy third state, and that which shall be thy last, consider what
in conclusion the Angel Raphael did: namely how when he had assigned a wife to
young Toby, (...) enriched him with all his Father-in-lawes goods, he brought
him back unto his Fathers house, loaded with many guiftes and much riches,
where he was received with so much the more joy, by how much the more sorrowful
they were for the expecting of his return, all fearing least perhaps he had
perished. Here likewise contemplate the office of thy faithful guardian, who
conducteth thy soul, after that having performed her long and perilous
pilgrimage, she shall be clear purged from all spot, joined to her heavenly
spouse, by the celestial Para^^^ph, and adorned with many guiftes and divine
graces, all cheerful, and exhilerated, to heaven, to that supernall Jerusalem
our mother, and there with great joy and exultation of all the Angels and
Saints of Paradise, of whom she had long since been expected, shall present her
before the face of her celestial Father, that from his Divine hand^ she may
receive her crown of glory, and of that felicity which from before all
eternity was prepared for her, and for which we, poor wretches, do groan and
sigh in this vale of tears.

O a thousand times happy soul, who after she has been faithful to her
Creator, and has obeyed the good Counsels of her Angell-keeper, after the
laudable spending of the years of her life, shall by the same Angel be brought
into those eternal taber^^cles of the just! There shall the true mar^i^ge of
the lamb be celebrated, with (...) rely beloved spouse, there shall be
complete joy perfect peace, and rest without end.

But thou, o my soul, that throughout the whole course of thy life have been
no otherwise employed, then in offending thy Creator, and contristating thy
good Angell-guardian, what comfort shall he have to bring thee before the face
of thy Father? and thou, with what countenance dare thou appear in his
presence? Alas, o my God, and therefore shall I despair? No verily. For seeing
that thy mercy is inexhaustible, and that in the person of that good Father in
the Gospel, thou did with so great charity rece aue thy penitent son. I
am altogether confident, that I, if grieuing and doing penance for my life
past I shall return unto thee my Father, that I shall not be cast-off, but
received of thee my most merciful Father, if not as an obedient, yet at least
as a penitent child. But now what retribution are we able to make to our Lord
for such, and so great benefits, received from his Majesty? For whatsoever we
are indebted to the blessed spirits, by whose industry all these benefits have
befallen us, all that do we owe to our Creator, who has commanded his
Angels, to keep us in all our ways. (Psalm. 90.)

Although in like manner, to the Angell-Guardians themselves we owe very great
thanks, for their immense charity, and the remonstrance of their most
faithful ministry toward us. And first of all thou owe, honor, worship
and reverence, to that Angel who continually assisteth thee, taking good heed
that in his sight thou do not any thing, which thou would est not do in the
presence of any man that is thy Superior. And (...) be to thee, if this holy
Angel, offended with thy finnes and negligences, shall on^^ think thee
unworthy of his presence and Angelical visitation. Besides these things, there
are many vortues, which are pleasing to the holy Angels, and which they desire
to see in our souls, and worthily ought we to bestow all diligence in the
obtaining of them. These are, sobriety, chastity, voluntary poverty, frequent
sighs, joined with de^ou^ tears and seruent prayer: but above all union,
peace, and brotherly charity: these are the virtues which principally the
Angels of peace require of us.

O my soul, o thou that art the beautiful image of thy Creator, would to God
thou did but know thy own dignity, how much thou art beloved of God, and
how much esteemed of his Angels, no doubt but, not to offer injury any more to
him who so much has honored thee, and not to contristrate thy most faithful
guardian, thou would no more so easily contaminate thy self, with the dregs
and filth of sin. For if so great joy be in heaven for the conversion of one
only sinner, think with how much grief thy good Angel is afflicted, when he
sees thee by sin spoiled of the grace of God. For if he were possessed of
either life or blood, most willingly wou^^ he in imitation of our Lord power it
forth^ for thy salvation* Bring to pass therefore that thou may chiefly be
adorned with those Virtues which exhilerate the Angels* and glorify thy
Creator, that by these (...) of most precious merits, thou may,
correspondent to the Angelical ve^tues, (...) fruit answerable to the reward
of Angels(...)

THE COLLOOVV.
Thou shall pray to our Lord God, that as he, after so admirable an order,
distributeth the offices and ministeries of his Angels for man's sake; so would
he likewise vouchsafe so grant unto thee, that by al^ those blessed spirits,
which are daily assisting^ and serving his Divine Majesty in heauen^ thy life
may evermore be preserved and (...) ^ended from thy cruel enemies. And th^^ as
he has to them granted that so copi(...) gift of grace, so would he by their
(...)ers also grant thee grace, to imitate the i^ humility, charity, and
purity; that leading vp^^ earth an Angelical life, thou may deserve one day
to be made like to the Angels (...) heaven, and together with them enjoy
(...)nally the wished and glorious vision of God.

DOCVMENTS.
1. OUR Lord says, that unless we be made as little ones* we shall not enter
into heaven: for as he says in another plate: Tali^menim est regn^^ caelorum,
Mot^^^ 19* of such is the Kingdom of Heave. Wherefore if we will be ^aued, it
behooves us to have the properties of little children, and to practice such
manners, as they in that their small age use. Little children are simple, void
of malice and deceit, they are pure both in mind and body, they set light by
either honor or disgrace, they put no injury upon any one, and when any is
offered them, they revenge it not, they contend not with any one, they give
place unto all, finally they are in awe of their betters, and easily submit
themselves unto them. And these are the Christian virtues which Christ himself
professed and taught others to imitate, when he said, Discite a me, quia mitis
sum and humilis cor^^, Matthew. 11. Learn of me, because I am mild and humble of
heart* in which two virtues all the forsai^ properties are contained.

2. Moreover our Lord said: Qui humiliauerit se, sicut paruulus iste, erit
mayor inregno celorum, Matthew. 18. He that shall humble himself, like this
little child, shall be the greater in the kingdom of heaven. Very well
therefore said the Apostle, that the wisdom of the flesh was an enemy, and
contrary to the wisdom of God: for in the world they are thought to be the
greatest, who diligently vphould the state and degree of their honor and
estimation, whom God makes no account of at all. But on the contrary part,
they that have no regard at all of their honor, and endeavor to humble
themselves, even under the feet of all others, these are truly great in the
sight of God, and shall be likewise in heaven more great then others, according
to the saying of the wise man: Quanto mayor es, humilia te in omnibus: and
coram Deo inuenies gratiam. Eccl. 3. The greater thou art, humble thy self in
all things: and thou shall find grace before God.

3. How much the less a man shall make himself then others, so much the
greater shall he be made, because how much the humbler every one is, so much
the liker and more allied he is unto Christ, who is superior unto all. Which
if it be so, Christians and spiritual men should not contend for any
precedence, or prerogative of honor but rather for the last place; for he that
armeth at the first place upon earth, shall find himself disgraced in heaven.
Let us not therefore endeavor to seem greater then others, but rather let us
make our selves inferior to all, for he is never awhit the iuster or the
better, who is more honorable; but rather how much the more just a man is, so
much the more honor is he worthy of.

4. If so much reverence be to be exhibited to the Angell-keepers, that, as our
Lord recommendeth it unto us, for their respect we ought not to contemn one of
these little ones. And in like manner the Apostle counseled women, that they
should cover their heads, least perhaps they might with their vanity or
indecency, offend those Angels that were desirous of the helping forward of
humane salvation: how much more ought we to be wary, least by injury or some
other more grievous hurt we offend our neighbors, for by offeding them we
offend their Angels, who as the friends and inward domesticalls of God, will
require revenge against us, and without all doubt obtain it.

5. And if the Angels employ so great care and industry in the custody of men,
and yet notwithstanding cease not, from beholding the face of their heavenly
Father, ^or are estranged from Divine love (for the care and solicitude with
which they are moved in our behalf, is subordinate to that love, and
undertaken by them, for the love of God:) so pious and spiritual men, whilst
they are interessed in external cares and occupations, ought to procure, that
they may not only be any impediment to their internal exercises, but even help
them forward to spiritual fruit, and the contemplation of Divine matters.
Which shall come to pass, when according to the example of the holy Angels,
they shall effect, that the external actions may proceed, and take their
efficacy from the internal, that is to say, that they may be undertaken for no
other end, then for the pure love of God.

6. They who take the care to bring men to Penance, ought never to desist from
their enterprise, out of tediousness of labor, or for that they fear this
labor shall not have that wished success in them, whom they are willing to
yield this spiritual help unto as the Angel-keepers have taught us by this
example, who never forsake the care or custody of sinners, yea they do not
forsake them, although from God they have it revealed unto them, that they,
over whom they have that charge, shall never be converted. Wherefore they do
not cease as long as they are in this life and in state that they may return
to God by Penance to excite the^ to amedment. Seneca a Pagan Philosopher,
writing to a certain friend of his admonishes him, that if in his actions and
speeches he would not depart from a right decorum, that he should always imagine
there was present with him Cato, as his severe censurer. Of which document much
more we Christians ought to make use, and to imagine that in all our actions
our good Angel-keepers are always present, as our severe censurers, to the
end, that this cogitatio^ may make us mindful of our selves, and that we may
carefully weigh whatsoever we would say or do: for if we shall do otherwise, we
may justly fear, least they that are now our advocates with God, may
afterward, at the day of judgment, become our accusers.

FINIS.
A TABLE* Of the Chapters.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHap. I. Of his Lineage. page 1. Chap. II. Of his Nativity. page 5. Chap III.
Of his Education till the seventh year^ of his Age. page 10. Chap. IV. How he
behaved himself from the s^a^en^h, till the eight year of his age. pa. 16.
Chap. V. He is brought by his Father to Florence, to apply his studies. page
21. Chap. VI. He voweth to God his virginity in his childhood, and flies the
company of women. page 25. Chap. VII. At Florence he makes great progress in
a more holy course of life. page 31. Chap. VIII. Being recalled back to
Mantua, he determines to renounce the Marquesate, and to lead an Ecclesiastic
all life. page 35. Chap. IX. Returning to Castilion he obtaynes from God an
excellent hability in mental prayer. page 38. Chap. X. The beginning of his
love (...) the Society of JESUS, and of his (...) souls. page (...). Chap. XI.
By the exhortation of Cardi^all Borromeus, he begins to frequent the sacred
mysteries. page 45. Chap. XII. Going to Monte-Ferrato, he undergoes a great
hazard of his life: there he conuorseth with Religious men. page 50. Chap.
XIII. He gives his mind to Religion. page 54. Chap. XIV. Being returned to
Castilion with his Father, he leads his life in great austerity, being very
much addicted to Prayer. pa. 61. Chap. XV. By Gods assistance, he escape^^
burning. His confidence in God, and conte^^t of the world. page 6^. Chap. XVI.
The testimony of the R. Fa. Claudius Finus Doctor of Divinity, of the Or^^^ of
S. Dominicke, of the sanctity of Aloysius. page 7^. Chap. XVII. He goes with
the Marquis into Spain, and is made Page of Honor (...) James the Prince. And
of the life which h^ lead in that Court. page 76. Chap. XVIII. He determines
to enter into the Society of JESUS. page 85. Chap. XIX. For four causes he
made cho^^^ of the Society of JESUS. page 90. Chap. XX. He discloseth his
vocation unto his Confessarius, and after to his Mother, and his Father. page
93. Chap. XXI. He returns into Italy, and ^eeteth by way of Complement with
all t^^ ^ri^ces thereof. page 102. Chap. XXII. His purpose is oppugned by diverse
(...). page 108. Chap. XXIII. The Marquis strongly opposes the vocation of his
son: at last he yields. page 113. Chap. XXIV. Aloysius ^rgeth the
renuntiation of the Marquesate. page 118. Chap. XXV. He is sent to Millane for
the dispatch of certain business: and what th(...) ges were done there. page
120. Chap. XXVI. The Marquis oppugueth hi^ with new practices. page 126. Chap.
XXVII. Blessed Aloysius going first to Mantua, retireth himself to the
spiritua^^ Exercises. page 134. Chap. XXVIII. Aloysius being returned to
Castilion, makes earnest suite to have leave to enter into Religion. His
course of life there. page 139. Chap. XXIX. Another hinderance, and delay of
the Marquis. page 143. Chap. XXX. He mitigateth, and ^^erc^^e^^ the mind of his
Father, with a vehement protestation. page 146. Chap. XXXI. The grief which
they of Castilion conceived for the departure of Aloysius. page 151. Chap.
XXXII. He reno^^ceth the Marquesate, and all his other Fortunes. page 154.
Chap. XXXIII. Ha^ing obtained to be sen^ to Rome, he go^th by Loreto, (...) his
piou^ exer^ises in that journey. page 159. Chap. XXXIV. At Rome having visited
the Churches of greatest fa^^e, having sa^ut^^ the Pope and Cardinals, he is
adjoined to the Society of JESUS. page 16^.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHap. I. How excellently he performed the Nouiship of his Religious lyf^. pa.
171. Chap. II. He is ex^rc^see^ by G(...)a certain pensiveness; an^ in like
manner by the Diue^^. page 17^. Chap. III. His constancy of mind in the death
of his Father the Marquis. page 178. Chap. IV. Of his mortification in the time
of his Nouiship; the custody of his senses. pa. 184. Chap. V. He refraineth
from the desire of honor; he explicateth wholesome precepts to the poor; he
earnestly desires to be reprehended publicly. page* 191. Chap. VI. The Master
of the Nouices makes trial of his virtue. For many rar^ virtues he is reputed
holy by his fellows. page 194. Chap. VII. Of the things done by him at Rome in
the house of the Professed Fathers, whilst ^e continued there; his preparation
to the Eucharist, and his sensible pie^y toward the same. page 196. Chap.
VIII. The letters of F^. Hieronymu^ Platus, whereby is described Aloysius his
vocation to Religion, and his virtues. page 201. Chap. IX. The rest of his
acts in the house of the professed Fathers: the custody of his eyes* and of
his obedience. page 208. Chap. X. How he spent the rest of the time of his
Nouiship: The purity of his mind; and moderation of his Affections. page 216.
Chap. XI. Of his singular hability in Prayer, and familiarity with God. page
219. Chap. XII. Of the notable Sanctity of th^^ Master, under whom he made
his Nouiship, and whom he did seriously imitate. page 233. Chap. XIII.
Aloysius goes with the same Father to Naples, and gives excellent documents
of virtue, whilst he remains there. page 240. Chap. XIV. Of his course of
life, when he applied himself to the study of learning in the Roman Coledge.
He publicly defends certain positions in the whole course of Philosophy. He
applies himself to the study of Divinity. page 248. Chap. XV. He makes his
vows of Religion. He receaueth the lesser Orders. page 260. Chap. XVI. Of his
humility: and his exercises for the obtaining thereof. page 261. Chap. XVII. Of
his Obedience, and observance of the Rules. page 27^. Chap. XVIII. Of his
Poverty, Chastity, Speech, and Conversation. page 285. Chap. XIX. Of his
Mortification, and the Afflictions of his body. page 287. Chap. XX. What he
thought of the Spiritual Exercises of Bl. F. Ignatius: and how he exercised
himself in them. page 294. Chap. XXI. His love toward God, his zeal towar^s
his neighbor, his desire of spiritual discourses. page 296. Chap. XXII. He is
sent into his Country for the appeasing of certain grievous discords* which
were between the Duke of Mantua, and the Marquis his brother. How he behaved
himself in this his journey. page 306. Chap. XXIII. What he did at Mantua,
what at Castilion, how dexterously he carried himself in the business, that
he negotiated. page 314. Chap. XXIV. He persuadeth his brother the Marquis, to
disclose his secret marriage, to the intent that he might avoid evil example.
At Castilion with a Sermon he exciteth the people to piety. page 328. Chap.
XXV. Of the excellent examples of virtue which he showed forth of himself that
short time which he lived at Millan. page 335. Chap. XXVI. The letters of F.
Bernardinus Medices of the virtues of Aloysius observed at Millan. Also Fa.
Achilles Galiardi his testimony of his manner of praying without distraction of
mind. page 345. Chap. XXVII. Aloysius is foretold of his death by God. He is
recalled by Fa. General from Millan to Rome. In his journey at Siena he makes
a sermon to them of the Sodality of the Blessed Virgin. page 349. Chap. XXVIII.
Of the accomplished Sanctity of B. Aloysius. page 354* Chap. XXIX. With great
Charity he serves the sick in the Hospital. Thereby he i^ infected with a
deadly disease. page 6^. Chap. XXX. Aloysius his sickness grows unto a Fever
Hectic, by which he consumes by degrees. His excellent sayings, and doings a^
that time. page 370. Chap. XXXI. He sends unto his mother two letters in the
time of his sickness, by the which he comfort her, and entreats her
prayers. page 379. Chap. XXXII. Of the preparation which Blessed Aloysius made
for his death; in a rapt he partaketh celestial joys, and foretells the day
of his death. page 384. Chap. XXXIII. Being fortified with his sacred Viaticum,
and in like manner with a plenary Indulgence from the Pope, he rests quietly
in our Lord. page 393. Chap. XXXIV. Of the obsequies, burial, and such things
which happened to the body of B. Aloysius. page 40^*
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHap. I. Of the Letters written by di^^^^ after his death. page 411. Chap. II.
The notable testimony which Robert Bellarmine, that most renown^^ (...)dinall,
gave of B. Aloysius. page (...). Chap. III. Many miracles of B. Aloysius. He
recouereth his mother from the point of death. He procures a happy delivery to
a noble woman much endangered in childbirth. He delivers a certain manfrom
danger of loosing his sight. page 422. Chap. IV. A Gentleman of Rome, having
made a vow to B. Aloysius, is cured of the stone. In like manner a Gentleman of
Luca is delivered from a malignant fever, by hanging his relics at his neck.
page 429. Chap. V. A Religious Virgin at Florence, by the Relics of B.
Aloysius, is cured of a very troublesome Canker. page 432. Chap. VI. He
delivers two of the Society, one of them from a malignant fever, the other
from the Stone. The later benefit happened also to one of Turino. page 438.
Chap. VII. Upon an Child, twice forsaken of the Physicians, twice he bestows
hea^th. He brings back to his senses a man ragingmad in a malignant fever.
page 444. Chap. VIII. A woman of Brescia is delivered from a fever, and from a
bloody flux: another in like manner, from a fever, and a great laxe* A
certain man is preserved in falling from a great precipice. page 448. Chap.
IX. The very touching of his relics ariueth away from the Earl of
Montemelino a fever: and from the Duke of Mantua another grievous disease: The
like favor was done to the Marshall of Polonia, praying before his picture.
page 451. Chap. X. Baccius a Doctor of Rome is recovered of diverse diseases.
page 455. Chap. XI. A Gentleman of Florence i^ delivered from an evil spirit
by the only touching of his relics. A certain young woman praying before the
picture of B. Aloysius, is recovered of lamenesse. page 458. Chap. XII. Many
miracles wrought in the Marquesate of Castilion, by the merits of B. Aloysius:
whereupon many votiue Tablets were hung at his Picture. page 462. Chap. XIII.
Diverse others favors, and graces conferred by B. Aloysius his intercession,
upon persons in sundry places. page 473. Chap. XIV. Certain favors of B.
Aloysius done for the good of souls, by driving away Tentations. page 475. A
MEDITATION OF THE HOLY Angels, and of those especially, who are deputed to the
Custody of men. Written by B. Aloysius Gonzaga. page 480.
FINIS.

