A MANVAL OF CONTROVERSIES. wherein the Catholic Roman faith in all the
chief points of controversies of these days is proved by holy Scripture.

By A. C. S.

Search the Scriptures, for you think in them to have life everlasting: and
the same are they that give testimony unto me.

Ihon cap. 5. verse. 39. Printed at Paris by Peter Buray. M. D. C. XIV.

THE EPISTLE to the reader.
I Have courteous reader taken some pains to put together this little manual of
controversies, entending nor pretending any other thing thereby then thy
profit: if thou reap any by it: my travail shall be richly recompensed.
Howsoever, in requital of my good will let me entreat this favor of the,
that, if thou will dayne it the reading, thou would do yt with some
attention, and such intention, as the subject requires: which howsoever, or by
whomsoever it be handled, is of that weight and moment, that may duly demand
thy best, most settled, and sincerest thaughtes. The ensuing preface will
acquaynt thee both with the drift and motive of this treatise, and also with
those few points which I have thaught worthy of remark concerning the same.
Therefore have I nothing more to trouble the with, but only to entreat thee to
take some heed in decerning the Catholic Positiones, from those of the
Protestants, because they are not so evidently distinguished in character
(especially before the page 76.) as they might have been: and also to pardon
the faults escaped in the print, but most of all those in the margent as most
important. In the latter end of the book they are all corected and therefore
may more easily be born with. Farewell.

Thy friend as thou art a friend to truth: howsoever thy well willer. A. C.

A TABLE OF THE Controversies.
1. SCriptures page 15. 2. Traditiones. page 20. 3. Difficulty of scriptures.
page 26 4. Churches infallibility. page 31. 5. Churches marks: universality.
p. 43. 6. Visibilitie. page 39. 7. Succession. page 42. 8. Consecration and
vocation of Pastores. 45. 9. Supremicie of S. Peter and Pope. 49. 10. Honor
of saints. 57. 11. Prayer to saints. 59. 12. Relics. 63. 13. Images. 67.
14. Purgatory. 76. 15. Of the Sacraments. 81. 16. Necessity of Baptism. 84.
17. Ceremonies of Baptism. 85. 18. Eucharist: real presence. 86. 19.
Transubstantiation. 89. 20. Adoration of Christ in the Eucharist. 91. 21.
Communion under one kind. 93. 22. Sacrifice of the Mass. 98. 23. Confirmation.
102. 24. Penance with indulgences. 107. 25. Holy orders. 118. 26. Extreme
unction. 120. 27. Matrimony. 122. 28. Effect of the Sacraments. 125. 29.
Character. 127. 30. Justification and concupiscence. 128. 31. Justice once had
may be lost. 141. 32. Certayntye of Salvation. 142. 33. Merit of works. 145.
34. Free will. 148. 35. Commandments possible. 152. 36. Evangelical
counsels. 155. 37. Preistes single life. 159. 38. Seruicce in the vulgar
tongue. 162.
FAVLTES ESCAped in the margent.
PAge. 23. for cap. 27. Read cap. 23. 24. sert sect. 29. degenesi ad literam
lib. 2. lib. 7. 30. 2. Petri cap. 2. v. 7. cap. 1. v. 20 30. Malachie. v. 2. 3.
v. 7. 30. Math. v. 27. v. 2. 32. Luc v. 16. 20 v. 16. 33. Math. v. 28. cap. 20.
cap. 28. v. 20. 33. [Actes 15] is placed to high 36. Cresco: cap. 3. cap. 33.
37 Psalm: 27. 71. 37. Math. cap. 18. cap. 28. 40. Math. 19. 18. 41. corin. v.
18. v. 28. 45. Act cap. 13. cap 14. 46. Rom: cap. cap. 10 55. epla 65. epla.
165. 61. Apocalip. cap. 3. cap. 2. 64. Act. v. 18. 12. 69. psalm. 9. 98. 86.
after. 24. add. [Luc] 91 Psalm. 69. 96. 95 Smaforward. forward 100. Malachic v.
1. v. 10. 11. 102. Act v. 20. v. 17 109. Act. v. 6. v. 3. 109. page 10. page
109. 120. want these citations James cap. 5. v. 14. 15. Chrisost. De
Sacerdotio. lib. 3. ad initium. 122. 5. v. cap. 31. cap. 5. v. 31. 126. Acts
cap. 22. v. 17 v. 16. 128. ser. sect. 128. and oncu. and concu. 132. contra
Iuliam: c. 5. c. 15. 136. is omited. De spiritu and litera cap. 27. 137.
Ephesios cap. 3. cap. 1. 143. is omitted the citation of Ecclesiastes cap. 9.
v. 1. 146. 2. Timo. cap. 5. cap. 4. 1. Regum. v. 45. v. 4. 5.
FAVLTES ESCAped in the text.
Page. 7. for. hall. read shall. 13. cotrouerted controuerted 19. this. that
21. nothinges nothing. 42. word. world. 44. then. them. 46. In the secund line
wants this word [inward]. 62. said. saved 62. sod. so. 68. placc. place 68.
the. he 73. his. is 78. eueire. every, 96. sam chapter. same chapter 96.
cheest. cheifest. 135. whose praise is not of god. For whose praise is not of
men, but of god.
A MANVALL OF Controversies. Wherein the Catholic Roman faith in all the
chief points of controversies of these days is proved by holy Scripture.
The Preface to the Reader.
THis brief treatise (courteous reader) being at the request of a friend
speedely compiled, may serve to convince them of manifest calumny, who no
less untruly then boldly, do affirm the Doctrine of the Catholic Roman
Church, to be either against holy scriptures, or at least to have no ground or
proof from them: And it may also give satisfaction unto such, as more upon
the confident boldness of them that affirm the Roman Religion to be destitute
of scriptures, then upon any other reason, are drawn, either to think this to
be true, or at least to doubt of the truth of the contrary. But before thou
proceed to vieue the thing it self, I desire thee to consider well these
few points followinge.

First that no proof of any one point of Christian belief, can be so direct
and full out of holy scripture, that may not be deluded by false
interpretation. For the damned Arrianes, and most other heretics, could
interpret all places of holy scripture brought by the Catholics against
their heresy in such sense, as being so understood, they made nothing
against it: yea, that, as seely, as peruers heretic Legate (burned in
smithfield not long since for Arrianisme) could not be convinced of heresy by
only scripture. Such proofs therefore of Catholic Doctrine, as cannot be
deluded by any interpretation, are not to be expected out of holy scripture.

Secondly that though Protesta^tes may alledg textes of holy scripture for the
proof of some points of their Doctrine, yet that alone is not sufficient to
make it true. Both because the same points are proved false by other places of
scripture: and also for that all heretics, have ever brought scripture for
their heresies, and none more apparent, or frequent then the blasphemous
Arrianes: to say nothing of the Devil his citinge of scripture even against
our blessed savior. By all which it is more then evident, that the sense of
holy scripture, besides the words, is necessarely required to make sufcient
proof of true doctrine. For which reason I often bring the vncorrupt
testimony of some holy father for the sense of the place alleged by me, who
haueinge lived at least on thousand years before these controversies began,
cannot be esteemed partial on our side.

Thirdly, that I expect and exact of him, or them that shall go about to answer
this treatise, the same round sincere, and direct dealinge, which I have here
used. Remembringe before all things that he first set down his faith in direct
positions, and then proceed inlike method as I have done for the rest. To whom
I willingly grant this large liberty above that which I have used that he tie
not himself unto the first 500. years for the fathers interpretations, but
that he take boldly 1500. years so that he bring not condemned heretics for
his auctours, and with all observe the point followinge.

Fourthly, that it shall not be to any purpose in way of answer, that any
adversary bring another interpretation of some father upon the places of
scripture alleged by me, besides that which I have brought. For it is not
denied, that one and the same place of scripture may be, and is often diversely
understoode, not only of diverse fathers, but of one and the same father. But
if he will say any thing to the purpose in this kind, he must bring an
interpretation contradicting that which I have brought: and withal labor
rather to prove his own Doctrine the^ to impugn that of the Catoliques. For
seeinge it is (as all men Know) a far more easy thing to impugn any
doctrine, though never so true, then to prove the same: no truth (espetially of
faith) being so evidently clear but that some thing with show of probabillitie
may be objected against it: it is not now expected, that any adversary
should stand to answer those auctorities of scripture and fathers which I have
alleged for proof of the Catholic Doctrine, or to impugn the same: but
rather to bring others in proof of his own: that the iudicions reader may
compare our grounds in scripture both together; and by the uieu of his own
eye, try whether of them be more conformable to Gods sacred word. And when
any one shall have produced his proofs for Protestantisme, in the like manner
as I have done in the behalf of the Catholic religion; (if he can so do)
yet shall he gain no more thereby, but an evident demonstration against the
cheifest ground of the Protesta^tes doctrine, that either, to the true and full
decision of controversies in matter of faith, is necessarily required Note.
some other judgment or trial, then the only words of holy Scripture, or else
that therere is no means at all to end controversies of faith; which later
neuertheless to affirm, is no less iniuriouse to gods wisdom, goodness, or
power, then to say that he has provided noe sufficient means for men to know
the way to save their souls. For both parties bringing scripture for them
selves who shall finally determine whether of them, does apply the said
Scriptures more sincerlie and according to their true meaning?

Fifthly that whereas, before I can prove any point of Christian belief by
scripture I should first by good order, prove that there is a holy Scripture,
and secondly in what books of the Bible it is contained: yet because nether of
these two points can be proved by scripture, unless we first believe some
scripture without proof: therefore that, I may prove those points of faith
wherein the Catholic Roman church does differ from the Protestants by holy
scripture (which our adversaries urge me unto) I must necessarily to satisfy
their disordered desire, proceed disorderly, and suppose that for truth
without proof, which requires most to be proved: I say without proof, if no
proof be good, but that which is made out of scripture.

And here occurr by the way two things worthy of note, The One that the
scripture cannot be an universal rule of our faith, seeinge some things are
to be believed with out proof of scripture, as are (for example) that there is
a holy scripture contayninge gods word and revelation, and that these and these
books be such: therefore must there of necessity be some other rule of our
faith more universal then the scriptures, and consequently before the
scriptures. And this cannot be but the authority of gods church: which is
clerly S. Augustins Doctrine, who was not afearde to say. I would not believe
the Gospel, Contra epistola^ fundamenti cap. 5.
but that the authority of the church does move me. Seeinge therefore the
authority of the church is a sufficient motive for us to believe what is
scripture, why should it not have the like authority with us in other points
of faith? which is also S. Augustins argument in the same place: but I will
notwithstanding satisfy our adversaries in their own humor.

The Secund thing to be noted is, that they that believe nothing, but that
which is proved by Scripture, are evidently convinced to believe nothing at
all. For they that cannot believe that there is a holy Scripture, or what
books be holy Scripture, cannot believe any thing, because it is proved by
scripture. For it is evident, that before they believe any thing because it is
proved by scripture, they must believe that there is a Scripture, and what
books are scripture: but they that believe not any thing but that which is
proved by Scripture, cannot believe that there is a scripture, nor what books
are holy scripture: for nether of these two, can be proved by Scripture.
Thefore they that believe not any thing but that which is proved by
scripture, cannot beleene any thing at all. This Argument is a plain
demonstration, and compels the Protestants either to confess that they have
no faith at all: or to acknowledge this their positione, to wit [that nothing
ought or can rightly be believed, but that which may be proved by Scripture] to
be false: which notwithstanding is the maine ground of all their religion. But
now haueing showed the absurdity of their Doctrine in this point, I will join
with them in the Scriptures, as they themselves do desire, obseringe this
method. First I set down the Catholic Roman belief in direct and plain
positions: then I bring in proof of it, one, two, or more places of holy
Scripture, citing the ancient vulgar translation, and often times I ad the
testimony of some ancient father of the frist 500. years understanding such
Scriptures as I cite, in the same sense and meaning that I cite them for:
Furthermore those few places of Scripture, which seem to sound directly
against the Catholic faith I show in brief how they are to be understood.
And last of all I put down the position contradictorie to the Catholic
doctrine, to the end that the indifferent reader (be he Catholic or
otherways) may more easily judge whether Doctrine has better ground in holy
Scriptures. And further that he that will impugn this treatise may see, what
he has to prove if he will prove any thing to purpose.

who is to understand, that though the Protestants do maintayn the negative
part, in almost all the positions cotrouerted betwixt them and the
Catholics, yet is he not for all that, to be excused from the proof of those
points, unless he will withal confess, that in them the Protestants have no
faith at all, but only a mere denial of faith. For, faith being not a simple
denying or not believing, but a possitiue assent and belief of such articles as
are reveled unto us by God; it has possitiue grounds, whereby it may and ought
to be proved, even in those points which are negative. And therefore as
Catholics do prove their faith, in these negative points: that only faith
does not justify: that we are not certain of our justification or salvation
and the like: so likewise are the Protestants to prove their faith in these:
that there is no Purgatory: no real presence: no sacrifice of the Mass, and
the rest. Unless as is said before, they will confess, that they have no faith
in these points, but only a mere denial of faith.

Haueinge thus advertised thee good Reader of these few things I leave thee to
peruse the treatise it self, desiringe thee to expect only the bare positiones
proved with the self text, of holy Scripture, and some few fathers, without
any florishe of words at all: The work being such as does rather resemble
the bare bones of a great body tied together with dried Sinews, then a body
thoroughly furnished with flesh, and orher habiliments of friendly narure. For
which cause, though to such as rather respect fashion then substance, it may
happ to appear hideous, yet to others of contrary appetite (for whose
contentment it is specially intended) it will not paraduenture be judged
altogether without form.

THE FIRST Controversy Of Holy Scriptures.
IT is Known that the Catholic Roman Church does admit more books and
percells of holy Bible for Scripture, then the Protestants do, and
consequently acknowledges a larger canon then they, and yet notwithstanding
she teaches.

Chatolique Positio^ 1.
That all such articles as by her, and the Protestants themselves are believed
and holden for articles of faith, are not so expressly contained in holy
Scriptures, as out of them only, full proof may be made thereof.

Proof.
The articles which the Protestants do believe to be of faith, as well as
Catholics, and yet are not contained expressly in holy scriptures, are many,
but we will give instance only in a few, 1 That there are three distinct
persons and one only substance in god. 2. That the secu^de and third
personns are of the same substance, and equal gloire with the first. ^. That
the third personn proceeds from the second and from the first. 4. That there
are two distinct and complete natures in our savior Christ, and but one only
personn. 5. That there are in him two wills, and two operations, to wit, of
god and man: about all which points have been diverse heresies as is well
Known to the learned. And though all these articles have most true ground and
proof in holy Scriptures, yet are they not so expressly contained therein, as
they may be fully proved by them alone. One example shall serve for all. To
prove the son to be consubstantiall or of one substance with the father, the
Catholics do alledg (and truly) John. cap. 10. v. 30.
this testimony: I and the father are one: yet because there are more means of
being one then in substance, as namely to be of one will, desire, and
affection of which sort of unity, specially the Arrianes did explicat this
place: alleging for them selves that testimony. I pray that they all may be
one, as thou Father in me and John. cap. 17. v. 21.
I in thee: that they also in us may be one: which cannot be understood of
unity in substance. Therefore this testimony without the interpretation of the
Church (which is the pillar of truth) does not fully prove the father and the
son to be one in substance. The like may be said of the other articles here
mentioned.

Catho. posi. 2.
All such articles as are of faith, and so holden by the Protesta^tes them
selves, are not contained so much as indirectly or implicitly in holy
Scriptures: but only so far, as the Scriptures contain and testify the
authority of the Church, and traditions.

Proof.
That all the Books of the Bible, and every part thereof which are
acknowledged for canonical scripture ioynthy of Catholics and Protestants
be such indeed. That the most blessed mother of our Savior Christ continued
perpetually a Virgin. That it is lawful for Cristians to eat strangled things
and blood (which were expressly forbidden them. acts. cap. 15. verse. 20) are not
so much as indirectly contained in holy Scriptures, otherways then is
mentioned in our position. But this being more amply proved in that which
follows of traditions, this which we have said already shall suffice for the
present.

The Positions which the Protestants in this question are to prove be these.

Protestant position.
1 All articles of faith are so expressy contained in scripture as out of them
only full proof may be made thereof. 2. All articles of faith are at least so
contained in holy scriptures as with out any testimony or auctoririe of the
Church, or traditions they may thence be plainly and distinctly deduced.
TE SECOND Controversy of Traditiones.
Catholic. Positions. 1.
THe holy Apostles delivered by word of mouth more things to be believed and
observed by the Church, then either they found written or wrote them selves. And
these things are usually called traditiones.

Proof. 1.
Haueing more things to write unto you 2ae. John
would not by paper and ^^^e, for I hope v. 12. 3ae. Iho: 13.
shall be with you and speak mouth to ^outhe.

2.
And the rest I will dispose when I 1. Cor. cap. 11. v. 34.
^ome: where the holy Apostle evidently shows that he reserved something more
to be ordained by word, then he wrote.

3.
The Apostles were commanded Mat. cap. 28. v. 20.
to teach all nationes to observe all things which our savior had commavnded:
which doubtless they fulfilled: but they were not commanded in any place to
write all the same: nether does it appear by any Scripture, that they did
write all things which they taught men to believe and observe. This is a
demo^stration that they taught more then they wrote, if nothing be to be
believed but what is contained in holy Scripture.

4.
They taught Baptism given to infants to be good and lawful: or else the
Anabaptists are not heretics for rebaptising them.

5.
They taught the sunday to be solemnised. and the Jews Sabbathe to be left
without all solemnity though most strictly Exodus cap. 31. v. 16.
commanded by god to be solemnised as an everlasting covenant.

6.
They delivered and taught the creed by word and not in writing, which from
their time till now has continued in the church by tradition only.

7.
They taught Baptism ministered August. de Bapti. con: Donatistas. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
by heretics to be good: and therefore S. Augustine speakinge thereof, says:
Many things which are not found* in the Apostles writings: nor in latter
counsels De baptis. co^a Donatis. lib. 5. cap. 27.
yet because they are observed by the whole church, are believed to be
delivered and recommended by none but by the^: Again he says: There are many
things which the whole church does hold, and therefore are well believed to be
commanded by the Apostles, albeit they be not found written.

Catholic positi.
The Catholic church does and ought to believe those things which the
Apostles delivered only by word, without writing: in the same degree of
faith with those, which are written. Note that the proofs of this position
does also prove the other going a fore.

Proof. 1.
Therefore Brethren stand and hold 2. Thesalo. cap. 2. v. 15.
the traditions which you have learned whether it be by word or by our
epistle. S. Basile says, I account it Apostolic to continue firmly in
unwritten Basil de Spiritu. sancto. cap. 29. cap. 27. Fulk. 2. Thesali. cap. 2
sert. 17.
traditions and alleges this place of S. Paul. S. Chrysostom cited by Fulke
himself says thus: Hereof it is manifest that they [the Apostles] delivered
not all by Epistles: but many things without letters, and the one is of as
great credit as the other. Therefore we think the tradition of the church to be
worthy of credit: It is a tradition inquire no more.

2. 1. to Timoth. cap. 6. us. 20.

O Timothee keep the depositu^: That is that which is committed to thy trust:
not certes by writing. For little or nothing writren of the new testament was
known to Timothee then. See a large discourse hereupon in Vincentius
lirenensis.

3.
But if any man seem to be contentious 1a. Cor. cap. 11. us. 16.
we have no such custom: nor the church of god: where S. Paul alleges the
custom of the church as a sufficient disproofe of any practice: why not
therefore for the proof of any?

The things which thou have heard 2. ad Timo. cap. 2. us. 2.
of me by many witnesses these commend to faithful men which shall be fit to
teach others also: lo no word here of writing, but of hearing and teaching by
word of mouth.

Now haueinge proved by Scripture it self, and evident instances, that many
things are to be believed, that are not directly contained in Scripture, it
appears a senseless thing to demand direct proof of every thing we
believe out of Scripture.

Protestants. Positi.
The holy Apostles delivered not by word of mouth moethings to be believed and
observed by the church, the^ theyether found written or wrote them selves: And
therefore are there no traditions to be holden or believed.

2. The Catholic church ought not to believe those thing which the Apostles
delivered only by word of mouth without writing, in the same degree of
faith with those which are written.

THE THIRD CON trouersie of the difficulty to understand the Scriptures.
Catho. positiones.
1 All places of holy scripture conteyninge articles of faith (the obstinate
misbeleife whereof is Damnable) are not eas^^ to be understood but requi^^ some
rule to be interpreted by.

Proof. 1.
Philipp said to the Eunuc^ Act. 8. us. 30. 31.
whom he found readinge the Prophet Esaias; Trow est thou th^^ thou
understand the things which thou read? who said: how can unless some man
show me?

2.
Our Savior accordingly Luc. 24. us. 45.
^pened the understanding of his Apostles that they might understand the
Scriptures: see therefore what a special grace it is to ^nderstand the
Scriptures in there true sense and meaning.

In the which [the Epistles of 2. Petri. 3. us. 16.
saint Paule] are certain things hard to be understood which the unlearned
and unstable deprave, as also the (...) of the Scriptures to their own
per^^ione.

Saint Hierome explicatinge Epist. 103. ad Pauli number.
^^e text now cited out of the acts concludes thus. These things have I
briefly touched as the limitts of an Epistle would permit; that thou may
understand, that with out a guide and teacher, thou can not enter the pathe
of holy Scriptures.

which is easy to conceive, seeinge as he notethe in the same place no trade,
nor mechanical art is learned with out a master.

Certes it is not only an heresy but a mere frenzy to say, that all
scriptures conteyninge points of faith necessary to be believed are easy to
be understood of private believers, sithence all heresies whatsoever, have been
bego^n and maynteyned for want of true understanding of holy scriptures:
whereof Vincentius Lirenensis says thus Some man may peradventure ask, for His
book against the profane ^oueltie of heresy.
as much as the canon of the scriptures (...) perfect, and in all points very
sufficient in it self, what need is there t^ join thereunto, the authority of
the ecclesiastical understanding? For this cause surely, for that all take
not the holy scriptures in one and the same sense, because of the deepness
thereof: b^^ the sayings thereof some interpret one way, and some another way,
so tha^ tbere may almost as many senses b^ picked out of it, as there be men.
For Nouatian does expound it one way, and Sabellius another way. otherwise
Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius, other ways Photinus, Apolinaris, Priscillianus,
otherwise, Iouinian, Pelagius, Celestius, lastly otherwise Nestorius; Thus
far that au^cie^t father: to whom we may ad: otherwais wicliffe, Luther,
Calvin, Anabaptists, Sanctes de Eucha: repet. 1. cap. vlto in fine.
with the rest: and this most truly, seeing of these few words [This is my
Bodye] there are found above 80. diverse senses, besides the Catholic ^ense
and meaning.

S. Augustine also avouches De genesis ad litera^. lib. 2. crp. 9*
the samesayinge. For no other reason are heresies made, but because men not
rightly understanding the Scriptures, do obstinatly affirm their own
opiniones against the truth of them.

Catho. pos. 2.
Private persons though true beieeuershaue not the spirit of interpretinge
the holy Scripture in the true sense and meaning of the same.

Proof. 1.
No prophecy of scripture is made by 2a. Petri cap. 2. us.. 7. Malachi cap. 2.
us. 2. 3.
private interpretation.

2.
The lips of the Priest shall keep knowledge and the law they shall require
of his mouth: be cause he is the Angel [that is the messe^ger] of the lord of
hosts. lo here the office of interpretinge the laws of god, given to
priests, and not assured to every faithful person.

3.
Upon the Chair* of Moses have sitten Mathe. ^3. us. 27.
scribes and Pharisees, all things therefore whatsoever they shall say to you
observe ye and do ye. lo here a command to hear the prelates and
pastoures of the church and no man left to follow his own fantasy in
matters of faith, and manners.

Protestants Positio^.
1. All places of holy Scripture ^onteininge articles of faith, the obstinate
misbelief whereof is damnable, are easy to be vnd er stood, and therefore
require not any rule to be interpreted by.

2. Private persounes that are true believers have the Spirit and gift of
interpretinge the holy Scripture in the true sense and meainge thereof.

THE FOVRTH Controversy Of the infallibility of the church.
Catho. pos.
THe sense and meaning of holy Scriptures given or aproued by the holy
Catholic church, is infallibly true, as are also the definitiones and
declarationes of faith, delivered by the same, and every one is bound upon
his damnation not to reject the judgment thereof.

Proof. 1.
My spirit that is in thee, and my ^^ay cap. 59. ^s. 22.
words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth and
out of the mouth of thy seed and out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says
our lord for this present and for ever. A manifest promise of the spirit of god
to continue for ever in the church.

2.
All power is given to me in heaven Mathe. 28. us. 18. 19.
and in earth: Goinge therefore teach ye all nations teachinge them to
observe all things what soever I have commanded you. Lo here commission to
teach given to the Apostles and in them to all pastores.

3.
He that hears you hears me: Luc. cap. 10. v. 16. 20
and he that dispiseth you dispiseth me: Lo here obligation for others, to
hear, and obaye that which they, who have the former commission shall teach.

4. Mat. us. 28. cap 20.

Behold I am with you all days even to the consu^mation of the world; Lo,
here the assurance of Christ's asistance to his church, and the lawful pastores
thereof, till the end of the world. who can now doubt of the infallibility of
the doctrine of gods Io. cap. 14. us. 16. 17. Act. 15 us. 28
church?

5.
I will ask the father, and he will give you another Paraclet, [that is an
advocate or comforther] that he may abide with you for ever. The spirit of
truth: lo here the spirit of truth promised to abide with the church for
ever. By warrant of which promised the first general counsel that ever was
houlden (which was at Jerusalem) says thus. Yt* has seemed good to the holy
ghost and to us, to lay no further burden upon you then these necessary
things.

6.
In respect of the singular privileges of the church and spetiallye of the
infallibility it has in doctrine, saint Paul callethe it: the house of god,
the church os the living god, the pillar and ground of truth.

7.
He that will not hear the church Math 18. us. 17.
let him be to thee as the Heathen and the publican.

Touching which point of Against Cr^sconius. lib. 1. cap. 3.
the infallibility of the church saint Augustine has this excellent
doctrine: Although (Says he) no example is brought out of canonical
Scripture of this thing. (Speakinge sf the validity os Baptism ministered by
heretics) yet do we follow the truth of the same Scriptures in this point
whilst we do that which pleases the whole church which the authority of the
Scriptures does co^me^d: And because the holy Scripture cannot deceive,
whosoever fears to be deceived by the obseurite of these questiones let him
consult there upon with the church, which without all doubt the Scripture does
show.

Protes. Pos.
The sense and meaning of the holy Scriptures given, or approved by the
Catholic church, is not always true: nether are the definitiones and
declarationes of faith deliured by the same infallible truths. Here the
reader may mark a strange peruersitie or blindness in the Protestants who
grant the gift of interpretinge the Scriptures to private believers and yet
deny it to the whole chuche;

THE FIFTH Controversy of the Marks of the true Church.
THe true Church of god is but one. This being not denied by the Protestants
needethe no proof. The question is which of all those Churches which do
challenge unto them selves the name of the Church, is that one true church;
which doubt will easelie be cleared by the notes and marks fololwinge.

Universality. Catho: Positions.
The true Church of Christ is Catholic or universal as well in respect of
place, as of time, That is: the true church of Christ has ever continued since
his gloriouse ascension into heaven till this day, and shall do till the end
of the world: which is to be Catholic or universal in respect of time. And
it has or shall be spread through all kingdoms and countries, that are under
heaven; which is to be universal or Catholic in respect of place.

Proof in respect of place. Psalm. 2. us. 8.

Ask of me and I will give thee the gentiles for thin inheritance, and thy
posessione In hunc Psalm
the ends of the earth. By this promise of god to Christ S. Augustine
conui^ceth the Donatistes and in them the Protesta^tes, that they have not the
true Chruche, because theyrs is not universal in such sort as here is
promised.

2. Psa. 27. us. 8.

He shall rule from sea, to sea; and from the river even to the ends of the
round world; These Prophesies are clearly understood of the inheritance and
kingdom, that is, the Church of Christ as he is man: According to which
prophesies Math. cap. 18. us. 18. 19.
our savior says; All power is given me in heaven and in earth. Goeinge
therefore teach ye all nationes: baptisinge them in the name of the father and
of the son and of the holy ghost.

3.
You shall receive the virtue of the Acts cap. 1. us. 8.
holy Ghost coming upon you, and you shall be witnesses unto me in
Jerusalem, and in all Ieury and Samaria, Con. Petilian lib. 2. cap. 38.
and even to the utmost of the earth. See Saint Augustine Learned reader if
thou pleas.

Proof in respect of time.
1. In the days of those Kingdoms, Daniell. cap. 2. us. 44
the god of heaven will raise up a Kingdom that shale not be dissipated for
ever, and this Kingdom shall not be delivered to another people. 2. And he
shall reign in the house Luc. cap. 1. us. 33. Mathe. 28. us. 20. Mathe cap.
16. us. 18.
of Jacob for ever, of his Kingdom there shall be no end. 3. Behold I am
with you all days, even to the consummation of the world. 4. Upon this Rock
will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
A faithful saying (Says Saint Oratione qnod Christus sit vnus.
Athanas.) and not a waueringe promise. and the Church is an invincible thing
although hell it self should be moved.

The universality of the church, all christians profess to beleeuei^ the creed
of the Apostles and of the first council of Constantinople, saying, I believe
the holy Catholic church.

protes. pos.
The ttue Church of Christ is not necessarily Catholic or universal; nether
in respect of place nor time. This positione most clearly against holy
Scripturs must the Protestants defend, and prove, if they will prove and
defend their Church to be the true Church of god and consequentlye their
religione to be true. Visibilitie.

Catho. pos.
The true Church of god is visible and apparent, both to the faithful
believers, that are in it, and to heretics, and those Mathe. cap. 5. us. 15.
Psalm. 13.
that are out of it.

Proof. 1.
A City cannot be hid, situated upon a mountain.

He put his tabernacle in the Sunn. S. Augustine proves our positione by these
textes: say inge, The true church is hid to no man: whence is that which he
[our Contra literas petibani lib. 2. cap. 32.
sauiour] Says in the Gospel, A City set upon a mountane cannot be hidd,
And therefore is it said in the Psalm: he has put his tabernacle in the
sunn, that is in manifest.

2.
In the latter days the mountain Isay. c. 2. us. 2.
of the house of our lord, shall be prepared, in the top pof mountains, and
it shall be elevated above the little hills, and all nationes shall flow unto
it.

3.
Men do not light a Candell and. Mathe. cap. 5. us. 16.
put it under a bushel, but Upon a Candlestick. To these textes does S.
Augustine allude, when Tract. 2. upon the. Epist of S. John.
he says; what else am I to say then, that they are blind that do not see
so great a mountain that shutt their eyes against the lamp set upon the
candlestick?

4.
If thy brother offend against thee Mathe. 19. us. 17.
tell the church; therefore must it of necessity be apparent and visible.

5.
The Church consistethe of Pastores and sheep, Superiors, or rulers, and
subjects. And he Ephesians. cap. 4. us. 11. first to the co^^. cap. 12. us. 18.
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other
some pastores and Doctores*

Are all Appostles? are all Prophets? are all Doctores? But superiores and
subjects, must be Known to one another, as also Pastores, and their sheep.
Therefore must the Church of necessity be visible and apparent.

Protestants. posit.
The true Church of god is not necessarily visible nor apparent, either to the
faithful believers that are in it, or to heretics and those that are out of
it. This position must the Protestants also prove and defend, though directly
against the holy Scriptures, unless they will confess their church not to be
the true Church as (if the Scriptures be true) it cannot be: seeinge that
before Luther it either was not at all, or was invisible, and therefore no true
church of Christ.

Catholic. Positi.
The true church of Christ can never want a lawful personal succession of
Pastors from her Succession.
first institution till the end of the world.

Proof. 1.
And he gave some Apostles and Ephesia. 4. us. 11. 12. 13.
some Prophets, and othersome Evangelists, and othersome pastores, and
Doctores. To the consummation of the saints unto the work of the ministry,
unto the edifyinge of the body of Christ. Until we meet all in the unity of
faith. Lo here Pastores given for the Church till all meet in unite of
faith which is till the end of the word.

2. Mathe. 28. 19. 20.

Goinge teach all nationes baptiseinge them in the name of the Father etc. and
behoulde I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world. Lo
here Christ promises to be with the pastores of the Church, whom he sendethe,
all days till the end: therefore there shall always be pastores.

3 Psalm 44* us.

For thy Fathers there are borne sons to thee thou shall make them princes
over all the earth: Understood Upon this Psalm toward the end.
by S. Augustine, of the successione of pastores in the church Saying.

The Apostles begott thee (o Christian Church) they were sent, they preached,
they are thy fathers. But could they be always corporally with us? could any
of them tarry here till this time? could they tarry till the time yet to come?
But was therefore the Church left desolate by their departure? God forbidd. For
thy fathers sonnsare borne to thee, what is this for thy fathers sons are
borne to thee? The Aposstles were sent fathers: inplace of the Aposstles sons
are borne to the: Bishops are appointed. For whence were the Bishops borne
that are at this day in the world? the church her self callethe them
fathers, she begat them and appointed them in the seats of the fathers. Do
not therefore think thyself desolate (O Christian church) because thou see not
Peter, see not Paul; for thou see not them by whom thou wast borne, but
of thyn issue, fatherhoode is spronge to thee. For thy fathers sons are borne
to thee, thou shall make them princes over all the earth This is the
Catholic church. Her children are made princes over all the earth: her
sons are constituted for fathers: let them acknowledge this that are cut of:
let them come to the unity: be they brought into the temple of the king Thus
S. Augustine.

prote. pos
The true church of Christ may be without a lawful personnall succession of
Pastores. This position they must also prove or else their church cannot be
any true church.

For they cannot show any Pastores of their religion before Luther to whom he
succeeded.

Catho. pos.
This lawful succession of Pastores in gods church is not without
consecration and authentical mission or sendinge by an ordinarye power
residing in the church.

Proof. 1.
when they (S. S. Paul and Barnabas) act. cap. 13. us. 22.
had ordained to them Priests in eueri church and had prayed with fasting
they commended them to our lord in whom they believed.

2.
Nether does any man take the honor Hebru: cap. 5. us. 4.
(of priesthood) to himself but he that is called of god as Aaron. Note that
if Luther, Calui^, and Beza, with the rest who say they are called of god as
Aaron: can show the like proofs of their calling that Aaron did: and besides
the external consecration which he also had notwithstanding his internal
calling of god: they shall be believed to have gods caling. Tough Aaron being
the first of his order, and therefore could not have his calling by succession
his case is far unlike to our new masters; unless they will co^fess a truth
and say, that they are also the first of their order, wherein they shall be
believed, and thereby convinced, not to be preachers of Christ, but of
themselves, because they have no mission from him, but come of them selves
being sent by none.

3.
How shall they beliue him To. cap. Us. 14. 15.
whom they have not hard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? But
how shall they preach unless they be sent. Amen Amen I say unto you, he that
10. cap. 10. Us. 1. 2.
enters not by the door, (that is by the ordinary way) into the fould of
the sheep, but climethe up another way he is a thief and a robber. But he
that enterethe by the Door is the Pastore of the sheep.

The Prophets prophecy lies in my Hiere. cap. 14. us. 14.
name, I have not sent them. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they rann.
with many such like whereby Hiere. 23 us. 21.
it appears that we are not to believe every one that prete^deth to come
from god, unless they show their mission, and co^missio^. To which purpose
hear this notable saying of the ancient Ireneus. It beho^uethe to obaie lib.
4. cap. 43. at. the end.
those priests, that are in the church, those who have the succession from
the Apostles, as we have showed who together with Episcopalitie, have received
according to the will of the father, the assured certain gift of truth. But
to suspect the rest that stand of from the original succession in what place
soever the are assembled, either as heretique^ and of bad doctrine, as makeinge
schism, and as high minded and pleasinge themselves: and of S. Cypriane*

If the church was with Cornelius wh^ Lib. 1. epla. 6.
succeeded the Bishope Fabiane, and whom beside the honor of Preistho^^ our
lord glorified with martyrdome^ Nouatian is not in the church, nor ca^ he be
esteemed a Bishope, who dispising evangelical and apostolical tradition,
succeeding to none is sprong^ out from himself. For nether can (...) have or
houlde by any means the church who is not ordered in the church.

Protestants. Pos.
The lawful succession of Pastores in gods church, may be with out
consecration, and authentical mission or sending by any ordinary power
residing in the church.

THE SIXTHE Controversy of the supremicie of S. Peter and of the Pope or
Bishope of Rome.
Catho. Positions. 1
SAint Peter was by our savior Christ constituted supreme head and souraigne
Bishope or Pastoure over his whole church militant.

Proof. 1.
Our savior said to S. Peter Io: 21. v. 17. 1*
Simon of Ihon love thou me? Feed my sheep: a speech directed to S. Peter
and to no other of the Apostles: containing charge, to feed as a shepherde
does his sheep all christ's flok whithout exception: so understood by S.
Cipria^ saying. To Peter our lord after his resurrection De vnitate Ec-
said, feed my sheep and builded his church upon him alone, and to him he
gave charge of feeding his sehepe By S. Chrysostom: he gave him Hom. 1.
depenit.
[S. Peter] the primacie and government of the church thrughe the whole world
and which is above all he shows him to have loved our lord more the^ All the
Apostles saying. Peter love thou me more the^ these. Our savior says to S
Peter Thou art Peter and upon this rock will Mathe 16. v. 18.
I build my church. Note that according to the Greek and Siriake text these
words sound thus, thou art a rock and upon this rock I will build my
church, which is also the true sense of the vulgar lati^. Here did our
savior christmanifestly promise to S. Peter souerayntie over his church. For
the foundation is to a buildinge, the same that the head or prince is in a
kingdom or common wealth. Thus does S. In Anccorato.
Epiphanius understand these words saying. Our lord him self has
constituted him [S. Peter] the first of his Apostles, the firm rock upon
which the church of god is built. To these words also manifestly alludeth the
holy general council of Calcedon, in the sentence of co^demnatione against
Dioscorus, saying. Leo the most holy and Cou^^ell. of Caledon. actiones. 3.
blessed Archebishope of great and ancient Rome by us and by this present holy
synod, together with the thrice most blessed and all praise worthy S. Peter
who is the Rock and very topp of the Catholic Church, and he which is the
foundatione of true faith has spoiled him [Dioscorus] of all episcopal
dignity.

Our savior says to S. Peter Math^. 16.
I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: where is also most
clearly signified S. Peter his pre-eminence in gods church; For none has the
government or commandment of the Keys of any town or city, but the prince
or governor of the same: and that soueraygne power is signified by the Keys,
it is proved by that of our savior Christ. I have the keys of death and
Apoc. 1. v. 18. Apoc. 3. v. 7.
hell. That is the rule and prower over death and hell. And again He that
has the Keye of Dauide he that shuteth and noe man opens.

S. Peter practiced the authority of supreme pastoure, in declaringe Judas to
have fallen Act. cap 1. v. 15. unto the 26.
from his Apostleship, and proposinge another to be chosen in his room: Peter
risinge up in the midest of the brethere^ said: and as follows. S. Chrysostom
understanding In hunc locum.
it so says; How fervent is he? how he acknowledgethe the flock committed by
christ? how he is prince of this company? and in every place begineth the first
to speak. His supremicie was acknowledged Gala. 1 us. 18.
by S. Paul goeinge to Jerusalem to see him. Then after three years I came
to Jerusalem to see Peter. S. Chrysostom understands Hom: 87. in Ihoan.
it so, saying, Peter was the mouth of the Apostles, prince and topp of that
company, therefore also Paul goethe up to see him beside the others.

Catho. pos. ^.
The Pope or Bishope of Rome is the law full and lineall successoure of S.
Peter in that charge and office which our savior gave unto S. Peter over his
church militant.

Proof.
The power which our savior gave to S. Peter over his church militante was
given him, as likewise the power given to other Apostles: to the consu^mation
Ephesia^s cap. 4. us. 12. 13.
of the saints, to the edif^nge of the body of Christ. until we all meet in
the unity of says and knowledge of the son of god. as S. Paul testifiethe,
and therefore to continue in the church, so long as the church is to
continue.

which is also proved by that: Upon this Rock will I build my church, and by
that: feed my sheep: for so long as the buildinge of the church continues,
or the flock of christ is to be fed which will be to the end of the world: so
long must the rock whereupon the church is built, and the pastors who must
feed the sheep continue: But this cannot be in S. Peter's personn: therefore in
his successoures: see S. Augustine his words before in that positione, that the
true church can never want a lawful personnall successione, of pastores, upon
these words of the psalm 44. For thy fathers are borne sons to thee.

And S Chriso. who. says: why Lib. 2. de Sace.
did our lord shed his blood? surely to redeem those sheep the cure whereof
he committed to Peter, and also to his successoures

Now, that the Bishope of Rome is the lawful and lineall successoure of S.
Peter is as authentically and evidently proved as that Lewis the 13. of France
is lineall successoure to Hughe a. lib. 3. cap. 3. b. lib. 2. against parmea
niane c. heresy. 27. d. epla. 65.
Capet or his majesty of Ingland to wiliam the co^querour S. Ireneus, Optatus,
S. Epiphanius, and S. Augustine, do derive the successione of the bishopes of
Rome from S. Peter until the bishopes that lived ^ their times. Besides
Eusebius, 1
or S. Hierosme, Prosper, and all such as have written the cronicles of
ecclesiastical affairs, do not omit to continue the Bishopes of Rome until
their answer to a cou^terfaite cathopa. 27.
own days And so well is this successione known that M. Fulke sayethe, we
can coumpt it on our fingares.

And S. Augustine doubts not to say, that the succession of preistes from
the seat of Peter, (to whom our Contra epla^n. fundamenti. cap. 4.
lord after his resurrection commended his sheep to be fed) until that
present Bishopp held him within the lapp of the church.

Protes. pos. 1.
S. Peter was not by our savior our Christ constituted supreme head and
soureygne pastoure or Bishop over his church militant.

2. The Pope or Bishope of Rome is not lawful and lineall successoure to S.
Peter in that charge and office which our savior gave to S. Peter over his
church militante.

THE SEVENTH Controversy of the honor due unto the holy Angels and Saints
in heaven.
Catho. pos. 1.
TO the holy Angels and saints in heaven is due more then civil honor and
reverence.

Proof. 1.
To me thy friends (o god Psalm. 138. us. 17.
are exceedingly honorable: lo here David being ^inge, auowethe that the
friends of god are greatly to be honored, by him: Certes not with civil
honors for such he ought not to them he being king, and the friends of
god, being all Io: cap. is v. 14.
those that do the things he commands (as our savior testifiethe) ^s. 13.
of what condition or degree soever.

2.
where this Gospel shall be preached Math. 26. us. 13.
in the whole world, that also which she has done, shall be toulde for a
memory of her.

Lo here an exeeding honor decreed by our savior him self to S. Marie
Magdaleyne. where Luc. cap 22. us. 19.
is to be noted, that this is commanded to be done in memory of her in like
manner of speech as our savior commanded the holy mysteries to be celebrated
in memory of him.

3.
Iosue being in the field of the city of hiericho, Iosue. cap. 5. us. 13.
saw a man sta^dinge against him, how ldinge a drawn sword, and he went nere
to him, and said, art thou ours, or our adversaries? who answered noe: but I
am a prince of the host of our lord. Iosue fell flatt down to the ground,
and adoreinge he said, what speaks the lord to his servant? loose says he
thy shoe from thy foot for the place where in thou stand is holy. And he
did as he was commanded Lo here the Angel not only adored to the ground
but also the ground it self nere where he stood duly reverenced for respect
of him.

Protest. pos.
To the Angels and Saints in heaven is due no other honor or reverence
then civil.

THE EYGHTETH Controversy. Of prayer to the holy angels and saints in heaven.
Catho. pos.
TO pray to the Angels or saints in heaven does not derogate any whitt at
all from our savior Christ his office of mediatoure.

Proof. 1.
S. Paul prays to the Romans Romans cap. 15. us. 30.
in this sort. I beseech you brethren by our lord Jesus Christ, and by the
charity of the holy ghost, that you help me in your prayres for me to god.

The like he has to the Ephesianes. cap. last v. 19. the first to the Thesalo:
cap 5. and else where often. But if the prayer to saints on earth do the not
derogat from the mediatorshipe of Christ: certes the prayers made to them in
heaven cannot.

Again Jacob prayed to his Genesis. cap. 48. us. 16.
good Angel in this sort: The Angel that delivers me from all euilles:
biess these children.

Catho. pos.
The saints in heaven do hear our prayers and understand our particular
estates there fore it is not idle or in vain to pray to the^, as though they
did nether,

Proof.
They are as the Angels of god in Matthew. ^. 22. v. ^0. Luc. c. 20. us.
heaven. They are equal to the Angels. but the Angels Know our particular
estates: see that you despise 36. c. Matt. cap. 18. us 10. d. Luc. cap. 15. us.
10.
not one of these little ones (says our savior Christ) For I say unto you
that their Angels in heaven do always see the face of my father which is in
heaven. yea they know our secret thoughts: I say to you, there shall be joy
before the Angels of god upon one sinner that does penance.

The saints have power over Apocal. cap. 3. us 26. 27.
nationes to rule them, therefore do they know their estates. He that shall
overcome and keep my words unto the end I will give him (says our savior)
power over nationes, and he shall rule them with a rodd of Iron.

Catho. pos. 3.
God does somtymes hear and accept the prayers of his serua^ds or saints for
a another man, when he will not hear that man prayinge for himself: therefore
is it profitable to pray unto them.

God said to Eliphas the Themanite Job last. cap. us. 7
my surye is wroth against thee and thy two freindes. Take therefore unto you
8. 9. 10.
seven oxen and seaue^ Ra^mes, and go to my seruande Job and offer holocaust
for your selves, and my seruande Job shall pray for you, his face I will
receive, that the folly be not imputed unto you. They went and did as our lord
had spoken to them, and our lord received the face of Job. Our lord also was
turned at the penance of Job when he prayed for his freindes.

Again, Pray one for a another that Iam. cap. 5. us. 16.
you may be saved: for the continual prayer of a just man avails much.

I allege not the fathers testimony for prayer to saints they being
confessed by the learned protestants to have taught that Doctrine; namely
Fulke says: In Nazia^zen, Basile and Chrysostom, 2. pet. cap. 1. sec. 3.
reminder to Bristo. 3. pa.
there is some mentione of the inuocatione of saints to help us with their
prayers The like he confesses of Ambrose Austine and Hierome. So that we see
the doctrine of the Greek and latin church in this point (by the co^fessione
of one of our seuerest adversaries) to have been 1200. years ago the same
with the doctrine of the present church of Rome.

Protest. pos.
To pray to the saints or Angels in heaven does derogate from the office of
mediator of our savior Christ.

2. The saints in heaven do not hear our prayers, nor know our particular
estates, or necessities, and therefore is it in vain to pray to them.

3. God does never accept of the prayers of his saints offered for another
man, when he does not accept of the same man's prayers for him self.

THE NINTH Controversy of holy Relics.
Catho. posi. 1.
God does honor the Relics of saints by working miraculouse things by them
to his own glory, the honor of the saints, the benefit of man, and the
edification of his church: and therefore are they to be honored and reverenced
by faithful Christianes.

Proof. 1. Acts. cap. 19. us. ^18.

There were brought from his [S. Paule] body napkins, and hand kercheeses upon
the sike and the diseases departed from them; and the wicked spirits went out.

2.
They did bring forth the sick into streets Acts cap. 5. us. 15.
and lead them in beds and couches that when Peter came, his shadow at the
least might over shadow any of them, and they all might be delivered from
there infirmities.

3.
Certain persons buryinge a man 4. of the ^imges. cap. 13. us. 21.
saw the rouers; and threw the body in the sepulcher of Eliseus, which when
it had touched the bones of Eliseus, the man revived and stood upon his feet.

For the testimony of the fathers The. 22. book of the cit. e of god. cap. 8.
in this point I will only alledg S. Augustine, whom vn^ess our adversaries
dare condemn both of error in Judgment and falsitie in history, they must
needs confess that holy relics in his time, were had in great and public
honor and reverence. The reader that desirethe to see or hear himself
speak, must be content to turn the book himself, for this words, to this
purpose, are over Pro^ix to be inserted in this brief treatise.

The Doctrine and practice of Exam. 4. parte^. sec haec gentilia.
ancient church is so evident in this point, that Chemnitins a renowned
protestant is forced to, write in this sort. Of translation of riliques
followed the caryinge them about in processiones, as is mentioned by Hierome
against Vigilantius: And by Augustine when in the translatione of the relics
of Steven, a blind woman received her sight, Lucilius the Bishope straight
ordained the carieing abont of the Relics of Steven. And be cause sometimes
certain miracles were done at the relics: all per so^ne^ in any i^firmitie
or necessite, what soever rann to them. Augustine mentions that flowers and
otherthinges: Ambrose that garments cast upon the sepulchers, or cofines of
martyrs were carried by Christianes, as defenses and preservatives from evil;
They did think that the martyrs them selves were present with their ashes.
Nor did they call upon god only, but the very martyrs did they inuccate at
their relics: and thinkinge grace and heavenly virtue, to reside in their
bones by prayer and other worship did they seek them at relics: As Basile
discoursethe upon the Psalm. 115. Nor did they Seek their only corporal
cures: but did imagine that spiritual graces, as holiness and charity was
given and creased by touching and Kissing of liques as Nyssenus does
gloriously ^eache of Theodore the martyr: with any other things to the same
^urpose.

Protes. positi.
God does not honor the re^ques of saints by worKeinge ^y miraculous things
by them ^her to his own glory, the ^onoure of the saints, the be^efit of
man, or the edification of his church: or though he ^oe, yet are not the
relics of ^^intes for all that to be honou^ed or reverenced. 2.

THE TENTHE Controversy of holy images
Catho. posi. 1.
THe images of holy persons may with out fear of idolatry or any other
inconvenience be placed in churches, and oratories.

Proof. 1.
Two Cherubins thou shall make Exodus. cap. 25. us. 18. 19. 20.
beaten gold on both sides of the oracle. Let one cherubin be on the one si^
and the other on the other, let them cover both sides of the propitiatory,
spreadinge their wings and coueringe the veil, and let them look one
toward the other, their faces turned vn^ the propitiatory where with the
Ark^ is to be covered. Lo here the commandment of god himself for the
placeinge of holy images, in the most holy place of the temple or tabernacle,
not with sta^dinge that the jews were most prone unto idolatric.

2.
All the walls of the temple round 3. of the king. cap. 6. us. 28. 29.
about ^e graued with diverse engraueinge and caruinge and he made in them
Cherubins and Palm trees and diverse Pictures, as it were standing^ out of the
wall, and cominge forth: ^e here holy images made in the ^mple with out any
express co^^aundinge of god.

3.
Our lord said to Moses make a Nubres cap. 21 us. 8.
^asen serpent and set it for a sign: that being stricken looks upon it all
live.

Catho. pos. 2.
The jmages of holy perso^nes ^ay and ought to be honored reverenced and
worshipped.

Proof.
The holy Scriptures approuue and command honor and euerence to be done to
diverse things, for the sole respect and ^elatione which they have to ho ^y
persons, though nether so evident, nor so natural as the respect which
images have to the persons whom they represe^t: therefore is it evident, that
they approve and command the liKe to be done to them.

Adore you his footestoole because it is Psulme.
holy. The Rabins by the foo^ 9. us. 5.
stool understand the Arc of the owld testament, which therfo^^ according to
this commandment they adored.

I will adore toward the holy temple, Psalm. 5 us. 9.
thy fear. Lo here adoration o^ the temple for respect of god whose how se it
is.

God has given him a name which Philipe^ cap. 2. us. 10.
above all names: that in the name JESUS every knee bow of the celestialls
terestr^alles and infernales. Lo^ here reverence commanded to be done to the
holy name of I^SVS.

Lose of thy shoe from thy foot, for Exodus. cap. 3. us. 5. Iosue. cap. 5. us
13.
the place wherein thou stand is ho^ ground, Lo here reverence commanded
to be done to the ground near where the Angel stood only in respect of his
presence there.

woe to you blind guides that sai^ Matthe. cap. 23. us. 19. 17
whosoever shall swear by the temple ^t is nothing, but he that shall swear
by the gold in the temple is bownde ^ee blind, for whether is greater the gold
or the temple that sanctificthe the gold. Lo here the gold in the temple
sanctified, for being in the temple, and therefore deserves reverence, but
much more the temple it self.

Now e let the iuditions reader consider, whether the image of any person
has not a more nee^e and evident relation and respect unto the person
represented by it; then these things which the holy Sripture auoweth and
commands to be honored forth respect which they have to some person
worthy of honor. And if he find that they have so in deed, as doubtless
they have: and further, if the perso^nes represented by the images deserve
honor and reverence (as is proved before that the saints and Angels do
then unless he be deprived of the light of natural reason, he cannot deny but
such holy images may and ought to be honored and reverenced in regard of the
perso^nes represe^ted by the^. which yet is made more playneby this reason. The
injury or contumely done to the image of any person, is by all men esteemed
to redounde to the injury or co^tunielie of the perso^ne represented by it,
which (to omit infinite other proofs) is evident by the wrath and
indignatione which Theodosius a good and wise prince, conceived against the
citezens Theodo. 5. book ofhis history cap. 19.
of Antioche for castinge down his wifes statua: which injury he had revenged
with the ruin of the whole city, if he had not been prevented by the prudent
and piouse endeuoures of others. The curious read may see Eusebius of Maximin
Eusebius. lib 9. cap. 9.
his statua defaced in dishonor of the person and also Suetonius of the the
like disgrace showed to Domitiane. The dishonor therefore done to the images,
redownding to the persons; the same must necessarily be said of the honor
Used to them. And this is evidently true if all natural reason and discourse be
not false. Math. cap. 9.


Of the woman cured of the bloody flix whereof mention is made in the gospel,
it is recorded that returninge home, she in memory of that benefit, set up
an image of Christ, at the Exseb. lib. 7. cap. 14.
foot whereof, grew an herb, which when it touched the hem of the image,
cured all diseases: which image Iuliane the Apostata threw down, and set up
his own in the place, which was i^mediatly destroyed by fire from heaven. But
the Image of Christ broken in pieces by the heathen: the Christiannes after
wards gatheringe the pieces together, placed in the church where it was: as
Sozomen writethe Sozome^. lib. 5. cap. 20
until his time.

Seeinge therefore god does honor holy images by doing miracles by them for
our beuefit; why should not we also honor them, with due reverence and
worshipp, or rather the persons represented by them? Exodus cap. 20.
Therefore when god forbidethe the makeinge and adoreinge of any graven thing,
or any similude; the meaning is only, that no such thing should be made o^
adored as god; and not otherwise. For he himself has commanded both to make
holy images and also to adore his footstool as is already showed. In like
manner therefore, as he torbideth to kill, not certes absolutely, but by private
authority, upon revenge, malice, or other unlawful cause. so does he forbid
to make and adore any graven thing: not absolutlye, but as a god. And for
confirmation of this thou may note [prudent reader] that noe one Catholic
father for these 1600. years has ever under stood this commandment in that
sense which the protestants would draw it unto: which is more then a probable
argument that it is not the true sense thereof. Demost. of his proble^^ title:
si^num Crucis.


For the testimony of the fathers in this point: I will content my self with
M. Parkins confession: saying that the cross begann to be adored about the
400. year of Christ. And though fraudulently he say yt begann to be adored
yet to the manifestation of his own fraud does he bring diverse testimonies
of Prude^tius, Hierome, Paulin, and others which manifestly show, that it was
then in public use, and not in beginning only. Note, that what is say de of
the honor due to the cross may be said of any other holy image.

Protestants position.
1. The images of holy persons may not without idolatry or other
inconvenience be made and placed in churches, oratories, or places of prayer.
2. The images of holy persons may not, or ought not, to be honored,
reverenced, or worshipped.
THE ELEVENTHE Controversy: Of Purgatory.
Catholic position.
AFter this life there is a purgatory, or place where the souls of the
faithful, departinge out of this world I^ the state of grace are detayned
until they be wholly purged from all guilt and pain due unto sin.

Proof. 1.
He that shall speak against the holy Math. cap. 12. v. 32.
ghost it shall not be forgiven him nether in this world nor in the world to
come. Hence it is manifest that some sins are forgiven in the world to come:
not in heaven whither no sinner enters: nor in hell where there is no
remission, therefore in a third place which is Purgatory, S. Augustine aludinge
to this place expressly says that some sins are remitted Deciuit lib. 21.
cap. 13.
in the next world.

2.
Be at agreement with thy adversary betymes whilst thou art in the way Ma
the. cap. 5. v. 25. 27
with him, lest perhaps thy adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the
Judge deliver thee to the officers and thou be cast into prisone. Amen I say
to thee thou shall not go from thence till thou repaye the last farthinge. To
these words S. Cyprian Epistle to Antonian.
alludinge Says. Another thing it is for him that is in prison, not to go
out til he has paid the last farthinge, another thing presently to receive
reward of faith and Virtue: another thing being by long pain tormented:
to be cleansed and purged by long fire.

3.
The work of eueire one shall be manifest for the day of our lord will
declare, 1. Corin cap. 3. us. 13.
because it shall be revealed in fire, and the work of every one of what kind
it is the fire shall try.

Vf any man's work burae he shall suffer detriment: but he himself shall be
us. 15. Upon the Psalm. 37.
saved, yet so as by fire. S. Augustine Understands this place of
Purgatory, saying if they did build upon the foundation gold, silver, and
pretions stones, they should be secure from both fyres, not only from that
everlasting which shall torment the impiouse eternally: but also from that
which shall amend them that shall be Saved by fire. For it is said, he shall be
safe yet so as by fire.

Catholic Positions. 2. Catho. pos. 2.

The souls in Purgatory are helped by the prayers, Sacrifices, and other
works of piety done for them by the faithful living in this world: And
therefore is it a good work to pray for them.

Proof.
Otherwise what sh. il they do that 1. Corin. cap. 15* us. 29. 30.
are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not again at all? why also are
they baptized for them? By baptism here is understood all corporal
afflictione and chastisement undertaken for the departed; in like manner as it
is understood Marc. cap. 10. us. 38
by our savior when he say the, with the baptism where with Iam Baptized shall
ye be baptized.

2.
And (Judas) makeinge a gatheringe 2. Machah. c. 12. us. 43. 44. 46.
he sent 12000. Drachmes of Silver to Jerusalem for sacrifice to be offered for
sin, well and religiouslye thinking of the resurrection (for unless he hoped
that they that were slain, should rise again, it should seem super stuouse
and vain to pray for the dead) it is therefore a holy and healthful cogitation
to pray for the dead that they may be loosed from sins.

For the judgment of the church, in and before S. Augustines time, let the
industrius reader see the confessione of Chemnitius 3. part. octaua. sect
in his examen where he undertakes to dispute against S. Augustine and S.
Chrysostom of purgatoire and prayer for the dead.

Protestant position.
1. After his life there is no purgatory or place where the souls of the
faithful, departed in the state of grace are purged either from guilt or pain
of sin.

2. The sowles in purgatory are not helped by the prayers, and other works of
piety done for them, by the faithful liueinge in this world. And therefore it
is at least in vain to pray for them.

THE XII. Controversy of the Sacraments.
Catholic position.
THere are seven Sacraments of the new law properly so called. That is
seven visible or sensible signs, ordained or instituted by our savior
Christ: whereby grace is given to those that worthily receive the^. The
protestants do confess that Baptism and the Eucharist are properly
sacraments, therefore are we only to prove the other five.

Note that as nether baptism nor the Eucharist are in any place of holy
scripture called or said to be sacraments: and yet because they are visible or
sensible signs, and ceremonies giueing grace (as the catholic church
beleeuethe: or signifyinge the same as the protesta^s teach) they have ever in
gods church (even by the confession of our adversaries) been truly called and
esteemed sacraments: so likewise all other external and sensible signs, or
ceremonies proved by scriptures to have the like effect and have been called
and esteemed of the ancient church sacraments: ought also of the
protesta^tes to be acknowledged for such: nether are they to require any other
proof for the other sacraments, then they are able to produce for these two.

And albeyt the protestants confess with the Catholics that Baptism and the
holy Eucharist are Properly sacraments: yet do they deny diverse things
pertayninge to them which the Catholic church tacheth: which are therefore
to be spoken of before we proceed to the proof of the other sacraments.

OF THE Necessity of Baptism:
Catholic position.
It is necessary for every man's salvation that he be baptized. Io. cap. 3. us.
5.


Proof.
A Men I say to thee, unless a man be borne again of water and the spirit, the
cannot enterinto the kingdom of god. S. Augustine numbereth Herese 88.
amongst other heresies of Pelagius this: that he promised eternal bliss
though without the kingdom of god to infantes without Baptism.

Protestant position.
It is not necessary for any man's salvation that he be baptized.

OF THE CEREMOnies of Baptism.
Catholic position.
THe exorcismes and other ceremonies used by the Catholic church in
Baptism, have example in the holy scripture and are agreeable there unto.

Proof.
And takeinge him from the multitude Marc. c. 7. us. 33. 34.
apart, he put his fingers into his ears, and spitting, touched his tongue,
And lookeinge up to heaven, he groaned, and said to him ephpheta which First
book of sacrament. v. cap. 1.
is, he thou opened. Saint Ambros testifiethe these ceremonies to have bine
used in his time.

Protestant position.
The exorcismes and other ceremonies used by the church in Baptism are
disagreable to holy scripture.

OF THE HOLY EVchariste, or most blessed Sacrament of the Altar.
Catholic Positions.
IN the holy Eucharist, the true body and blood of our savior Christ is truly,
really and substantially, and not in figure only.

Proof.
Take ye and eat: This is my body. Matthew. cap. 26. us. 26. 27 28. Marc 14. v.
22 24. cap. 22. us. 19. 20.
Drink ye all of this. For this is my blood of the new testament which
shall be shed for many unto remission of sins Again.

This is my body which is given for you. This is the chalice the new testament
in my blood which shall be shed for you. and yet again Our lord Jesus in the
night that he was betrayed 1. corint. cap. 11. us. 23. 24. 25.
took bread: And giuinge thanks brake, and said. Take ye, and eat: This is
my body which shall be delivered for you, this do ye for commemoration of me.
In like manner also the chalice after he had supped, saying this chalice is
the new testament in my blood this do ye as often as ye shall drink, for
the commemoration of me.

Note that these words (this is my body) being understood as they sound
there can be no more controversy about this point: And that they are to be
understood as they sound, and without all figure, may be convinced in this
sort. There can nether reason nor authority be alleged why any other
words of holy scripture are to be understood as they sound, and namely these
words which are Matthew. cap. 17. us. 5.
most like them (This is my well-beloved son) which does not prove the same of
these whereof we now speak. Therefore without all sense and reason, and merely
of heretical wilfulness, is a figure sought in these Words, more then in any
other, and namely in these I have mentioned. But here I inte^d not any further
dispute.

OF TRANSVBST ANtiation.
Catholic position.
THe word Transubsta^tiation is not found expressly in holy scripture, as
likewise is not co^substantiall: but as the Catholic church did ever believe
the equality of power, and unity of substance in the Father, and the son,
and by the assistance of the holy ghost the John ca. 16. us. 13.
spirit of truth, which teaches her all truth did express her belief in
that point, by the word consubstantiall in the holy council of Nice: so like
wise haueinge ever believed the true and real presence of Christ's body in the
most holy eucharist, by the change of the bread into the same body: did,
(being assisted by the same never fay linge spirit of truth in the holy
council of Lateran first, and since in diverse others) express her belief in
that point, by the word transubstantiation, as most fitly declaringe the
verity of that most holy mystery. Nether can the protestants produce any
thing against transubstantiation, which they themselves are not bound to solue
and answer: the Arriannes obiectinge the very like against that of
consubstantiall. That the doctrine of tra^substa^tion is not new Adamus
Francisci a learned protestant Marga. theologi. page 256.
(with others) confesses in these words. The fiction of transubstantiation
crep into the church betimes: And this shall suffice for this point till
occasion be given of a larger discourse.

OF ADORING THE holy Eucharist.
Catholic Positions.
Our Savior Christ being noe less truly present in the holy Eucharist the^
he was in the stable. in Bethelem, or upon the cross, he is noe less to be
adored of all faithful christians in the sacrament, then he was there: or then
being in the form of a gardener he was of S. Marie Magdalein.

Proof.
Adore ye him all his Angels: Psalm 69 us. 8.
which words S. Paul hebrwes cap. 1. understands of the ado^ation of Christ
in his humanity.

Adore ye the footstool of Psalm. 98. v. 5. S. August. upon that pla^
his feet. By which footstool S. Augustine understands the flesh or body
of our savior Christ and says, Because he walked here in flesh, and gave the
same flesh to us to be eaten for our Salvation: and no man eats that flesh
unless he first adore it, it is found how the footstool of our lord is
adored.

Certes he that acknowledges our savior Christ truly present in the B.
Sacrament and yet thinks him not worthy of Adoration is more senseless and
unthankful then that ungrateful kaytiff that seeinge his grations sovereign
coming to visit him in his vile cottage, should think him less honorable for
such exceeding grace and favor.

Protestants positions.
In the holy Eucharist the true body and blood of our sauiou^ Christ is not,
truly, really an^ substantially, but in figure only 2 The body of Christ is not
i^ the Eucharist by transubstantiatione.

3 He is not to be adored in the Eucharist.

OF COMMUNION under one kind.
Catholic positions. 1.
IT is no where forbidden i^ holy scripture to minister the holy communion to
lay persons under one Kind only. This Positione is clear no such
prohibitione appearing in the scripture. And if the Protesta^tes growndes of
beleeuinge nothing but what is proved by scripture were true; would
sufficiently warrant the practice of the Roman church in this point. But
^urther.

It is no where commanded ^ holy scripture to give the holy ^ommunion under
both kinds ^o the lay people. This Posision is also clear no such
commandment any where appearinge. For that which is said: do Luc ca. 22. v.
19.
^his for remembrance of me: is spoken only of the kind of bread: and
therefore does well prouue the contraire: S. Paul in deed 1 Corin. cap. 11.
^ddeth it to both kinds: thereby also declaringe this holy mystery taken
either under both or one kind, to be a memorial of Christ, and his passione:
and therefore does rather prove the Catholic Roman practice, then any way
disprove yt. Though these words, do rather give power and authority to the
Apostles and priests, to consecrate and offer the unbloody sacrifice here
instituted and offered by our sauiou^ Christ: then import any commandment of
ministringe the same to the lay people vnde^ both kinds. And this shall
appear more evidently by tha^ which follows.

Catholic position.
The Catholic Roman church does not any wrong or injury to the lay
people, ministringe unto them the holy Eucharist under one kind only, They
receauinge the same benefit by one that they should do by both: christ's body
and blood Io: cap. 6. from the 53. smasorvvard.
being whole in each.

Proof.
He that says unless you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his
blood you shall not have life in you says also. He that eatethe me the same
also shall live by me. And again: he that eats of this bread shall live
forever. And he that says; he that eateeth my flesh and drinks my blood,
abides in me and I in him: The same also says, the bread that I will give is
my flesh forth life of the wolrde. And he that says, he that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood has life everlasting. The same says, he that
eats this bread shall live for ever. All these are the sayings of our
savior Christ in on and the same hapter of S. Ihon, where if we say with most
Catholic Docteurs that he speaks of the holy Sacrament Sacramentally
received it is manifest, that he ascribes the same effect and virtue to one
kind that he does to both. And therefore can they have noe wrong done them,
that for most just causes have it ministered under one kind only. But if we
say with the Protestants that here is no speech of sacrame^tall eatinge of
Christ his body: the^ is there noe difficulty in their cheest argument, which
is ground upon the first words allege in this proof.

2.
The were perseueringe in the doctrine Acts cap. 2. us. 42.
of the Apostles, and in the communication of the breakeing of bread and prai^
Lo here communion under on^ kind. For this breakinge o^ bread was the
ministringe of the holy sacrament. Again.

And the first of the Sabothe wh^ Acts cap 20. v. 7. Epistlo. 86. to Cass^la.
we were assembled to break^ bread^ This S. Augustine understand et^ of
breakinge bread, as in the Sacrament of Christ his body. so that it appearethe
the practice of the Apostles to minister the Sacrament to the people in one
kind only.

Protestant Position.
1 It is forbidden in holy Scripture to give the holy communion to the lay
people under one kind only. 2 It is commanded in holy Scripture to give the
holy communion to the lay people under both Kinds.
The lay people have wrong done them, in that they are a bridged of the
Sacrament under both Kinds: thereby receauinge less benefit then if they
received it under both.

OF THE SACRIFICE of the Mass
Catholic Position.
THere is in the new law a Sacrifice; truly and properly so called to wit the
holy mass wherein is offered the body and blood of Christ.

Proof 1.
Our Savior Christ gave Power and commandment to his Apostles and all
Preistes to do that which he did in his last supper: Saying do this for
commemoration Lue. cap. 22. v. 19. 1 cor in: cap. 11. v. 23.
of me. But our savior Christ in his last supper sacrificed his body and blood
under the forms of bread and wine: therefore the Apostles and all preistes have
now power and commandment to offer the same sacrifice, which is not done but
in the holy Mass. That our savior Christ sacrificed in his last supper is
proved thus. Christ was, and is, for ever to the end of the world a priest
according to the order of Melchisedeche, whose priesthood Psalm 109
co^sisted in offering bread and wine Melchisedech king of Salem bringing
Genesis. cap. 14. v. 18.
forth bread and wine for he was the Priest of god most high: therefore it is
evident tha tour Savior was to offer some time in the same form, which he
never did but in his last supper where though he offered his body and blood,
saying, this is my body which shall be given for you this is my blood which
shall be shed for you, yet did he perform this under the form of bread and
wine, according to the rite or use of Melchisedeche his sacrifice.

2.
I have no will in you says the lord Mala. chie. cap. 1. v. 1.
of hosts: and gift I will not receive of your hand. For from the riseinge of
the sun even to the goeinge down, great is my name among the gentiles, and
in every place there is sacrificinge, and there is offered to my name a clean
oblation. This prophecy is not fulfilled but by the sacrifice of the mass.
This is the sacrifice (says S. Augustine) Deciuie. dei lib. 18. cap. 35.
by the Preisthoode of Christ according to the order of Melchisedech: seeinge
we now see it to be offered to god in all places from the riseinge of the sunn
unto the settinge thereof. And many other fathers in like sort. whose words we
cannot here rehearse studyinge to be brief.

But for the Doctrine of the most ancient fathers in this point I will taKe
the confessione True reformation of the* church.
of Calvin. Saiynge thus; It is an usual thing with these knaves [soe modest
is this new Apostles.] to rake together whatsoever is vitiouse in the fathers.
Therefore when they object the place of malachi to be expounded by Ireneus of
the sacrifice of the Mass The offeringe of Melchisedech to be see handled of
Athanasius, Ambros, Augustine, Arnobius, it is briefly answered, the same
writers else where to interpret also bread the body of Christ, but so
ridiculusly that reason, and truth causes us to dissent. Thus M. Calvin, but
whether he, be not ridiculus rather then these fathers let the indiffrent
reader judge.

Protestants Position.
In the new law is there not any sacrifice truly and properly: nether is the
mass a sacrifice of the body and blood of our savior Christ.

OF CONFIRMAtion.
Catholic position.
Confirmation as it is practiced in the Catholic Roman church is truly and
properly a Sacrament of the new law.

Proof.
It is a sensible sign giueinge grace: therefore a Sacrament. Acts cap. 8. v.
20.


Then did they impose their hands upon them, and they received the holy ghost
whereof says S. Cyprian: They that in Samaria were baptized of Philip Epistle.
73. to Iubai.
because they had lawful and Ecclesiastical baptism, ought not to be
baptisedanie more: But only that which wa^ted, was done by Peter and John; to
wit, that by prayers made for them, and impositione of hands the holy ghost
might be powered upon them; which now also is done with us. that they which in
the church are baptized, by the rulers of the church offered, and by our
prayers and imposition of hands receive the holy ghost, and be signed with our
lords seal. Again.

It is to little purpose to impose hands Epistle. 72
upon the^ to receive the holy ghost, unless they receive the churches
baptism. For then may they be fully sanctified, and be the Children of God, if
they be born by both Sacraments.

And S. Augustine: the Sacrament Against the letters of Petilian lib. 2. cap
104.
of Chrisme in the kind of visible seals is sacred and holy, even as Baptism
it self.

Protestant Position.
Confirmation as it is practiced in the Roman church, is not truly and
properly a Sacrament of the new law.

Of Penance.
Catholic Positions. 1.
Penance consisting of contrition, confession, and satisfaction of the
penitent, and absolution of the priest is truly and properly a Sacrament of the
new law.

Proof.
It is a visible sign or ceremony as appearthe by the confession of the
penitent and absolution of the priest: it remitte the sins and therefore
gives grace.

Receive you the holy ghost; whose sins John. cap 20. v. 23.
you shall forgive they are forgiven them: And whose sins you shall retain
they are retained. Of this power of remittinge sins S. Chrysostom says
thus. For they that dwell Lib. 3. de Sacer. dotio:
one the earth that conuers in it, to them is commission given to dispense
those things that are in heaven, to them is it given to have the power which
god would not to be given nether to Angels nor Archangells. For nether to them
was it said, what soever you shall bind in earth shall be bound in heaven and
whatsoever you shale lose in earth shall belosed in heaven. The earthly Princes
in deed have also power to bind but, the bodies only: but that bond of
preistes which I speak of, touches the ve^^ s^ule it self, and reaches even
to the heauenes: in so much that whatsoever t^^ preistes shall do be neathe;
the self sa^^ god does ratify above, and the sentence (...) the servants* the
lord does confirm. F^^ in deed what else is this, the^ that the power of all
heavenly things is granted them of god? whose sins soever (says he) you
shall retain, they are retaine^ what power I beseech you can be greater then
this?

Haueinge thus proved the power of preistes to remit sins* And the
protestants confessing^ contrition, which they call repentance: it remaynethe,
that I prove the other two parts of Penance to wit confession and
satisfaction.

OF CONFESsione.
Catholic position.
OF the power of retayning (that is not remittinge) of sins given to preistes
follows the necessity of confession of all sins. For if on the one side,
the sins retained and not remitted by Preistes upon earth be retained and
not remitted in heaven, as is manifest by our Sauioures own words; and if on
the other side, the priest cannot remitt the sin unless he know it, as is
manifest he cannot: nor ca^ he know it unless it be towlde him: it follows
necessarily, that he that will have his sins remited, must by his own
confessione make them known unto him, to whom god has given power to remitt
them.

Confession was practiced in the Apostles times as appear the Acts cap. 19 v.
18.
for many of them that believed came confessinge and declaringe their deeds.
It is also probable that S. James speaks of this Sacrame^tall confession when
he says: Confess your sins one to another. for so does James. cap. 5. v. 16
Origin homily 2. upon. leuiticus.
Origin understand it saying. There is a seven the kind of remissione of
sins, though very hard and laboursome when the sinner washes his bed with
tears and they are made his bread both day and night: and when he is not
ashamed to declare his sin to the Priest of our lord, and to seek remedy
according to him which says: I have said I will pronounce my injustice
against my self to our lord, and thou have remitted the impiety of mine heart.
In whom also that is fullfilled which the Apostle says: if any be sick let
him bring in the preistes of the church and if he be in sin they shall bear
mitted to him.

The judgment of the ancient church is so clear in this point of
confession, that Mr. Fulke (a most piuishe enemy to all Catholic Doctrine)
is compelled, by the multitude of most clear testimonies of the ancient
fathers to co^fess, that it is expedient some times: in these words. That it
is Upon th 20. cap. of s. John Sect S. ^ovvardes the end.
expedient in some cases for men to confess their sins to their pastoure, we
deny not.

OF SATISFACction.
Catholic position. 3.
THe guilt of the sin being remytted, the pain due therefore is not always
so pardoned, but that often times, there remains a temporal pain to be
suffered for it, either here in this life, or else in purgatory.

Proof. 1.
Forgive I beseech thee the sin of this Nu^b cap 14. v. 20. 21.
thy people, according to the greatness of thy mercy, as thou have been
propitiouse to them since their goeinge out from Egypt unto this place. And our
lord said I have forgiven it according to thy word: live I and the whole
earth shall be replenished with the glory of our lord. But yet all the men that
have seen my majesty, and the signs that I have done in Egypt and in the
wilderness, and have tempted me now tenn times nether have obeyed my voice
they shall not see the land for which I swore to their fathers: nether shall
any of them that have detracted me behold it.

The like is recorded of Moses Deuter: cap. 32. v. 49* and of Aaron. Numbers
cap. 20. v. 23. yet noe man doubts but the sin for which they were punished
was forgiuuen them before their death,

David said to Natha^ I have sinned 2. of kings cap. 12. v. 13. 14.
to our lord: And Nathan said to David our lord also has taken away thy Syn
thou shall not dye: Neuertheless because thou have made the ennimies of our
lord to blaspheme, for this thing the son that is borne to thee dyinge shall
die.

Catholic position.
This temporal pain remaining after the guilt of the sin is remitted, may
be redeemed by good works; as by fasting prayer, Alms and the like, which
therefore are truly called satisfactorie.

Proof. 1.
If I shall shut heaven, and reane fall 2. of Paralip. cap. 7. v. 13. 14.
not, and shall bid and command locustes to devour the land and shall send
Pestilence into my People: And my poeple being converted upon whom my name is
inuocated shall do penance from their most wicked ways: I also will hear
from heaven and will be propitious to their sins, and will save their land.

2.
O king let me counsel thee and redeem Daniell. cap. 4. v. 24.
thy sins with alms and thy iniquities with the mercies of the poor.

3.
Therefore are there among you many 1. Cori^. cap. 11. v. 30. 31.
weak and feeble and many sleep. But if we did judge ourselves we should not
be judged: that is if we punish or chastise our selves, we should not be
chastised of god, for our sins remitted, for of such the Apostle speaks as
is manifest by the verse followinge But whiles we are indged of our lord we are
chastised, that with this world we be not damned.

Catholic Positions. 5.
works done for the satisfaction of the temporal pain remaining after the
sin be pardoned, do no way derogate from the satisfaction of christ his
passion.

Proof. 1.
I Paul, who now rejoice in sufferinge Collose^. cap. 1. v. 24.
for you and do accomplish those things that want of the passiones of Christ
in my flesh, for his body which is the church.

2.
we are heirs truly of god, and coheyres Roman. cap. 8. v. 17.
of Christ yet if we suffer with him that we may be gloriffied which him. Lo
here our sufferinge at least a condition necessary for our glorification.

3.
To him that is such an one this rebuke 2. Cor. cap. 2. v. 6.
suffices that is given of many: where S. Paul speaks of the Pe^nance
enjoined upon the incestious Corinthiane.

Do Penance says S. John Baptist Mathe. cap. 3. v. 2.
and by his life and example showed what penance he spoke of: And again:
yield therefore fruit worthy of Penance.

But Zacheus standinge said to our lord Luc. 19. us. 8.
Behold the half of my goods I give to the poor: and if I have defrauded
any man of any thing, I restore four fould.

The doctrine and practice of the ancient church thouching Centurie. 3. coll.
127
Satisfaction, is confessed by the Centuristes in these words: The life of
those that confessed lesser sins was considered, and judged whether they had
done just penance, as appreareth by Ciprian lib. 3. epistle 16. and that
satisfaction was accustomed to be imposed upon them according to the quantity
of the fault appearethe by his S. sermon de lapsis. Tertuliane also mentions
the same in his book of Penance.

OF INDVL. gences.
Catholic position.
THere is in the church of God power to give Indulgences, or grant
pardonnes: that is to remitt and pardonne part or all the temporal pain,
penance, or punishment which (for the most part) remains to be performed,
or suffered, for the satis-faction af the sin after the guilte of the synn be
taken away.

Proof.
To the will I give the keis of the kingdom Matthew. cap. 16. v. 19. 6. Mat. ca.
18. v 18 2. Cori. cap. 2. v. 10.
of heaven and what soever thou shall lose in earth shall be also losed in the
heavens. And the same repeated again to all the Apostles, in another place.
This power is practiced by S. Paul, whom you have pardonned any ^^ing. I
also. Formy self also that which I pardoned if I pardoned anithing for you in
the person of Christ. Lo here S. Paul at the prayer of others, pardoned and
assoyled of mere mercy and grace, the incestu ouse corinthiane, of the rest of
his Penance, which with out the same pardone, he was bound to have performed,
though his sin was already forgiven him,

Protestant Positions. 1.
Penance, consistinge of contrition confession, and satisfaction of the
penitent, and absolution of the priest, is not truly and properly, a Sacrament
of the new law.

2. It is not necessary for the penitent to confess all his sins: or that
confession is not necessary for obtayni^g remission of our sins.

3. The guilt of the synn being pardonned there remainethe no temporal pain
to be suffered, or other satisfaction to be made, there in this life or in the
next.

^, The temporal pain re^ayning cannot be redeemed ^y any works: nor are
there ^nie satisfactorie works.

^* works done for Satisfaction ^or synn, or for the pain due to ^t, do
derogate from the satifaction of our Saviors passion.

^. There is not in the church of Christ any power to give indulgence, or
grant pardon of any part of the the temporal pain, or penance to be
performed after the guilt of the synn be pardoned, and remitted.

OF HOLY ORders.
Catholic position.
HOly orders whereby power is given both to consecrate the true body of Christ
as the catholic church does beliue: and also to minister other Sacraments in
the church (which is the mystical body of Christ) and to exercise other
ecclesiastical functiones is truly and properly a Sacrament of the new law.

Proof.
Holy order is given by a visible or sensible sign with the effect of grace:
therefore properly a Sacrament.

Proof. 1.
Neglect not the grace that is in thee: 1. Tim. cap. 4. v. 14.
which is given thee by prophecy with imposition of the hands of preisthoode.
^gayne.

2.
I admonish thee that thou resuseitate 2. Tim. 1. v. 6.
he grace of god which is in thee by the ^mposition of my hands. Further.

3.
Then they fasting and praying and imposing Act. ca. 13. v. 6.
hands upon them dismissed them S. Ambrose upon the words before cited out of
the first to Timothee 4. says thus. The imposition of hands is mystical
words where with the elect is confirmed to this work receiving authority
(his conscience bearing witness) that he may be bold in our lord steed to
offer sacrifice to god.

M. Bilson proves by the authority Perpetual gournment page 10.
of Calvin, holy orders, or creating ministers (as he terms it) to be a
Sacrament: which Calvin does not only affirm, but prove (if the other cite him
truly) by these reasones: because it is a visible sign, with grace.

Protestans positions.
Holy orders whereby power i^ given to minister other Sacrame^t^ and exercise
other ecclesiastical functiones is not properly and truly a Sacrament of the
new law.

OF EXTREME unction.
THe anoylinge of the sick with the form of words joined there with, used in
the Catholic Roman church, is truly and properly a Sacrament of the new
law.

Proof.
It is a sensible sign with the effect of invisible grace, therefore properly a
Sacrament.

Proof 1.
Is any man sick among you let him bring in the priests of the church and
let them pray over him anoyleing ^im with oil in the name of our lord: Lo
here the external sign, And ^he prayers of faith shall save the sick: and our
lord shall lift him up: and if he ^e in sins they shall be remitted to him:
Lo here the internal grace of which S. Chrysostom says ^hus: They [to wit
preistes] have authority to forgive sins; not only when they regenerate us
but after wards also. For, is any sick among you, ^aith the Apostle let him
bring in the Preistes etc.

Protestants position.
The anoyleinge of the sick with the form of words adjoined, used in the
Roman church, is not properly a Sacrament of the new law.

OF Matrimony.
Matrimony contracted betwixt christianes is not a bare civil contract, but
truly and properly a Sacrament of the new law.

Proof.
It is a Symbol or sign of a holy thing with the effect of grace therefore a
Sacrament.

For this cause shall man leave his father Ephe. 5. v. cap. 31.
and mother and shall cleave to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh.
This is a great Sacrament, I speak in Christ and in the church. Note that
Catholic auctores urge not this word Sacrament to prove that matrimony is
properly a Sacrament: but to prove it a holy sign, or a sign of a holy thing;
and therefore not a mere civil contract, and this does the text evidently
importe: declareing that the ioining together of man and woman, as it is used
in Christ his church is a Symbol or sign, of the inseparable union, and
a^mitie of Christ and his church. The effect of grace in this Sacrament, is
also showed by the same words. For matrimony is not only a sign of the
union of Christ, and the church, in conformity of nature, but also by
spiritual charity where with Christ loved his church, and governs it
holily, and the church does inseperably adhere unto Christ by faith, hope, and
charity, and is subject to him by obedience: which spiritual union marriage
cannot signify, unless there be betwixt man and wife a spiritual union of
minds beside the civil contract: and therefore the Apostle does warn, that In
the sam^ cap v. 24. 25.
husbands should love their wives as Christ does his church, and that wives
should obaye their husbands as (...) church does Christ.

S. Augustine to omit other fathers De bono coniugali cop. 18
says thus of this Sacrament. In the marriage of our people [meaninge
Christianes] the holiness of the Sacrament is of more worth^ the^ the
fertility of the womb Again.

The good of marriage in all natione^ The same book cap. p. 4.
and men is in the cause of procreation and faith of chastity: but for as mu^^
as pertaynethe the people of god, it is (...) in the holiness of the Sacrament.
which places besides others manifestly show that he speakethe of a Sacrament
properly, for else these sayings were not true.

Protestant Position.
Matrimony contracted betwixt Christianes, is but a bare civil contract: and
not any Sacrament properlye.

OF THE EFFECT OF the Sacraments.
Catholic Position. 1.
THe Sacrament of Baptism as it is a Sacrament of the ^ewe law (and therefore
all the Sacraments of the new law) gives grace ex opere operato, or of the
work it self, or is the true cause of grace in those that receive it
worthily, which is to give grace ex opere operato: or of the work wrought,
and is not only a sign, or a seal of gods good will to us, or a bare means
to stir faith up in us, as the preaching of the Gospel is.

Proof. 1.
Unless man be borne again of water John cap 3. v. 5
and the spirit he cannot enter* into the kingdom of god. Lo here our
regeneration ascribed to Baptism as to a true cause.

2.
Do penance and be every one of (...) Acts cap. 2. v. 32.
baptized in the n^me of Jesus, Christ. (...) remission of your sins: Loehere
remission of sins atributed to baptism as to a true cause: as if one should
say, take medecin for your health. The like or more Acts cap. 22. v. 17.
plain is that Rise up and be baptized, and wash away thy sins inuocating
his name.

3.
Not by the works of justice which we did but according to his mercy h^
Titus cap. 3. v. ^*
has saved us by the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy ghost.
Lo here we are saved by baptism.

4.
whereunto Baptism being of the like 1. Petri: cap. 3. v. 21.
form now saves you also As Noe (says S. Augustine) with his, was delivered
by the w^t^r and the wood. So the family of Christ by baptism signed with the
p^ssion on the Cross. Lib. 12 against fausius cap. 14.


Protestants position.
Nether baptism, nor the other Sacraments of the new law give grace as
cause thereof, but are only signs of gods good will toward us, or means to
stire up faith in us.

CHARACTER.
Catholic position.
THe Sacrament of Baptism Confirmation and orders; (besides the grace which
they give) do make and leave a sign or seal in the soul of the receauer
which after S. Augustine is ordinarily called a Character.

Proof. 2. Cor. cap. 1. v. 21. 22.

And he that confirmethe us with you in Christ, and that has anointed us, god,
who also has sealed us. of S. Augustines Doctrine co^cerninge this matter M.
Fulke says thus S. Augustine does righely convince the Upon the 2. to Cor. cap.
1. Scr. 7.
Douatistes, that the Sacrament of Baptism ought not to be reiterated, because
it is the Scale or character of regeneration, which being once given, by gods
ordinance is not to be repeated; the like he says of ordination.

Protestans positions.
Nether Baptism nor any other Sacrament of the new law do leave any sign,
mark or character in the soul of the receauer.

THE 13. Controversy; Of Justification.
Catholic positions.
Justification is the translation of sinners from the state of sin unto the
state of grace, and adoptione of the Children of God: and therefore consists
not in the bare remission of sins, but in true sanctification and renouation
of spirit.

Proof. Colloss: cap. 1. v. 12. 13.

Giving thanks to god and the father who has made us worthy unto the part
of the lot of the saints in the ligtht who has delivered us from the power
of darkeness, and has translated us, into the kingdom of the son of his
love. De N^^. and oncu. lib. 1. cap. 20.


The diligent reader may see S. Augustine, alleging this place in the same
sense.

2. Gallatas cap. 4. v. 4. 5.

God sent his son made of a woman, made under the law. That he might redeem
the^ that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

3.
He has saved us by the lauer of regeneration Tit cap. 3. v. 5. 6.
and renouatio^ of the holy ghost, whom he has powered upon us abundantly by
Christ Jesus our savior.

4.
Nor thieves, nor couetouse, nor drunkards nor raylers, nor extortioners shall
1. Cor. cap. 6. v. 10. 11.
possess the kingdom of god.

And these things certes you were, but now you are washed but now you are
sanctified, but now you are justified, in the name of our lord Jesus Christ,
and in the spirit of our god.

5.
Lay you away according to the old conversation the owld man, which is
Ephesios cap. 4. v. 22. 23. 24.
corrupted according to the desires of error: And be renewed in the spirit of
your mind: and put on the new man which according to god is created in justice
and helines of truth.

Behold (says S. Augustine) Degene. ad let. lib 6. cap. 26 and 27.
what Adam lost by sin^e, in that therefore we are renewed, according to that
which Adam lost that is according to the spirit of our mind.

Spoiling our selves of the owld man Coloss. cap. 3. v. 9. 10.
with his acts: And doing on the new, him that is renewed unto knowledge
according to the image of him that created him.

This image (says S. Augustine) In the place last cited.
imprinted in the spirit of our mind Ada^ lost by sin which we receive by the
grace of justice.

Catholic position. 2.
Synn is not only covered, or not imputed by justification, but it is washed,
purged, and quite taken away.

Ezechiel cap. 36. v. 2^.
Proof. 1.
I will power out upon you clean water and you shall be cleansed from all your
contaminationes.

2. Psalm 50. v. 9.

Thou shall sprincle me with hysope and I shall be cleansed, thou shall wash me,
and I shall be made whiter then snow.

3. Psalm. 102. v.

As far as the cast is distant from the west: has he made our iniquities far
from us.

4. John. cap. 1. v. 29.

Behold the lamb of god, behold him that take the away the sin of the
world.

5. Acts. cap. 3. v. 19. 1. John cap. 1. v. 7.

Be penitent therefore and convert, that your sins may be put out.

But if we walk in the light as he also is in the light: we have society one
toward another, and the blo^de of Jesus Christ his son clensethe us from all
sin.

OF CONCVPIScence.
Caetholique position.
THat rebellion or concupiscence of the flesh which remay nethe in man after
Baptism, is not properly sin of it self, or with out the free consent of the
will.

Proof. James. cap. 1. v. 15.

Concupiscence when it has conceived bring the forth sin: therefore of it
self is it not sin. As S. Augustine plainly proves by these words Against
Iuliane. lib 6. cap. 5.
saying: when concupiscence has conceived it brings forth sin: verily in
these words, that which is brought forth, is distinguished from that which
brings forth: that which bringethe forth is co^cupisce^ce that which is
brought forth is sin: but concupisence does not bring forth unless it have
conceived, it conceaueth not unless it has allured, that is unless it has
obtained the assent of the will to do evil.

There is now therefore noe damnation to the^ that are in Christ Jesus, that
walk Romans cap 8. v. 1. Roma. cap. 7.
not according to the flesh.

S. Paul calls it sin because it his the root, cause, matter, and also the
effect of sin.

As likewise the golden calfe made by the people of Israel is Deutrono. cap.
9. v. 21.
called sin, because, it was the cause, and effect of sin.

Our savior also is called sin, because he was the Host and oblation 2. Cor.
cap. 5. v. 21
for sin.

Catholic position.
Asynner is not justified, that is, cleansed from sin, made just, holy, and the
child of god* all which are effected by justification) by the external justice
of Christ imputed unto him: but by internal grace truly received and inherent
with in him.

Proof.
1.
The holy scripture plainly testifiethe that there is a grace which Romans
cap. 8. v. 11.
is the spirit of god dwelling with in us: if the spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Jesus Christ, from the
dead, shall quicken also your mortal bodies, because of his spirit dwellinge
in you.

2.
which is the life of our spirit: Romans cap. 8. v. 9. 10.
you are not in the flesh but in the spirit, yet if the spirit of god dwell in
you. But if any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. But if
christ be in you the body in deed is dead because of sin, but the spirit
lives because of justification.

3.
which is the circumcision of Roman^^ cap. 2. v. 29.
the heart in spirit. Not that which is in open show, in the flesh, is
circumcision, but the circumcisione of the barte in spirit, not in the letter
who^e praise is not of god. The circumcision of the heart says* De Spi^it^ and
litera cap. 8.
S. Augustine, is the will, pure from all unlawful concupiscence, which is not
made by the teaching and threating letter, but by the helping and healing
spirit.

4.
which is a scripture or writing 2. Cor. cap. 3. v. 3.
made in our hearts. Being manifested that you are the epistle of Christ
ministered by us, and written not with ink, but with the spirit of the living
god: not in tables of stone but in the heart, where unto S. Augustine alluding
says. By the grace whereby we are freely justified, justice which was blotted
out by sin, is written in the interriour man renewed.

5.
which is powered out abundantly Titus. c. 3. v. 5. 6.
upon us: he has saved us by the lauer of regeneration, and renouation of the
holy ghost whom he has powered upon us abundantly by Jesus Christ, our savior.

6.
which is powered forth in our Romaues cap. 5. v. 5.
hearts: And hope confounds not because the charity of god is powered forth
in our hearts, by the holy ghost which is given to us. whereupon S. Augustine
says, the charity of god is said to be powered forth in our hearts not that
by which he loves us: but that by which he makes Despiritu and litera cap. 32.
us lovers of hi^ as the justice of god is said that whereby we are made just by
his gift.

And not to be over prolix in this point. which makes us the. 1. Cor. cap. 3.
v. 16.
temple of god. Gala. c. 6. v. 15
A new creature. 2. ^ Petri. c. 1. v. 4.
makethe us pertakers of his divine nature. Gala. 3. v. 27.
whereby we put upon us Christ. Ephe. cap. 3. v. 14.
which is a pleadg of our inheritance, and the. ^ John cap. 3. v. 9.
seed of god a^yd^ge in us, with other such like: let now the indifferent
reader judge, whether this grace whereof all these things are said is not truly
with in us: but being in our sauiou^ Christ, is but only imputed to us.

Catholic position.
It is not only faith that works in us remission of sins, and the
adoption of the children of god, or to say the same in other words, it is not
only faith that does justify us.

Proof. 1. 1. Cor. cap. 13. v. 2. Tom: 7. concio de gest^^ ^u^ Emerito ante
medium.

If I should have all faith, so that I could remove mount^ynes, and have not
charity I am nothing: where upon S* Augustine excellently says, what (...)
man would say, Prophecy is nothing? These things are not nothing: but wh^lst
I have these great things, if I have not charity I a^ nothing, these are
great things, and I have great things, and I am nothing, if I have not
charity, by which these great things do profitt me. If I have not char^t^e
these things may be in me (note these words) but they can not ^rofitt me.

2. The same. cap. v. 13.

Now there remain faith, hope, charity these three, but the greatest of
these is charity. Therefore doubtless does it save and iustifi rather then
faith.

3. James. ^. 2. v. 20.

will thou know O Vain man, that faith with out works is idle? if idle,
therefore it alone does not justify.

4. Same. ^. v. 24.

Do you see that by works a man is justified and not by faith only?

5.
For even as the body without Same ca. v. 26.
the Spirit is dead, so also faith with out wotkes is dead.

6.
In Christ Jesus nether circoncision Galatas. cap. 5. v. 6.
auaylethe ought, nor prepuce: but faith working by charity.

7.
The end of the precept is charity 1. Timo. cap. 1. v. 5.
from a pure heart, and a good conscience and a faith not feigned. The end, that
is the accomplishment and perfection of the law or commandment being
charity, certes with out it we cannot be just nor justified.

Go ye away from me you cursed into eternal fire etc. for. I was hungrye
Mathe. cap. 25. v. 41. de fide et operibus. cap. 15
and you gave me not to eat. He does not blame them says S. Augustine that
they did not beliue in him, but because they did not good works.

If thou will enter into life keep the commandments. I see not says S.
Augustine (...) De fide and operi. cap. 15
why Christ should say if thou will have life everlasting, keep the
commandments: if whith out obseruinge them, by only faith one might be saved.

Protestants positions
1. Justification is only the remission of synn with out renouation of spirit,
or interioure sanctification. 2. By justification sin is only covered, or not
imputed, and not whashed or quite taken away. 3. Concupiscence of it self. and
with out the consent of the will is properly a synn: 4. Sinners are instified
by the only imbutation of Christ his justice and not by any internal grace
or justice received, or inherent with in them. 5. It is only faith that
iustifiethe.
Catholic position.
True faith, or justice once had may be lost.

Proof. 1.
For they upon the rock: such as Luke 8. cap. 13.
when they hear, whith joy receive the word: and these have noe roots
because for a time the believe and in time of temptation they reuoult.

2.
Haueing faith, and good conscience, 1. Timo. cap. 1. v. 19.
which certain repelling, have made shipwrake about the faith.

3.
The root of all evils is conetousness: 1. Timo cap. 6 v. 10. and vc 21.
which certain desiering have erred from the faith.

4.
They went out from us: but 1. John: cap. 2. v. 19
they were not of us: not because they dissembled justice but because they
perseuered not in justice, says S. Augustine, de correp: and gratia cap. 9.

Protestants Position.
True faith, or justice, once had can never be lost.

Catholic Position.
whith out particular revelation no man in particular is so certain of his
justification or salvation, that he may not justly fear* the contrary.

Proof. 1.
Thou by faith do stand be Romans ca^. 11. v 20. 1. Cor. cap. 4. v. 4.
not to hihgly wise but fear.

2.
I am not guilty in conscience of any thing: but I am not justified herein,
but he that iudgethe me is our lord.

3.
I chastise my body, and bring it 1. Cor. cap. 9. g. v. 27.
into servitude lest perhaps when I have preached to others, my self become
reprobate.

4.
He that thinks himself to 1 Cor. cap. 10. v. 12.
stand, let him take heed lest he fall.

Man knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred but all things are
reserved uncertain for the time to come.

wherefore S. Augustine says De correptione and ^rat. cap. 13.
thus what one among the faithful, so long as he lives in this mortallitie
can presume that he is of the number of the predestinate? For it is needful
that this should be hidden here: where hautiness is so to be taken heed of,
that even so great an Apostle 2. Cor. cap. 12
was to be buffited by the Angel of satan, lest he should be puffed up.

Protestants position.
Every faithful beliuer ought to be so assured of his justification or
salvation, that he should be with out fear of the contrary.

THE 14. Controversy Of good works.
Catholic position.
GOod works done in the state of grace are meritorious of life everlasting.

Proof. 1.
Come ye blessed of my father Matthe. cap. 25 v. 34.
possess the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I
was an hungered and you gave me to eat, I was a thirst and you gave me to
drink. etc.

Come ye blessed of mi father says Upon the Psalm 49.
S. Augustine, receive, receive what? a kindome: For what? I was hungrye and
you gave me to eat: what is so cheap, what so earthly, as to give bread to
the hungrye? so much is the kingdom of heaven, worth.

2.
I have fought a good fight I 2. Timo. cap. v. 7.
have kept the faith, concerning the rest, there is laid up for me ^ crown of
justice, which our lord will render to me in that day a just judge. Upon which
words most excellently says S. Augustine, explicating both the necessity of
grace that we may merit, and the justice of reward due to merit. To whom says
he should the De gratia and libero arbitrio cap. 6.
just judge render a crown, if the merciful father had not given grace? and
how should there be a crown of justices, unless grace which does justify the
wicked had gone before?

3.
God is not unjust that he should Heb. cap 6. v. 10
forgett your works and love which you have showed in his name which have
ministered to the saints and do minister. Against Ioui. lib. 2. cap. 2.


In deed great were gods injustice, if he would only punish sins, and would
not receive good works. Says S. Hierome upon these words.

The son of man shall come in Math. cap. 16. v. 27.
the glory of his father with his Angels: and then will he render to every
man according to his works. He says not according Sermon: 35. de verbis Apost.
to his mercy: says S. Augustine: and I also add, not according to faith only.

Protestants position.
Good works done in the state of grace are not meritorious of life everlasting.

THE 15. Controversy of freewill.
NOte that I speak here of freewill only i^ such things: as appartayne to our
salvation, and not in natural, moral, or indifferent actions as in eating
walking, or saluting, others.

Catholic position.
Man through the help of gods grace which is never denied him has free will
and power both to fly such evil, and to do such good, as is necessary for
his salvation: nor is he forced or constrained to either.

Proof. 1.
He that has determined in his heart 1. Cor. c. 7. v. 37.
being settled not having necessity, but having power of his own will, and
judges this in his heart to keep his virgin does well: This place is cited by
S. Augustine for this same purpose, de gratia, and libero arbitrio cap. 2.

2.
Come ye blessed: get ye Mathe. cap. 25. v. 34 41. De actis cum Felice
maniche^ cap. 8.
away from me you cursed. It is no inco^gruitie (says S. Augustine) that god
should say, go i^to ever lasting fire, to them that by their will have
repelled his mercy: And to the other, come ye blessed of my father, that by
their free will have received faith, confessed their synn and done penance.

He has set before thee water Ecclesi. cap. 15. v. 17. 18.
and fire: to which thou will stretch out thy hand: before man is life and
death, good and evil, what pleases him shall be given him. Behold (says S.
Augustine De gract lib. arbitirio cap. 2.
having cited these words) we see the freedom of man's will most plainly
expressed, which in the beginning of that chapter he promised to show out of
holy scriptures, and therefore is it manifest that he took this book to be
holy scripture but this by the way only. He that is not satisfied with these
testimonies, let him take the pains to read S, Augustine his 2. cap. of his
book of grace and free will in the. 7. tome of his works, where haueing cited
above 20. testimonies out of the oulde and new testament to prove man's free
will, he concludethe thus: whith others of like sort to wit, where it is
said, do not this, or do not that, and where, to the doing or not doing of
any thing the act of the will is required, by gods admonition free will is
sufficiently declared.

Of the judgment of the most Centur. 2. cap. 4 collum: de libero
ancient church, (to wit of the secunde hundretho years after Christ hear
the confession of the ce^turistes, these are their words. arbitrio.
There is almost no point of doctrine which begann so soon to be obscured as
this of free will. And after. In like manner Cleme^s does every where teach
free will: that it may appear, not only all the doctors of this age (meaning
age after Christ) to have been in the same darkness, but also in the ages
following their darkness did much increase.

Protestant Position.
Man though helped by gods grace has not freewill either to fly any evil,
or to do any good auayling to his salvation, but in both is forced to do
that, which god has ordained he should do.

THE 16. Controversy of the possibility of observing gods commau^dements.
Catholic Position^ 1.
IT is not impossible for a man assisted whith gods grace to observe and keep
all gods commandments.

Proof. 1.
The judgments of our lord be true Psalm. 18. us. 10. 11. 12.
justified in them selves: to be desired above gold and much precious stone and
more sweet then the honey and the honey comb. For thy seruand keeps them, in
keeping them is much reward.

2.
They were both just before god, walking Luke. c. 1. us. 6.
in all the commandments and iustificationes of our lord whith out blame.

3.
Take up my yock upon you and learn Mathe. cap. 11. v. last. 1. John ca. 5. v.
3. Denatura and gratia. c. 69.
of me etc. for my yocke is sweet and my burden light. And in another place.
His commandments are not heavy. S. Augustine says, it being most constantly
believed, that the just and good god, could not command impossible things,
we are admonished what we ought to do in easy things, and what to ask in
hard things. For all things to charity are easy, according to which it is
said: that his commandments are not heavy.

The diligent reader may please to see what S. Augustine writes of this
point, in his book de perfectione iustitiae cap 10. to. 7. where for the
proof of this Catholic doctrine, besides other testimonies he alleges that.

This commandment that I commau^de the this day is not above the nor so far
of etc. Deutronomie. cap. 30. v. 11. and. after.

4.
Romans. c. 8. v. 4.
That the justification of the law might be fulfilled in us. who walk not
according to the flesh but according to the spirit. Lo here the law
fulfilled by those that walk not according to the flesh.

Protestants position.
It is not possible for a man though assisted whith gods grace to observe all
gods commandments.

THE 17. Controversy Of works of supererogation.
Catholic position.
A Man by the help of gods grace may do many things not commanded* but only
counseled or (which is the same) may do works of supererogatio^, which are
of more perfection then the commandments.

Proof. 1.
If thou will be perfect, go sell the Math. c. 19. v. 21. upon the 1. to the
corinth. cap. ^.
things thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven: and come and follow me. Some things (says S. Chrysostom) he
commands, some things he leaves to our own fre^ will. For he said not, sell
that thou hast^ but if thou will be prefect sell that thou have. and much more
to the same purpose has that holy father in that place.

As concerning virgins a commandment 1. cor. c. 7. v. 25.
of our lord, I have not but counsel I give, as haueing obtained mercy of our
lord to be faithful.

Because (says S. Augustine) by De S. Virginitate cap. 14.
avoiding synn or obtaining remission thereof, life everlasting is to he got, in
which there is a certain excellent glory, not to be given to all the blessed
but to some certain, for the obteyning whereof it does little avail to be free
from synn, unless something be vowed to our deliverer, which to have not willed
is no sin, but to have vowed and performed is prays worthy: therefore he says
I give counsel as haueing obtained mercy of god to be faithful.

3.
There are euneuches which have Math. c. 19. v. 12
guelded themselves, for the Kingdom of heaven, he that can take, let him
take.

Have care of him, and whatsoever Luke. c. 10. v. 35. De S. Virginitate. cap.
30.
thou shall supererogate, I will at my return repaye thee S. Augustine
alluding to these two places says, you that yet have not vowed: who can take,
take, runn, whith perseverance that you may obayne, take every one his
sacrifices, and enter into our lords court not of necessity, but having power
of yor own will, For as it is said thou shall not kill, it cannot so be said
thou shall not marry. For these things are exacted, they are proffered, if they
be done they are commended if the other be not done they are condemned: in these
things god commands a debt, in those what you shall supererogate (or
bestow more) he will render at is return. with much more to the same purpose
in the whole book where he proves virginity to be only a counsel, to be
more perfect then wedlok, and to have a greater glory in the next life.

But for the Doctrine of the ancient church in this point I need no other
witness then Mr. Caluins own confession set down in these words. This (say
lib. 4 institu. c. 13. sect. 27.
they) has from furthest memory been observed, that they which would
dedicate them selves wholly to our lord, should bind them selves with the vow
of continency. I grant indeed that this manner has also been of ancient time
received but I do not grant, that that age was so free from all fault, that
what soever was done, might be taken for a rule.

Protestants Position.
No man though assisted with gods grace can do any works of supererogation
or of counsel nether are there any councelles of more perfection then the
commandments.

THE 18. Controversy Of Preistes not Marrying.
Catholic Position.
IT is most conformable to the Doctrine of holy scriptures and practice of the
ancient church that all Preistes and other church men should vow perpetual
chastity. And lead a single life.

Proof. 1.
I would have you without carefulness 1. corint. cap. 7. v. 32.
he that is with out a wife is careful for the things that pertain to our
lord how he may please god. But he that is with a wife, is careful for the
things that pertayne to the world, how be may please his wife, and he is
divided.

2.
No man being a soldier to god inta^gl^^ 2. Timo. cap. 2. v. 4.
ethe himself with secular businesses that he may please him to whom he has
approved him self.

After the days of is office were expired he departed into his own house. It
is Luke. c. 1. v. 23.
plain hereby and else where, that the Preistes of the old law did abstain
from their wives during the time of their ofice which they exercised by turns.

If thou have aniething at hand 1. Regum. c. 21. v. 45.
yea if but five loaves give me, or what soever thou shall find, and the
priest answered David saying, I have no lay breades at hand but only holy
bread if the servants be clean especially from weomen? And David answered the
priest, and say de to him. And truly if the matter be concerni^g weomen we have
refrayned our selves from yesterdaye and the day before.

Now if such cleanesse, even ^^om the law full use of weomen was required in
lay men, to eat the hallowed bread of the owld law which was but a bare
figure of that which is offered in the new law, what cleaness may we think is
required in Preistes them selves of the new law?

For the practice of the ancient church in this point I will only allege the
2. Council of Carthage where S. Augustine was present which says thus. It
pleases concelli, cartagiu^ 2. can. 2.
all, that Bishopes, preistes, and Deacones abstain from wives. that we may
also observe that which the Apostles taught and antiquity observed.

Protestants positions
It is contrary to the doctrine of holy Scripture and practice of the ancient
primitive church, that preistes and other church men should vow chastity and
lead a single life.

THE 19. Controversy Of the church service in the learned tongues.
Catholic position.
IT is no where forbidden in holy Scripture that the public Service of gods
church should be in a tongue not vnderderstood to all the assistantes.

Proof.
No such prohibition appears in all the Scripture.

Yea the practice of the contrary is evidently gathered out of these words
According to the custo^e Luke. c..1. v. 9. 10.
of the preistlye function, he went forth by lot to offer incense entering
into the temple of the lord. And all the multitude of the people was praying
with out at the hour of the incense Lo here the people did not understand
nether the prayers nor the actions of the priest; yet never the less did they
participate of both. The same Levy cap. 10. v. 17.
is more expressly commanded in these words. Let no man be in the tabernacle
when the high priest goes in to the sanctuary to pray for him self and for
his house and for the whole assembly of Israel until he come forth. nether
does that of S. Paul if thou bless in the spirit: he that supplieth the 1.
Cor. cap. 14. v. 16.
place of the Vulgar how shall he say Amen upon thy blessing because he
knowethe not what thou say? nor any thing i^ all that chapter make any
more against the practis of the roman church in this point, then it does
against that of the Iewishe church now menrioned S. Paul speaking not of the
ordinary, public, received and established church service, (werof all the
assistantes are parttakers because it is performed by the priest a public
officer in all their behalfes, thaugh they understand not the words, nor see
the actions done by the priest) but of certai^e particular exhortationes,
hymes; Psalms, and other holy and good things uttered by particular persons,
haueing the gift of tongues: which being not understood of others, ha^ no
other fruit then the edification of the speaker, and that nether to his
instruction, for often times he understood not him self: but to an elevation of
his mind, or spirit to god, as appears by that: For if I pray with tongue,
my spirit prays, but my vndersting is with out fruit. Therefore S. paul
would that these v. 14.
exercises showld be used with much moderation, and in good order, but
forbids them not. Therefore that which he says of that matter touches
nothing, ^he public service of the church which the perpetual practice of
the same church (a sure rule to all those that desire to be gods children) does
show to be most co^uenie^tly celebrated in the learned tounges. Against which
if any will wrangle or be contentiouse we answer the^ as S. Paul 1. cor. c.
11. v. 16.
does their like in another occatione: we have no such custom, nor the church
of god.

Protestants position.
It is forbidden in holy scripture that the public service of the church
should be in a tongue not understood by all the assistants.

Haueing as thou see (judicious reader) gone through al or at least all the
cheef points of controversy of these times, and proved the^ by express
scripture: thou may understand that I have not labored to bring all the
pla^^^ (...) holy Sripture for euer^ point, which makes for the proof
thereof: for, I profess not to compile here an index, or concordance of all such
passages which prou^ the points of the Catholic religion, but have brought
those that I esteem sufficient to satisfy any indifferent understanding,
though I have not peradventure brought always the most pregnant according to
thy judgment: wherein so, far as I have failed, I humbly request the defect to
be supplied by thy diligence, and zeal, in defense of the Catholic truth;
if thou be Catholic.

Finis.

