EXEMPLARIE NOVELLS; IN SIX BOOKS.

The two Damsels. The Lady Cornelia. The liberal Lover. The force of blood.
The Spanish Lady. The jealous Husband.
FVLL OF VARIOVS ACCIDENTS BOTH DELIGHTFVLL AND PROFITABLE.

By MIGVEL DE CERVANTES SAAVEDRA;

One of the prime Wits of Spain, for his rare Fancies, and witty Inventions.

Turned into English by DON DIEGO PVEDE-SER.



LONDON, Printed by John Dawson, for R. M. and are to be sold by Laurence
Blaicklocke: at his Shop at the Sugar-loafe next Temple Bar in Fleetstreet.
1640.

TO THE WORTHY (AND VVORTHILY OF ALL WHO KNOW YOU TO BE MVCH HONORED) Mris
SUSANNA STRANGVVAYES, Wife of GYLES STRANGVVAYES Esquire, Son and Heir to
Sir JOHN STRANGVVAYES Knight.
YOung Ladies and Gentlewomen that are studious of reading good Books, (such
as your self often converse withal) when they find their eyes wax dull and
weary, put their book from them; and for their better refreshing and
diversion, change the Scene, and breathe themselves a while, till their
spirits being thereby revived, they turn to their wonted strength and vigor.
I have seen some of your Sex, (especially such as have been gentily bred)
when they have wrought hard with their Needle upon some curious Work, have
laid that aside, and taken a Lute in hand, or some other musical Instrument,
and played a Lesson or two thereon, to recreate themselves therewith, and anon
after fall to their work afresh: So natural is it to all sorts of persons
whatsoever to take delight in Variety. To harp always on one string, is harsh
to the Ear. To feed still upon one Dish, does but glut the Stomach. Your
wisest and learned Men both in Church and Commonweal, will sometimes leave
off their more serious Discourses, and entertain themselves with matters of
harmless Merriment, and Disports. Such are these Stories I present unto your
view. I will not promise any great profit you shall reap by reading them: but
I promise they will be pleasing andd elightfull; the Scene is so often varied,
the Passages so pretty, the Accidents so strange; and in the end brought to so
happy a Conclusion. Here, though one bit (as we say) will draw down another,
you shall not cloy your self. These are but a few of running banqueting
dishes: Take (as you like) here and there a little of each sort: which will but
whet your Stomach, and set an edge on your Appetite, against you come to feed
your Understanding with meats more nourishable and substantial. If you shall
but kindly accept, and take in good part (which the sweetness of your
Disposition cannot otherwise choose) this poor Pittance, you will encourage me
to invite you to a more solemn Feast, worthier your self, and him, who shall
ever love and honor your Virtues and Goodness.

Don Diego Puede-Ser,

A STORY OF TWO DAMSELS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
FIve Leagues off from the City of Sivill, there is a Town called
Castilblanco, and into one, of those many Innes which it has, about the
shutting in of the day when night was drawing on, entered a Travaylour, a
stranger to that place, mounted upon a very handsome Nag, he had no servant
attending on him, and without staying that any should hold his Stirrup, with
great nimblenes he dismounted himself. The Host of the house made all the
haste he could unto him, (who was a diligent man and careful to give his
Guests content) but for all the speed he made he came not in soon enough; in
so much that this Travaylour was already lighted from his horse, and had sat
him down upon a bench which was in the court, where falling a pace to the
unbuttoning of his doublet his arms fell presently one one way, and another
another giving a manifest sign and token of fainting, and swouning. The
Hostess who was a charitable woman, ran forth unto him, and sprinkling his
face with cold water made him come again to himself; and he making show that
it did much trouble him that they had seen him in this taking, returned to the
buttoning up of his doubtlet, entreating that they would presently bring him to
a lodging whither he might with draw himself, and that if it were possible he
might be all alone. His Hostess told him that she had no more but one empty
in all the house, and that that too had two beds in it, and that she must be
constrained if any other Guests should come thither that night, to accommodate
him in the one of those two beds* Whereunto this our Travaylour replied, that
he would pay her for both the beds, whether any guest came or not; and putting
his hand into his Pocket, and taking out a Crown in gold, he gave it unto his
Hostess, but with this condition, that she should not let any one lie in the
spare bed. His Hostess was no whit displeased with her pay, but rather
willingly offered her self to do that which he desired: yea, though the
Deane himself of Sevill should come that night to her house. Then did she
ask him, whether he would suppe or no? he told her no; only he entreated her
that there might be an especial care taken of his Nag* He called for the key
of the chamber, and carrying up with him his Portmanteau, he entered thereinto,
and shutting the door after him, he turned the key and locked it. And to make
the surer work (by that which afterward appeared) he had set two Chayers
against it. He had scarce shut himself up in his Chamber, but that mine Host
and Hostess, and the Ostler and two other of their neighbors which were there
by chance, laid their heads together (as if they had been so many grave
Counselors) and began to talk and discourse of the great beauty and
sprightfull disposition of this their new guest, all of them concluding that
they had never in all their lives seen a fayrer or more beautiful Creature.
Then fell they to the reckoning up of his age, and their resolution was, that
it was about 16. or 17. years or much thereabouts. Much prattle they had about
it, too and fro, off and on, and more particularly, what might be the cause of
that his fainting and swouning? But because that was beyond their reach, they
rested contented being rapt with admiration and wonder of his rare proportion,
and comeliness of person. The neighbors went away to their own house, the
Host to take care of the Nag, and the hostess to make ready something for
supper for such other guests as might happily come. And it was not long before
another entered, somewhat but not much elder then the former, and of no less
metal and spirit, and the hostess had even scarce seen him, when she brake
out into this exclamation; God bless me, what a strange thing is this? Are
Angels come this night to lodge in my house? Why say you so said this new come
gentleman to the hostess? Sir said she, I do^ not say that for naught; only
I say unto you, that you will be pleased to spare your self the labor of a
lighting, because I have never a bed for you; for those two which I had, a
gentleman that lodges in that Chamber there, has taken them up, and has paid
me for both, though he has need but of one, because he will have none to be
with him in his Chamber. And it seems he loves solitariness and shunneth
company, but why and wherefore I know not: for he has such a face and
disposition as ought not to be hidden, but that all the world should both see
and praise it. Is he such and so handsome (mine hostess) as you speak him to
be? (replied the gentleman) such? (quoth mine hostess) yes much more then
such, since only he is such. Thereupon the gentleman replied, though I sleep
all night on the bare floor, I am resolved to see this curious piece by you so
highly commended, and calling to his man, who came along with him, willing him
to hold his ^tirrup he allighted, and gave order to have his supper made
ready as soon as possibly they could, which was done in a trice: And whilst
he was sitting at supper, comes me in an Alquazil of the Town, (as ordinarily
they use to do in little Villages,) and sat him down by this gentleman to
converse with him, and keep him company till he had made an end of his supper,
and between whiles he did not (for all his discoursing) forbear to trill
down three good goblets of Wine, and tire upon the brains and cradle of a
Partridge which the gentleman gave him, which kindness the Alquazil thought he
had requited to the full by asking him, what news at Court? how the wars
went on in Flanders? and whether the Turk were not making great preparation for
his coming down into Christendom? not forgetting to question him touching
Transylvania, how things stood there, etc. The gentleman had by this time supt,
and was silent all the while, because he was unaquainted with those passages,
and therefore could not satisfy him in those his demands. Now likewise by this
time had mine host ended the provendring of the Nag, and came and sat
himself down to make a third in this their conversation, and to fall a
tasting of his own wine, gulping down no less then the Alquazil, and after
every cup that he took he would wry his head; and laying it on his left
shouder, and highly commending the wine, said that it carried him into the
Clouds, though he durst not stay any long time in them, least he should have
too much water in his wine. And ever and anon he fell a reiterating the praises
of his guest that had shut up himself, telling them of his swouning, and that
he would have nothing to his supper, exaggerating all things in an excessive
kind of manner. Hereunto he added what Portmanteu he had, and the goodness
of his Nag, and what a dainty riding suit; all which did require that he
should not travail thus without a man to wait upon him. All these
exaggerations did stir up a new desire in the other to have a sight of him,
and entreated his host that he would by one means or other so bring the
business about, that he might get into the chamber and lie in that other bed,
and that he would give him a Crown in Gold for his pains. And although the
greediness of gain had already wrought the effect even upon mine Hosts will,
yet he found it was not seasonable by reason that he had shut in himself,
neither durst he awaken him out of his sleep, having likewise considered with
himself, that he had paid well for both the beds; all which rubs the Alquazil
did remove, making the way very facile and easy: Telling them that which may,
and is to be done, is this, I will knock at the door, saying that I am the
Justice, and that by the command of my master the Alcalde I was willed to bring
this gentleman to lodge in this Inn, and that there being no other bed for
him, his will and pleasure was that he should have that; whereupon mine Host
must reply, aggravating the great wrong and injury that is done him, being that
he had rented the chamber and bed of him, and that there was no reason in the
world why he should not freely enjoy that which he was possessed of, and had
paid so well for it; so by this means mine host shall be blameless, and your
worship shall obtain your purpose. This plot of the Alquazil was very well
liked and approved by all of them. And the gentleman who had a longing desire
to see this rare Jewel, enclosed as it were in a case, gave the Alquazil four
Royalls in Requital of his readiness to do him this desired service.
Whereupon he presently puts his plot in execution, and in conclusion the first
guest showing great risentment, removing the chayres and unlocking the door,
opened it to the Justice: And the second guest craving pardon of the wrong
which he might conceive he had done him, went and laid him down in the leere
bed. But the other returned him not so much as one word in answer thereunto,
much less would he suffer him to see his face, for he had scarce opened the
door, but he hy'de himself with all the haste he could to his bed, and
turning his face to the wall, that he might not answer him, made as though he
were asleep: the other also betook him to his rest, hoping in the morning
when they were to get up to accomplish his desire; The nights were of those
long and large ones of December, and the coldness of the weather and the
weariness of their journey, might enforce Travailours to procure to them pass
over with sweet repose. But because the first guest knew not what ease or rest
was, anon after midnight he began to sigh so grievously, that with every sigh
he seemed to send his soul from out his body, and so deeply were they fetched
from the heart root, that though the second guest were fast asleep, he could
not choose but be wakened with the pitiful sound of the complainant. And
wondering at the sobs and throbs, wherewith he accompanied those his sighs, he
attentively set himself to listen unto that, which to his seeming he
whispered and muttered to himself. The room was dark, and the beds in a good
distance the one from the other, yet notwithstanding all this, he came to hear
amongst other his discoursings, these ensuing, which with a weak and feeble
voice were uttered by the first afflicted guest.

Ah me! of all other I most unfortunate! Whither does the unresistable force of
my destiny carry me? what course is this which I run? or what hope have I to
part out of this intricate Laberinth wherein I find my self? O my few and ill
expired years, incapable of all good consideration, and counsel. What end
will this my unknown perigrination have? O my contemned and despised honor,
how lightly have I set by thee? O my ill requited love! O how have I trodden
under foot the respects that I owed to my noble Parents and kinsfolk! And ah
me, a thousand and a thousand times that I have with so loose a reyne suffered
my self to be carried away by my desires! O ye feigned words, which did
sotruly and really obleige me, that by my works and deeds I should correspond
with you! But alas poor miserable perplexed wretch that I am, of whom do I
complain? To whom do I make my moan? Am not I the person that was so willing
to deceive my self? Am not I the party that took the knife with mine own
hands, wherewith I did cut off my credit and throw it on the ground, and
together therewith the reputation and worth of my ancient parents? O faithless
Marco Antonio, how is it possible that in those sweet words which thou
uttredst unto me, the gall should be mingled of thy discourtesies and
disdaines? O thou ungrateful where art thou? whither forgetful of me, art
thou gone? Answer me, for I speak unto thee; uphold me, for I am ready to
fall, pay me that which thou owe me; relieve me in my distress since I have
so many ways obleiged thee unto me. Having said this she was silent;
manifesting by her sighs and groans that her eyes did not cease to shower
down tears in abundance. All which this second guest lay listening unto with
a still and quiet silence; collecting by those discourses which he had heard,
that without doubt it was a woman that did thus complain and be wayle her
wretched condition; which served as a coal to kindle the more the desire he
had of knowing her; and he had often resolved with himself to go on to her
bed, being fully persuaded she was a woman. And doubtless he had done it, if
in that very instant he had not heard him rise, and opening the chamber door
call to the Host of the house to saddle his Nagge, because he would presently
be gone. To whom mine Host, after suffering himself a good while to be
called upon, made answer, that he should go sleep and take his rest, for it
was not yet midnight, or but a little paste, and that it was so exceeding dark
that it were great rashness and indiscretion to put himself upon his journey.
With this he rested quiet, and returning to shut the door, he did not lay,
but throw himself all at once down upon the bed, sending forth withal a strong
sigh. It seemed unto him that heard him not amiss to speakeunto him, and to
offer himself to procure his remedy, as far forth as on his part he was able
to perform; to the end he might obleige him thereby to discover himself, and
to recount unto him the lamentable history of his misfortune: And therefore
said unto him; Certainly (noble Sir) if the sighs which you have vented, and
the words which you have uttered had not moved me to a fellowfeeling and
condoling of that evil, whereof you complain, I should think with my self
that I wanted natural compassion, or that my soul were of stone, and my breast
of hard brass. And if this compassion which I have of you, and if the purpose
which I have put on to hazard my life for your remedy, (in case your malady
requires it) may merit any courtesy in recompense thereof, I beseech you that
you will use it with me, by declaring unto me without covering or
concealig any thing from me, the cause of your sorrovv. If my sorrovv had not
bereft me of my sense (ansvvered he that complained) I might very well have
bethought my self that I was not all alone in this lodging, and therefore
should have put a bridle to my tongue, and made a longer truce with my sighs:
But in punishment of my memories failing me, and in such a place, where it so
much imported me to have looked better unto it, I will do that which you
desire me; because by renewing the sad story of my misfortunes, it may be that
a new sense, and fresh feeling of them will make an end of me. But if you will
that I do that which you desire me, you shall promise me by that faith which
you have professed unto me in that offerture which you have made me, and that
as you are a Gentleman, and by that inbred goodness which is in you, (for by
that which your words express you, you promise much) that for the things which
you hear from me, and which I shall tell you, you move not out of your bed,
nor come unto mine, nor ask more of me, then what I shall be willing to tell
you; for if you shall do contrary thereunto, in that very instant that I hear
you stir or move, with a Sword which I have at my beds head, I will run my
self through the body. The other (who would not stick to promise a thousand
impossibilities, for to know that which he so much desired) made answer, that
he would not in any the least Title differ from that which he desired,
confirming the same with a thousand oaths. Upon this security the first guest
said unto him, I will now do that which hitherto I never did to any, to wit,
to give you an account of my life, and therefore hearken unto it.

Sir, I must give you to understand that I who entered into this lodging (as no
doubt but they have told you) in man's attire, am an unfortunate Damsel, at
least one that was so, not full eight days ago, but have now lost that noble
name by mine unadvisednesse and foolishness, and by giving credit to the well
composed, but counterfeit words of faithless men. My name is Theodosia, my
country one of the chiefest and prime places of all Andaluzia, whose name I
silence (because it does not so much import you to know it, as it does me to
conceal it) My parents are noble, and more then meanly rich, who had between
them one son and one daughter; he, for to be a staff to rest themselves on
in their old age, and an honor to their house, and she, the clean contrary.
They sent him to Salamanca to study, and me they kept at home, where they bred
me up with such wariness and circumspection as best became their virtue and
nobleness, and I without any repining or grudging was always obedient unto
them, conforming my will unto theirs without erring therefro in any least
point, till that my happiness being in the Wane, or my misfortune growing
toward the Full, a son of one of our neighbors, more rich then my parents
and no less noble then they, presented himself to mine eyes. The first time
that I saw him, I was not sensible of any thing else, save only a complacencie
and kind of pleasingnes in having seen him, neither was it much that I should
be somewhat taken therewith, because his bravery, gentle carriage, face, and
fashion were of the most, praiseworthy and best esteemed in those parts,
receiving some further addition by his rare discretion and courtesy. But what
does it avayle me to praise mine enemy, or to go, by way of discourse, in
larging his my unfortunate succes, or (to say better) the beginning of my
folly? In conclusion, I say, that he saw me not once but often from a window
that was right over against mine. From thence (as it seemed then unto me) he
sent his soul unto me by his eyes, and mine, with another kind of content then
at first, took pleasure and delight in beholding him and did even enforce me
to believe that they were pure truths which I read in his face and behavior*
His eyes, were the intercessours and procurers of speech, his speech, the
Interpreter of his desire, his desire, the inflamer of mine, and of giving
faith and belief unto his. To these he added promises, oaths, tears, sighs
and all that which to my seeming a firm and constant lover could possibly do,
for to express the integretie of his loving affection, and the steadfastness
and sincerity of his heart and mind And in me (poor soul) who had never
seen my self in the like occasions, and dangerous adventures heretofore,
every word, was a Canon shot which did batter down a part of the Forte of mine
honor; every scalding tear, was a flaming fire wherein my honesty was
scorched and burnt; every sigh, a furious wind which did in such sort augment
the flame, that it came to consume that virtue which until then had been
never touched; and lastly, having plighted his faith and truth to me to be my
husband in despite of his parents (who had provided another wife for him) I
did set all my retirednes at six and seavens, not caring which way the world
went: and, without knowing how my self, I delivered over my self into his
power (my parents being unacquainted therewith) without having any other
witness of my folly, and inconsiderate rashness, then Marco Antonio his Page,
(for this is the name of the disturber of my rest and quietude) and scarce had
he taken of me the possession of that which he so much desired, but that
within two days after he disappeared and was gone, neither his parents; nor
any other person being able to tell or imagine which way he took, or what was
become of him. In what a woeful case I was, let him speak that is able to
speak it, for I know not, nor ever knew more, save only to bewail and lament
it* I did chastise my hayres as if they had been in fault, and guilty of my
errors; I did marryrise my face, because I conceived that it had given the
occasion of all my mishap. I cursed my fate, accused my too quick
determination, I did shed many and infinite tears, I saw my self even almost
choked betwixt them and those sighs which vented themselves from forth my
grieved soul: I silently complained on heaven, I reasoned and discoursed with
mine imagination, to see if I could discover any way or part that might lead
to my remedy. And that which I found was, to put my self into man's apparel,
and in that disguised habit to absent my self from the house of my parents,
and to go seek out this second Imposter Aeneas, and this cruel and
faithless Viveno, this defrauder of my good thoughts, and of my lawful and
well grounded hopes, and so without sounding to the bottom, or diving any
deeper into my discoursings, occasion offering me a riding suite of my
Brothers, and a Nag of my Fathers, which I sadled in an exceeding dark night,
I got me packing, with purpose to go to Salamanca where (as it was afterward
told me) it was thought Marco Antonio might hap to be; for he likewise is
Student there (as before I told you) and my brothers chamber-fellow. Nor did I
omit to take good store of Crowns with me, against all chances that might
befall me in this my unthought on journey. But that which does most trouble me,
is, least that my parents should follow after me, and find me out by my
clothes, and by the Nag which I have brought along with me. But put case I did
not fear this, yet am I afraid of my brother, who is in Salamanca, by whom if
I come to be known, the peril is easy to be apprehended, whereunto my life
is put for though he may hear my excuses in my discharge, yet the least point
of his honor will weigh down the balance, and oversway all the satisfaction
that I shall be able to give him. Notwithstanding all this, my principal
determination is (though I loose my life in the pursuit) to seek out this
false hearted man my Husband, for he cannot deny himself so to be, unless he
will give the lie to those pledges which he left in my power, which are a Ring
of Diamonds, and the Poesy therein, speaking thus* Marco Antonio, is
Theoaosia's Husband If* meet with him, I will put him to the question what it
was that moved him so quickly to leave me? And in conclusion I am fully
resolved that he shall comply with his promised word and faith made unto me,
which if he refuse to do, I will kill him; shevving my self as ready to take
revenge, as I was facile in suffering him to wrong me. For that nobleness of
blood which my parents have given me, goes rovvsing up my spirits, and puts
such metal into them, that they already promise me either a remedy of my
received vvrong, or a full revenge of my offered affront. This (noble Sir is
the true and unfortunate History which you so much desired to know, which
may sufficiently plead the excuse of those sighs and words which did awake
you out of your sleep. That which I now beg and entreat of you, is, that
since you cannot give me any remedy, yet at least you will give me your best
counsel and advise, whereby I may be able to avoid those dangers which may
oppose themselves, and stand in my way, and to qualify and moderate the fear
which I have of being found out, and to facilitate the means which I am to use
for the obtaining of that, which I so much desire and stand in need of.

He who had attentively hearkened to the History of inamored Theodosia,
continued a great while without returning her so much as one word, and so long
that she thought he was asleep, and that he had heard nothing of all that
she had said. And for to certify her self of that which she suspected, she
said unto him; Sleep you Sir? Indeed it is not amiss, that you should
sleep, because the grieved and afflicted person, who recounteth his miseries
and misfortunes to him that is not sensible of them, it is meet that they
should cause in him that hears them rather sleep then pity.

I sleep not replied the Gentleman, but rather am so broad awake, and so
sensible of your disadventure, that I do not know, whether it may be said
that it grieveth me in the self same degree as it does you; and therefore the
counsel which you crave of me shall not only end in advising you, but in
helping you as far forth as my ability and strength shall enable me. But
seeing that in the manner which you have held in recounting unto me your
success, you have manifested the rare understanding wherewith you are endowed,
me thinks, that answerable thereunto, your own rendered up will should not have
so mightily misled you* so that it seems your own inclination and
willingness did more deceive you, then Marco Antonio his persuasions. Yet
notwithstanding I am content to take in excuse of your error, those your few
and tender years which for want of experience cannot come to discern the
manifold deceits of men. Gentlewoman patient your self, go, take your rest,
and sleep if you can, during this small remnant of night, and when the day
shall come on, we two will lay our heads together, and see what course is best
to be taken for to give you remedy. Theodosia in the best language she could
deliver, acknowledged her thankfulness, and settled herself to rest a while,
that she might give way to the Gentleman to sleep. But it was not possible
for him to take any rest, but he rather began to toss and tumble too and fro
in the bed, and to sigh in such sort that Theodosia was enforced to ask him,
what he ayled? And that if it were some passion whereunto she might apply any
remedy, she would do it with the same willingness as he had offered unto
her. Hereunto the gentleman answered, suppose (Gentlewoman) that you are she
which causes that disquietnesse which you have perceived in me, yet you are
not she that are able to remedy it: For could you be she I should not feel
any pain at all. Theodosia could not well understand whether those confused
reasons tended, yet notwithstanding she suspected that some amourous passion
did trouble him: And thought with her self that she was the cause, and she
might with some reason suspect and think so, since that the commodity of the
lodging, the solitude and darkness of the room, and she being now known to
be a woman, it had been no such great wonder that it should awaken and stir
up in him some evil motions. And therefore being fearful thereof, she made
her self ready in great haste, and with much silence and stillnesse, and took
to her her sword and dagger, and being thus armed sitting down upon her bed,
she continued in that posture expecting day, which within a little while after
gave tokens of his coming by that light which entered in by many chinkes and
crevices, which commonly all your lodgings in Innes are seldom without. And
what Theodosia did, the same did the Gentleman, for he no sooner saw the
lodging starrifyed with the day light peeping through those many little holes,
but he forth with rose from his bed, saying, Arise Mistress Theodosia, for I
will accompany you in this your journey, and will never let you go from my
side, until that you have Marco Antonio to be your lawful husband, or that
either he or I will loose our lives, And by this shall you know the obligation
and willingness, whereinto your misfortune has put me. And having said this,
he opened the windows and doors of the Chamber. Theodosia was well pleased
therewith, longing to see by the clearenesse of that light, what manner of man
he was with whom she had held discourse all that night. But when she had
viewed him and knew him, she then wished that it had never been day, but that
there her eyes had been closed and shut up in perpetual night. For the
Gentleman had scarce turned his eyes toward her to behold her, (for he like
wise did desire to see her) but she presently perceived, that it was her
brother of whom she was so much afraid. With whose sight she had almost lost
that of her own eyes, and remained suspensive and speechless, and without any
color in her cheeks. But drawing from fear courage, and from danger
discretion, pulling out her Dagger, she took it into her hand by the point,
and humbling her self on her knees before her brother, she spoke unto him
with a troubled and timorous voice, saying; Take this (my beloved brother) and
work on me with this sharp pointed Iron the chastisment of that folly which I
have committed, satisfying therewith thy displeasure, sithence that for so
great a crime as mine, it is not fit that any mercy should be extended toward
me. I confess my offense, acknowledge my sin, but would not that my
repentance should serve to excuse my fault. Only I beseech you that the
punishment may be such, as may take away my life, but not mine honor; for
although I have put it into manifest peril, by absenting my self from my
fathers house, yet notwithstanding it cannot escape opinion, if the
chastisement which you give shall not be secret.

Her brother looked steadily on her, and thought the looseness of her
audaciousnesse did in^ite him to revenge, yet those her so tender and
effectual words, wherewith she manifested her fault, did in such sort
mollify his bowels, and work such compassion in him, that with a pleasing
countenance and cheerful semblance, he raised her up from the ground, and
comforted her the best he either could or knew; telling her (amongst other
speeches which he used unto her) that because he could not find out a
punishment answerable to her folly, he would suspend it for the present, and
that therefore as well in respect of that, as also for that it seemed unto him,
that Fortune had not as yet wholly shut the doors against giving her remedy,
he rather made choice to procure it her by all possible means, then to take
revenge of that wrong, and affront, which by her overmuch lightness and
credulity reflected upon him. With these kind words Theodosia began to
recover her lost spirits, her color returned to her face, and her almost dead
hopes were quickened and revived. Don Rafael (for so was her brother called) was
not thence forward willing to treat any more with her touching her disaster,
knowing how harsh that note would sound in her ears, only he advised her that
she would change that her name of Theodosia into Theodoro, and that they would
both of them go forthwith to Salamanca to look out Marco Antonio, albeit he
imagined that he was not there; because being his chamber*fellow he would have
acquainted him with his going thither, though it might be that the wrong which
he had done him in his sister did not only make him conceal it, but to have
no desire at all to see him. This our new Theodoro referred her self wholly to
that which stood with her brothers pleasure. And now (for a Parenthesis) comes
in mine Host, whom they appointed, that he should make ready their breakfast,
for they would presently be gone. In the Interim that their beasts were
sadling, and breakfast come in, there entered into the Inn a Gentleman a
Travaylour, who was instantly known by Don Rafael. Theodoro likewise knew him,
but durst not come out of the lodging for fear of being seen. These two
lovingly embraced each other, and Don Rafael asked this new commer, what news
there was in those parts from whence he came. To whom he made answer, that he
came from the port of Santa Maria, where he left four Galleys that were bound
for Naples, and that in them he saw embarked Marco Antomo Adorno, the son of
Don Leonardo Adorno, with which news Don Rafael was wonderful well pleased;
conceiving, that since so without any further trouble, he came to have
knowledge of that which did so much concern him, it was a sign that the
business he had in hand would have a good end. He entreated his friend that
he would exchange his Mule with him for his fathers Nag, telling him that he
was to go to Salamanca, and was loath to carry along with him so good a Nag so
long a journey. The other who was a well bred man, and his friend was content
to exchange with him, and took it to his charge to deliver the Nag to his
father. They two brake fast together, and Theodoro alone by himself, and the
time of parting being come, they took their leave each of other, and Don
Rafaels friend took the way that led to Cazalla, where he had a goodly
Lordship, Don Rafael did not go cut with him, and that he might the better
give him the slip, he told him that he must needs return that day to Sevill.
And therefore as soon as he was gone, their beasts being brought forth, having
made their reckoning, and paid their host, saying Adieu, they rode forth of the
Inn, leaving as many as remained therein, wondering at his great beauty and
gentle carriage; who for a man had no less gracefulnes, metal and sweetness of
behavior then his sister. They were no sooner gone thence, but Don Rafael told
her the news which he had received concerning Marco Antonio, and that he
thought it fit that with all possible diligence they should make for Barcelona,
where ordinarily the Galleys which either pass into Italy or come for Spain,
stay a day or two; and in case they were not as yet come they might stay and
expect their arrival, and that there without doubt they should find Marco
Antonio. His sister said unto him that he should do what liked him best, for
her will was his Don Rafael then calling to the Muletere, whom he brought along
with him told him that he must have patience, for it stood him upon to go to
Barcelona, assuring him that he would give him good content and pay him well
for the time he should continue with him. The Muletere, who was a good fellow,
and as blithe a lad as any of his function, and one who knew that Don Rafael
was a liberal gentleman, made answer that he would go with him to the end of
the world, and do him the best service he could. Hereupon Don Rafael demanded
of his sister what moneys she had brought along with her? she replied that she
had not told them, and that she knew no more concerning them, save that they
had put her hand into her fathers Cabinet seven or eight times, and took it
out full of Pistolets, and according to that quantity, Don Rafael imagined that
it might be a matter of some 500* Crowns, which with other two hunded which
he had, and a chain of Gold which he wore about his neck, he thought him
self very well provided: And the better, for that he verily persuaded himself
that he should meet with Marco Antonio in Barcelona; with this persuasion they
slacked no time, they made all the haste they could, without loosing one days
journey, and so without any let or impediment befalling them, they came within
two leagues of town, which is nine from Barcelona, named Yqualada. They had
notice upon the way, how that a gentleman of quality, who was to go Ambassador
to Rome, stayed in Barcelona expecting the Galleys which were not as yet come
thither; news which liked him well, and gave him much content with this good
tidings, they jogged merrily on, till they were upon entering into a little wood,
out of which they saw a man come running, and looking behind him, as one that
had bin shrewly affrighted. Don Rafael put himself before him, saying unto
him, my honest friend, why do thou fly away so fast? or what is it has
befallen thee, that with manifestation of such great fear, has put wings to
thy feet, and made thee make so much have; will you not that I run with
haste (answered this affrighted man) since that I have miraculously escaped
from a company of out-lawes, and highway robbers, that keep this wood to pray
upon passengers? This is not well (said the Muletere) it is not well I tell
you; robbers at this time of day? we are like to smart for it, they will make
novices of us. Brother be not dismayed, do not vex or grieve your self at it,
for they have done their business* and are gone by this time, having left
bound to the Trees of this wood above 30. passengers, stripping them even to
their very shirts. Only they left one man at liberty, that he might unbind
the rest, after that they had recovered a little mountain, from whence they
would give him a signal to set them free. If this be so (said Calvete) for so
was the Muletere called, we may safely pass, because that place where these
robbers make their pray, do not for a pretty whiles after return thither
again. And this I am able to assure you of, as one that has fallen twice into
their hands, and am well acquainted with their tricks and fashions; it is true
that he tells you, said the man. Which being heard by Don Rafael, he resolved
to pass forward, and they had not gone far, when lo they lighted on those
that were bound, being above 40* persons, whom he that they had left loose,
fell to unbinding of them as fast as he could; it was a strange spectacle, to
see some stark naked, others clad with the robbers tattered rags; some weeping
to see themselves robbed and stripped of all that they had, others laughing to see
the strange forms and fashions of their fellows, and how odly they looked
when their feathers were plucked from them, and outed of their gay clothes.
This man reckoned up to a farthing what they had taken from him; that other,
that a Box with an Agnus Dei in it, which he brought from Rome did more grieve
and trouble him then all the rest of the things, though of great value, which
they took from him. In conclusion, all that passed there were nothing else but
tears, and the loud lamentations of those miserable dispoyled passengers. All
which not without a great deal of sorrow, the two brothers beheld, rendering
thanks to heaven that it had freed them from so great and imminent a danger.
But that which has wrought more upon their compassion, and stirred up most
pity in them, especially in Theodoro, was to see fast bound to the trunk of
an oak, a young youth of the age (to seeming) of 16. years, with a shirt
only to his back, and a pair of linen breeches, but of so fair and
beautiful a countenance, that he moved and enforced all that beheld him to
take pity of him. Theodoro alighted to unbinde him, and he returned very
courteousand thankful language for the received benefit. And to make it the
greater, he entreated Calvete their Mu^tere to lend him his cloak, till that
they should (which they would do the first town they came at) buy another for
this pretty gentile youth. Calvete gave it him, and Theodoro covered therewith
the youth, asking him whence he was, whence he came and whither he would. At
all this Don Rafael was present, and the youth answered, that he was of
Andaluzia, and of such a place, which in naming of it, made them to know it was
but two leagues distant from their own habitation; he told them that he came
from Sevill, and that his design was to go for Italy, to try his fortune in
the exercise of Arms, and to be trained up in the school of honor, as many
other Spaniards daily used to do. But that his chance was unfortunate by that
his ill encounter, with those Out-lawes and Robbers, who took a good quantity
of money from him and such clothes that he could not buy the like for 300.
Crowns, yet notwithstanding all this, he was resolved to prosecute his course
because he came of such a race, that the first evil success that befell him,
should not cool the heat of his fervent desire. The good discourse and
language of the youth, together with their having heard that he was so near a
neighbor unto them, and more especially for that Letter of recommendation
which was writ in his forehead, wrought a loving affection in both the brothers
to favor him in all they were able. And so sharing amongst those which to
their seeming had most need, some moneys; more particularly amongst the Friars
and Churchmen, which were to the number of eight. They made the youth to get up
upon Calvetes Mule, and without further stay, in short space they arrived at
Yqualada, where they came to learn that the Galleyes had put into Barcelona
the day before, and that within those two days they were to be gone, if foul
weather did not hinder them. This news made them to rise early in the morning
before the Sun was up, though all that night they slept but broken sleep;
The occasion of this sudden passion and inquietude in the two brothers, grew
upon this occasion; they sitting at board, and with the youth whom they had
unbound, Theodoro fixed his eyes very wishly on his face, and beholding
somewhat curiously with a prying look, he perceived that he had holes boared
through the tippes of his ears, and as well by this, and by that maiden blush,
and modest countenance which he showed, his mind gave him that she must
needs be a woman and sat upon thorns all supper time, wishing that it were
ended, that taking him aside he might the better certify himself of this his
suspicion And whilst they were at supper, Don Rafael demanded of him whose
son he was, because he knew all the principal persons thereabouts, and if
he had named the place aright, he could not choose but know his condition and
quality. Whereunto the youth answered, that he was the son of Don Henrique
de Cardenas, a Gentleman well known to all; hereunto Don Rafael replied, that
he very well knew Don Henrique de Cardenas, but withal knew and was well
assured of it, that he had no son at all, but conceived that he told him so,
because he was loath to discover his parents; and because it did not import
him to know whether it were so or no, he would not press that point any
further, nor had any purpose to question him any more of it, it is true
(answered the youth) that Don Henrique has no sons, but a brother of his
called, Don Sancho. Nay (quoth Don Rafael) that is not so, he has no sons
neither, but one only daughter, and it is said of her, that she is the
fairest Damsel that is in all Andaluzia; but this I know no otherwise then by
the fames and general report that goes of her. For though I have been often
there where she lives, yet it was never my good hap to see her. All that you
say (Sir) is true, (replied the youth) for Don Sancho indeed has no more but
one daughter, but not so fair as fame reports her. And if I told you that I
was son to Don Henrique, I spoke it (Gentlemen) only to this end, that you
might hold me in the better esteem, but ingeniously to confess the truth, I
am not the son of Don Henrique, but of the Steward to Don Sancho, who has
served him these many years, and I was borne in his house, and upon a certain
distaste which I had given my father, having taken good store of money with
me, I was willing as I told you to make for Italy, and to follow the wars, by
which course I have seen many of mean birth and obscure parents come to be
noble, and rise to the highest places of honor and command. All these reasons,
and the manner of delivering them. Theodoro attentively noted, and still went
more and more confirming the suspicion he had entertained. Now by this time
supper was ended, and all taken away, and while Don Rafael was making himself
unready, Theodoro having told him the conceived suspicion he had of the youth,
with his good leave and liking he took the youth aside to a broad bay window,
which looked out toward the street, and they two standing both close breast to
breast, Theodoro began to break the Ice, and to speak to the youth in this
ensuing manner.

I could wish ( Sennor Francisco) for so did he style himself) that it had
been in my power to have done you so many good offices, that they might have
obliged you, not to deny me any thing whatsoever, that I either could or would
ask of you, but that little time which has brought you to my knowledge has
not given way thereunto, it may be that in that which is to come, you shall
come to know that which my desire deserves from you. And if to that which I
now have at this present, you shall not be pleased to give satisfaction; yet
for all this shall I not cease to be your servant, as I now profes my self
truly to be. And before that I discover my conception unto you, I would have
you to know, that although my years be as few as yours, yet have I had more
experience of the things of this world, then they promise. And thereby have I
come to suspect, that you are not a man as your habit shows you to be, but a
woman, and likewise so borne as your beauty publishes you to be, and
peradventure so unfortunate as this changing of your apparel presents it to
our understanding, since that such kind of disguizing as these are never good
for the party that put them on; if that which I suspect be true, deal plainly
with me, for I swear and vow unto you by the faith of a gentleman, that I
will assist and serve you in all that I am able. Now, that you are not a woman,
you cannot possibly deny it, for by those windows in your ears, the truth is
clearly to be seen, and I must tell you, you have been a little too
negligent and careless in the shutting and stopping of these holes, with some
wax of the same color with your ear, which might so artificially have been
done, that another so curious as my self though not so honest, should hardly
have discerned that which you have not so well known to cover. I tell you
therefore that you need not be scrupulous, or cast any doubts in declaring
unto me who you are, for I offer you my assistance and service, and assure you
that I will be as secret as you your self would have me to be.

With great attention did this ^youth stand, harkening to that which Theodoro
said unto him; and continuing a while silent before that she made him any
answer, she took hold on both his hands, and bringing them up to his mouth, by
plain force he kissed them, and likewise bathed them with great store of
tears, which trickled down his fair eyes, which strange sorrow caused the
like in Theodoro, in so much that she could not forbear to accompany him in
them, it being the proper and natural condition of women of quality to grow
tender and sensible of other folks griefs and afflictions. But after that
with some difficulty he had withdrawn her hand from the youths mouth, he
stood very attentive to see what answer he would give him; who sending forth a
grievous groan, accompanied with many sighs said, Sir, I neither will, nor
can deny that your suspicion has not been true, I am a woman, and of all
women the most unfortunate, that ever was brought forth into the world* And
since that the good deeds which you have done me, and the fair offers which
you have made me, oblige me to obey you in all that you shall command me;
listen now unto me, for I shall now tell you who I am, if it may not be
troublesome and tedious unto you, to hear another misfortunes. Let me live
for ever in them, (replied Theodoro) if I shall not take as great pleasure in
knowing them, as I shall the pain they will give me, in that they are yours.
For I already begin to be a sensible of them as if they were mine own. And so
returning to embrace him, and to make him new and true offers, the youth being
somewhat better quieted, began to speak in this wise.

Touching my country I told you the truth, but touching my parents, not. For
Don Henrique is not my father, but mine uncle, but his brother Don Sancho is.
And I am that unfortunate daughter which Don Sancho has; who for her beauty
(as your brother says) is so much praised and commended, the falsehood whereof
is easily to be seen in that little or none at all that I have. My name is
Leocadia; the occasion of changing my attire, I shall now deliver unto you. Two
leagues from that place where I lived, there is another, one of the richest and
noblest in all Andaluzia, where in there lives a principal gentleman, who
fetches his pedigree from the noble and ancient Adorno of Genoa. This
gentleman has a son, who (if fame do not overlash herself in his praises,
(as she has done in mine) is in the rank of those Gentlemen, which diserve
no mean commendation, being every way as complete as can be wished or desired
in one of his quality. This Gentleman then, as well for the vicinitie of both
these places, as also that he was well affectioned to the exercise and sport
of hunting, as my father likewise was, came now and then to our house, and
stayed there five or six days together. All which days, yea and even part also
of the nights he and my father passed abroad in the fields From this occasion
either Fortune or Love or my little heedfulnesse, took that which was
sufficient to throw me down headlong from the height of my good thoughts, to
the bottom of that low estate and condition wherein I now am. For having
beheld some what more then was lawful for a wary and discreet Damsel, the
gentilenesse and discretion of Marco Antonio, and having considered the
quality of his Lineage, and the great store of goods, bearing the name of those
of Fortune) which his father had, it seemed unto me, that if I could get him to
be my husband, it was all the happiness that could come within the compass of
my desire. With this thought I began to eye him with more care, when as indeed
it ought to have bin done with more carelessness, since that he thereby came to
take notice of my love by my looks. Nor did this Traitor either desire or
need any other entrance for to enter himself into the secret of my bosom,
and to rob me of the best pledges of my soul. But I know not (Sir) to what
purpose I should put my self to recount unto you point by point those lesser
matters in the prosecution of our love, because they make little to the
substance of that business I am to treat of, but to tell you at once, that,
which he with so many solicitations obtained of me, which was that having given
me his faith and word, under great and (to my seeming firm and Christian
oaths) to be my husband, I offered my self unto him to do whatsoever he would
with me. But yet for all this, being not well satisfied with his oaths, and
words, to the end that the wind might not carry them away, I wrought with him
that he should write them down in a Schedule firmed with his name,
strengthened with so many circumstances, that there with I rested satisfied.
Having received this Schedule and note under his hand, I plotted and divised
how that on such a night, he should come from his own house to mine, and enter
by clambring over the garden wall, into my lodging, where without any
disturbance he might reap that friuit, which for him only was reserved and
destinated, at last came that night which by me was so much desired.

Till she came to this point, Theodoro had the patience to continue silent,
having her soul hanging on the words of Leocaaia, which with every one of them
as with so many swords did pass through her very soul* especially, when she
heard the name of Marco Antonio, and saw the rare beauty of Leocadia, and
considered the greatness of her worth, interwoven with that her singular
discretion, which she had well manifestd in the manner of recounting this her
story. But when she came to say; at last came that night which by me was so
much desired, she was ready to loose the stirrops of her patience, and not
being able to hold and contain herself any longer, she brake out interrupting
her discourse, into these ensuing words. Very well* and when this most happy
and desired night was come, what did he then? Had* he the good hap to enter?
Did he enjoy you? did he a new confirm the Schedule? Did he rest well pleased
in having gotten that of you which you say was only his? did your father know of
it? or in what ended these honest and wise beginnings.

They did end (replied Leocadia) in putting me into this case wherein you now
see me, for I did neither enjoy him, nor he me, nor came to any certain
conclusion and final agreement.

With these words Theodosia began to recover a little breath, and gathered up
again those her spirits unto her, which by little and little went leaving her
vital parts, incited and egged on by that raging pestilence of jealousy,
which spreading and defusing it self, went entering her very bones and marrow,
for to take entire possession of her patience. But for all this did not free
her so fully therefro, but that with some qualmes and heart-passions, she
returned to hearken again unto that which Leocadia prosecuted, saying; he did
not only not come unto me, but some eight days after I was certainly informed
that he had absented himself from his own home, and carried away with him*
stealing her out of her fathers house, a Damsel of the same place where he
lived, the daughter of a noble Gentleman, named Theodosia, a Damsel of
extraordinary beauty, and rare discretion. And for that she was descended of
such noble Parents, this stealth was spead abroad in our Town, and presently
brought to my ears, and with it that cold and fearful Lance of jealousy
which pierced my heart, and did set my soul on such a flaming fire, that
thereby my honor was turned into ashes, my credit consumed, my patience
parched, and my wisdom wasted to nothing Ah me, most unfortunate! for I then
presently began to figure in my imagination Theodosia to be fayrer then the
Sun, and more discreet then discretion it self, and above all, far more
happy then I miserable. I read over and over the words of the Schedule again
and again, I looked on the signing and confirming of our marriage by assurance,
having set down his name thereunto in writing with his own hand, and that
they could not possibly fail in that faith which they published: and although
unto them, as to a Sanctuary, my hopes fled for shelter* but when I fell into
the reckoning of that justly to be suspected company which Marco Antonio carried
along with him, my cake was dow, and all those my hopes fell to the ground* I
did ill entreat my face, I did tear my hayres and cursed my misfortune. And
that which did most of all grieve me was that I could not offer up these
sacrifices by reason of the enforced presence of my father. In conclusion that
I might make an end of my wayling, and mourn to the full without any let or
hinderance to stop the current of my sorrows, I resolved with my self to leave
my fathers house; and for to put in execution an evil thought, it seems that
opportunity is never wanting, and that occasion does facilitate, and remove out
of the way all inconveniences, without fearing any thing that might befall me,
I stole from one of my fathers Pages a suite of clothes, and from my father
good store of coin; and in a night that had put on his black cloak, I left
the house, and walked some League a foot, till I came to a Town called Osuna.
And accommodating my self there with a Wagon, from thence, within two days
after I arrived in Sevill, which was an entering into the securest place that
possibly could be for not being found out, though they should seek after me.
There I bought me other clothes, and a Mule, and with certain Gentlemen that
were speedily to go to Barcelona, that they might not loose the opportunity
of the Galleyes, which were to go for Italy, I travailed till yesterday a long
with them, when that befell me which you know already, falling into the hand
of Out-lawes* and Robbers, who took all that I had from me, and amongst other
things, that Jewel which did keep me alive, preserve my health, and lighten
the burden of my afflictions, to wit, the Schedule I had from Marco Antonio,
thinking therewith to pass into Italy, and finding Marco Antonio to present
the same unto him, as a witness of his small faith, and a testimony of my
great constancy, and to work so with him that he should perform and make
good his promise unto me. But together with this, I have weighed and
considered with my self that he will easily deny the words that are written
in a piece of paper, who denies those obligations, which ought to be engraven
in the soul. Besides it is clear and apparent, that if he has in his company
the unparalled Theodosia, he will not vouchsafe to look upon wretched
Leocadia. Howbeit notwithstanding all this, I am resolved either to dye or to
put my self in the presence of them both, that my sight may disturb their
quiet. And let not that enemy to my rest think that she shall enjoy at so
cheap a rate that which is mine. I will seek after her, I will find her out,
and I will if I can, take away her life.

But what fault can you find with Theodosia (said Theodoro) or wherein is she
to be blamed, if happily she were likewise deceived by Marco Antonio, as well
as you (Lady Leocadia) have been? It may be so (replied Leocadia:) But if he
has taken her along with him, and they who love each other so well, living
together, what deceit can there be in this? Certainly none at all; they live
contented since they live together. But I could wish (as we usually say) that
they were in the remote and scorching deserts of Libia, or the furthermost part
of frozen S^ithia; she questionless injoyes him, be it where ever it be, and
she only shall pay the cost of my sorrows, if it be my good hap to meet
with her; it may be (said Theodoro) that you are much mistaken, and your
jealousy has misguided you, and blinded the eyes of your understanding. For,
I know her very well, whom you call your enemy, and I am so privy to her
condition, and retiredness, that she will never adventure to foregoe her
fathers house, nor to yield unto the will of Marco Antonio. But admit she
should, yet she neither knowing you, nor witting any thing of that which has
passed betwixt him and you, she has not done you any wrong at all, and where
there is no wrong offered, no revenge ought to be taken. Of her retiredness
(said Leocadia) you may say what you list for any great reckoning that I make
of it. For I am sure that I was as retired and as honest as any Damsel in the
world, and yet notwithstanding he got within me, and did as you have heard. Now
that he carried her away with him, it is not to be doubted* And whereas you
urge that she did not do me any wrong, should I look thereon without
passion, I must confess she did not, but the pain whereunto my jealousy
puts me, does represent both her and it to my remembrance, and I shall hardly
ever get it out of my memory. This is that sword which is sheathed in my
bowels, and if I be not to be blamed, that as an instrument which gives me so
much pain and torment, I labor and endeavor to pluk out the weapon that
wounds me, and to break it in pieces, how much more prudence and wisdom is
it, to put those things far from us, which do us hurt, since that it is
natural unto us to hate and abhor those things which work our harm, and to
remove those from us that hinder our good. Since you will have it so, be it as
you say Lady Leocadia, answered Theodosia. For I perceive that the passion
which at this present possesses you, will not permit you to judge of things
aright; nor are you for ought I see in case at this time to receive any
wholesome counsel. For mine own part I shall say that which I have already
said unto you, that I will be ready to favor and further you as far forth
as I am able, in all that shall be just and meet. And I promise you the like
from my brother, for his natural condition and nobleness, will not suffer him
to do otherwise. Our course is shaped for Italy, if you please to go along
with us you may guess at your usage by that little (though kind
entertainment) which you have found in our company. Only I shall request one
thing at your hands, which is; That you will give me leave, that I may
acquaint my brother with this your business, that he may carry himself with
that manerlinesse and respect toward you as is due unto you, and that he may
be thereby obliged to have a care of you, as it is meet he should. Besides, I
would not have you to change that habit you now wear, for I hold it (as the
case now stands) neither fitting nor safe for you. And if in this Town we can
get any good clothes, to morrow morning I will buy you the best that are to be
had for money, and which shall be most convenient for you, and as for the rest
of your pretensions leave the care thereof unto time, which is a great master
for the giving and finding out of remedies in cases that ^e most desperate.
Leocadia thanked Theodosia, whom she^ took to be Theodoro, and most kindly
accepted of these her many courteous offers, and gave her leave to acq^ her
brother with what she thought fit, beseeching her, that she would take her into
her protection, since that she^ saw to what dangers she was exposed if she
should be known to be a woman. With this they took leave each of other and
repaired to their several lodgings to take their rest. Theodosia to that of
her brother, and Leocadia to another that adjoined thereunto. Don Rafael was
not as yet fallen asleep, expecting the coming of his sister, that he might
know what passed with him, whom she thought to be a woman. And she entering
before that he had ^etled himself to take his rest, he demanded of her
whether it were so or no? Who point by point, recounted all that Leocadia had
said unto her. As, whose daughter she was, her being in love, the Schedule of
Marco Antonio, and her intended purpose. Don Rafael wondered at it, and said
unto his sister* if she be the same she speaks herself to be, I must tell
you (sister) she is of that place wherein she lives the most principal, and
one of the noblest gentlewomen in all Audaluzia. Her father is very well known
to ours, and that report which has gone of her beauty, does answer very well
unto that which we now see in her countenance, and my opinion in this
particular is; that we must be very wary and circumspect, that she do not get
the starte of us, and speak first with Marco Antonio. For that Schedule which
she says he made, though we should suppose it to be lost, yet will it behoove
us to look about us, and will (I fear me) cost us some care. But be of good
cheer (sister) get you to bed and take your rest, for we shall seek out a
remedy to prevent this mischief, and to mee^e with all inconveniences that
shall occur. Theodosia did that which her brother commanded her concerning
her going to bed* but in that of taking her rest, that lay not in her hand to
do it; for that raging plague of jealousy had taken possession of her soul.
O how much greater then it was in it self represented it se ^e unto her
imagination, the beauty of Leocadia, and the disloyatie of Marco Antonio! Oh!
how often did she read, or ^eigned to read the Schedule which he had given
her! Oh! what reasons and words did she add thereunto to make it the more
effectual and authentical! How often would she not believe that she had
lost it! And how often imagine that without it, Marco Antonio would not fail
to comply with his promise, without so much as once thinking on that, which he
had made unto her, and the obligation wherein he stood bound unto her* In these
and the like passages passed the greater part of that night, without sleeping
one wink. And as little rest took her brother Don Rafael. For as soon as he
heard tell who Leocadia was, his heart was as hotly inflamed with love as if he
had long before for the same end held communication and conversation with her.
For such force has beauty that in an instant, in a moment of time it carries
after it the desire of him that beholds and knows it, and when he does
discover or promise to himself some means how to obtain and enjoy it, the
soul of him that contemplates it, is set on fire with a powerful vehemency,
just after the same manner and easiness as dry and well conditioned powder
quickly takes fire with the least spark that touches it. He did now no more
imagine her to be ^yed and bound to a tree, no^ clad with the tattred clothes
of a man, but in her woman's apparel, and in the house of her rich parents, and
of that principal rank and quality as they were. He did not neither was
willing to detain his thoughts in a cause of that consequence, as this of
bringing her to his knowledge, and therefore desired that day were come that he
might prosecute his journey, and find out Marco Antonio, not so much for to
make him his brother in law, as for to divert him from marrying of Leocadia.
And now love and jealousy had taken such strong hold on him, that he would
have h^ld it for a good opinion rather to see his sister without that remedy,
which he promised to procure for her, and Marco Antonio without life, and
fairly buried, then to see himself hopeless of obtaining Leocadia. Which
hopes went on, promising him a happy success in his desire, either by the way
of force or by fair means, since that for the effecting of his purpose, time
and occasion offered themselves for either: With this which he promised to
himself, he was somewhat quieted, and within a little while after the day began
to appear, and then they began to leave their beds And Don Rafael calling for
the host of the house, demanded of him whether that their town would afford a
suit of clothes for a Page who had bin stipt naked by out-lawes and robbers?
Mine host replied, that he himself had a reasonable handsome suite to ^ell*
He brought it, and it fitted Leocadia as well as if it had been made for her.
Don Rafael paid him for it, and she did put it on, and girded her sword and
dagger unto her with such a grace and spirit, that in that very ga^e and habit
of hers* she did suspend the senses of Don Rafael, and multiply jealousies in
Theodosia. Calvete had sadled his Mules and about eight in the morning they
departed from their Inn, and set onward on their journey for Barcelona,
omitting for the present to visit the famous Monastery of Mon^errat* I want
words to express to the life the thoughts which the two brothers entertained
and with what different minds both of them went looking on Leocadia; Theodosia
desiring her death, and Don Rafael, her life, both of them being jealous and
passionate. Theodosia seeking to find out some faults in her that she might
not despair of her hopes; And Don Rafael finding out perfections in her, that
did the more obliege him to love her; yet for all this they were not careless
in making all the have they could, so that they came to Barcelona before
Sunset. They did wonder at the beautiful situation of that City, and held it
to be the flower of the fairest Cities of the world, the honor of Spain, the
terror of their bordering and remote enemies, the pleasure and delight of its
inhabitants, the Protectresse of strangers, the school of Chevalry, the
pattern of loyalty, and the satisfaction of all that which a discreet and
curious desire can expect or wish from a great, famous, rich and well founded
City. In their entering thereinto they heard an exceeding great noise and
clamor, and they might see a great company of people run in a tumultuous
kind of manner; and asking the cause of that noise and hurrey, they made them
answer, that they of the Galleys that were at the sea side, were together by
the ears with those of the City. Which Don Rafael hearing, would needs go
see what passed amongst them, though Calvete told him that he should by no
means do it; for there was no wisdom or discretion in so doing, and that
thereby he would put himself into manifest peril, for he knew well enough
by experience how ill they came off, who did thrust themselves into such kind
of differences, and confused garboyles, which were ordinary in that City, when
the Galleys came thither: but this good counsel of Calvete could not prevail
so far forth with Don Rafael as to hinder his going, and so they all followed
him. And in coming to the Sea shore they might see many swords drawn, and
many people slashing each other without any pity or mercy. Notwithstanding all
this, without alighting they came so near unto them, that they might
distinctly see the faces of those that fought, for the Sun was not as yet
down. Infinite was the people which came from the City, and great likewise
the number which disimbarked themselves from the galleys; howbeit he that had
the charge of the galleys, who was a knight of Valencia, called Don Pedro
Vique, from the Poope of the Captain galley threatened those who had embarked
themselves in the Cockboate to go and relieve their fellows; but seeing his
persuasions nor nings could prevayle with them, he caused the prowe of the
Galleys to be turned toward the City, and a piece of Ordnance to be
discharged without a bullet, being a signal unto them, that if they did not
depart and get them gone the next should not be shot off without it. Don Rafael
was very attentive in beholding this cruel brangling and scuffling amongst
them, and had noted and observed that amongst other brave fellows that took
part with the Galleys, there was a young man that laid about him lustily, being
about the age of two and twenty, little more or less, clad in green, with a
hat of the same color, adorned with a rich Hatband of Diamonds, the
nimblenesse and dextrousnesse wherewith this young gallant fought, and the
bravery of his clothes caused all those that beheld the fight to turn their
eyes toward him, and in such steadfast manner those of Theodosia, and
Leocadia, that both of them at one and the same instant cried out, God bless
me, either I have no eyes, or he in the green is Marco Antonio. And no sooner
had they said this, but with great nimblenesse they dismounted from their
Mules, and drawing out their swords and daggers without any fear in the world,
they made way through the midst of all the company, and placed themselves one
on the one side, and the other on the other of Marco Antonio, (for he was that
young man in green we formerly spoke of.) Fear you nothing, Marco Antonio,
(so said Leocadia, as soon as she came in unto him) for you have one at your
side, who with the loss of his own life, will be a shield for to save yours*
who doubts it (replied Theodosia) I being here? Don Rafael, who saw and heard,
what had passed, he likewise followed them, and took part with him. Marco
Antonio being busied in offending others, and defending himself, did not take
any notice of those words these two then said, but rather being very hot and
earnest in fight, did things (to seeming) beyond belief. But in regard that
the multitude of people came continually flocking from the City, they of the
Galleyes were enforced to retreat, wading through the water to get into their
Boats; Marco Antonio retired likewise though sore against his will; And
(sailing by the same compass) went retiring on either side of him those two
valiant and new Bradamante, and Marfisa, or Hippolita and Penthesilea. Now
while they were in this hurly burly came thither a Knight of Catalunia, of the
famous family of the Cardonas upon a strong sturdy steed, and putting himself
in the midst of either party, he made those of the City to retire; such was
the respect, which they bare unto him. But some that were further off threw
stones at those which were making to the water, and as ill luck would have it,
one hit Marco Antonio full on the bosom, with such force and fury, that he
fell there with in the water being already up therein to the knees. But
Leocadia had scarce seen him fall, but she presently took hold of him and
upheld him in her arms, and the like did Theodosia. Don Rafael was a little
further off from them, defending himfelfe from those showers of stones, which
rayned down about his ears. And being desirous to approach to his souls
remedy, and to hasten to the helping and relieving of his sister and brother in
Law, this Catalunian Knight puts himself before him, and said unto him; Sir, I
command you to be quiet by that duty which you owe to the profession of a good
soldier, and do me the favor to go along with me by my side, and I will
free you from the insolency and excess of this unruly route. Good Sir
(answered Don Rafael) I beseech you suffer me to pass on, for I see those
things in great danger, which in this life I love most. The Knight permitted
him to pass, but he came somewhat to late, for the boat belonging to the
Captain Gally had before he came taken in Marco Antonio, and Leocadia, who
would never let him go out of her arms; And Theodosia desiring to imbarke her
self with them, whether it were that she were weary, or whether she were
overcome with grief to see Marco Antonio wounded, or whether enraged with
jealousy to see her great enemy to go along with him, she had neither power
nor strength for to get into the boat, and doubtless had fallen down in a
swoune into the water if her brother had not come in time to succor her; who
felt no less pain and torment then his sister had felt, in seeing that
Leocadia went away with Marco Antonio (for he likewise had taken notice of him,
and knew him to be Marco Antonio.) The Catalunian Knight, being much affected
and taken with the gentle presence of Don Rafael, and his brother (whom he
took to be a man) called unto them from the Sea shore, entreating them that
they would go along with him, and they being enforced by necessity, and being
afraid least the people, which were not pacified, might do them some wrong,
they were willing to accept of the friendly offer he had made them. The Knight
lighted off from his horse and taking them by his side, he passed with his
naked sword through the midst of that tumultuous route, entreating them to
retire and so they did. Don Rafael looked round about on every side to see
whether he could espy Calvete with their Mules but could not, for as soon as
they had alighted he took hold on the Mules, and driving them before him went
unto an Inn, where he had often heretofore lodged. The Knight came home to his
own house, which was one of the chiefest in all the City, and demanding of
Don Rafael in which of the Galleys he came, made answer, in none of them: But
that he was newly come into the City in that very instant that this difference
began, and for that he knew in that conflict the Gentleman whom they carried
away hurt with a stone into the boat, he had put himself into that peril,
and did therefore earnestly entreat him that he would be pleased to give order
for the bringing of him on shore that was wounded, for thereon depended both
his contentment and life. This shall I do with a very good will (replied the
Knight) and I know the that General will not deny me this courtesy, but
securely trust me with him: for he is a Gentleman of good rank and quality,
and my near kinsman. And without further delaying the business, he returned
back to the Gally where he found them very busy in curing Marco Antonio, and
the wound he had received was very dangerous, because it was on the left side
near the heart, and for that the Surgeon said it was dangerous, he
prevayled so far forth with the General, that he gave him leave to take him
along with him to cure him on land, and so putting him with great care and
tenderness into the boat, they brought him thence, Leocadia as one that was
loath to leave him, imbarking herself with him, and following him, as the
North-starre of her hope. Being now landed on the shore, the Knight caused a
hand-chaire to be brought from his house, wherein to carry him with the more
ease. In the interim whilst this was in doing, Don Rafael had sent to seek out
( alvete who was safe in his Inn, though very sad, and with a great deal of
care, to know what was become of his Masters, and when he knew that they were
well, he was exceeding glad, and came thither where Don Rafael was. Anon after
came the Master of the house, Marco Antonio, and Leocadia, who all lodged
therein, and were entertained with much love, and magnificence. And there was
present order taken that a very famous Surgeon of that City should be sent
for to take a new upon him the curing of Marco Antonio, He came, but would not
meddle with him, till the day following, saying, That the Chirurgions belonging
to Armies and Fleets, were evermore well experienced men, by reason of the many
hurt and wounded persons, which every foot they had under their hands, and
therefore held it not convenient to enter upon the cure till the next day. That
which he gave present order for was; that they should place him in a very
warm lodging where they should let him take his rest. At that very instant
came thither the Surgeon of the gally, and gave an account to that other of
the City of the nature and quality of the hurt, and what he applied for the
curing of it, and in what danger (to his seeming) his life was in, with which
information he rested fully satisfied of that which he desired to know. And he
himself (according to that relation which he had received) did exaggerate the
danger wherein Marco Antonio was Leocadia and Theodosia heard this; with that
grief and sorrow of heart: as if they had heard the sentence of their own
deaths, but that they might no^ make show thereof, they did repress and
silence it all they could for that time, yet had Leocadia resolved with her
self to do that, which she thought fitting for the satisfaction of her
honor. And this it was, as soon as ever the Chirurgions were gone, she comes
me into Marco Antonio's lodging, and before the Master of the house Don Rafael,
Theodosia and diverse other persons she made up to the beds head of this
wounded gentleman, and taking him fast by the hand, she spoke thus unto him,
It is now no fit time ( Senior Marco Antonio Adorno) being in that state
wherein you now are, to spend many words with you, and therefore I shall only
entreat you that you will lend your ear to those few which convene, if not to
the health of your body, yet to that of your soul* And that I may speak them
the more freely, it is needful that you give me your good leave, and license,
and that you will observe what I shall say unto you if you have a mind to
hear me. For it should be contrary to all reason, that I having endeavored
from the very instant that I knew you, not to give you any distaste, but did
all to your content and liking, that now at this present, for my last farewell,
I should be the cause of giving you any the least grief or sorrow. At these
words Marco Antonio opened his eyes and steadily fixed them on Leocadias face,
and having recollected himself, and taken her in a manner into his knowledge
more by the Organe of her voice then by her countenance, with a weak and
feeble voice, as one that was full of pain, he said unto her, say on Sir what
you please for I am not yet so near my end, that I cannot listen unto you,
neither is this voice of yours so harsh and unpleasing unto me, that it should
cause any fastidiousnesse or loathing in me to hear it.

To all this Dialogue Theodosia was most attentive, and every word that
Leocadia uttered was a sharp Arrow that went athwart her heart, and wounded
likewise the very soul of Don Rafael, who also heard her. And Leocadia
prosecuting what she had begun, went on thus; if some blow on your head, or
to speak more properly, if one greater has not lighted on my soul, it could
not ( Semor Marco Antonio) beat out of your memory, the image of her, who not
long since, you were wont to say was your glory, and your Heaven, you may very
well call to your remembrance, who Leocadia was, and what was the word that you
gave her signed in a Schedule with your own hand, nor can you be forgetful
of the worth of her parents, the integrity of her retyrednesse and honesty,
and of the obligation wherein you stand bound unto her, for having applied her
self to your gust and liking in all whatsoever you desired. If you have not
forgotten this, howbeit you see me in this so different a habit, you may easily
know that I am Leocadia, who being fearful least new accidents and new
occasions should quit me of that which is so justly mine, as soon as I knew
that you were gone out of the country, treading under foot and sleighting all
whatsoever (though never so infinite inconveniences,) I resolved with my self
to follow after you in this habit, with intention to seek you out in all parts
of the earth, till I had found you out, whereat you ought not to marvel, if
your self has at any time felt the force of true Love, and the rage of a
deceived woman. Some troubles I have passed in this my demand, all which I
account well bestowed with that discount which they have brought with them, in
making me so happy as to see you. And considering the case wherein you are, if
that it shall please God to take you from this to a better life, by your doing
that which you ought (as worthy your self) before your departure out of this
life, I shall think my self the happiest woman in the world: promising you to
betake my self to such a course of life after your death, that but little time
shall be spent therein, before I follow you in this your last and enforced
journey. And therefore first of all I beseech you for the love you bear unto
God, to whom my desires and intentions go directed; next, for your own sake,
who owes much to your quality, and therefore ought to be the same you are.
And lastly, for my sake, to whom you owe more then to any other person in the
world, that now presently you will receive me for your lawful spouse, not
permitting that justice should enforce you to that, which with such and so many
real obligations, reason ought to persuade you unto. And here Leocadia stopped
the current of her speech, and said not a word more; and all they that were in
the room were in a wonderfell still silence all the while that she talked
with him, and with the same stillness and silenee they expected what answer
Marco Antonio would make her, which was this.

I cannot ( Leocadia) deny my knowing of you, for your voice and countenance
will not give me leave so to do. Neither can I deny how much I am bound unto
you, nor the great worth of your noble parents, together with your own
incomparable honesty, and retiredness, neither do I nor will I esteem you
in less for that which you have done, in coming to seek me out in a habit so
different from your own, but for this I do and shall ever esteem of you in
the highest degree that may be imagined. But since that my time (you say) is
now come, and that I likewise believe that this may be the last day of my life,
and since that such kind of trances as these are the Chrysolls of truth,
purifying the Gold from the dross, truth from falsehood; I will tell you a
truth, which if it shall not be now pleasing unto you, it may be that
hereafter it may turn to your good. I confess (fair Leocadia) that I loved
you well, and so did you me; and likewise I confess that the schedule which I
made you, was more to comply with your desire, then mine own* For many days
before that I had signed it and set my hand thereunto, I had delivered up my
will and my soul to a Damsel of the same place, where I live, whom you very
well know. Her name is Theodosia, the daughter (be it spoken without
disparagement) of as noble parents as yours are. And if I gave you a schedule
firmed with my hand, I gave her my firmed hand, and accredited with such works
and witnesses, that I remain impossibilited to give my liberty to any other
person in the world. That which passed betwixt my self and Theodosia, was the
obtaining of that fruit, which she could give me, and which I was willing
she should give me, plighting my faith unto her that I would be (as truly I
am) her husband And if at one and the same time I left both her and you, you
suspensefull and deceived and she fearful, and (as she thought) robbed of
her honor, I did therein unadvisedly and undescreetly, and (as a young man as
I am) without any discourse or judgment. Thinking with my self that all those
things of this nature, were but tricks of youth, and of little or no
importance, and that I might do them without any scruple at all: Accompanied
with other the like thoughts, which came then in my head, which did solicit me
to do that which I did, which was to go for Italy, and to employ therein some
few of my youthful years, and afterward to return home, to see what was
become of you and of my true Spouse. But heaven (as it should seem) being
offended, and having complained of me to the highest power there, I verily
believe that God has permitted and given way to put me into that condition,
wherein you see me, to the end that by confessing these truths, arising from my
many sins, I may pay in this life that which I owe, and you remain
dis-deceived and free being at your own liberty to do that which shall seem
best in your eyes. And if at any time Theodosia shall come to have notice of my
death; she shall know both by your self and by these that are here present,
how that at my death I complied with that promise which I made her in my life*
And if in that little time of life (sweet Leocadia) which remains unto me, I
may serve you in any thing, tell it me, I beseech you, and be it what it will
be, I shall most willingly do it, so as it be not to take you to wife, for
that I cannot do; no other thing shall I refuse for to give you content, that
comes within my possibility to perform. Whilst that Marco Antonio went thus
discoursing as you have heard, he rested his head all that while on his elbow,
and having made an end of speaking he let his arm fall, giving some signs
that he was ready to swoune. Don Rafael hastened presently unto him, and
straightly embracing him, said unto him; Sir, come again to your self, be of
good cheer, and embrace this your friend and your brother, since that it is
your pleasure to have it so. Look up, and see if you know your companion and
Chamber-fellow Don Rafael, who will be a true witness of your good will and
affection, and of the grace and favor which you are willing to do his sister
in admitting her to be yours. Marco Antonio came again to himself, and
instantly knew Don Rafael, and embracing him in his arms, and kissing him on
the cheek, said unto him; The great joy (dear brother) which I have received
in seeing you can bring no less rebatement with it, then exceeding great
sorrow. For as it is in the proverb, after joy comes sorrow. But I shall give
it for well employed whatsoever shall befall me, in exchange of that great
content which I have received in seeing you* Nay then (replied Don Rafael,) I
will make it more complete, by presenting you with this jewel which is your
beloved spouse. And looking out Theodosia he found her behind all the company,
weeping, suspensive, and astonished, between grief and joy, as well for that
which she saw as for that which she heard. Her brother took her by the hand,
and she without making resistance, suffered herself to be carried whither
he would lead her; which was to bring her to Marco Antonio, who knew her, and
lovingly embraced her, both of them guttering down their cheeks tender and
amorous tears. All that were in the room were stricken with admiration, in
seeing so strange an accident. They looked one upon another without speaking
one word, expecting what would be the issue of these things. But Leocadia,
having lost her hopes, though found out the error, when she saw that with her
own eyes, which Marco Antonio did, and saw her whom she took to be Don
Rafaels brother in his arms, whom she held to be her Husband, and together
with this, seeing her desires mocked and her hopes lost, she stole out of all
their sights, their eyes being earnestly bent in beholding that which the sick
man did with the Page, whom he hugged so close in his arms. And being gone
out of the room, she instantly made into the street, with intention to go,
driven by despair, wandering through the world, or at least where none might
see her. But scarce had she got into the street but Don Rafael began to miss
her, and as if he had lost his soul he inquired after her; but no body could
tell him which way she was gone. And so without any longer tarrying, like one
that was desperate he went out to seek her, and hyed him with all the haste
he could thither, where he was told that Calvete lodged, least she might
happily have gone thither to procure a Mule to ride away; and not finding her
there, he went like a mad man through the streets, searching after her, one
while here, and another while there; and imagining that she might peradventure
return back to the galley, he came to the Sea side, and a little before he
came thither, he might hear one call aloud from the shore for the boat of
the Captain galley, and he knew that the voice that called for it, was that of
Leocadia, who being jealous of some ill intention toward her, hearing one
coming behind at her heels, she laid her hand upon her Sword, and stood
upon her guard until that Don Rafael drew nearer unto her, whom she presently
knew, and it grieved her to the very heart that he had found her, and more
particularly all alone in a place so far from all company, for she had
perceived by more shows then one, which Don Rafael had made her, that he did
not wish her ill, but so well that she would have taken it for a good
recompense that Marco Antonio had loved her but half so well. With what words
shall I now be able to express those, which Don Rafael uttered to Leocadia,
opening his soul unto her? which were such and so many that I dare not take
upon me to set them down, deserving a better pen then mine to give them their
true life and luster. But since necessity, and the nature of the subject now
in hand, inforceth me to say something, the words, which amongst many other he
delivered, were in effect these. If together with fortune which sayleth me,
there should now (fair Leocadia) be wanting unto me the courage and boldness
of discovering the secrets of my soul, there would lie buried in the bosom of
perpetual oblivion, the most inamoured and honestest affection that ever has
been, or can be bred in a faithful and loving breast. But that I may not
wrong this my just desire, come what will come of it, I would have you to know
(if your surprised thoughts will but give way to your judgment, and these your
fits of passion, to your sounder discourse and reason) that in no one thing
has Marco Antonio any advantage of me, save only in this that he is your
beloved. My lineage is as good as his, and in those goods which they call of
Fortune, I am little inferior unto him; and for the gifts of nature it is not
amiss that I should commend my self, and the rather if in your eyes they
should not be esteemed. All this I purposely lay before you (my dear Lady and
Mistress) to the end that laying aside your passion which blindes your
understanding, you might take that remedy and means which fortune now offers
unto you in the utmost extremity, and height of your disgrace: You see
already, that Marco Antonio cannot be yours, because heaven has ordaind him
for my sister, and the same heaven which this very day has robbed you of Marco
Antonio, is willing to make you amends by me, who desires no other happiness in
this life, then to rende^ up my self unto you to be your husband. Behold and
consider, that good success stands calling at the doors of that ill fortune,
which has hitherto followed you. Neither do you so much as once imagine, that
the boldness and daringnesse which you have showed in seeking after Marco
Antonio, shall any whit lessen the love I bear you, but I shall ever highly
esteem of you, according to your merits and deserts, and as if there had never
any affection past between you. For, in that very hour wherein I desire and
determine to equal my self with you, by making choice of you to be my
perpetual Lady and Mistress, in that very hour, I will forget all, nay already
have forgotten all whatsoever in this particular I have either seen or known.
For I well wot that those forces which have enforced me to go thus roundly to
work, and letting loose the reins to my desire, to dispose my self to the
giving and delivering up of my self to be wholly yours, the very same have
brought you to that estate wherein you are. And therefore you shall not need to
seek out any excuse where there has been no fault committed. Leocadia
continued silent all the while that Don Rafael spoke unto her, save that now
and then she would fetch deep sighs, which came from the very heart-roote of
her. Don Rafael (taking his hint from this her heaviness) grew so bold with
her as to take her by the hand, and she not having strength to resist it,
kissing it again and again, repeating over that lessen often; after a little
pausing, he said unto her; Mistress of my soul, make an end of being wholly
mine, let us here make up this match between us in the sight of this starry
Canopie of heaven which covers us, and of this calm and quiet Sea, which
listneth unto us, and of these bathed sands whereon we tread. Give me now
your consent, sithence that without all doubt it conveneth as well for your
honor, as it does for my content. Take it once again into your consideration,
that (as you know very well) I am a gentleman and rich, ^d one that truly loves
you, which is that which you ought most to esteem; and that in stead of
finding your self all alone, and in a habit which does not suit so well with
your honor, far from the house of your parents and kinsfolk, without any
person to furnish you with that which should be needful for you, and without
all hope of obtaining that which you so earnestly desired, you may return to
your own Country in your own proper honest and true habit, accompanied with
as good a husband, as that other whom you had formerly made choice of: you
shall go home rich, contented, esteemed, and served, and also praised of all
those, to whose knowledge shall come the various success of this your History.

If this be so, as so it is, I know not what you should stick at, or what
manner of doubt you can make to your self. Once more therefore I say unto you,
make an end of the business, come I say, and raise me from the ground of my
misery, to the heaven of my deserving you, for in so doing you shall find a
heaven for your self, and cumply with the laws of courtesy, and of
thankfulness, showing your self at one and the same instant both grateful
and discreet. Go to then (said doubtful Leocadia) since that heaven has so
ordained it, and since that it is not in my hand, nor in that of any woman
living, to oppose herself against that which it has disposed and determined,
let that (Sir) which it, and you will, be done. And heaven it self knows,
with what shamefastness I come to condescend unto your will; not because I do
not understand the great gain I make in obeying you, but because I am afraid
that when you have had your will of me, ^and enjoyed that which you now so much
desire, you will look upon me with other eyes then peradventure you have
hitherto, and repenting you of your bargain will complain that they deceived
you. But be it as it may be, yet howsoever I am sure of this, that the name of
being the lawful wife of Don Rafael ae Villavicencio can never be lost, and
with this Titl^ ^ly I will live contented. And if the carriage and behavior
which you shall see in me, after that I am yours, shall be a means to make you
hold me in some esteem, I will give thanks unto heaven that has brought me
at last by, many strange turnings and windings so and by so many miseries to
come to the happiness to be yours. Give me ( Senior Don Rafael) that hand of
yours to be mine, and lo here I give you mine to be yours. And let those serve
for witnesses, which you so lately mentioned, the heavens, the Sea, the sands,
and that still silence, only interrupted by my sighs and your entreaties.
Having said this she suffered her self to be embraced, and gave him her
hand, and Don Rafael in exchange gave her his, celebrating that nocturnall and
new Nuptials with only the shedding of a few tears, which the joy and
content thy took in despite of their forepassed sorrow, had drawn from their
eyes.

This ceremony ended, they presently returned to the Knights house, who was
very sorry to see that they were missing, and no less were Marco Antonio, and
Theodosia, who by the hand of a Priest were newly espoused, for at the earnest
request and persuasion of Theodosia (to the end that some contrary accident
might not trouble that good and happiness which she had found) the knight
sent forthwith for one that should marry them out of hand. So that when Don
Rafael and Leocadia came in together, and that Don Rafael had recounted unto
them what had betided him with Leocadia it did in such sort augment their joy,
as if the knight and the rest that were there had been of their nearest blood
and kindred; for it is the natural condition, and proper to the inbred
nobleness of the Cataluntans, to befriend and favor such strangers as in
their necessities have occasion to use them. The Priest that was there present
gave order that Leocadia should change her habit, and put on such clothes as
suited with her sex, and the good Knight was not idle in putting thereunto his
helping hand, apparrelling them with the richest clothes that his own wife
had, who was a principal Lady of the lineage of the Granolleques, a famous and
ancient family in that kingdom. The Surgeon (who out of charity had
pity of him that was hurt, took notice how that he talked much and that
they would not suffer him to be alone, that he might take some rest,) gave
express order that they should leave him in silence, and say nothing unto him.
But God who had so ordained it, using means and instruments for the
accomplishing of his works, when in our eyes he will work some wonder,
ordained that the excess of joy, and the little silence which Marco Antonio
had kept was a great cause of his amendment, so that the next day when they
dressed him they found that he was out of danger, and within fourteen days
after he was so well and perfectly cured that without any fear he might
safely travail, and undergo his journey. For I must give you to understand,
that at that time as Marco Antonio kept his bed, he resolved to go on
pilgrimage a foot to S. Iago of Ga, licia, in performance of which promise Don
Rafael, Leocadia, and Theodosia, would accompany him, and so also Calvete their
Muleter, a work very seldom used by men of their profession. But the
goodness and plainness which he had found in Don Rafael obliged him not to
leave him till that he were returned to his own country. And seeing that
they were to go a foot like Pilgrims, he sent his Mules to Salamanca
together with that which was Don Rafaels, for he could not want some by whom to
send them. And now was the day come of their departure, and having accomodated
themselves with their Knapsacks and all other necessaries they took their
leave of that liberal Knight, who had done them so many favors, and had given
them such royal entertainment, whose name was Don Sancho de Cardona, most
noble in his blood, and as famous for his person; all of them offered their
service unto him, and promised not only for themselves, but their decendents,
to whom they would leave it in charge, perpetually to keep in memory those
such singular received favors, that they might at least make a thankful
acknowledgment, though they could not make him a sufficient and real
requital. Don Sancho inbraced all of them one after another, telling them that
it grew from his natural condition, and was an imbred disposition that he
had, to do those or other the like good offices, to those whom he knew, or
imagined to be gentlemen of Castile. They did twice reiterate their
imbracings, and with joy, intermingled with some sense of sorrow, they took
their farewell. And walking on their way with such commodity and conveniencie,
as the delicateness and tenderness of those two new Pilgrims would permit, in
three days they came to Monserra^e, and stayed there so many more; with the
like leisure they went onward on their way, and without having any cross
accident, or any mischance at all, they arrived at Saint lago. And after that
they had performed their vow, they would not unfrock themselves, nor leave off
their Pilgrims weeds, till they should enter into their own houses. To which
they came by little and little, and though weary, yet well contented. But
before that they came thither being in sight of Leocadias dwelling which (as
we formerly told you) was a league off from that of Theodosia, from the top
of a high hill they might discern both their houses. But as they discovered
these, so could they not cover those tears, which the contentment they took in
seeing them, brought unto their eyes, at least to the two new brides, who with
their sight renewed the remembrance of those sundry successes they had passed.
They discovered likewise from that part of the hill where they stood, a large
and spacious valley, which divided the two Lordships. Wherein they might see
under the shade of an Olive tree, a tall lusty gentleman, mounted upon a square
and strong limmed horse, with a white shield on his left arm, and a stiff and
long Lance well pointed, in his right. And beholding him with attention, they
might likewise perceive, that from among the said Olive trees, came two other
gentlemen with the same arms, and with the self same grace and posture; and
anon after they perceived that all three of them met together, and having stayed
a little while together they went apart each from other, and one of those which
came in last did go a pretty distance off from him, who stood first under the
Olive tree, and putting Spurs to their horses, they incountred each other with
manifest demonstrations of being mortal enemies, beginning to charge each
other very bravely and nimbly with their Lances; sometimes avoiding the
strokes by the shifting of their bodies, and sometimes by receiving them on
their shields with such dexterity that they gave good proof that they were
masters in that exercise. The third man stood still as a spectator looking on
them without moving from his place. But Don Rafael being impatient of being so
far off from them, beholding so well a maintained combat, running with all the
speed he could down the hill, his sister and his Spouse following him, in a
very little while he drew near unto the two combatants, even just then when
as the two Gentletlemen were both of them (though but slightly) wounded; and
one of their hats being fallen off, and together with it a burganet of steel
that was under it, in the turning aside of his face Don Rafael knew that it was
his father, and Marco Antonio likewise knew the other to be his. Leocadia, who
had earnestly eyed him, who did not fight, knew him to be the father that
begat her, with which sight all four were much amazed and astonished, and
almost beside themselves. But this their sudaine passion giving way to
discourse, and reason, the two brother in laws without any more ado,
presently made in, and putting themselves in the midst between those that
fought, they cried out aloud unto them, saying, No more (gentlemen) no more, it
is enough if not too much already, and therefore hold your hands, for they who
crave and beg this of you, are your own sons. My Lord, and my father (said
Marco Antonio) I am Marco Antonio; I am he for whom (by that which I imagine)
these your venerable gray hayres are put to this rigorous straight. Bridle your
fury, and throw away that Lance, or turn it against some other enemy, for he
whom you have before you from this day forward* is to be your brother. To the
like purpose spoke Don Rafael to his father, whereupon these gentlemen forbore
to offend each other any further. And they then began to look more wissely on
those that uttered these speeches, and turning their heads aside they perceived
that Don Henrique the father of Leocadia, was alighted from his horse, and
embraced him, whom he took to be a pilgrim. For no sooner had Leocadia come
unto him, and made herself known unto him, but she besought him that he
would go and make peace between those two that fought, recounting unto him in
few words that Don Rafael was her husband, and that Marco Antonio was wedded to
Theodosia. Her father hearing this, presently dismounted and embraced her* as
we told you before. But leaving her, he hasted to atone the other two, though
it needed not, being that already they had taken notice of their sons, and
were alighted from their horses, and most lovingly embraced them, all of them
shedding tears, springing out of those two fountains of Love and Joy. They
were all close combind, standing together as it were in a Ring, and began a new
to look on their sons, and knew not what to say. They did touch their bodies
with their hands to try whether they were fantastic bodies, and walking
spirits. For their sudden and unexpected coming upon them bred this, and
other the like suspicions and jealousies; But being soon dis-deceived, and
quickly put out of his error, they returned afresh to their tears and
imbracements. And whilst this was in doing, there appeared to their view in
the said Valley a great number of armed men both on foot and horseback, which
came to side with their several Lords, and to abet and maintain their
quarrel. But when they came and saw them embracing those Pilgrims, and tears
standing in their eyes, they allighted and wondering what this should mean,
they stood like men amazed, until such time as Don Henrique briefly delivered
unto them that, which his daughter Lecc^dia had recounted to himself. Hereupon
all of them went to embrace these Pilgrims with such shows and tokens of
content, as cannot be enough endeared. Don Rafael he likewise related unto
them with that brevitie as the time required, all the whole success of his
love, and how he came to be married to Leocadia, and his sister Theodosia to
Marco Antonio; his father there offering to celebrate these their Nuptials at
his house. And this being agreed upon they brake up and departed. And some of
them that were there present, hasted away before to ask Albricias of the
kinsfolk and friends of those married couples. Don Rafael and Marco Antonio in
their way homewards, as they went talking along, came to know the cause of this
their strife and difference; which was as you shall hear. The fathers of
Theodosia and Leocadia had challenged Marco Antonio's father, charging him that
he was consenting and privy to these deceits of his son. And both of them
being come into the field, and finding him all alone, without any second, they
would not fight with him upon that odds and advantage but singly one to one,
as became gentlemen to do; which quarrel must have ended in the death of one
or both, if they had not come in so luckily as they did. The four Pilgrims
rendered thanks unto God for this happy success. And so the next day after
their arrival, with royal and splendide magnificence, and sumptuous expense,
the father of Marco Antonio solemnized the Nuptials of his son and
Theodosia, and those of Don Rafael and Leocadia; who lived many and happy
years in the company of their dearly beloved wives, leaving behind them a
noble stock and descent from father to son, which continues even to this
day in those two places which are numbered amongst the best of Andaluzia. And if
I do not name them here unto you, it is for that I desire to keep good
decorum with those two Damsells, whom peradventure tongues either wickedly
malicious, or foolishly scrupulous might tax of lightness in their desires,
and that sudden changing of their habits. Whom I shall entreat that they will
not go about to blame such the like liberties and exercises, till they look
back into themselves and examine their own hearts, whether they have not at
one time or other been touched with Cupids arrows; for Love is in effect a
force, (pardon the exorbitancy of the word) that is unresistable, so strong a
war is that, which the appetite wageth against reason. Calvete the Muletere
rested well contented with the reward Don Rafael sent him home to Salamanca,
and many other gifts bestowed on him by the rest of those that were newly
married. And the Poets of those times took occasion for the employing of their
pens, in extolling the beauty and exaggerating the success of those two
adventurous, but most honest Damsells, being the principal subject of this
strange story.

The end of the first Book.
THE LADY CORNELIA.
THE SECOND BOOK.
DOn Antonio de Ysunca, and Don Iuan de Gamboa, principal Gentlemen, both of
one age, very discreet and great friends, being students in Salamanca,
resolved to leave their studies and to go for Flanders, carried thither by the
heat of their youthful blood, and by the desire, which they had (as we
usually say) to see the world. And because it seemed unto them, that the
exercise of Arms though it suteth well with all, yet it has its principal
seat and residence, and in much better sorteth with those that are well borne,
and of noble blood.

They came then to Flanders, but at such a time, that things were in peace and
quietness, or upon treaty and agreement of being quickly so settled. They
received in Antwer^e Letters from their fathers, wherein they writ, and
signified unto them the great displeasure and coffeehouse which they had
received, for that they had left their studies without advising them thereof,
to the end that they might have come so fitted and accommodated for Flanders,
as their birth and quality required.

In conclusion they knowing how this course of theirs grieved their parents,
determined to return back again to Spain, since that they saw there was
nothing for them to do in Flanders. Yet before they would return, they were
very desirous to see all the famousest Cities of Italy, and having seen all of
them, they ^etled themselves in Bolonia, and admiring the studies of that
famous University, they were willing therein to prosecute theirs. They gave
notice of their intention to their fathers, who were wonderfully glad of it,
and they expressed how well they were pleased therewith by magnificently
providing for them, and in such a noble manner that they might show in their
fashion and carriage, who they were, and of what house they came. And from the
very first day that they visited the schools, all took notice of them, and
acknowledged them to be gallant, discreet, and well bred gentlemen.

Don Antonio might be about some twenty four years of age, and Don Iuan not
above twenty six, and they did adrone this good age of theirs, by being very
brave Gentlemen, good Musicians, better Poets, and very active, and valiant
parts that procured them much love, and made the best wishes of all those that
conversed with them to wait upon them.

They had in a very short time won unto them many friends, as well Spanish
students (there being very many of them commonly in that University) as also
of those of that City, and of strangers. They showed themselves toward all
liberal and bountiful, kind, and loving, and far from that pride and
arrogance (an ordinary fault) whereof the Spaniards generally use to be
taxed. And for that they were young men and full of jollitie and
jocunda^inesse, (...) ^as not unpleasing unto them to take notice of the best
beauties of that City; and albeit there were many Gentlewomen both maidens and
married wives, that had a good report of being both fair and honest, yet above
all, the Lady Cornelia Bentivogli bore the bell, being of the ancient and noble
family of the Bentivogli's, who were sometimes Lords of Bolonia.

Cornelia was extremely fair and beautiful, and was under the guard and
protection of Lorenzo Bentivogli her brother a most honorable and valiant
gentleman, being both fatherless and motherlesse. And although they left them
thus all alone, yet did they leave them exceeding rich. And riches to
Orphaneship, is a great ease and comfort, so great was Cornelia's retiredness,
and so great her brothers care and solicitude in guarding her, that she
neither suffered herself to be seen, nor would her brother permit that any
should see her.

This fame and report of her rare beauty made Don Iuan, and Don Antonio very
desirous to have a sight of her. But the labor they took therein was lost and
all in vain, and their desire by reason of the impossibility of obtaining,
had in such sort cut off all hope thereof, that it went by degrees decreasing
and diminishing. And therefore being now wholly taken up with the love of their
studies, and with the entertainment of some honest recreations of youth, they
led an honest and merry life together; they seldom rambled abroad in the
night* and when they did, they went both together well armed.

It afterward so fell out, that being to go forth one night Don Antonio told
Don Iuan that he would stay a while, but would have him to go, promising that
he would presently follow him. That shall not need (replied Don Iuan) for I
will stay for you; and if we should not go abroad this night the matter is not
great. No, as you love me (said Don Antonio) get you gone and take the air
for I* will be instantly with you, if you walk that round, which we use to
do. Do what you think good, (answered Don Iuan) fare you well, and if you
shall walk ^orth, I will go the same stations this night as I did the last;
Don Iuan went his way, and Don Antonio stayed behind.

The night was somewhat dark and duskie, and the hour eleven, and having gone
through two, or three streets, and seeing himself all alone, and that he had
no body with whom to talk and converse, he resolved with himself to return
home, and putting it in execution passing through a street, which had a
walking place built upon Pillars of marble, he might hear from a certain
door that some did whiste unto him with a soft and low voice. The darkness of
the night, which was made the more by means of that close walk, would not let
him guess and conjecture whence that whisting directly came. Whereupon he
stood still a while, attentively listening whence it should come, and whilst he
was thus busied, he might see a door half way open it self; He drew near
thereunto, and might hear a low voice which spoke thus. Is it Fabio? Don Iuan
answered, yes. Then take this (replied they within) and have a care to have it
safely kept, and return hither presently again, for it much imports us. Don
Iuan puts forth his hand, and felt a bulk, he knew not what, and thinking to
take it with one of his hands, he found that he had need to use both, and they
had scarce put it into his hands, but they shut the door upon him, and left
him* And he went his way and found himself in the street with his hands full,
but knew not what burden he bare. But within a little while after he heard a
babe begin to cry, which it should seem had been but newly borne. Whereat
Don Iuan remained amazed and suspensive, not knowing what he should do, or
what course to take in this strange case. For to return back to the door, and
call there unto them, he considered with himself, that he might run some
danger for the babes sake, having personated another man to whom it was
intended, and in leaving it there at the door, the babe might have its life
hazarded. And to carry it home to his own house he had not any one there that
could give it the teate, and those other helps that were needful, nor did
he know in all the City any body whither he might carry it. But sithence that
they had said unto him that he should see it safe and return again presently
he determined to carry it to his own house, and to leave it in the power and
custody of a woman that served them, and to return forthwith to see whether or
no they had any further need of his service, since that he plainly perceived
that they had taken him for another, and that it was a mere mistake in giving
the babe unto him.

In conclusion, without making any further discourses, he came home with it to
his house, when as Don Antonio was not there. He entered into one of the rooms
next at hand, and called his woman servant unto him, and caused her to unswathe
the babe, and found it to be one of the fairest creatures that ever they had
seen. The clothes wherein it was lapt, told that it came of rich and noble
parents. When the woman had unswathed and opened it, they saw that it was a man
child. Then said Don Iuan to his woman, we must needs get one to give this
child suck; but first of all I would have you take away these rich Mantles,
and lay them aside in some safe place, and to put and wrap it in others more
mean and humble. And without making it known, that I brought it hither you
shall carry it to the house of some one Midwife or other, for such kind of
women are never commonly unprovided of necessary remedy in such like
necessities, you shall take money along with you, wherewith she may remain
satisfied and contented, and you shall give it such parents, as you your self
shall think fit, for the better covering of the truth of my bringing it
hither. His woman made answer, all should be done as he had ordered it.

This business was no sooner put into so good a way, but that Don Iuan with
all the haste he could returned to see whether they would whiste once more
unto him; but a little before that he came to the said house where they had
called unto him, he might hear a great clashing of swords, as if many had
been together by the ears slashing one another. He stood listening a while,
but could not hear any one word pass between them. This hammering of Iron
was in the dark, save only that by the light of those sparks which the stones
wounded by their swords, raised, he had a glimpse that there were many that had
set upon one, and he was confirmed in this truth by hearing that one say; O
traitors, though ye be many and I but a single man, yet shall not your
overmatching me in number make you prevail in your purpose.

Which Don Iuan hearing and seeing* transported by his valiant heart, at two
leapes, he made into the side of him that was assaulted, and taking his sword
in one hand, and his buckler which he brought along with him in the other, he
said unto him that defended himself, in the Italian tongue, that he might not
be known to be a Spaniard. Fear you nothing (Sir) for such succor is now
come to you, as shall not fail you till his life fail. Bestirre your self,
and set your self roundly to them; for traitors though they be many, are able
to do but little. To these words replied one of the adverse part; thou lie
in thy throat, for here is no traitor; but for the recovering of a man's lost
honor, it is lawful to take this, or any other advantage whatsoever.

There passed no more words between them, because the haste which they made to
offend and wound their enemies, would not give them leave to talk, who were
(to Don Iuans seeming) some six of them. They did press so hard upon his
companion, that at two home thrusts which they made at him at once full in his
breast, they* laid him flat on the ground. Don Iuan thought that they had killed
him, and with strange nimblenesse and valor he bestird him, and set upon them
all, whom he made to give ground by the force of a shower which he rayned
down upon them of blows and thrusts.

But all his diligence had not been able for to offend them, and defend
himself, if good fortune had not offered him her aid, by causing the
neighbors thereabouts in that street to open their windows and come forth
with lights, and to call out aloud to the Justice. Which they of the contrary
part perceiving, forsook the street, and turning their backs, went their way.

Now by this time he that was fallen had got up again, for those Stoca^os and
thrusts that were made at him, lighted on a privy coat which he had, that was
as hard and impenetrable as if it had been a rock of Diamonds. Don Iuan in
this fray had let fall his hat, and seeking for it, in stead of his own,
lighted by chance on another, which he clapped on his head without looking
whether it were his own or no.

His fellow that was fallen, came unto him, and said, Sir whosoever you be* I
confess that I am indebted to you for my life, the which with all that my
estate besides can reach unto, I will spend in your service. Let me entreat
you to do me the favor to tell me who you are, and what is your name, to the
end that I may know to whom I owe so much that I may manifest my thankfulness.

Whereunto replied Don Iuan, I will not (Sir) seeing my self now
disinteressed, be discourteous with you. To cumply therefore with your desire,
and to fulfill your pleasure, I shall only tell you that I am a gentleman, a
Spaniard, and a student in this University, if the knowing of my name may any
whit import you, I shall tell it you. But if happily you shall be pleased in
any other thing to make use of my service, I would then (Sir) have you to know,
that my name is Don Iuan de Gamboa*

You have done me a great favor herein replied he that was fallen. But I (
Senior Don Iuan de Gamboa) will not tell you who I am, nor my name, because I
am willing you should rather know it from another then my self, and I will
take care, that both shall be made known unto you.

Don Iuan had but a little before asked of him, whether or no he had not
received some hurt, because he saw that they had given him two great stocadas;
whereunto he answered, that the goodness of his privy coat next under God had
defended him. But that yet notwithstanding his enemies had made an end of him,
if he had not stuck so close unto him.

By this time there came toward them a company of people more in number then
those they had before to do withal; whereupon Don Iuan said, if these be
those our enemies, stand (Sir) upon your guard, and behave your self like your
self. I believe (replied the other) that they are not enemies but friends
which make toward us. And it was so indeed. For they that came, were in all
eight persons who compassed him round that was fallen, and whispered some few
words in his ear but they were so soft and so secret, that Don Iuan could not
hear them.

The party defended turned presently aside from them to Don Iuan, and said
unto him, had not these my friends come in unto me, I would by no means (
Senior Don Iuan) have left you, till you had finished this your well begun
work by setting me in some place of safety. But now with all the
indearingnesse that I can, I shall entreat you that you will leave me, for it
much imports me, that you yield to my request. Having said this, he put
his hand to his head, and found that he was without a hat, and turning himself
to those that came to him, he spoke unto them to give him a hat, for his own
was in fighting fallen from him. He had scarce spoke the word, but that Don Iuan
put that which he had found upon his head. He that fell felt it with his hand,
and returning it to Don Iuan said unto him* this hat is none of mine. As you
love me, ( Don Iuan) take it, and carry it away with you as a Trophee of this
skirmish, and keep it well, for I believe it is known. They gave him another
hat, and Don Iuan for to comply with that which he had entreated of him,
interchanging some other but short compliments, he left him, not knowing who
he was, and came home to his own house, without offering to go to that door,
where they had given him the babe, because he perceived that all the whole
street was up, being awakened out of their sleep, and in a kind of tumult and
uproare by reason of this quarrel.

It so then happened that in his returning to his lodging he met in the mid way
with Don Antonio de Ysunca his Comrade, and knowing him, Don Antonio said,
return with me ( Don Iuan) a little up this way, and as we walk along, I
shall recount unto you a strange story which has befallen me; and I believe
in all your life you never heard such passages as I shall now acquaint you
with. Whereunto Don Iuan replied, come let us go whither you will, and tell me
this your strange story. Don Antonio led the way and said.

You shall understand that little more then an hour after that you were gone
out of the house, I went forth to seek you, and not 30. paces from this place
I saw coming as it were to meet me, the black bulk of some person, which
came in great haste, and the party approaching nearer unto me, I knew it was a
woman clad in a long habit, who with a voice interrupted with sighs and sobs,
said unto me; are you (Sir) a stranger or one of the City? I replied, a
stranger and a Spaniard; Are you wounded (Lady) or do you bear about you some
evil presages of death? It may be (quoth she) that the evil I bring with me,
will be my death if I have not speedy remedy. By that courtesy which is
always wont to reign in those of your Nation, I beseech you (noble Spaniard)
that you will take me out of these streets and bring me to your lodging with
the greatest speed you can, and there if it please you, you shall know the
evil I bear about me, and who I am, though it be to the cost of my credit.

Hearing her say so, it seeming unto me, that she had need of that which she
desired, without making any reply, I took her by the arm, and through by
lanes, brought her to my lodging. Santistevan the Page opened me the door, I
willed him to withdraw himself, and so without his seeing of her, I conducted
her to my chamber. Whereinto she was no sooner entered, but she threw her
self on my bed, and fell suddenly into a swoune; I drew near unto her and
uncovered her face which she had covered with her mantle, and discovered
therein the greatest beauty, that humane eyes had ever seen; she might be to
my seeming about some eighteen years of age, rather under then over. I stood
a while amazed at the beholding of such rare and singular beauty. But calling
my self to remembrance I hastened to sprinkle a little water on her face,
wherewith she came to her self, tenderly sighing. And the first word that
she spoke unto me was; Do you know me Sir? No (quoth I) nor is it fitting
that I should have had the happiness to have known so much beauty. O unhappy
is that beauty (said she) which heaven bestows upon some for their greater
misfortune. But this (gentle Sir) is no time to commend beauty but to remedy
mischiefs, I shall therefore entreat you by that worth and nobleness that is
in you, that you will leave me here shut up, and suffer none to see me, and
that you will presently return to the same place where you met with me, and
see if there be any maintaining a quarrel each with other: Side (I beseech
you) with neither part, nor favor any of those that you find in this duel,
but seek to make peace between them, for whatsoever hurt shall light on
either side, it will help to make mine the gaeater. I left her shut up, and am
going to see if I can end this difference and make them friends.

Have you any more to say, Don Antonio? (said Don Iuan) Why do not you think
that I have said enough (replied Don Antonio) since that I have told you, that
I have under lock and key in my Chamber, the greatest beauty which humane eyes
ever saw? Doubtless it is a strange case, (answered Don Iuan*) but now I pray
hearken what betided me. And presently he related unto him all the whole
success of his business, and how that the babe, which they had given him was
at home in the house in the custody and keeping of his shee-servant, and the
oder that he had left with her for the changing of those rich into poor
Mantles, and to carry him to some Nurse that might breed him up, or at least to
relieve this its present necessity by giving it suck: and he signified further
unto him, that the difference, which he came to inquire after was ended, and
that all was well and quiet, and how that he himself was in that quarrel, and
that all those (as he did imagine) who were in that bickering were gentlemen
of great both quality and valor. They both did bless themselves, and did
wonder and admire at each others fortune, and so made all the haste they could
to return home, for to see what the locked up Lady had need of.

In their way homeward Don Antonio told Don Iuan, that he had promised that
gentlewoman that none should see her, nor come into that Chamber save only
himself, since that there was not any one thing, wherein he could do her a
greater courtesy. ^ush that is nothing (said Don Iuan) I will not want some one
devise or other for to have a sight of her, for already I long extremely to
see her* you having given such extraordinary commendation of her beauty.

Whilst they were thus discoursing on the business, and (by the light which
one of those their Pages brought) Don Antonio by chance casting his eyes on the
hat which Don Iuan wore, he saw how it did gli^er and shine with diamonds. He
took it off from his head, and saw, that those sparkling lights beamed forth
their rays from their fellows which were curiously ranked in an exceeding
rich hat-band. They both of them looked again and again upon it, and having
well viewd it, they concluded that if they were all fine and perfect, as they
appeared to be, they could not be less worth then twelve or thirteen thousand
ducats. By this they certainly knew that they in this quarrel were persons of
principal note and quality, especially he that was succored by Don Iuan who
(as he well remembered) told him that he should take the hat with him and keep
it, because it was known.

They commanded their pages to withdraw, they did so; then Don Antonio opened
the door to his chamber, and found the Lady sitting on the bed, leaning her
cheek on her hand, trilling down tender tears.

Don Iuan, out of the desire which he had to see her, made a shift to put his
head half way within the door, which he had no sooner done, but in that very
instant the glittering of the Diamonds shined on those eyes which rayned down
soft showers of tears, and lifting them up, she said come in (my Lord Duke)
come in, why will you give me with so sparing a hand the riches of your
presence.

Hereunto (replied Don Antonio) here Lady is no Duke that need to excuse
himself for his not seeing of you. How (said she) no Duke? he that did peep
in at the door even now is the Duke of Ferrara, whom the richness of his hat
cannot conceal from me. Truly (Lady) I can assure you, that the hat which you
saw, no Duke wears it, and if you are willing to be put out of your error,
give him leave that wears it to come in: With all my heart (said she) let him
come in, though if he should not prove to be the Duke, my sorrows and
misfortunes will be the greater. All these words Don Iuan heard, and seeing
that he had leave given him to enter, with his hat in his hand he came into
the Chamber; and as soon as he had thus presented himself before her, she
presently knew that he who had this rich hat was not the person she took him
to be. And therefore with a troubled voice, but with a quick and nimble tongue
she said unto him.

O unhappy, O miserable that I am* Tell me (Sir) I beseech you, and that
instantly without holding me any longer in suspense, whether or no you do know
the mast^ and true owner of this hat? where you left him? and how* you came by
it? is he happily alive? Or is this the news which he sends me of his death?
O my dearest good* what strange successes are these? Is it possible that I
should see thy pledges here, and yet see my self without thee she up in a
chamber, and in the power of I know not what Spanish gentlemen? O the fear of
loosing my honesty, would it would quit me of my life! Patient your self
(Madam) said Don Iuan. For neither is the owner of this hat dead, neither are
you in such hands that you shall receive any the least wrong in the world, but
shall be ready to serve you, as far forth as their force and strength can
reach, even to the laying down of their lives for to defend and protect you.
For it is not meet, that that faith of yours should prove vain, which you
have of the Spaniards goodness. And since that we are of that nation and
principal men in our country, (for here and on this occasion, that may well
now become me to say, which elsewhere might be accounted arrogance) be
confident (Lady) and rest you right well assured, that that decorum toward you
shall be kept and observed, which your noble and graceful presence deserves.

I believe (replied she) no less, but notwithstanding I pray Sir tell me, how
this rich hat came into your possession? Or where is its master who besides his
other titles is Alfonso de Este, Duke of Ferrara?

Then Don Iuan, that he might not hold her further in suspense, recounted unto
her how that he found one in a quarrel, and that himself took part with a
gentleman who in all likelihood, by that which he had gathered from her
speeches, must be the Duke of Ferrara. And that in the fray he had lost his
hat, as I likewise had mine, and by chance lighted on this in stead of mine
own; and that the said gentleman when I offered it unto him, he wa^ing a hat
(not knowing then whether it was his or mine own* for it was dark) entreated
me to keep it, for it was a hat that was well known, and that the quarrel
was ended without the gentleman's receiving any hurt or himself: And that after
all was ended there came in some company which to his seeming were either the
servants or friends of him, whom he imagined to be the Duke, who besought me
that I would leave him, and so we parted, he showing himself very thankful
for the assistance which I had given him. So that (sweet Lady) this rich hat
came into my power just in the same manner as I have delivered unto you, and
its owner (if it be the Duke as you speak him to be) it is not a full hour
since I left him safe and sound. Let this truth suffice in part for your
comfort (if he be the man we both pitch upon) that you know the Duke is well.

To the end (gentlemen) that ye likewise may know whether I have reason or
good cause or no, for to inquire after him; be attentive, and listen unto me,
and you shall hear (I know not what other name I may give it) my sad and
unfortunate History.

All the while that this passed, their she servant entertained her self in
feeding the babe with honey and in changing those his rich into poor mantles.
And now that she had quite made an end of dressing it, she was going to carry
it to the house of some Midwife as Don Iuan willed her. And passing with the
babe close by the Chamber where she was, who was about to begin her promised
History, the poor little thing cride, and so strongly that the Lady heard it,
and starting upon her feet, she did attentively listen thereunto, and heard the
cry more distinctly and said, Gentlemen, what creature is that which seems to
be but newly borne? it is a child (said Don Iuan) which this night was laid at
our door, and she that looks to our house, is going to seek out one that
may give it suck. For Gods sake bring it hither to me (said the Lady) for I
will do this charitable office for other folks children, since heaven will
not let me do it to mine own.

Don Iuan called in the woman, and took the child from her, and to satisfy
her desire, put the babe into her arms; saying withal, you see (Lady) the
present that has this night been bestowed upon us. And this is no news, for
few months go over our heads, but that we find at our doors such kind of
unlookt for commodities.

She took the babe into her arms, and she looked wissely as well on his
face, as on those poor, though clean clothes, wherein it was wrapped, and
presently without being able to refrain weeping, the tender tears trickling
down her cheeks, she threw the veil that covered her head over her breasts,
that she might with the more modesty give the babe suck, and applying it to
her breast she joined her face to his, and did feed it with her milk, and
bathe the face of it with her tears. And in this manner she continued without
lifting up hers so long as the child did not leave the teate.

In the interim, all four of them remained silent. The child sucked indeed,
but drew no milk, for they that are newly delivered, cannot presently give the
breast. And so she falling into the reckoning what little or no sustenance she
gave it, she returned the babe to Don Iuan, saying, in vain have I have I
showed my self charitable, I seem to be but a Novice in these cases. I pray
(Sir) give order that this child have his palate moystned with a little honey,
and by no means give way that it be carried out in the open air at this time
of night through the streets, let it be day first, and before that it be
carried hence, bring it once more again unto me, for I take great comfort in
looking upon it.

Don Iuan returned the babe to the woman, and gave order that she should
entertain the time with the child till it were day, and that dressing it up as
neately and handsomely as she could, she should put thereon those ric^
Mantles, wherein he brought it thither, and that she should not bring the babe
unto him, till he first called for it. This done, coming again into the
Chamber, and they three being all alone, this fair Lady said unto them.

Gentlemen, if you will have me to speak, give me first something to eat,
for I feel my self begin to faint, and not without cause, considering the
manifold occasions of my grief. Don Antonio ran presently to his Cabinet,
and took forth sundry sorts of Conserves, and other sweetmeates, whereof this
fainting Lady did eat some, wherewith she came to her self, having drank a
draught of cold water after them, and being now somewhat quieted and of better
cheer and comfort, she savd, sit down (Gentlemen) and hearken unto me. They
did so; And she raising her self up on the bed, sitting thereon upright and
covering her feet well with the skirts of her clothes, she let fall on her
shoulders a veil which she ware on her head, leaving her face bare and open,
representing the Moon in its clearenesse, or rather the Sun when it shines
brightest. Liquid pearls did distill down from her eyes, which she wiped
away with a most pure white Hand-kercher and with such hands, that between
them and the linen, he must have a good discerning judgment that could
distinguish and difference their snowy whiteness. In fine, after that she had
vented many sighs, and after that she had procured the easing somewhat of her
breast, with somewhat a sorrowful and troubled voice, she spoke thus.

Gentlemen, I am she whom doubdesse you have often heard named in this City,
because there are very few ^ongues which have not published the same of my
beauty such as it is. In a word I am Cornelia Bentivogli, sister to Lorenzo
Bentivogli, and in saying this, I shall happily have said two truths. The one
of my nobleness of birth, the other of my beauty. Being very young I was le^t
fatherless and motherlesse, in the power of my brother, who from my childhood
put upon me for my guard wariness and circumspection it self; though that he
did more rely upon my honest and honorable condition, then on that solicitude
and heedefulnesse, which he had taken in guarding me. In conclusion, confined
within walls and solitudes, accompanied with no other save my maide-servants, I
went increasing in years and growth, and together with me, went increasing
the fame of my propernesse of person, beauty and comeliness, proclaimed in
public by some of my men servants, and by those who privately treated with
me, and by a picture which my brother caused to be drawn by a famous Painter
to the end, that, (as he said) the world should not remain without me, if
heaven should take me here to a better life. But all this had been but the
least part of hastening my perdition, had not the Duke of Ferrara come to a
Kinswomans wedding of mine, being invited to do her the honor to give her in
Church, whither my brother carried me with a good intention, and for to grace
this my kinswoman. There I saw and was seen; there I conceive I took hearts
captive, and made them do vassalage and homage to my will; There I perceived
that I was well pleased with their praises, though they were given me by
flattering tongues; there, lastly, I saw the Duke, and he saw me; from which
interview I am now brought to see my self in that state, wherein you now see I
am.

I will not (gentlemen) relate unto you (for that were but to make my discourse
infinite) the devices, the plots, and the means, whereby the Duke and my self
came at the end of two years, to obtain those desires, which had their birth
at the wedding. For neither guardings nor watchings, nor brotherly admonitions,
nor any other humane dilligences were sufficient for to hinder our secret
meetings, and enjoying each other. But before I would yield unto his pleasure,
he gave me his faithful word and promise for to marry me, and make me his
wife, for without this plighting of his troth unto me, it had been impossible
for him to have made me render and yield up the forte of my virginity upon
dishonorable terms.

I spoke unto him a thousand times and more, that he would move my brother in
public for me, being that it was not possible, that he would deny him me, and
that the Duke needed not to excuse himself to the vulgar, if they should
chance to tax him with the inequality and disparitie of the marriage, as
somewhat to mean for him, since that the nobleness of the Lineage of the
Bentivogli's, was no whit inferior to that of the house of Este.

To this proposition of mine he answered me with excuses, entreating me that I
would approve of them, as sufficient, and necessary, and I giving credit unto
them (having already rendered up my self unto him) I did as one that was in
love, believe the best, and pressed him no further; but submitted my will wholly
unto his, at the intercession of a maide-servant of mine, who by the Dukes
large gifts and promises, was as pliable as wax, not regarding (as she ought to
have done) the truth and confidence which my brother had of her fidelity.

In conclusion, within a few days after I found my self with child, and
before that my clothes should manifest my liberties (that I may not give it any
other name) I feigned my self sick and melancholy, and wrought my brother to
bring me to that my kinswomans house, whom the Duke gave in marriage.

There did I make known in what case I was, the danger that did threaten me,
and the small assurance that I had of my life, because I was jealous that my
brother suspected my looseness; it was agreed upon between the Duke and my
self, that when I was upon my last month I should advise him of it, and that
he with other of his friends would come for me, and carry me with him to
Ferrara, where in the time by him expected he would marry me in public.

This very night was that concluded on for his coming, and this very night
waiting and looking for him, I heard my brother pass by with many other men to
my seeming armed by the clattering of their arms, by reason of which sudden
and unexpected fear, passion prevailed so far with me that my throws came
upon me, and instantly brought forth a fair son. That maidservant of mine,
who was privy to my actions, and the Dukes solicitresse, seeing her self now
prevented by this sudden chance wrapped the babe in other clothes then those the
child had, which was laid at your door. And going to the door that opened to
the street she gave it (as she told me) to a servant of the Dukes. I within
a little while after accommodating my self the best I could, according to my
present necessity, got me out of the house, verily believing that the Duke was
in the street, which indeed I ought not to have done til he had come to the
door. But the fear which that armed troop of my brother had put me into,
thinking that he was now brandishing his sword over my neck, it did not give
me leave to make any better discourse, and so unadvisedly and foolishly I went
forth, where that has befallen me which you now see. And albeit I see my self
without a son, and without a husband, and with fear of worse succes, yet do I
give thanks unto heaven for having brought me into your hands, from which I
promise all that unto my self which Spanish courtesy can promise me, and more
particularly yours, which for that you are so noble as you seem to be, you know
the better how, and where to extend it.

Having said this she suffered her self to sink down from the top of the
bed, and the two gentlemen drawing near unto her, to see whether she were
fainting and falling into a swound, they saw it was not so, but only that she
wept bitterly. Whereupon Don Iuan said unto her.

If hitherto (fair Lady) my self and Don Antonio my friend and companion,
have had compassion of you, and pitied your case, as you were a woman, now
that we know your quality, that pity and compassion comes to be a precise
obligation, binding us to serve you. Be of good cheer, be not dismayed, and
though you have not bin accustomed to such like chances; yet shall you by so
much the more show who you are by how much the more patiently you shall bear
your misfortunes. Believe me (Madam) I am of the mind that these such strange
successes will have a happy end, for the heavens will never permit that so much
beauty should be ill enjoyed, and such honest thoughts so ill rewarded. Betake
your self (Lady) to your rest, and have a care of your person, for it is no
more then needs, and here shall a woman servant of ours come in to serve you,
and wait upon you, of whom you may be as confident as you are of us, she
likewise knows as well how to silence your misfortunes, as she does to assist
you in these your necessities. Such a one I take her to be, that I dare be
bold to say that she will adventure to wade through all difficulties that you
shall put her to.

She made answer, let her (Sir) since you will have it so, come in; for being
tendered to me by so good a hand as yours, I cannot but hold her to be very
useful in all that, wherein I shall have occasion to employ her. But I beseech
you (Sir) let none more then this good woman see me. On my word (replied Don
Antonio) there shall not.

And so leaving her alone, they went out* And Don Iuan went unto the woman, and
willed her to go in, and that she should carry in along with her the babe in
its rich clothes, if she had put them on, the woman told him that she had, and
that it was now dressed just in the same manner as he brought it thither. The
woman came in, being advertised before hand what she should answer unto that,
which touching that creature, the Lady which she should find there within
should ask her.

As soon as Cornelia saw her, she said unto her; welcome my friend; give me I
pray thee this pretty creature and bring hither this light, she did so. And
Cornelia taking the babe in her arms, she was mightily troubled, and looked
very wissely and steadily on it, and said to the woman; tell me truly, this
child and that which was brought me a little while since is it one and the
same? yes (Madam) answered the woman; how then comes it to pass that the
Mantles are thus changed? (replied Cornelia.) Indeed (my friend) I conceive
either that these are other Mantles, or that this is not the same creature. All
this may very well be, said the woman. Very well be, (said Cornelia) how may
that be? O good woman how my heart does beat and is ready to break through my
breast, and will never leave beating till I know this change of clothes. Tell
me, I conjure thee (my friend) by all that which thou love best, by that
which is nearest and dearest unto thee, tell me I say, whence have thou these
rich mantles? for I must let thee know that they are mine if my sight do not
deceive me, or my memory fail me. With these very same, or with others like
unto them, I delivered my maid the beloved pledge of my soul. Who took them
away? (O wretched that I am!) and who brought them hither? Ay me most
unfortunate!

Don Iuan and Don Antonio, who heard all these complaints were not willing that
she should proceed any further in them, neither would they permit that the
error and deceit of changing the Mantles, should hold her in further pain and
suspense, and therefore they entered in, and Don Iuan said unto her.

These Mantles and this child ( Lady Cornelia) are both yours. And presently
pointby point, he recounted unto her that he was the man to whom the maid had
given the child; and how he brought him home to this his house, and gave the
woman order for the changing of the Mantles, and the reason and occasion why he
did it. Howbeit, after that she had acquainted him with her delivery, he did
certainly assure himself that it was her son, and that if he had not told
her so before, it was because that her sudaine passion of being in doubt of
knowing him might be recompensed with the supervening joy of knowing him.

Thereupon, infinite were the tears of joy shed by Cornelia, infinite the
kisses which she gave her son, and infinite the thanks, which she rendered
to these Spanish Gentlemen, who had done her these great favors, styling them
the humane Angels of her guard, and giving them many other Titles which might
give notorious manifestation of her thankfulness.

They left her with their woman, recommending her unto her care, charging her,
that she should look well unto her, and as far forth as was possible serve
her diligently, advertising her in what case she was, that she might have
recourse for her remedy, since that she in regard that she was a woman, knew
better what belonged thereunto then they did. And so that little that remained
of night they went to take their rest, with intention not to enter into
Cornelia's Chamber unless it were that either she did call for them, or in
case of precise necessity. The day came and the woman brought one very
secretly, and whilst it was yet dark, for to give the child suck.

When the gentlemen were up, they inquired after Cornelia; the woman told them
that she was taking her rest: whereupon they went to the schools and passed
through that street where the quarrel was, and by that house, from whence
Cornelia came, for to see if her fault or her being mist were public, or if
there were any company gathered together thereabouts. But by no means could
they perceive, or hear any thing neither of the fray, nor of Cornelia's
absence.

This diligence done, having heard their Lectures they came home. Cornelia
called for them, and sent their woman unto them, to whom they made answer, that
they were resolved, not to put their feet within her Chamber, to the end that
with the more decorum, that respect should be had, which was due to her
modesty, and honesty. But she replied with tears and entreaties that they
would come and see her, for that was the most convenient decorum, if not for
her remedy, yet at least for her comfort. They did so, and she received them
with a cheerful countenance, and a great deal of courtesy; entreating them
that they would do her the favor to go into the City, and see if they could
hear any news of her bold attempt. They told her, that they had done this
diligence with all the curiosity they could devise, but not a word that was
spoken of it.

Whilst they were talking of this business, one of their Pages (for they kept
three) came to the Chamber door, and from without, said; there is a gentleman
at door attended by two servants, who names himself Lorenzo Bentivogli, and
would feign speak with my Master Don Iuan de Gamboa.

Upon the hearing of this message, Cornelia clapped both her hands upon her
mouth, from between which came forth a low and fearful voice, saying.

My brother (Gentlemen) my brother, it is he, it is he; doubtless he has
had notice of my being here, and is come purposely hither to take away my life.
Help me (Gentlemen) good Gentlemen help me, succor and protect a poor
distressed Gentlewoman, and suffer her not to be murdered in your presence.

Quiet your self Lady, (said Don Antonio) content your self and be still;
for you are in such a place, and in the power of such a one, who will not
suffer any the least wrong in the world to be done unto you. Go you forth (
Don Iuan) and see what this gentleman will have, and I will stay here to make
good this place if need shall require, in the behalf of Cornelia. Don Iuan
without any alteration or change of countenance went down; And Don Antonio
caused presently a brace of pistolls that were ready charged, to be brought
him, and commanded the Pages, that they should take unto them their swords, and
be prepared to prevent any affront that should be offered.

The woman perceiving these preventions, trembled; And Cornelia, fearful of
some ill success, shaked and quivered much more. Only Don Antonio and Don
Iuan were themselves and very well appointed, and resolved on that which they
were to do.

At the door that opened to the street, Don Iuan found Don Lorenzo, who had
no sooner seen Don Iuan, but he said unto him; I beseech you (Sir) (for this
is the fashion, and courtesy of Italy) that you will do me the favor to go
along with me to that Church, which is there right over against us; for I have
a business to impart unto you, which imports no less, then my life and my
honor* With a very good will replied Don Iuan; Come (Sir) let us go whether
you please. Having said this, they walked hand in hand to the Church, and
sitting down on a form, and in a place apart, where they might not be heard,
Lorenzo spoke first and said.

I (noble Spaniard) am Lorenzo Bentivogli; if not one of the richest, yet one
of the chiefest of this City. This truth being so notorious, may serve to
excuse this my speaking in mine own praise; I have some years since continued
an Orphane, and there remained in my power a sister of mine, my only sister so
fair and so beautiful, that were she not so near unto me I should in such
lively colors set it forth, that no indearing should be wanting; for to tell
you truly there is not that beauty, take it altogether that can truly match it.
Now for that I am honorably descended, and she young and fair, it made me to
be very solicitous and careful in the safe keeping of so rich a jewel. But
the headstrong will of my sister Cornelia (for that is her name) has defrauded
all my preventions, and diligences. In a word, for to cut of that (not to weary
you) which would be too long a story to tell, I shall shut up all in this.

That the Duke of Ferrara, Alfonso de Este, with Lynx his eyes overcame those
of Argos, overthrew my vigilancie and triumphed over my industry by subduing my
Sister, carrying her away by night, and taking her out of our kinswomans house,
and (as they say) being but newly delivered, it was night ere I knew it, and
this very night I went to seek him out, and I think that I met with him, and
gave him something that he cannot brag of; but he was succored by some Angel
who would not give way that I should wash out the stain of my dishonor with
his blood. My kinswoman told me (for I had all this from her) that the Duke
had deceived my sister under the promise of taking her to be his wife. Which I
believe not, by reason of the inequality in the match in regard of the goods
of fortune, though there be no disparitie in those of nature and of blood,
since that the quality of the Bentivogli of Bologna is well known to the
world. That, which I believe is, that the Duke (as all great and powerful
persons use to do, who seek to tread under their feet the honor of a
timorous and wary Damsel) setting before her eyes the sweet name of husband,
making her believe that for certain respects he could not with conveniencie
presently marry her; lies carrying appearance of truths, but false, and ill
intended. But be it what it will be, I am sure I see my self without a sister
and without mine honor; though all this until now I have locked up in my
bosom, under the key of silence, and was not willing to make any acquainted
with this my wrong, till I could see whether I could be able to remedy it, or
in some sort receive satisfation. For it is better that infamies be presumed
and suspected then that they should be certainly and distinctly known; for
betwixt the yea and nay, the affirmation and negation of a doubt, every one may
lean and incline to that part, which he best likes, and every one shall have
their abettors.

In conclusion I resolved to go to Ferrara, and to require of the Duke
himself satisfaction of my affront, and if he shall deny it me to defy him,
and challenge him the field upon the case now in hand, but this not to be
performed by squadrons and troops of men, for these, I can neither make nor
maintain, but man to man. In which business I would crave the assistance of
your person, and that you would be pleased to accompany me in this my journey,
being confident of your sufficiency and good performance in what you
undertake, for that you are a Spaniard and a Gentleman as I have already been
informed. Nor am I willing to acquaint therewith any kinseman or friend of
mine, from whom I expect nothing but counsels and diswasions, and from you I
may expect those that are good and honorable, though they break through any
dangers and difficulties whatsoever. You (Sir) I must entreat to do me the
favor to go along with me, for having a Spaniard by my side, and such a one,
as you seem unto me to be I shall make account that I carry with me in my
defense the Armies of Xerxes. It is a great courtesy that I crave of you, but
the debt of corresponding with that which fame proclaymeth of your nation
obliegeth you to much more.

No more ( Senior Lorenzo) at this time said Don Iuan (for hitherto without
interrupting you, I have hearkened to every word of yours) no more I say; for
henceforth I constitute my self your defender and adviser, and take to my
charge either satisfaction or revenge of your wrong. And this not only as I am
a Spanyard, but as I am a gentleman, and that you are so principal a person as
you have voiced your self to be and as I my self and all the world knows.

Now (Sir) it remains, that you resolve upon the time of our going hence. And
as I conceive the sooner the better for the Iron is to be wrought whilst it
is hot, and the heat of choler does increase courage, and an injury whilst it
is fresh does rouse and stir up revenge.

Lorenzo rose up from the form whereon he sat, and with close imbracements
claspt Don Iuan in his arms, and said* having so generous a breast as yours is
( Senor Don Iuan) it is needless to move it, by setting before it any other
interest then that of that honor, which you shall gain in this action, the
which shall be wholly yours, in case we come off happily with this business.
And for an addition, I offer unto you all whatsoever I have, hold or possess,
as far as I am or can be able. And if you like of it, I would willingly that
we should take our journey to morrow morning, for I shall be able to day to
provide all things necessary for it.

I like very well of it (replied Don Iuan;) But I pray give me leave ( Senor
Lorenzo) that I acquaint therewith a gentleman, my companion and friend of
whose valor and silence you may be bolder to build upon then on mine.

Since that you ( Senior Don Iuan have (as you say) taken my honor to your
charge, dispose thereof as you please and speak thereof what you will, and to
whom you will; how much more to your companion and friend, who be he what he
will be, being of your choice, cannot choose but be good.

This said, they embraced each other, and took their leave, Signor Lorenzo
telling him, that he would send one unto him the next morning to call him, and
that they would take horse without the City, and go on their pretended
journey in some disguise, that there might no notice be taken of them Don Iuan
came home, and gave an account to Don Antonio and Cornelia of that which had
passed with Lorenzo, and the agreement made between them.

Lord bless me (said Cornelia) great (Sir) is your courtesy, and as great
your confidence. How, and so suddenly have you put your self into a business
so full of inconveniences? And how do you know (Sir) whether my brother will
carry you to Ferrara, or some other place? But whither soever he shall carry
you, you may assure your self, that there goes along with you faithfulness it
self, though my self (I confess) as a wretched and unfortunate woman, do
stumble at the motes of the Sun, and am afraid of every shadow; and can you
blame me for being afraid, since that my life or my death depends on the
Dukes answer? And what do I know whether or no he will answer so temperately
that my brothers choler may contain it self within the bounds and limits of
his discretion? And say it should break out, do you think that he is to
deal with a weak enemy? And do not you likewise think that all the while
that you shall be absent I shall remain hanging betwixt heaven and hell,
fearful and suspensefull, expecting the sweet or bitter news of the
success of this business? Do I love so little either the Duke or my brother,
that I do not dr^ad the disgrace and misfortunes of them both, and feel the
anguish of them in my very soul? You discourse much and fear more, (Lady
Cornelia) said Don Iuan. But let me persuade you amongst so many fears to
leave some place for hope. Put your trust in God, in my industry and good
desires and I doubt not, but you shall see yours fulfilled with a^l felic^tie
and happiness. Our going to Ferrara is not to be excused, and as little my
desisting to assist your brother; as yet we do notknow the Dukes intention,
and as little whether he know that you be missing. And all this we must know
from his own mouth, and no man can better put this question unto him then my
self* And (Lady Cornelia) I would have you to know, that the welfare and
content of your brother and the Duke, I have placed in the apples of mine eyes,
and will be as careful of them as I am of these. Heaven prosper you ( Senior
Don Iuan) replied Cornelia, and give you the power to bring this business to a
good issue, and me a thankful acknowledgment for the good comfort I receive
from you. In the midst of these my troubles (thanks to your goodness) I hold my
self very fortunate. Now however fear may afflict me in your absence, or hope
hold me in suspense, me thinks I would feign see you gone, and as feign see
you quickly return.

Don Antonio approved the determination of Don Iuan, and commended the good
correspondence which Lorenzo Bentivogli's confidence had found in him. Moreover
he told him that he would go to accompany them, in regard of that which
might happen, not knowing whether things would be fairey carried, and so for
fear of the worst would be ready (if occasion served) to see how the game
went, and to prevent all foul play.

O by no means (said Don Iuan) as well because it is not meet that the Lady
Cornelia should be left alone, as also that Signor Lorenzo may not think that
I would, (as if I wanted true valor,) underprop mine own weakness, with the
strength of others. What concerns you concerns me (answered Don Antonio;)
and therefore though unknown, and keeping aloof off, I mean to follow you,
and I presume my Lady Cornelia will be well pleased therewith* Neither will
she remain so all alone, that she shall want one to serve, attend, and keep
her company.

Whereunto Cornelia answered, it will be a great comfort to me (gentlemen) that
ye go both together, or at least in such sort, that (if need should require)
you may aid and help each other; and since that (to my seeming) you go upon
a pe^ce of service which may be subject to much peril and danger, do me the
favor (Gentlemen) to carry these relics along with you: and she had no
sooner said so, but she took from out her bosom a Cross of Diamonds of
inestimable value, and an Agnus Dei* They looked both of them on these rich
Jewels, and did ^alew them in more then they had the hatband, But they
returned them back again unto her, saying; That they did carry relics with
them, though not so well set forth, and richly adorned, yet at least as good in
their quality. Cornelia was very sorry that they would not accept of them, but
in fine she must do as they would have her.

The woman took great care and pains in tending and cheering up Cornelia, and
knowing the departure of her masters, for they had acquainted her therewith,
but not what they went about, nor whither they went, she took it to her charge
to look well unto the Lady, (whose name as yet she did not know) so that they
might not at their return have any just cause to find fault.

The next day betimes in the morning Lorenzo came to the door, and found Don
Iuan ready for his journey, in a handsome riding suite, his rich hat making
somewhat the more graceful show by reason of its intermingled black and
yellow feathers, but the hatband he covered it over with a black veil. He
took his leave of Cornelia, who imagining that her brother was now very near
her, was so afraid, that she had not the power to speak one word to these two
gentlemen that took their leave of her.

Don Iuan went forth first, and with Lorenzo walked out of the City, and in a
garden somewhat out of the rodeway, they found two very good Horses well
fitted, and two Lackeyes holding of them. They mounted on them, the Lackeyes
running before them, and by uncouth paths, and untrodden by-ways they
travailed toward Ferrara.

Don Antonio upon a good quat*Nag of his own, and in another different riding
suite, disguising himself followed after them, but it seemed unto him, that
they had an eye upon him, especially Lorenzo, and therefore resolved to take
the direct way to Ferrara, assuring himself that there he should meet with
them.

They had scarce gone out of the City, but that Cornelia gave an account to
the woman of all that had befallen her* and how that child was hers, begotten
on her by the Duke of Ferrara, with all the points and passages which hitherto
have been related touching her story, not concealing from her how that
journey which her masters had undertaken was for Ferrara, accompanying her
brother* who went to bid defiance by way of challenge to the Duke Alfonso.
Which the woman hearing, said unto her.

O sweet Lady, has all this ado been about you, and do you like one that
sleeps without stretched legs stay here thus careless in a business of such
consequence? Either have you no soul, or have you it so benumbed and so
senseless that you have no feeling of the miserable estate and condition
wherein you are? And I pray tell me, do you happily think that your brother
goes to Ferrara? Deceive not your self, do not think so, but rather think
and believe that he has taken my masters hence, and to get them far from
home, that he may the safelier return hither and take away your life; which
he may as easily do, as I take up this cup and drink. Consider with your
self under what guard and protection we remain. We have no more but three
Pages in the house, and they have enough to do to scratch their itching
scabbes, whereof they are full; and say they should put themselves upon upon
defense, what can they do? This at least I can say of my self, that I (for my
part) have not the heart to stay expecting the success and ruin which
threatens this house. Signior Lorenzo, an Italian and trust Spaniards? He
crave their help and assistance? believe it he that list, for I do not; He
reckon of them? he cares not a Fig for them. If you (daughter mine) will
take my counsel, I will give you that that shall make you see a little better
if you will not stand in your own light.

Cornelia hearing the woman's reasons which she uttered with such earnestness
and vehemency, and with such shows and manifestations of fear, that all that
she said unto her seemed to be truths, and that peradventure Don Iuan and Don
Antonio might be slain, and that her brother might be entering the doors of
the house, and with his dagger never leave stabbing of her til he had killed
her; and therefore being thus perplexed, she said unto her; And what counsel
will you give me (friend) that might be wholesome, and that might prevent this
storm that hangs over our heads?

What counsel will I give you? Marry such and so good that all the world (said
the woman) cannot bettere^. I did once (Madam) serve an honest Curate of a
country Village, which is some two miles off from Ferrara; he is a good man
and will do any thing for me that I can ask of him or is in his power to
perform He loves me well, and is more obliged unto me, then to any other
woman whatsoever. Let us go thither and let me alone to get some one or other
that shall carry us thither. And as for her that gives the child suck, she is
a poor woman, and will go along with us to the worlds end. And admit (Lady)
that you should be found out, it were better that you should be found in the
house of a Priest, and that is an old and reverend man, then in the power of
two young Students and those Spaniards, who are a kind of people (as I my self
can well witness) that will fly at any game. If they cannot meet with a
handsome piece of Timber they will content themselves with Chips, and if they
cannot ^ight upon a smooth polished stone, they will make use of rubbish. And
though now (Lady) that you are ill at ease, they have borne you good respect,
yet when you shall be well and in perfect health, then heaven have mercy upon
you. There is no other help that I know. And that I may not lie unto you, if
my repulses, disdaines and integrity had not guarded me, they had given check
mate to my honesty; all is not gold (Lady) that glisters in them. They say one
thing and think another, I have had trial enough of them, yet they were not
so cunning but I was as crafty. Every body knows where his own shoe wrings
him most. I am Madam, (may I speak it without boasting) well borne; I come of
the Cribelos of Milan; and for point of honor that I hold in so good a height,
that I make account that it reaches hence ten miles above the clouds. And yet
notwithstanding all this, you may see the calamities and crosses (Madam) which
I have past through, since that being descended as I am, I am come to be a
servant and drudge to these Spaniards whom they call their woman. Though
indeed I must confess that I have no great cause to complain of my masters,
for they are very kind and loving, so long as you do not cross and anger
them* And herein they seem to be Biskayners, as they report themselves to be.
But it may be that they are guilty to themselves, that they are Gallegos,
which is another nation they say less punctual, and somewhat more subtle and
wary then the Biskayners.

In conclusion, she rendered such and such reasons, that poor Cornelia
disposed her self to follow her advise; and so in lessethen four hours, she
disposing the business and Cornelia consenting thereunto they had both of them
got them into a Wagon, together with the child's nurse, and without being heard
of the Pages they put themselves upon their way for that Village where the
Curate dwelt. And all this was done by the persuasion of this foolish,
fearful woman, and with her moneys, for not long before her master had paid
her a whole years wages. And therefore there was no need of pawning a jewel
which Cornelia gave her for that purpose. And for that Cornelia had heard Don
Iuan say that he and her brother would not go the direct way to Ferrara, but
by unused paths, they were willing to take the direct way going on very
leysurely, that they might not meet with them; and the Waggoner did apply
himself to their will, and paced on according to their mind, because they had
contented and paid him according to his. But let us leave them jogging on their
journey, with that (how e're it hap) their bold adventure.

And now let us see how it fared with Don Iuan de Gamboa, and ^ignor Lorenzo di
Bentivogli, of whom it is said, that being upon their way, they had notice that
the Duke was not in Ferrara but in Bologna. And therefore leaving the wheeling
and going about which they had fetched, they came into the common highway,
considering with themselves that the Duke must pass that way in his return
from Bologna* And they had not long been entered thereinto, when looking
toward Bologna for to see if any came from thence, they might epsy coming
toward them a great troop of Horse; And then Don Iuan said to Lorenzo that
he should go a little out of the way because if it should happen that the
Duke should come in company with them, he would have some speech there with
him, before he should enter into Ferrara, which was not far off. Lorenzo did
so, and approved Don Iuans opinion.

As soon as Lorenzo was gone aside, Don Iuan took off that case which covered
his rich ^hatband, and this he did not without difereete discourse, as he
afterward declared. By this time this travayling troop was come, and among
them came a woman upon a pide Nagge in a fair riding suite, and her face
covered with a Mask, either for the better keeping of her self from being
known, or for to keep her self from the Sun and Air.

Don Iuan stood still with his horse in the middle of the way, and bare faced,
waiting till this troop should come up to him. And in coming nearer up unto
him, his fashion, his lively and spritefull look, his pleasing countenance,
the galantrie of his clothes, and the proudnesse of his Horse, and the
glittering luster and bright-shining beams of his Diamonds, drew after them
the eyes of all those that past that way; and more especially those of the Duke
of Ferrara, who was one of them; who as soon as he had placed his eyes on the
hatband, he presently apprehended that he who wore it, was Don Iuan de Gamboa,
who had taken part with him, and brought him safe off in that his quarrel. And
so truly did he apprehend this truth, that without making further discourse
with himself, he set Spurs to his Horse, and made up to Don Iuan, saying;
Noble Sir, If I call you Don Iuan de Gamboa, I persuade my self I shall not be
therein deceived, for your brave and gentle disposition, and this hat you wear
tells me as much.

It is true (answered Don Iuan) for I never yet knew nor am I willing to
dissemble, or conceal my name, for I have not done ought that I need to be
ashamed thereof. But I pray (Sir) tell me who you are, least I might otherwise
offend in point of good manners, and so show my self discourteous.

That is impossible (replied the Duke) for I conceive and assure you on my
part, that you can in no case be discourteous with me, yet notwithstanding I
tell you Senior Don Iuan that I am the Duke of Ferrara, and he that is obliged
to serve you all the days of his life; for it is not four nights since that
you gave it me. The Duke had no sooner made an end of saying this, but Don Iuan
with strange nimblenesse alighted from his horse and went to kiss the Dukes
foot. But for all the haste that he made, the Duke had got down from his
seat, and took Don Iuan and embraced him in his arms* Signor Lorenzo who
from afar beheld these ceremonies, not thinking that they were of courtesy but
of choler put spurs to his horse as hard as he could drive but in the midst of
his speed, he took him up gently by degrees, and made a stand, because he
saw the Duke, and Don Iuan (who now knew the Duke) closely embracing (...), and
the Duke casting his eye over Don Iuans shoulder hee^ ^spied Lorenzo, and knew
him, and was at the first sight, not dreaming of his being there so near him,
somewhat start^ed therewith, and therefore whilst they were as yet in their
imbracements, the Duke demanded of Don Iuan whether Lorenzo Bentivogli, who
stood thereby, came along with him or no? Whereunto Don Iuan replied; Let us
go^ a little (...), and I shall acquain^: your Excellency ^ith great and
strange matters. The Duke did so, and then Don Iuan said unto him.

Signor Lorenzo Bentivogli, whom you see there, has a complaint* and no small
one against you; He says, that it is now four hights since that you took
his Sister Cornelia out of his Kinswomans house, and that you have deceived and
dishonored her, and (...) know from you what satisfaction you mean^ vol give
him by way of reparation, which he holds ^to require. He entreated me that I
would be his second, or at least become an Vmpire, for the according of this
business, upon honorable terms. I offered this my service and my best
endeavors, because by these g^sses and suspicions which he gave me of the
quarrel, I knew that you (Sir) were the master and owner of this hatband which
out of your liberality and courtesy, you would that it should be mine. And
knowing likewise that none could better undertake this task then my self, nor
more tender your good and safety then I do, I offered him my best furtherance
and assistance. Now that (Sir) which I would entreat of you, is, that you
would plainly tell me what you know concerning this case, and whether that
be true which Lorenzo says.

O my dear friend, (answered the Duke) it is such a truth that I dare not,
though I would deny it: But I must tell you withal, that I have neither
deceived, nor taken Cornelia away, though I know she is gone out of the house
where she was, but whither God knows, for I do not. I have not deceived her,
because I hold her to be my wife; nor have I taken her away because I know not
what is become of her. And if I did not publicly celebrate my Nuptials, it
was because I did still look that my mother (who is now upon her last) should
pass from this to a better life; being very* desirous that I should marry the
Lady L^ia, daughter to the Duke of M^tua, as likewise for many other
inconveniences, more per adventure effectual then the former, and not now fit
to be spoken of. That which posseth (and take it for truth) is. That that very
night, when you came in to suecour me* I purposed to have carried her away
with me to Ferrara. For she was now in the month wherein she was to bring
forth to the light that pledge which heaven had ordained to be deposited in
her. Now whether it were by reason of that quarrel, or whether by my
carelessenes, when I came to her house, I found coming out of it, the
secretary of our compact and contract, and all other our meetings and
agreements. I ask't for Cornelia, she told me that she was newly gone out,
and that she had that very night been delivered of a son, one of the
fairest creatures that ever eye saw, and that she had given it to my servant
Fabio. That is the damsel which comes there, Fabio is here with me, but the
babe and Cornelia are both missing. I have been there two days in Bologna,
expecting and inquiring if I could hear any news of Cornelia, but have heard
none.

So that (Sir) said Don Iuan, when Cornelia and your son shall appear you
will neither deny the one to be your spouse, nor the other your son.

No certainly, (replied the Duke) for though I prize my my self to be a
gentleman, yet I prise my self more, to be a Christian. And the rather for
that Cornelia is such a one* as deserves to be mistress of a kingdom, should
she appear and live or my mother die, the world shall then know that if I
knew to be a lover, I likewise knew how to keep that faith in public, which
I did plight in secret.

You shall do well (Sir) said Don Iuan; that what you have said to me you will
say the same to your brother Signor Lorenzo. I am sorry (replied the Duke) that
he has been kept so long from knowing it.

Thereupon Don Iuan instantly made signs to Lorenzo that he should alight from
his horse, and come unto them, which he did, being far from thinking on that good
news which attended him. The Duke advanced himself, to receive him with open
arms, and the first word he spoke unto him was ( Brother.) Lorenzo scarce knew
on the sudden how to return answer to so loving a salutation and courteous a
reception. And standing thus in suspense before he could recollect himself to
speak a word. Don Iuan said unto him.

The Duke ( Signior Lorenzo) acknowledges the secret conversation which he
has had with your Sister, the Lady Cornelia. He likewise confesses that she
is his lawful wife; and that as he avers it here, so will he avouch it in
public when occasion shall be offered. He grants in like manner that he went
some four nights since to fetch her away from her kinswomans house, for to
carry her with him to Ferrara, and to wait for a good conjuncture for the
celebrating of his Nuptials, which he has deferred upon very just causes,
which he has made known unto me; he tells me also of the quarrel which he
had with you; and that when he went for Cornelia, he met with Sulpicia, her
waiting gentlewoman, which is that woman whom you see there, of whom he
learned that it was not above an hour since that Cornelia was delivered, and
that she gave the babe to a servant of the Dukes, and that Cornelia forth with
believing that the Duke was there, went full of fear out of the house, because
she imagined, that you Signor Lorenzo, had already notice of her proceedings.
Sulpicia gave not the babe to the Dukes servant but to another in his stead.
Cornelia appears not, the Duke bears all the blame, and yet he says; That
whenever and wheresoever the Lady Cornelia shall appear, he will take and
receive her as his true and lawful wife. Now ( Signior Lorenzo) what can he
say more, or what more by you, and us to be desired or wished for, then the
finding out of those two, as rich, as unfortunate pledges?

Hereunto answered Signor Lorenzo (throwing himself at the Dukes feet, who
strove to take him up) Of your christianity and greatness (most noble Sir)
and my dear brother, neither could my Sister nor my self expect less good
from you, then that which you have done to us both. To her in equalling her
with your self, and to me in ranking me in the number of your friends and
alliance. And with that the tears trickled down from his eyes, and so
likewise did they from the Dukes, both out of mere tenderness of heart. The
one for the loss of his spouse, and the other that he had found so good a
brother in Law. But considering that it might seem weakness in them to
manifest their grief by their tears, they did compresse them, and withdrew
them from their eyes. But those of Don Iuan were very cheerful, as if they
had asked them Albricias, or some reward for the glad tidings of Cornelias and
her sons being found, being that he left them well in his own house.

In these terms things stood, when lo Don Antonio de Ysunca discovered
himself, whom whiles he was yet a good ways of, Don Iuan knew by his Nagge,
but when he drew near he made a stand, and saw Don Iuans and Signor Lorenzoes
horses, and the Lackeyes that held them, and though they were a good way off,
yet he knew Don Iuan and Lorenzo, but not the Duke. He knew not what to do
with himself, whether he should draw near or no, where Don Iuan was: Coming
therefore to one of the Dukes servants, he demanded of him whether he knew
that gentleman which was with the other two, pointing to the Duke? He told him
that it was the Duke of Ferrara; wherewith he remained amazed, and knew less
what to do with himself now then he did before. But Don Iuan did put him out
of this his perplexity by calling unto him by his name. Don Antonio alighted,
seeing that they were all a foot, and came unto them. The Duke received him
with a great deal of courtesy, because Don Iuan had told him that he was his
friend, and companion.

In conclusion Don Iuan recounted unto Don Antonio all that which had betided
him with the Duke, till he came unto them. Don Antonio was therewith
extremely joyed, and said to Don Iuan; Why Senior Don Iuan do not you make an
end of putting the joy and contentment of these two gentlemen in their true
point, giving a period thereunto, by craving Albricias for the finding out of
the Lady Cornelia, and her son? If you had not come ( Senior Don Antonio) I
would have begd Albricias, but now do you beg them; for I assure you they
will give them you with a very good will.

The Duke and Lorenzo hearing them treat of the finding of Cornelia, and of
Albricias, asked them what was that they talked of? What should it be (replied
Don Antonio) but that I am willing to make one in this Tragick-Comedie, and
must be he that must beg Albricias of you for the finding of the Lady
Cornelia, and of her son, for they are in my house. And so presently point by
point he recounted unto them all that which heretofore has been said; where
of the Duke and Signor Lorenzo received so great pleasure and content, that
Lorenzo embraced Don Iuan, and the Duke Don Antonio. The Duke promised all his
estate for bringing him this good news, and Signor Lorenzo his goods, his
life, and his soul. They called to the waiting gentlewoman that delivered the
child to Don Iuan, who having taken notice of Lorenzo stood trembling and
quaking for fear. They asked her if she knew the man, to whom she had
delivered the child, she answered no; but that she asked him, if he were
Fabio? And he replied, yes, and that upon this good belief she gave it him,
you say true indeed (said Don Iuan) and you (gentlewoman) anon after shut the
door and told me that I should have a care of it, and see it safe, and come
quickly back again unto you: it is even so (Sir) as you say, answered the
gentlewoman, shedding many a tear. But the Duke bid her be quiet, and said;
Now there are no need here of tears, but Iubiles, and feastings. And since
the case stands thus, I will not enter Ferrara, but forthwith return back to
Bologna; for all these contentments are but as in shadow, till that the seeing
of my Cornelia make them true. And without saying any more, by a joint consent
they presently turned about to make for Bologna. Don Antonio went before for to
prepare for Cornelia, least that she might be overtaken with some sudden
passion upon the unexpected coming of the Duke, and her brother. But when he
found her not, neither could the Pages tell him any news of her, he remained
the most ashamed, and most sorrowful man in the world. And when he saw that
their woman too was wanting, he imagined that by her industry and persuasions
Cornelia was missing. The Pages told him that the woman was wanting the same
day that they were. And as for Cornelia, for whom he asked, they never saw her.
Don Antonio was almost out of his wits with this unexpected chance, fearing
happily that the Duke would hold them for liars or impostors, or perhaps
imagine other worser things, which might redound in prejudice of their honor,
and Cornelia's credit.

Whilst he was imagining and casting these doubts and scruples with himself,
entered the Duke, Don Iuan, and Lorenzo by unfrequented streets and back lanes,
having left the rest of their people with out the City. They came to Don Iuan
house, and found Don Antonio sitting in a Chair, with his hands on his
cheeks, and with a color as pale and wa^e as death. Don Iuan asked him, what
are you not well? Where is Cornelia? Don Antonio replied; How can I be well,
since that Cornelia does not appear? who with the woman that we left with her
for to keep her company* the same day that we were gone, she was gone. The
Duke wanted little of growing desperate upon the hearing of this sad news.

In a word, all of them were much troubled, suspensive, and imaginative,
casting I know not what in their minds. Whilst they were thus in their dumpes,
there came a Page unto Don Antonio, and whispering him in the ear, told him;
(...) Don Iuan Page, from that day that you went hence, has kept a very
handsome woman in his chamber and I believe that her name is Cornelia, for I
heard him call her so. Antonio was now troubled (...) and would rather that
Cornelia had not appeared at all (for he did verily believe that that was she
whom the Page had ^id) then that they should find her in such a place, yet
notwithstanding he said nothing, but holding his peace he stole to the Pages
Chamber but found the door locked, and the Page from home. He came to the
door, and in a low voice said; Lady Cornelia open the door, come forth to
receive your brother and the Duke your husband, who are come to seek you. He
heard one answer within* what do you mock me? I am not so ill favored* nor so
unfortunate that Dukes and Earls may not seek after me. But this it is, to
have to do with Pages, I deserve no better payment. By which words Don Antonio
understood that she that answered him was not Cornelia.

Whilst this passed, came Santistevan the Page, and hyed him presently to his
lodging, and finding Don Antonio there who willed him to bring him the Keys of
the house, for to try if any of them would open the door; the Page falling
down upon his knees, with the Key in his hand, said unto him* your absence and
my ^guery made me bring hither this woman, who has abode with me here, this
three nights; I beseech you (Sir) as you are a gentleman, and may hear good
news from Spain, that if my master Don Iuan de Gamboa has not already heard
of it, that he may not know of it* for I will instantly put her out of the
house. And what is this woman's name, said Don Antonio her name Sir (replied the
Page) is Cornelia.

The Page who discovered the Ambush (who bare no great good will to (...)* nor
is it known whether out of simplicity, or malice*) came down where the Duke,
Don Iuan and Lorenzo were saying; that Page yonder has kept up Cornelia close*
like a Hawke in a Mew, and could, have wished that his master had not come home
so soon, that he might have taken his pleasure of her three or four* days
longer, Lorenzo over heard this, and asked him what is that (my friend) you say?
where is Cornelia? Above (answered the Page.) The Duke had no sooner heard
this, but like lightning he got him up the stayres to see Cornelia, imagining
that she had appeared, and lighted right on the chamber where Don Antonio was,
and entering he said; where art thou Cornelia? where is the life of my life?
Here is Cornelia answered a woman, that lay wrapped up in a sheet of the bed with
her face covered and prosecuted her speech, saying; This is no such great fault
as you would make it, you need not make such a deal ado about it, it is no
such new or strange thing for a woman to lie with a Page, that you make such a
wonder of it. Lorenzo, who was there present, raging with despite and chollor,
took the sheet by one of the corners and pulled it off, and discovered a young
woman of no ill aspect, who out of shame clapped her hands before her face, and
made haste to take her clothes unto her which served her instead of a pillow,
for the bed had none; and by these and other like signs they saw that she was
some common hackney which did set out her self to hyre: The Duke ask't her and
willed her that she should tell him truly whether her name were Cornelia or
no? She made him answer that it was; and that she had kinsfolk of very good
account and credit in the City, and that none can say of themselves that they
will not drink of this water.

The Duke was so ashamed, that he was almost ready to imagine that the
Spaniards had put a trick upon him* But to the end that he might not give way
to the entertaining of so ill a suspicion, he turned his back, and without
speaking one word Lorenzo following him, they got to their Horses and went
their way, leaving Don Iuan, and Don Antonio more ashamed then they; and
determined with themselves to use all possible, yea even all impossible
diligences in seeking out Cornelia, and in satisfying the Duke of their truth
and good desires. They put Santistevan out of their service for a bold impudent
fellow, and turned that shameless Queen Cornelia out of doors; And in that
very instant it came into their mind that they had forgotten to tell the Duke
of those jewels, the Agnus dei, and the Cross of Diamonds which Cornelia had
offered them, being that by these tokens he might have been induced to believe
that Cornelia had been in their power, and that if she were now wanting, they
could not do withal they hasted forth to tell him this, but they found him
not in Lorenzo's house where they thought he had been.

They met with Lorenzo, who told them, that without making any stay at all he
went directly to Ferrara, leaving order for the looking out of his Sister; They
acquainted him with their errand, and with what they meant to have said to the
Duke in their just excuse, but Lorenzo told them that the Duke was very well
satisfied of their good proceeding, and that both of them had laid the fault on
Cornelia's too much fear, and that God would be pleased that she should ere
long appear, since that they persuaded themselves that the earth had not
swallowed up the Child, the woman, and her self.

With this they did all comfort themselves, and were not willing to make
inquiry after her by public proclamations, but by secret diligences, because
her being mist was known by none but her kinswoman; and amongst those who did
not know the Dukes intention, his Sister might run the hazard of her
reputation, if they should make a public proclayming of it, and that it would
require a great deal of labor and trouble for to go satisfying every one of
those suspicions which a vehement presumption should infuse into them.

The Duke went forward on his journey, and it so happened by good fortune, or
rather divine Providence had so disposed it, that he came to that Village of
this Curate, where were already arrived Cornelia, the Child, the Nurse, and the
Plotter and deviser of their going thither; And they had given him account of
all the business, and besought his advise and counsel what they were best to
do.

The Curate was a great lover of the Duke, to whose house fitted and
accommodated, like that of a rich and curious Clergie-man; the Duke did use
oftentimes to come from Ferrara, and from thence went a hunting. For he took
great pleasure and delight as well in the Curates curiosity, as in the
wittiness and gracefulness in all whatsoever he either said or did. He was no
whit moved or troubled to see the Duke in his house, (for as already has been
said) it was not the first time that he had been there. But it did grieve and
discontent him to see him there so sad and melancholy; for he did presently
perceive that his mind was troubled and possessed with some passion.

Cornelia had overheard that the Duke of Ferrara was there, and was extremely
troubled thereat, because she did not know with what intention he came
thither; She wrung her hands, and ran up and down from one place to another,
as if she had been distracted and out of her wits* Cornelia would feign have
spoken with the Curate, but he was entertaining the Duke, and had not the
leisure to talk with her.

The Duke said unto him, Father, I am come hither I confess very sad and
heavy, and will not enter to day into Ferrara, but be your guest; I pray go
forth, and bid those that came with me, to go back again to Ferrara, only
let Fabio stay here with me. The good Curate did so; and then presently went to
give order for the entertaining and serving of the Duke. And so upon this
occasion Cornelia might have the opportunity to speak with him; who taking
him by both the hands, held him fast, and said unto him. O Father, what is that
the Duke would have? what is it he comes about? for Gods sake (sir) give him
some touch, touching my business, and see if you can sound him, and by some
sign or other, discover his intention. In conclusion, so carry this business
as shall seem best unto you, and as your great discretion shall direct you.

Whereunto the Curate answered, that the Duke was very sad and pensive, but
has not as yet told me the cause of this his grief. That which is to be
done, is that you presently dress this Child, and make it as neat and fine as
possibly you can; adorning him withal your jewels* especially those the Duke
gave you, and leave the rest to me. Cornelia embraced him and kissed his
hands, and withdrew her self to dress and trick up the Child.

The Curate in the mean while went forth to entertain the Duke until dinner
time; and talking and discoursing of diverse things, the Curate asked the Duke
whether he might be so bold, as to learn from him the cause of his
melancholy? because a man might plainly perceive a league of this his sadness.

Father (said the Duke) it is a clear case, that the sorrows of the heart
will break out and show themselves in the countenance of man or woman; and in
our eyes and looks is read the relation of that which is in our souls. And
that which grieves me most, is; that I cannot as yet communicate my sorrow to
any. But truly (my Lord) replied the Curate, if you were but now in case, or
would be pleased to see things of pleasure and delight, I could show you one
which I keep to my self, which would give you great contentment. Very silly
and simple (answered the Duke) should that man be, who having a remedy offered
him for his malady would not take it. As you love me (Father) I pray show it
me; this which you now speak of, must be some of your curiosities, all which
have hitherto given me singular content.

The Curate rose up from his seat, and went where Cornelia was, who had now
made an end of dressing her son and had put on and about him those rich
jewels of the Cross, and of the Agnus dei, with other three most precious
stones, all given by the Duke to Cornelia; and taking the Child in his arms,
he went where the Duke was, desiring him that he would rise from his chair,
and that he would be pleased to take the pains to come to the window, because
the light was there much clearer. Being come thither, he took the Child out of
his arms, and put it into those of the Duke; who when he had looked upon it
and knew the jewels and saw that they were the same which he had given to
Cornelia; he remained astonished and amazed: and looking wishly on the Child,
it seemed unto him that he saw his own picture, And being full of admiration,
he asked the Curate whose Child that was, which in its adorning and dressing
seemed to be the Child of some Prince?

I know not (replied the Curate) only I know this, that some (I know not how
many) months since, a gentleman of Bologna brought him hither unto me, and
gave me in charge that I should look well unto him, and breed him up; for that
he was the son of a valiant and noble Father, and of a principal and most
beautiful Mother. There came likewise with this gentleman, a woman for to
nurse the Child; of whom I did demand if she knew ought concerning the Parents
of this Babe? but she told me she knew nothing touching that particular. And
indeed if the Mother be so fair as is the Nurse, she must needs be the
fairest woman in all Italy. May we not see her said the Duke? yes certainly
said the Curate. Come you (sir) with me; for if the dressing and beauty of
this pretty creature has thus suspended you, and made you stand at a gaze, as
I believe and perceive it has, what will the sight of its Nurse do? The
Curate would have taken the Child from the Duke, but he would not let him go
till that he had hugged him in his bosom, and bestowed many kisses upon him.
The Curate in the interim got him a little before, and calling to Cornelia,
wished her that she should come forth without any perturbation at all, for to
receive the Duke.

Cornelia did so; and being overtaken with a sudden passion, there arose such
fresh colors in her face, as did beautifie^ her beyond measure* The Duke was
wonderfully stricken when he saw her, and she throwing her self at his feet
would have kissed them. The Duke without speaking any one word* gave the Child
to the Curate, and turning himself from them, he got him with great haste out
of the house; Which Cornelia seeing, turning her self about to the Curate,
said unto him;

Aye me (good sir) have my looks scared and affrighted the Duke that he
cannot endure the sight of me? Am I grown odious in his eyes? am I so foul
that he does loath and abhor me? Has he forgot those obligations wherein
he stands bound unto me? what would he not vouchsafe to speak so much as one
word unto me? Was his Son so burdensome unto him? was he so weary with
holding of him, that he so quickly rather threw, then put him out of his arms?
To all which her complaint the Curate replied not a word, wondering at the
sudden flight of the Duke, for it seemed unto him to be rather a flying, then
any thing else.

But all this his haste was to no other end, save to go out to call Fabio, and
to say unto him; Run ( Fabio) and make all the haste you can to Bologna, and
bid Lorenzo Bentivogli, and the two Spanish gentlemen, Don Iuan de Gamboa, and
Don Antonio de Ysanca, that instantly laying all businesses and excuses aside,
they come instantly unto me to this Village. See ( Fabio) that you make all
possible speed, loose no time, and by no means do not you come without them,
for it imports me no less then my life to see them.

Fabio was not slothful, but presently put his Lords command in execution. He
being thus dispatched and sent away, the Duke presently returned back again
where Cornelia was; finding her distilling pearled drops of tears. The Duke
took her into his arms, and adding tears to tears, a thousand times he
drank in the breath of her mouth, taking great content in each other, though
their tongues were bound to the peace. And so in an honest and amorous silence,
these two happy lovers and true man and wife did enjoy themselves. The Child's
Nurse and Cri^ela) at least as she her self said) who between the doors of
another chamber stood observing what passed betwixt the Duke and Cornelia, were
ready for joy to leap out of their skinns, and were so overtaken with this so
pleasing a sight, that they seemed wild and half out of their wits.

The Curate bestowed a thousand kisses on the pretty sweet babe which he had
in his arms, and with his right hand which was disoccupied and at liberty, he
was never satisfied with throwing Benedictions on those two embraced lovers.
The Curates Maid who was not present at this great and strange chance, because
she was busy in dressing and providing dinner; when all was ready to be served
in, she came in to call them to sit down to their meat which stayed on the
table waiting for them. This brake off their strickt embracements, and the Duke
disincumbred the Curate of the Child and took him into his own arms, and
there held him all the while that (that rather well seasoned then sumptuous)
dinner lasted. And being thus sitting and eating together, Cornelia gave him an
account of all that which had happened till her coming to that house, by the advice and counsel of that she servant of the two Spanish gentlemen, who had
served, protected, and kept her with the honestest and most punctual decorum
that could be imagined. The Duke likewise recounted unto her all that which had
be fallen him till this very instant.

There were present waiting on them, the two Nurses wet, and dry, who received
from the Duke great offers, and large promises. In all of them was renewed the
content which they took in the happy end of this rare success, and only
stayed expecting to make it fuller, and to put it into the best state that
possibly could be desired, by the coming of Lorenzo, of Don Iuan, and Don
Antonio: who some three days after comforting themselves with hope, and being
very desirous to know whether the Duke had as yet any news of Cornelia? For
Fabio, who was purposely sent for them, could not inform them of her being
found, because he knew nothing of it.

The Duke went forth to receive them in a large room adjoining near unto that
where Cornelia was; but without expressions of any contentment at all:
whereupon these new-come guests were very heavy and sorrowful, and looked
sadly one upon another. The Duke caused them to sit down, and he himself fate
with them, and directing his speech to Lorenzo, he said unto him;

You wott well ( Signor Lorenzo Bentivogli) that I did never deceive your
Sister, as Heaven, and mine own Conscience can well witness for me; you know
likewise the diligence which I have used, and the desire which I have had to
find her out that I might marry her, and make her my Wife, according unto
promise. She appears not, and my word ought not to be eternal. I am a young
man, and not so well grounded and experienced in the things of this World, that
I should not suffer my self to be carried away by those, which delight every
foot offers me. The self same affection which made me promise my self to
be Cornelias Husband, did likewise lead me, before I past my word unto her, to
promise marriage to a Country wench, a husband man's Daughter of this Village*
whom I did think to put off, and leave deluded, that I might apply my self to
Cornelias worth; though not to that which my conscience did dictate unto me,
which was no small manifestation of my great love. But since that no man
marries with a Wife which does not appear; and that it does not stand with
reason, that a man should seek after a Wife that forsakes him, that she may
not be found by him whom she abhors; I say this ( Signor Lorenzo) that you
may thereby see the satisfaction, which I am both willing, and able to give
you, that I have not done you any the least wrong or affront, being that I
never had any inten^ion or purpose to do it. And therefore I would have you to
give me leave to comply with my first promise, and that I may marry this
Country Maid, who is now here in this house.

Whilst that the Duke was making this speech, Lorenzo's countenance went,
changing it self into a thousand colors, neither could he for his life sit
still after one and the same manner; which were clear signs and manifest
tokens, that choler went taking possession of all his senses. In the like
taking was Don Iuan, and Don Antonio, who did presently resolve that the Duke
should not go on with his intention, although it cost them their lives.

The Duke then reading their mind in their faces, said; rest you quiet (
Signior Lorenzo) for before that you shall return me any one word in answer
to mine; I will, that the beauty that you shall see in her, whom I am desirous
to make my Wife, may obliege you to give me leave to do that which I crave of
you. For it is such, and so beyond all mortal manner, that it will be able to
plead excuse for far greater errors.

When the Duke was risen and went his way from them, Don Iuan stood up, and
resting both his hands on the arms of the Chair where Don Lorenzo sat, he
said unto him in a loud voice; By St. Iago of Galicia ( Signior Lorenzo) and by
the Faith of a Christian which I profess; I vow, that I will as soon suffer
the Duke to proceed in this his purpose, as I intend to turn Moore. As I am a
Gentleman, here, even here, and in these very hands of mine, he shall either
leave his life, or perform his word and promise which he made to your Sister
the Lady Cornelia; or at least to give them time and respite for to seek after
her, till such time that they should certainly know that she were dead; and
in the mean while, not to permit him to Marry. I am of the same opinion
answered Lorenzo; and of the same likewise (replied Don Iuan) will my friend
and companion Don Antonio be.

While they were thus debating this business, from out a Room just before
them, came Cornelia in the middle, betwixt the Curate, and the Duke, who led
her by the hand. After whom followed Sulpicia, Corneti^ Gentle woman, (the Duke
having sent for her to Ferrara) and the two Nurses to the Child, and the Woman
belonging to the Spanish Gentlemen.

When Lorenzo saw his Sister, and had taken a full view of her, and knew that
it was she (for at first, the impossibility, to his seeming of such a
success, did not suffer him to enter truly into the reckoning of it,)
stumbling out of haste, he went to throw himself at the Dukes feet; he
took him up, and placed him in his Sisters arms, who embraced him with all
possible demonstrations of joy.

Don Iuan, and Don Antonio, told the Duke that he had put upon them the most
discreet, and most savourie conceit in the World.

The Duke took the Child which Sulpicia brought in her arms, and giving it
to Lorenzo, said; Here Brother, take your Nephew, and my Son, and see now,
whether or no you will give me leave to marry with this Country Less, who is
the first that ever I plighted my faith unto, that I would marry her.

It were an endless piece of work, to recount that which Lorenzo replied;
that which Don Iuan asked him; that which Don Antonio thought, the rejoicing of
the Curate, the joy of Suloicia, the content of the advisers, the admiration of
Fabio, the Iubile of the Nurse; and in a word, the general contentment of all.

The Curate forthwith married them, Don Iuan de Gamboa being the Father that
gave her. And amongst them all it was concluded and agreed upon, that those
Nuptials should be secret, and concealed; till they should see how it fared
with the Duchess his Mother, who was almost spent, by reason of her long
sickness: and that in the meane-while, Cornelia should return with her
brother to Bologna. All this was done.

The Duchess shortly after dyed, and Cornelia entered into Ferrara, cheering
the World with her fair presence: Mourning weeds, were turned into gay and
rich clothes, The Nurses were liberally rewarded. Sulpicia was married to
Fabio. Don Antonio, and Don Iuan were wonderful well contented, that it was
there good fortune, that they had been some way serviceable to the Duke; who
offered them two of his near kinswomen to be their Wives, with exceeding rich
Dowries. But they told him, that the Gentlemen of Biscay, for the most part did
marry in their own Country: and that not out of any scorn, (for that was not
possible) but for to comply with that commendable custom, and the will of
their Parents, who had already provided Wives for them; they did not, nor could
accept of this his most noble offer.

The Duke admitted of their excuse, and by honest and honorable means, and
seeking after lawful occasions, he sent them many Presents to Bologna, and
some so rich, and that in so good a season and conjuncture; that although they
might not admit of them, least it might seem that they received pay for their
service, yet the time wherein they came, did facilitate their kind acceptance
of them. Especially those which he sent them at their going for Spain: and
those which he gave them when they went to Ferrara to take their leave of him,
where they found Cornelia accompanied with other Ladies, amongst whom, her
transcendent beauty, and incomparable virtues, made her shine with as much
superiority, as a Star of a greater magnitude exceeds in splendor the lesser
Lumanaries of its own Sphere. The Duke being (according to all the grounds of
reason and love) more enamoured of her then ever.

The Duchess gave her Cross of Diamonds to Don Iuan, and her Agnus dei, to
Don Antonio; who when they saw that all their mannerly refusalls would not
serve their turn* they with an unwilling willingness received them.

They came to Spain, into their own Country, where they were married to
rich, principal, and beautiful young Women, continuing still their
correspondencie with the Duke, and the Duchess; and with Signior Lorenzo
Bentivogli, to the great good liking on either part.

The end of the second Book.
THE LIBERAL LOVER.
THE THIRD BOOK.
OH the lamentable Ruins of unhappie Nicosia! The blood of thy valiant and
unfortunate defenders being yet scarce dry. If (as thou art senseless thereof)
thou had any feeling at all in this desolate and woeful estate wherein now
we are, we might jointly bewail our misfortunes and that wretched estate and
condition wherein we are; And happily having a companion in them, it would
help to ease me in some sort of my torment, and make that burden of my grief
the lighter; which I find so heavy (I had almost said insupportable) for me
to bear. Yet there is some hope left unto thee, that these thy strong Towers
dismantled and laid level with the ground; thou may one day see them,
(though not in so just a defense, as that wherein they were overthrown) raised
to their former height and strength.

But I, (of all unfortunate, the most unfortunate man,) what good can I hope
for in that miserable straight wherein I find my self? yea, though I should
return to the same estate and condition wherein I was, before I fell into
this; such is my misfortune, that when I was free and at liberty, I knew not
what happiness was; and now in my thraldom and captivity, I neither have it,
nor hope it.

These words did a Christian Captive utter, looking with a sad and heavy
countenance from the rising of a hill on the ruined Walls of the late* lost
Nicosia. And thus did he talk with them, and compared his miseries with
theirs, as if they had been able to understand him. (The common and proper
condition of afflicted persons, who being violently carried away with their
own feigned fancies, and imaginary conceptions; do, and say things beyond all
reason, and without any good discourse, and advisement)

Now whilst he was thus discoursing with himself from out a Pavilion, or one
of those Tents pitched there in the field, not far from him issued out a
Turk, a handsome young man, of a good presence, an ingenious aspect, and
accompanied with spirit and metal answerable to his looks; who drawing near
unto the Christian, without much ceremony, yet in a fair and civil way, said
unto him; Sir, I durst lay a wager with you, that those your pensive thoughts
which I read in your face have brought you hither. You read aright, answered
Ricardo, (for this was the Captives name) they have brought me hither indeed:
But what does it avayle me? since in no place whether so ever I go, I am so
far from procuring a peace; that I cannot obtain a truce, or any the least
cessation of them. Nay rather these Ruins which from hence discover themselves
unto me, have rather increased my sorrows. Those of Nicosia you mean?
replied the Turk; What other should I mean (answered Ricardo) since there are
no other which here offer themselves to my view. You have great cause (quoth
the Turk) to weep, if you entertain your thoughts with these and the like
contemplations.

For they, who but some two years since had seen this famous and rich Island
of Cyprus in its prosperity, and peaceable estate; the ^nhabitants thereof
enjoying all that humane happiness and felicity, which the Heavens could grant
unto men, or themselves desire, and now to see them banished out of it, or made
miserable slaves in it; Who can be so hard hearted, as to forbear from
bewailing its calamity and misfortune.

But let us leave talking of these things since they are remediless, and let
us come to your own bosom sorrows, for I desire to see if they be such, as
you voice them to be. And therefore, I earnestly entreat and beseech you, and
conjure thee, by that which thou owe to those good offices I have done thee;
the good will I bear thee, the love I have shown thee, and by that which
ought to obliege thee thereunto; in that we are both of one and the same
Country, and bred up in our Childhood together; that thou will deal freely
with me, and lay open unto me what is the cause which makes thee so exceeding
sad and melancholy? For how be it, Captivity alone of it self be sufficient
to grieve the stoutest heart in the World, and to check its mirth; though
otherwise naturally inclined thereunto, yet notwithstanding I imagine, that the
current of your disasters has a farther reach and deeper bottom.

For generous minds (such as thine is) do not use to yield and render up
themselves to common and ordinary misfortunes, in such a measure, as to make
show of extraordinary sorrows. And I am the rather induced to believe what I
conceive, because I know that you are not so poor, but that you are well
enough able to pay any reasonable Ransom they shall require of you. Nor are
you clapped up in the Towers of the black Sea, as a prisoner of note, or Captive
of consideration, who late, or never obtaines his desired liberty. And therefore
yourill fortune not having taken from you the hope of seeing your self a free
man; and yet notwithstanding all this, when I see thee so much overcharged with
sorrows, and making such miserable manifestations of thy misfortunes; It is
not much that I imagine that the pain proceeds from some other cause then thy
lost liberty, which I entreat thee to acquaint me withal; offering thee all
the assistance I am able to give thee* Perhaps, to the end that I may be
serviceable unto thee, Fortune in her wheeling has brought this about, that I
should be clad in this habit which I so much hate and abhor.

Thou know already ( Ricardo) that my Master is ( adi of this City (which
is the same, as to be it is Bishop;) Thou likewise know the great sway which
he bears here, and how much I am able to do with him. Together with this,
thou art not ignorant of the servent desire and inflamed zeal which I have,
not to dye in this estate which I thus seem to profess; but God knows my
heart, and if ever I should come to be put to my trial, I am resolved openly
to confess, and in a loud voice to publish to the whole world, the Faith of
Jesus Christ, from which my few years, and less understanding separated me;
though that I were sure that such a confession should cost me my life; for
that I may free my self from losing that of my soul, I should think the
losing of that of my body very well employed.

Out of all this which has been said unto thee, I leave it to thy self to
infer the conclusion, and that thou will take it into thy deeper and better
consideration; whether my proffered friendship may be proffitable and useful
unto thee.

Now that I may know what remedies thy misfortune requires, and what medicines
I may apply both for the easing and curing of it; it is requesite, that thou
recount it unto me; the relation thereof being as necessary for me, as that of
the rich Patient to his Physician; assuring thee in the faith of a friend, that
thou shall deposite it in the deepest and darkest den of silence, never to come
to light.

To all these words of his, Ricardo gave an attentive ^are, though his tongue
were silent* but seeing himself obliged by them and his own necessity,
returned him thereunto this answer.

If as thou have hit the right vein Oh my dear friend Mahamut (for so was this
Turk called) touching that which thou imaginest of my misfortune, thou could
hit as right upon its remedy; I should hold my self happy in my lost liberty,
and would not change my unhappines, for the greatest happiness that may be
imagined But I wott well, that it is such, that all the World may take notice
of the cause whence it proceeds; but that man cannot therein be found, which
dare undertake not only the finding out of any remedy for it, but of giving it
any the least ease. And to the end that thou may rest thy self thoroughly
satisfied of the truth thereof, I will relate the same unto thee, as briefly and
compendiously as I can, shutting up much in a few words. But before I enter
into this confused laborinth of my miseries; I would first have thee to recount
unto me, what is the cause why Azam Bashawe my master has pitched here in
this field these Tents and Pavilions, before he makes his entry into Nicosia,
being deputed (and to that purpose bringing his provision with him) to be
Viceroy there, or Bashawe, the useuall style or title which the Turks give
their Viceroy's.

I will (answered Mahamut) answer your demand in a few words; and therefore
would have you to know, that it is a custom amongst the Turks, that they who
come to be Viceroyes of some Province, do not instantly enter into the City
where their Predecessor resideth, till he issues out of it, and leave the
residence freely to his Successors. Now when the new Bashawe has made his
entrance, the old one stays without in the field, expecting what accusations
shall come against him, and what misdem can ours (during his government) they
shall lay to his charge; which being alleged and proved, are recorded, and a
note taken of them, all possibility being taken away from him of enterviewing,
either to help himself by suborning of witnesses, or by his friends, unles he
have made his way before hand, for the clearing of himself. Now the other
being settled in his Residence, there is given by him to him that leaves his
Charge, a scroll of Parchment sealed up very close, and therewith he presents
himself at the gate of the Grand-Signior; that is to say, in the Court before
the Grand-Councell of the great Turk; which being seen and perused by the
Visir-Bashaw, and by those other four inferior Bashawes; they either reward,
or punish him, according to the relation that is made of his Residencie: In
case that he come home faulty, with money he redeems and excuses his
punishment: but if faultlesse, and they do not reward him (as commonly it
falls out) with gifts and presents, he procures that Charge which himself
most affects. For places of command and offices are not given for merit, but
for money, all is sold, and all bought. They who have the Provision, (or as we
style it, commission and authority for the conferring of charges and offices,)
rob those which are to have these offices and charges, and fleece them as
near as the sheeres can go. And they again out of this their bought office,
gather wealth and substance for to buy another, which promises much more
gain. All goes as I tell you, all this Empire is violent, a sign that it will
not last long. For that reason then that I have rendered thee, thy master Azam
Bashawe has remained in this field four days; and he of Nicosia, that he
has not as yet come forth as he ought to have done; the cause is, that he has
been very sick, but is now upon the mending hand; and will without fail come
forth either to day or to morrow at the farthest; and is to lodge in certain
Tents which are pitched behind this rising hill, which as yet thou have not
seen; and thy master is forth with to enter into the City. And having made
this already delivered, known unto thee, is all the satisfaction that I can
give to your propounded demand.

Listen then unto me, replied Ricardo; but I know not whether I shall be as
good as my word, in cumplying with that which I formerly promised; that I would
in a few words recount unto you my misfortunes, they being so large, that to
make up the full measure of them, I want words enough to do it; yet
notwithstanding, I will do herein what may be, and as time and your patience
will permit.

But let me first of all ask you, if you know in our town of Trapana, a
Damsel to whom Fame has given the name of the fairest woman in all Sicily;
in whose praise all curious tongues have spent themselves, and of whom the
rarest judgments have ratified, that she was the perfectest piece of beauty
that the past age had, the present has, and that which is to come can hope to
have; one of whom the Poets sang, that her hairs were golden wyars, her eyes,
two resplendent Suns; and her cheeks, pure damask-roses; her teeth, Pearls;
her lips, Rubies; her neck, Alablaster; and that her parts with the whole
frame, and the whole with her parts, made up a most pleasing harmony, and most
harmonious concord. Nature spreading over the whole composure such a sweet
delightfulness of colors, so natural, and so perfect, that envy it self
cannot take her in any one particular.

And is it possible ( Mahamut) that all this while thou have not told me yet
who she is, and by what name she is called? I undoubtedly believe, that either
thou do not hear me, or that when thou wast in Trapana, thou did want thy
senses. Mahamut hereunto answered; that if she whom thou have set forth with
such extremes of beauty be not Leonisa, the Daughter of Rodolphus Florenc^us,
I know not who she is; for she alone had that fame which you speak of.

This is she, oh Mahamut (replied Ricardo) this is she (oh my dear friend) who
is the principal cause of all my felicity, and of all my misfortune. This is
she, and not my lost liberty, for whom mine eyes have, do, and shall shed
tears not to be numbered; This is she, for whom my heartburning sighs
inflame the air far and near: And this is she, for whom my words weary
heaven, which hears them, and the ears of those which hearken unto them. This
is she, for whom thou tookest me to be mad, or at least, for a man of small
worth, and less courage. This Leonisa, to me a Lioness, and to another a
meek and gentle Lamb; is she which holds me in this wretched and miserable
estate.

For I must give thee to understand, that from my tender years, o^ at least,
ever since I had the use of reason, I did not only love, but adore her; and
did serve her with such solicitude and devotion, as if neither on earth, nor in
Heaven there were any other Deity for me to serve and adore, save her self.

Her kinsfolk and Parents knew my desires, considering withal, that they were
directed to an honest and virtuous end. And that therefore, many a time and often
(which escaped not my knowledge) they acquainted Leonisa with the fervent love
and affection I bare unto her, for the better disposing of her will to accept
me for her Husband.

But she, who had placed her eyes on Cornelio, the Son of Ascanio Rotulo,
(whom you know very well) a young Gallant, neat and spruce, with white hands,
and curled hairs, having a melifluous voice, and amorous words at will; and in
a word, being all made of Amber, Musk, and Civet, clad in Tissue, adorned with
rich embroyderies,) would not vouchsafe to cast so much as one glaunce of her
eye on my countenance, which was not so delicate as that of Cornelio, neither
would entertain (notwithstanding my best endeavors to please her) with
thankfulness, my many and continual services, requiting my good will with
disdain and hatred: And to such extremes did the excess of my love bring
me, that I should have held my self happy, had her disdaines and
unkindnesses killed me outright, that I might not have lived to have seen her
confer such open, though honest favors on Cornelio. Consider now, being
anguished with disdain and hatred, and almost mad with the cruel rage of
jealousy, in what miserable case (you may imagine) my soul was, two such
mortal plagues reigning therein. Leonisa's Parents dissembled those favors
which she did to Cornelio; believing (as they had good reason to believe it,)
that the young* man attracted by her most exquesite and incomparable beauty
(which none could match, but her own) would make choice of her for his Spouse,
and so in him gain a richer son in Law, then in me: and well (if he were so)
might he be so. But I dare be bold to say, (without arrogacie be it spoken)
that as good blood runs in my veins, as his; my quality and condition nothing
inferior to his; and for his mind, it cannot be more noble then mine, nor
his valor go beyond mine: But that indeed which did over balance me, was
Leonisia's favor, and her Parents furthering the business; and this only
made the scales uneven, by their enclining to Cornelio.

Now it so fell out, that persisting in the pursuit of my pretensions, it came
to my knowledge, that one day in the month of May last past, which this very
day makes up a year, three days, and five hours; Leonisia, her Parents, and
Cornelio, and some friends of his, went to solace themselves, accompanied with
their kindred, and servants to Ascamo his Garden, near adjoining to the
Seaside, in the way that leads to the Salt Pits.

I know that place passing well (said Mahamut,) go on Ricardo; I was more then
four days in one of them, I could have wished I had been there but four
minutes.

I knew that (replied Ricardo) and in that very instant that I knew it, my
soul was possessed with such a fury, such a rage, and such a hell of
jealousies, and with that vehemency and rigor, that it bereaved me of my
senses, as thou shall plainly, by that which I presently see did, which was
this.

I hyed me to the Garden where I was told they were, where I found most of the
company solasing themselves, and Cornelio and Leonisa sitting under a
Walnut-tree somewhat out of the way from the rest. How my sight pleased them I
do not know, but know, to say so much of my self, that her sight wrought so
upon me, that I lost the sight of mine own eyes; and stood stock still like
a Statuaa, without either voice, or motion. But I continued not long so, before
that my anger awakened my choler, choler, heated my blood; my blood, inflamed
rage; and rage gave motion to my hands, and tongue. Howbeit my hands were bound
by the respect which (me'thought) was due to that fair face which I had before
me; But my tongue breaking silence, vented forth these words;

How can thou find in thy heart, how give thy self content (Oh thou mortal
enemy of my rest) in having, (and therein taking so much pleasure) before thine
eyes, the cause which must make mine to overflow with rivers of tears; and by
my continual weeping, become another Deluge? Come, come, (cruel as thou art)
a little nearer, and wreathe thy twining Ivy, about this unprofitable truncke,
which wooes thy embracings. Let him lay his head in thy lap, and let thy
fingers learn to play with those breaded locks of this thy new Ganimede; what
thou will do, do quickly; Make an end at once of delivering up the possession
of thy self, to the green and ungoverned years of this your Minion; to the
end, that I losing all hope of obtaining thee; may together with that end, this
my life, so much by me abhorred.

Think thou peradventure (thou proud and ill advised Damsel) that this
young Princoxe, presumptuous by reason of his riches; arrogant, by your gracing
of him, unexperienced, in that he is too young; and insolent by his relying on
his Lineage, will love as he ought, and you deserve? No, he cannot, no, he
knows not how to love constantly; nor to esteem that which is in estimable,
nor come to have that understanding and knowledge, which accompanies ripe and
experimented years. If you think so, do not think it; for the World has no
other good thing, save the doing of its actions always after one and the same
manner. For none are deceived, but by their own ignorance: In young men there
is much inconstancy; in rich, pride; vanity in the arrogant; in the
beautitifull, disdain; and in those that have all these, foolishness, which
is the mother of all ill success

And thou (oh young Gallant) art such a one, who think to carry all before
thee, and to go clear away with that reward, which is more due to my good
desires, then thy idle protestations; Why do thou not arise from that Carpet
of flowers whereon thou lie, and come to take this my soul from me, which so
deadly hates thine? Not because thou offendest me in that which thou do,
but because thou know not how to esteem that good which fortune gives thee:
and it is clear and evident, that thou makst little reckoning of it, since
thou will not rise up to defend it, that thou may not put thy self to the
hazard of discomposing that painted composure of thy gay clothes. If Achilles
had had thy reposed condition, or been of thy cold temper; Ulysses might very
well have been assured, that he would not have gone through with that which
he undertook. Go, get thee gone and sport thy self amongst thy Mothers
mayds, and there have a care of kembing and curling thy locks, and keeping thy
hands clean and white; thou art fitter to handle soft silks, then a hard
hilted sword.

All these words could not move Cornelio to rise from the place where I found
him, but sat him still looking upon me as one aghast, not once offering to
stir. But the voice wherewith I uttered these words which you have heard,
occasioned the people which were walking in the garden to draw nearer, stood a
little while listening* hearing many other disgraceful speeches which I gave
him, and thereupon made in; who taking courage by their coming (for all or
most of them were his kinsfolk, servants, or friends) he made show of rising;
but before he was fully upon his feet, I laid hand on my sword, drew it, and
did set not only upon him, but on as many as were there. Leonisa no sooner saw
my glittering sword, but she fell into a deadly swound, which did put greater
courage into me, and stir up greater despighte: and I cannot say, whether
those so many which did set upon me, sought only to defend themselves, as we
see men usually do against a furious mad man; or whether it were my good
fortune and diligence, or Heavens disposing, to expose me to greater evils,
and to reserve me to farther miseries. In conclusion, I wounded seven or eight
of them which came next to my hand; Cornelio betook himself to his heels,
and by his swift flight escaped my hands.

Being in this so manifest a danger hemmed in by my enemies, who now (seeing
their blood run from them, and enraged with the wrong which they had
received) sought to revenge themselves upon me: Lo Fortune provided a remedy
for this mischief, but such a one as was worse than the disease; for better
had it been for me there to have left my life, then in restoring it me by so
strange and unexpected a means, to come to lose it every hour a thousand and
a thousand times over and over. And this it was; That on the sudden there
rushed into the garden a great number of Turks, Pirates of Viserta, who with
two Galleys had put into a little Creek of the Sea, between two rocks hard
by the shore, where they disimbarked themselves without being heard or seen
by the Centinells of the Watch-Towers, nor discovered by those scouts, whose
daily office it was to scour the Coasts, and see that all was clear. When my
adversaries had espied them, leaving me alone; they, with the rest in the
garden; ran their way as fast as their legs would carry them, and shifted so
well for themselves, that they had got themselves out of their danger, and put
themselves in safety. So that of all the whole companies, the Turks took no
more Captives, but three persons besides Leonisa, who lay there still in a
swound. They took me after they had shrewdly wounded me in four several
places, revenged before by me on four Turks whom I left dead in the place.

This assault ended, the Turks with their accustomed diligence, and not being
very well pleased with the success; made haste to embarke themselves, and
presently put farther to sea, so that what with their sails, and help of their
Oars, in a short space they recovered Fabiana; where they mustered their men,
and finding that the slain were four soldiers, Levant-men (as they call
them,) being of the best and choicest, and of most esteem amongst them, they
were the more willing and desirous to take their revenge of me. And therefore
the Admiral of the Captaine-galley commanded them to hang me up on the mayn
yard. All this while Leonisa stood looking on this speedy preparation for my
death, (who was now come again to her self) and seeing me in the power of
these Pirates, the tears trickled down in great abundance from her beauteous
eyes, and wringing her soft and delicate hands, not speaking so much as one
word; gave diligent ear, and was very attentive to hear if she could
understand what the Turks said. But one of the Christian-slaves that was
chained to the Oar, spoke to her in Italian, giving her to understand how that
the Captain had given order to have that Christian hanged up (pointing unto
me) because I had slain in her defense, four of the best soldiers belonging
to his Galleys. Which being heard and understood by Leonisa; (being the first
time that ever she showed her self pitiful toward me) she willed the said
slave that he should speak unto the Turks to spare his life, and not to hang
him; for in so doing they would lose a great ransom, and that he should advise
them to tack about, and make again for Trapana, where his ransom would
presently be brought aboard unto them. This I say was the first, and the last
kindness which Leonisa used toward me, and all this for my greater ill. The
Turks hearing what their Captive told them, did easily believe him; and this
their hope of profit, turned the course of their choler. The very next morning
hanging out a flag of peace, they anchored before Trapana. That night thou
may better conceive then I utter, with what a deal of grief I past it over;
not so much for my wounds sake, though they were very sore and painful, as to
think on the peril wherein my cruel enemy was amongst these Barbarous
people. Being come now as I told thee to the City, one of the Galleys entered
the Haven, the other stood off. All the Citizens flocked to the seaside, the
Christians standing as thick one by another, as the shore would give them
leave. And that Carpet-knight Cornelio stood afar off observing what passed in
the Galley, whilst my Steward was treating of my ransom; to whom I had given
order that he should in no wise treat of my liberty, but of that of Leonisa:
and that he should give for the freeing of her, all whatsoever I was worth,
either in lands, or goods. And I willed him moreover, that he should go a
shore and tell Leonisa's Parents, that they should leave it to him to treat
of their Daughters liberty.

This being done, the chief Captain who was a Grecian, but a Renegado, his
name Ysuph, demanded for Leonisa, 6000 Crowns, and for my self four
thousand, and that he would not sell the one without the other; setting this
so great a prise (as I was given afterward to understand) because he was
enamoured of Leonisa, and was therefore unwilling she should be redeemed;
purposing to give to the Captain of the other Galley (with whom he was to
share the one half of the prize) my self at the rate of 4000 Crowns in ready
money, and 1000 more in other commodities, which made up 5000, prizing Leonisa
at other 5000. And this was the reason why he rated us two in ten thousand
Crowns. Leonisa's Parents offered him nothing on their part, relying on the
promise which on my part my Steward had made them; neither did Cornelio so much
as once open his lips to offer any thing toward her ransom. And so after many
demands and answers, my Steward concluded the business, with giving for
Leonisa 5000, and for me 3000 Crowns. Ysuph accepted this offer, forced
thereunto by the persuasions of his companion, and all the rest of their
Soldiers. But because my Steward had not so much money in Cash, he entreated
only three days time to make up the full sum, with intention to sell my
goods under hand, and at a cheap rate, till he had got so much together as
would pay the ransom. Ysuph was glad of this, thinking with himself in the
mean while to find some occasion that the bargain might not go forward; and
so returning back again to the Island of Fabiana, he said, that by that time
the three days were expired, he would not fail to be there with them, to
receive the money according to the agreement.

But spiteful and ungrateful Fortune, not yet wearied out with ill entreating
me; had so ordained it, that a Galleys boy who sat on the top of the mast, as
the Turks Centinell discovered afar off at Sea, six Italian Galleys, and
did guess (which was true) that they were either of Malta, or Sicily. He came
running down with all the haste he could to give them news thereof; and in a
trice the Turks embarked themselves, who were a shore, some dressing their
dinner, some washing their linen; and weighing anchor in an instant, hoysing
sail, and working hard with their Oars, turning their Prows toward Barbary;
in less then two hours, they lost the sight of those Galleys, and so being
shadowed with the Island, and covered from kenne by the approaching night, they
were secured from that fear which afrighted them.

Now I leave it to thy good consideration (my friend Mahamut) how much my mind
was troubled in this voyage, finding it to fall out so cross and contrary to
that which I expected: and much more, when the next day the two Galleys
reaching the Island of Pa^tanalea on the South part, the Turks went a shore to
get them wood, and fresh victuals; but most of all, when I saw both the
Captains land, and fell to sharing between them in equal proportion all those
prizes they had taken, each action of these, was to me a delayed death.
Coming then at last to the dividing of my self, and Leonisa; Ysuph gave to
Fetala, (for so was that Captain of the other Galley called) six Christians,
four for the Oar, and two very beautiful boys, both naturalls of Corso, and
my self likewise with them, that he might have Leonisa for himself.
Wherewith Fetala rested very well contented. And albeit I were present at all
this, I could not understand what they said, though I knew what they did;
neither had I known then the manner of their sharings, if Fetala had not come
unto me and told me in Italian; Christian thou art now mine, and put into my
hands (as my Captive) thou being rated at two thousand Crowns; if thou will
have thy liberty, thou must give me 4000, or resolve here to end thy days* I
then demanded of him, whether the Christian Damsel were his too, he told me
no, but that Ysuph* kept her fob himself, with intention to make her turn
Moore, and then* marry her. And therein he said true; for one of the Galley
slaves told me, that sat chained on his bancke at his Oar, and understood
very well the Turkish language, that he overheard Ysuph and Fetala treating
thereof. Whereupon I came to my master and told him, Sir; if you will bring^ the
business so about that the Christian Damsel may become your Captive, I will
give you ten thousand Crowns in good gold for her ransom. He replied, it was
not possible; but I will acquaint Ysuph with this great sum which thou
offerest for her freedom: and perhaps, weigh^ing the profit he shall reap
thereby, he will alter hiopurpose, and accept of the ransom. He did so; and
then presently commanded all those of his own Galley to embarke themselves as
soon as possibly they could, because he would go for Tripoli in Barborie,
whence he was. And Ysuph likewise determined to go for Viserta; and so
embarked with the self same haste as they use to do when they kenne either
Galleys which they fear, or Vessels which they mind to rob. And that which
moved them to make the more haste, was; that they saw the weather began to
change, with manifest signs of a storm.

Leonisa was on land, but not there where I might see her, save only at the
time of her embarking, where ^ee both met at the seaside. This her new lover
led her by ^e hand, and setting her foot upon the planke which reached from the
land to the Galley; she turned back her eyes ^o look upon me, and mine,
which never were off from ^er, looked wishly on her, but with such tenderness;
that without knowing how such a cloud was cast before them, that it took away
my eyesight; and being robb^d of it* and of my senses, I fell in a swound to
the ground. The like they* afterward told me befell Leonisa; for they saw her
fall from the planke into the Sea, and that Ysuph leapt in after her, and
brought her out thence in his arms. This was told me by those of my masters
Galley whereinto they had put me, I not knowing how I came there.

But when I came again to my self, and saw my self alone in that Galley, and
the other steering a contrary course, and gone clean out of sight from us,
carryings away with them the one half of my soul, or (to say (...)) all of
it; my heart was clouded anew, and I begun an^ to curse my misfortune, and
called out aloud for death. And such, and so great was the moan and
lamentation* I made, that my masters ears being offended there (...)*
threatened with a great cudgel, that if I did not hold my peace, he would
severely punish me* Whereupon I: ^sed my tears, and smothered my fig^es,
thinking (...) violent restraining of them, would break out the more forceably
in some one part or other, and open a door to let my soul out, which I so
earnestly desired, might relinquish this my miserable body. But froward Fortune
not contenting her self to have put me into this so narrow a straight, took
a course to overthrow all, by taking from me all hope of remedy; for in an
instant, the storm we so much feared overtooke us, and the Wind which blew
strongly from the South, blew full in the teeth of us; and began with such
fury to reinforce it self, that we were forced to tacke about, putting the
Prow in the Poopes p^ce, suffering our Galley to go which way the wind ^ould
carry her.

Our ^aptaines design was, by fetching of boords, to have pu^ into some part
of the Island for shelter; and more particularly, on the North part thereof:
but it fell not out answerably to his expectation, but rather quite contrary to
what he had designed; for the wind charged us with such impetuousnesse, that
all that which we had sailed in two days, within little more then fourteen
hours, we saw our selves within two Leagues or thereabout of the same Island
from whence he had put forth; And now there was no remedy for hindering our
being driven upon it, and not to run our selves upon some sandy-shoare, but
amongst very high Rocks, which presented themselves to our view, threatening
inevitable death to our lives.

We saw on the the one side of us, that other our fellow Galley wherein was
Leonisa, and all their Turks, and Captive-rowers laboring hard with their
oars, to keep themselves off as well as they could from running upon the
Rocks. The like did we in ours, but with better success (it should seem)
and greater force and strength then the other; who being tired out with their
travail, and overcome by the stiffenesse of the wind, and blustering storm;
forsaking their Oars, and with them abandoning themselves, they suffered
themselves (we looking upon them) to fall amongst the Rocks, against which
the Galley dashing it self, was split in a thousand pieces.

Night was then drawing on, and so great was the cry of those that gave
themselves for lost; and the fright of those who in our Vessel feared to be
lost, that not any one of those many things which our Captain commanded, was
either understood, or done by them; only they did attend the not forgoing of
their Oars, plying them still, holding it for their best remedy to turn the
Prow to the Wind, and to cast two Anchors into the Sea to keep off death for a
while, which they held to be certain. And although the fear of dying was
general in all of them, yet in me was it quite contrary; for fed with the
deceitful hope of seeing her in that other World, who was so lately departed
out of this; every minute that the Galley deferred its drowning, or splitting
against the Rocks, was to me an age of a more painful death. The high
swollen waves which past over the top of our weather beaten Vessel, and my
head; made me very watchful to see whether or no, I could epsy floating upon
those crump shouldered billows, the body of unfortunate Leonisa.

But I will not detain my self now (O Mabamut) in recounting unto thee piece
by piece, the passions, the fears, the anguishes, the thoughts, which in that
tedious and terrible night I had, and passed; that I may not go against that
which before I propounded, and promised, in relating briefly unto thee my
misfortune. Suffice it, that they were such and so great, that if death had
come to me at that time, he needed not to have taken any great pains in
taking away my life.

Day appeared, but with appearance of a far greater storm then the former;
and we found that our Vessel lay riding out at Sea, and a good ways off from
the Rocks. And having descried a point of the Island, and perceiving that we
might easily double it, both Turks, and Christians began to be of good
cheer, taking new hopes, and new hearts unto them, fell anew to their work,
in six hours we doubled the point, and found the Sea more calm and quiet;
insomuch, that with a great deal more ease, they could handle and use their
Oars; and coming under Lee of the Island, the Turks leapt out to land, and
went to see if there were any relics remaining of the Galley which the night
before fell on the Rocks. But even then too would not Fortune be so
favorable unto me, as to give me that poor comfort which I hoped to have had
of seeing Leonisa's body in these my arms; which though dead and broken, I
would have been glad to have seen it, for to break that impossibility which
my star had put upon me, of linking my self therewith, as my desires well
deserved. And therefore entreated one of the Renegadoes to dis-embarke himself
to go in search thereof, and to see if the rolling of the Sea had cast her on
the shore. But (as I told thee) all this did Heaven deny me; and just in that
very instant the Wind began to rise, and the Sea grow rough, so that the
shelter of that Island was not of any benefit at all unto us.

Fetala seeing this, would not strive against Fortune, who had so violently
persecuted him; and therefore commanded them to right and fit the Galley to
bear a little sail, and to turn the Prow to the Sea-ward, and the Poope to
the Wind-ward; and he himself taking charge of the Rudder, sat at the helm,
suffering her to run through the wide Sea; being well assured that no
impediment would cross its course: The Oars bare themselves very eeven, being
seated very orderly on their banks, and all the rest of the company got them
into the Hold underneath the Hatches, so that there was not a man to be seen
on the Deck, save the Master; who for his more safety, caused himself to be
bound fast to his seat, giving thence direction to the Rowers, for the better
governing and guiding of the Vessel; which made its way with that swiftness,
that in three days, and three nights, passing in sight of Trapana, of Melazo,
and Palermo, she imboked by the Pharos of Mecina, to the wonderful fear of
those that were in her, and of those likewise which behold them on the land.

In fine, not to be tedious in recounting unto thee the terriblenesse of this
tempest, which is beyond all expression, I say; that being weary, hungry, and
tired out with such a large compass about, as was the rounding of almost all
the whole Island of Sicily, we arrived at Tripoli in Barbary; where my master
(before that he had reckoned with his Levant-men, shared out the spoils, and
given that unto them which was their due, and a fifth to the King, as the
custom is;) fell sick of a Pluresie, accompanied with a burning Fever in that
violent manner, that within three days it sent him packing to hell.

The King of Tripoli seized presently upon all his goods; and the Alacade de
los muertos, which is an Office of Inquiry concerning the dead, substituted by
the great Turk; who as you know, is heir to those that are his natural
Subjects after their deaths. These two possessed themselves of all my Master
Fetala's wealth, and I fell into the hands of him who was the Viceroy of
Tripoli; and within fifteen days after he received his Patent for Cyprus, with
whom (you see) I am come hither, but without any intention at all to ransom my
self, though he has often told me that I should if I would, and wondered why I
did not do it all this while, being (as Fetala's Soldiers told him) a
principal person, and a man of good means in his own Country. But I was so
far from entertaining that motion, that I told him, that they had mis informed
him of my fortunes. And if thou will ( Mabamut) that I acquaint thee truly
with what I think; Know thou then, that I will never return back again to
that place, where I can no ways receive any comfort, and where Leonisa's death
will in part, if not wholly be imputed unto me. What pleasure then can I take,
either there, or here* in this my thraldom, though I must confess, that the
remembrance of her loss is more grievous unto meethen a thousand Captivities.
And if it be true, that continual sorrows, must of force have an end, or end
him who suffers them; mine cannot choose but do it, for I am resolved to give
them such a loose reine, that within a few days, they shall give an end to
this my miserable life, which I hold so much against my will.

This (O my brother Mahamut) is my sad success; This is the cause of these my
sighs and tears; Behold now and consider, if this be not sufficient for to
hale the one from out the deepest bottom of my bowels, and to exhale the other
from out my afflicted and tormented bosom? Leonisa is dead, and with her my
hope; and though that which I had (she living) hung but by a small and slender
thread; yet, yet, and with this yet, his tongue clave so close to the roof of
his mouth, that he could not speak one word more, nor refrain from weeping,
whose tears, drop after drop, one overtaking another, trickled down his face
in such abundance, that the ground was all wet whereon they fell. Mahamut,
accompanied those with his tears.

But this Parosisme being over-past, caused by relating this sad story, and
calling to mind his lost Leonisa; Mahamut was very willing, and withal went
about to comfort him all that he could, with as good terms and persuasions as
possibly he could devise. But Ricardo did cut him short of telling him.

That which thou ar^ (my dear friend) to do, is; that thou will advise me,
what course I shall take forto fall into disgrace with my master, and with all
those with whom I shall converse, that being hated and abhorred by him, and by
them* the one and the other might ill entreat me, and persecute me in such
sort* that adding sorrow to sorrow, I may speedily obtain that which I so
earnestly desire, which is to end my life.

Now I find that to be true (said Mahamut) which is commonly spoken* L^ qu^
sa^e senti^, se sa^ dezir. He that knows his grief, knows how to speak it*
though sometimes it so happens that it makes the tongue dumb. But howsoever
it be, (whether thy sorrows reach to thy words, or thy words out go thy
sorrows) thou shall ever ( Ricardo) find me thy true friend, either for
assistance, or for counsel. For albeit my few years, and the
inconsideratnesse which I have committed, in putting my self into this habit,
may cry out against me that of neither of these two things which I offer thee,
thou may have any confidence, or hope; yet will I endeavor to the^ utmost of
my power, that this suspicion may not prove true, nor any such opinion be held
for certain. And albeit thou will not neither be advised, nor assisted by me,
yet will I not leave off doing that which shall be fitting and convenient for
thee; as good Physicians use to deal with their sick patients, who do not
give them that which they crave, but what they think convenient for them to
have.

There is not any in all this City, that can do, or prevail more then the
Cadi my Master; no, not even thine, (who comes to be Viceroy thereof) is so
powerful as he. This being so as it is, I dare be bold to say, that I am the
man that can do most in this City, because I can do whatsoever I will with
my Master. I speak this, because it may be I shall so plot the business with
him, and bring it so handsomely about, that thou may come to be his; and
being in my company, time will teach us that which we are to do, as well for
to comfort thee, if thou will or can be comforted; as likewise for my self
to get out of this, to a better life; or at least, to some place where it may
be more safe when I leave this. I kindly thank you ( Mahamut) replied Ricardo
for your proffered friendship, though sure I am, that when thou have done all
thou can do, thou can not do any thing that can do me any good.

But let us now give over this discourse, and make toward the Tents; for if my
eyesight deceive me not, I see a great press of people coming out of the
City, and doubtless it is the old Viceroy, who comes forth into the field for
to give place unto my Master, that he may enter the City, to make his
Residence. It is even so, said Mahamut, come along with me Ricardo, and thou
shall ^ee the Ceremonies wherewith they receive him, for I know thou will take
pleasure in seeing them. With a very good will answered Ricardo; for
peradventure I shall have need of thee; if happily the Guardian of my Masters
Captives should happen to meet with me, who is a Renegado, and by birth of
Corso, but of no very pitiful and tender bowels.

Here they left off any farther communication, and came to the Tents just at
that very instant as the old Bashawe came thither; and the new one came forth
to receive him at the door of the Tent. Ali Bashaw, (for so was he called who
left the government) came accompaied with all the Ianizaries, being the
ordinary garrison Soldiers in Nicosia, ever since the Turks were masters of
it, being to the number of five hundred. They came in two Wings or Files; the
one with their Muskets, and the other with naked Simyters. They came to the
Tent of the new Bashaw Hazan, rounding it from one side at the door thereof,
till they met at the other; where Ali Bashaw bowing his body, made a lowly
reverence to Hazan; and he with a less enclining himself, re-saluted him.

This done Ali presently entered into Hazan's Pavillion, where the Turks
presently mounted him upon a proud Horse, with wondrous rich furniture; and
conducting him round about the Tents, and a good part of the field, clamouring
out with loud acclamations in their own language; Long live Solomon Sultan,
and Hazan Bashaw in his name: They repeated this very often, re-inforcing their
voices and vociferations, and then presently returned back again to the Tent,
where Ali Bashaw remained; who with the Cadi and Hazan, shut themselves up
close for the space of one hour all alone* Mahamut then told Ricardo, that
they had thus retired themselves, to treat of that which was fit to be done in
the City, touching such businesses as were commenced, but not finished by Ali.
Within a little while after the Cadi came forth to the door of the Tent, and
said with aloud voice in the Turkish, Arabic, and Greek tongue; That all they
who would enter to crave justice, or to ^ay any other matter against Ali
Bashaw, might have free entrance: for there was Hazan Bashaw, whom the Grand
Signior has sent for Viceroy of Cyprus, who would do them all right and
justice. This license being given, the Ianizaries left the door of the Tent
dis-occupied, and gave way to such as would enter in; Mahamut wrought Ricardo
to go in with him, who for that they were Hazans slaves, had without any
hinderance free access thereunto.

There entered to crave justice, some Greeke-Christians, and some Turks, but
all of them charging him with such trifling things, and of so small moment;
that the Cadi dispatched most of them, without giving a Copy to the Defendant,
without further examination, demands, and answers. For all causes, unless
they be matrimonial, are dispatched in an instant, more die the judgment of a
good understanding man, then the quercks of Law. And amongst these Barbarians
(if they be so in this particular) the Cadi is the competent Judge of all
Causes, who does abbreviate them, and determine them in the turning of a hand;
and forthwith pronounces sentence without any appealing there^ro, to any other
Tribunal.

In this interim, entered in a Cha^z, which is as it were an Alquazil, and said;
That there was a Jew at the Tent door, who had brought to be sold a most
fair and beautiful Christian; the Cadi commanded that they should bid him
come in: The Cha^z went forth, and presently came in again, leading the way to
a venerable ^ew, who ^ed by the hand a Woman in a Barbary habit* so well made
and set forth, that the richest Moore in Fez, or Morocco, was not able to
compare therewith; for in her whole dress throughout, she surpassed all the
Affrican women; yea, though even those of Argier's should have presented
themselves there with all their Pearls and rich embroyderies. She came in,
having her face covered with a scarf of Crimson Taffata; about the smalls of
her legs (which discovered themselves) there appeared two golden chains of
pure burnisht gold; and on her arms, which likewise through a smock of
Cendall, or thin Taffata-Sarcenet, were transparant, and showed themselves to
the searching curious eyes of the beholders; she ware two bracelets of gold,
wherein were set scatteringly here and there, many fair Pearls and precious
Stones. In conclusion, the fashion of her clothes, and all other habiliments
about her were such, that she presented her self before them, most richly and
gorgeously attyred.

The Cadi, and the other two Bashaw's upon the very first sight of her, being
mightily taken; before any other thing was said or questioned by them, they
willed the Jew, that he should take the scarf from off the Christians face;
He did so, and withal did discover such a splendor, and such a beautiful
countenance, as did dazzle the eyes, and glad the hearts of all the standers by*
As the Sun scarfed with clouds, after much darkness, offers it self to the
eyes of those who long for its desired presence; such, and no otherwise then
such was the beauty of this Captived Christian, in this her braverie and
gallantry.

But he, on whom this wonderful light which was discovered, wrought the
greatest and deepest impression, was this our sorrowful Ricardo, as one who
better than any other knew her, since that she was his cruel and beloved
Leonisa, who so often and with so many tears, had by him been reputed and
deplored for dead. With the sudden and unexpected sight of the singular
beauty of this Christian, the heart of Ali was wounded and captivated* and in
the same degree, and with the self same wound Hazan found himself touched; the
Cadi himself not being exempted from this amorous wound, who more perplexed
than both the other, knew not how to remove his eyes from looking on those
fayrer lights of Leonisa. And for to endeare the great and powerful force of
Love; I would have thee to take notice, that at one and the same instant there
was bred in the hearts of all these three, one and the same (as they flattered
themselves) firm hope of obtaining and enjoying her. And therefore without
questioning how, where, and when the Jew came by her, they only asked him what
he would take for her? The covetous Jew answered, two thousand Crowns. But
he had scarce set the prise, but that Ali Bashaw said unto him, that he would
give him so much for her; and that he would go to his Tent, and presently
bring him his money.

But Haz^n Bashaw, who was minded that he should not have her, though therein
he should hazard his life; said, I likewise will give for her those two
thousand Crowns which the Jew demands; yet would I neither give so much,
neither set my self to cross Ali herein, or what he has offered, did not
that enforce me thereunto; which he himself shall confess is reason, and
does obliedge and force me to do as I do, and this it is; That this gentile
slave appertains not to either of us two* but only to the Grand-Signior; and
therefore I say, that in his name I buy her: Now let us see who dare be so
bold as to offer to take her from me.

Marry that dare I, replied Ali; because for the self same end and purpose do
I buy her: and it appertains more especially unto me, to tender this present
to the Grand-Signior, in regard of the conveniencie that I have to convey her
forthwith to Constantinople; carrying her along with me, that thereby I may
gain the good will of the Grand-Signior. For I being now a man (as thou now
Hazan see) without any charge or command, I had need seek out some means to
procure it, wherein thou art surely settled for three years, sinoe that this is
the very first day in which thou beginnest to bear rule, and to govern this
rich kingdom of Cyprus. And therefore, as well for these reasons, as that I
was the first that offered the propounded prise for her; it stands with all
reason (O Hazan) that thou leave her unto me. Nay rather it is more fitting,
and will be better taken at my hands (replied Hazan) to procure her and send
her to the Grand Signior; since that I do it without being moved thereunto out
of mine own private interest, or expectancie of profit. And whereas you
allege the commodiousnesse and conveniencie of carrying her along with you; I
will set forth a Galley of mine own well armed, putting thereinto men of mine
own, some servants, some slaves, which shall serve for her Convoy, and go
along with her. At these words Ali's blood began to rise, and rising upon his
feet, he laid his hand on his Cimyter, saying; Hazan, my intentions being the
same, for the presenting and carrying of this Christian to the Grand-Signior,
and I having been the first chapman that drove the bargain; it is grounded
upon all reason and justice, that thou leave her unto me; and if thou should
but think to carry her from me, this Cimyter which I lay my hand on shall
defend my right, and chastise thy presumption.

The Cadi, who was attentive to all that past between them, and burned no
less in Loves flames then the other two, fearing least he might go without
the Christian; bethought himself how he might quench this great fire which
was kindled between them; and withal, to get the Captive into his own
custody, without giving any the least suspicion of his damnable intention. And
therefore rising up, he interposed himself between them, and said; Hazan, and
Ali, let me entreat you both to be quiet, and lay aside these your
differences; and I doubt not but I shall be able to compose them in such sort,
that both of you may effect your intentions, and the Grand-Signior be (as you
desire) well served by you.

To these words of the Cadi, they presently showed themselves obedient, and had
he commanded them a greater matter, they would have done it; (so great is the
respect which those of that sect bear to his gray hairs.) The Cadi then
prosecuting what he had begun in this manner.

Thou Ali say, that thou would have this Christian for the Grand-Signior;
and Hazan he says the like: Thou alleagest, that thou wast the first in
offering the demanded price for her, and therefore she ought to be thine.
Hazan contradicts thee in this; and though he does not put his argument so
home to the pinching point; yet I find it is the same as thine is; that is,
the same intention, which without all doubt was hatched as so one as thine was,
in his desire and willingness to buy the Slave for the same effect; only thou
gotst the start of him, in having first declared thy self, yet ought not this
to be a cause that he should absolutely and wholly be defrauded and frustrated
of his good desire. And therefore in my opinion, it shall not be amiss to
accord this business between you, in this form and manner following; That
both of you shall have equal interrest in this Slave, and since that the use
of her is to be at the will and pleasure of the Grand-Signior, for whom she is
bought, it belongs unto him to dispose of her. In the mean while, you Hazan
shall pay two thousand Crowns; and Ali shall lay down the other two thousand,
and the Captive shall remain in my power, to the end, that in both your names
I may send her to Constantinople, that neither of you might remain unrewarded;
and can certify (as being an eye witness) your forwardness to gratify the
Grand-Signior; and therefore offer my self to send her thither at my cost and
charge, with that authority and decency which is due to him, to whom she is
sent. Writing to the Grand-Signior, acquainting him with all that which passed
here, and your readiness to do him this service.

These two enamoured Turks, neither knew, nor could, nor would contradict him;
each of them forming and imagining in his mind a hope (though doubtful) of
promising to themselves the attaining to the end of their inflamed desires.
Hazan, who was to continue Viceroy of Cyprus, thought upon giving great gifts
to the Cadi, that being thereby overcome and obliged, he should deliver up unto
him the Captive. And Ali he imagined to do some such act as should assure the
obtaining of what he desired, and each of them holding his own design the
best, and the surest; they easily condiscended to what the Cadi had propounded,
and with a joint consent both of them delivered her up presently unto him, and
made each of them present payment to the Jew 1000 Crowns a piece: But the Jew
said he would not part with her upon those terms, if they meant to have into
the bargain her wearing apparel, and her jewels, which he valewed at 1000
Crowns more. And in very deed they could be little less worth, because in her
hairs which partly hung dishevelled on her shoulders, and partly knit up in
curious knots on her forehead, there appeared some ropes of pearls, which
very gracefully were interwoven with them. The bracelet about her arms, and
above her ancles in the small of the leg were likewise full of great pearls;
her raiment throughout was very rich, and thereon a mantle after the Moorish
manner of green Satin deeply fringed and embroydered with gold.

In a word, it seemed to all that were there present, that the Jew had
undervalued the attyring of her. And the Cadi, that he might not show himself
less liberal then the two Bashaw's, told him, he would pay him those
thousand Crowns, because he would have her to be presented in the same dress
(which she was now in) to the Grand-Signior. The two competitors did approve
very well of it, each of them believing that all should fall out as they would
have it.

I want now words significant enough to tell you what Ricardo thought, in
seeing his soul set out thus to open sale; and those thoughts which then came
into his head, and those fears which suddenly surprised him; when as he saw
that his finding of his beloved Pledge was to lose her the more; He knew not
for a while, whether he were sleeping or waking, not believing his own eyes,
in giving credit to that which they had seen. For it seemed unto him a thing
impossible, that they should see so unexpectedly before them, those eyes of
hers which he had (not long since) given to be shut up in eternal darkness.

When he saw that this was no phantasma or dream, but a real truth; he came
to his friendly Mahamut, and whispering him in the ear, said softly unto him;
Friend, do not thou kow her? Not I said Mahamut; Then would I have thee know,
(replied Ricardo) that it is Leonisa: How (answered Mahamut) what is that
Ricardo, thou say? That (said Ricardo) which thou have already heard. Hold
thy peace then, and do not discover her, replied Mahamut, for Fortune goes now
so ordering the business, that thou shall find her good and prosperous, since
that she is in my Masters power. Do thou think it fit, said Ricardo, that I
go and put my self in some such place where I may be seen by her? No, by no
means, replied Mahamut; least she should put you, or you her into some
sudden passion; and have a great care that you do not give any the least
sign or token that you know her, or that ever you had seen her; for if you
should do so, it might redound much to the prejudice of my design, if not
utterly overthrow it. I will follow your advise, answered Ricardo, and so went
his way, leaving the place, least his eyes might encounter with those of
Leonisa; who held hers all the while that this passed nailed to the ground,
trilling some tears down from them.

She being thus (as you have heard) rendered up unto the Cadi he came unto her,
and laying hands on her, delivered her unto Mahamut, commanding him to carry
her to the City, with charge to deliver her to his Lady Halima; and to tell
her withal, that she should use and entreat her well, as being the slave of
the Grand-Signior. Mahamut did so, and left Ricardo all alone, who with his
eyes went following this his Star, till it was wholly taken out of his sight,
and covered as it were with a cloud from him by the walls of Nicosia. Having
lost her, he goes to look out the Jew, finds him; and coming civilly unto
him, asked him where he had bought this Captive Christian, and how, and in what
manner she came into his hand. The Jew made him answer, that he lighted on
her in the Island of Pantanalea; and that he bought her of certain Turks,
whose Galley had suffered wrack, being split there against the Rocks. And being
willing to have gone on in the prosecution of what he had begun, it received
interruption, and was wholly broken off by one that came from the Bashaw's,
telling the Jew that he must come away presently unto them who had purposely
sent for him; that they might demand that of him, which Ricardo was so desirous
to know, and thereupon he abruptly took his leave.

In the way, which was between the Tents and the Town, Mahamut took occasion
to ask Leonisa (speaking unto her in Italian) whence she was, and of what
place? Who made him answer, that she was of the City of Trapana: Then Mahamut
demanded again of her, whether she did know in that City, a rich and noble
Gentleman, called Ricardo? At her hearing him named, Leonisa fetched a deep
sighe, saying; Too too well to my hurt. How, to your hurt? replied Mahamut.
Because he knew me (said Leonisa) to his own, and my unhappiness. But I pray
tell me (quoth Mahamut) Did you know likewise in the said City another
Gentleman of a gentile disposition, the Son of very rich Parents, and
himself in his own person very valiant, very liberal, and very discre^t,
called Cornelio? I likewise know him (said Leonisa) and I may say much more to
my hurt than Ricardo.

But I pray Sir who are you, who know these two, and ask me of them? I am
(said Mahamut) of Pa^ermo, and by various accidents in this disguise and
different habit from that which I was wont to wear. I know them passing well,
for it is not many days since that they were both in my power. For certain
Moors of Tripoli in Barbary had taken Cornelio Captive, and sold him to a
Turk, who brought him to this Island, whether he came with Merchandise, (for
he is a Merchant of Rhodes) who had trusted Cornelio with all his goods. And
he will keep them well, (said Leonisa) because he knows so well to keep his
own.

But tell me Sir, how, or with whom Ricardo came to this Island? Marry he
came (answered Mahamus) with a Pyrate who took him prisoner in a Garden near
the seashoare of Trapana; and that together with him, he had Captivated a
Damsel, but I could never get him to tell me her name. He abode here some few
days with his Master, who was to go to visit Mahomets Sepulcher, which is in
the City of Almedina: But just at the time of his departure, Ricardo fell so
extreme sick, that his Master left him with me (for that I was his
Countryman,) to the end, that I might use all the best means for his
recoverie, and take care and charge of him, till his return; and in case that
he did not return hither, that I should send him unto him to Constantinople,
whereof he would advertise me when he came thither.

But Heaven had otherwise ordered it, since that unfortunate Ricardo without
having any accident or simptome of a dangerous sickness, within a few days
ended those of his life; making often mention of one Leonisa, whom (as himself
told me) he loved more then his own life, and was as dear unto him, if not
dearer then his own soul. Which Leonisa (as he at large related unto me)
suffered shipwreck at the Island of Pantanlea, the Galley wherein she was,
being split upon the Rocks, and her self drowned, Whose death he continually
lamented, and with much weeping bewailed, till that his mourning had brought
him to breath his last; for I perceived no sickness at all in him in his
body, but great shows of grief and sorrow in his soul.

Tell me (Sir) replied Leonisa; this other young man whom you speak off, in
those his discourses which he had with you; which (for that you were of his
own Country) could not but be very many, did he not at any time speak of
Leonisa? And did he tell you, how she, and Ricardo were made Captives, and the
whole manner of it? Speak of her (said Mahamut) yes a thousand, and a thousand
times; and asked me many a time and often, whether any Christian of this name
had of late been brought to this Island, and with such and such marks and
tokens, and how glad he would be to hear any tidings of her, that he might
ransom her. And withal I must tell you, that he had told his Master, and in
telling, made him believe that she was not so rich as he took her to be; and
for that he had enjoyed her, he might now make the less reckoning of her; and
that if three or four hundred Crowns would purchase her freedom, he would
willingly give so much for her, because heretofore he had borne some good will
and affection toward her.

Very little (said Leonisa) must that his affection be, which would not go
beyond four hundred Crowns. But Ricardo is more liberal, more valiant, more
generous, and ingenious, then to make so poor an offer, for that which he
prized at so high a value. God pardon the party that was the cause of his
death; for it was I that am that unhappy woman whom he bewailed for dead; and
God knows, if I should not be glad with all my heart that he were alive,
that I might requite his kindness, and that he might see how sensible I
should be of his misfortune, who has sor^owed so much for mine.

I Sir (as I have already told you) am she, who is as little beloved of
Cornelio, as I was greatly bewailed of Ricardo; She, who by very many and
various chances am come to this miserable estate wherein I now find my self; and
though it be so dangerous (as you see) yet have I always by Heavens gracious
assistance, kept mine honor entire and untoucht, wherewith in this my misery I
live contented. But now (woe is me) neither do I know where I am, nor who is
my Master, nor whether my contrarious fates will hurrie me. Wherefore I
beseech you Sir, by that blood which you have in you of a Christian, that you
will give me your best counsel and advise in these my troubles; which for
that they have been many, though they have made me look about and be
somewhat the more wary and circumspect; yet notwithstanding, such and so many
every moment came upon me, that I knew not well how to prevent and withstand
them.

Whereunto Mahamut answered, that he would do all whatsoever he was able to
do, in serving, advising, and assisting her with his best wit and strength.
And then did he advertise her of the difference between the two Bashaw's for
her sake, and how that she now remained in the power of the Cadi his Master,
for the conveying and presenting her to the great Turk, Selim, at
Constantinople. But rather then this should take effect, he hoped in the true
God, in whom he believed, (though a bad Christian) that he would dispose
otherwise of her; advising her withal, that by bearing her self fayrely, she
should work and insinuate her self into Halima's favor and good opinion, Wife
to the Cadi his Master, in whose power she was to remain till they should send
her to Constantinople; acquainting her withal, with Halima's conditions and
qualities; and besides these, told her many other things which might make much
for her good, holding talk and discourse with her all the way, till he had
brought her to, and left her in the Cadi's house, and in the power of Halima,
to whom he delivered his Masters message. The Moore, for that she saw she was
so well clad, and so beautiful, gave her a very kind and friendly welcome.
Mahamut having rendered up his charge into Halima's hands, returned back to the
Tents, to recount unto Ricardo what had passed betwixt himself, and Leonisa;
and meeting with him, told him all, point by point, from the beginning to the
ending. But when I came to tell him how sorrowful Leonisa was, when I
signified unto her, that he was dead, the water stood in his eyes: I told him
how I had feigned that counterfeit story of Cornelio's being a Captive, to see
how she would take it; I acquainted him with her coldness to Cornelio, and the
bad conceit she had of him for his undervaluing her. All which was as a
sovereign cordial to Ricardo's afflicted heart; Who said unto Mahamut.

There comes now into my mind (friend Mahamut) a tale which my Father told
me, who (you know) how curious he was; and have heard (I am sure) what great
honor the Emperor Charles the Fifth did him, whom he still served in
honorable places in his Wars: I tell you that he told me, that when the
Emperor was at the Siege of Tunez and took it, together with the Fort Goleta;
being one day in the field in his Tent, they presented unto him a Moore, as a
singular rarity for her beauty; and that at that very time wherein they
presented her unto him, entered in certain beams of the Sun at the one side
of the Tent, and rested on the hairs of the Moore, which seemed to stand in
competion with those of the Sun, being between red, and yellow, resembling
the color of golden Wyars; A rare and strange thing amongst the Moors, with
whom your black hairs are in greatest esteem and request. He told me
likewise, that on that occasion, there were in the Tent, amongst many other,
two Spanish gentlemen, both very discreet, and both Poets; the one of
Andaluzia, the other of Catalunia. The former having taken a view of her,
vented certain verses, which they call Coplas, ending in rhyme; but being at a
stand when he had uttered five of his verses; the other gentleman (seeing him
stick, and that he could go no further to make an end of what he had
begun, for want of words which on the sudden did not offer themselves to
his liking,) who stood close by him, and had heard these his Verses, went
presently on where he left, adding instantly five other to the former. And
this presented it self unto my memory, when I saw that most beautiful
Leonisa enter the Bashaw's Tent; not only out shining the beams of the Sun,
should they have lighted on her, but even Heaven it self, with all it is
stars.

Hold (said Mahamut) no more, least (friend Ricardo) thy tongue run riot, for
at every word thou utterest, I am afraid thou will pass so far beyond the
bounds, of not only reason, but religion, in the praise and commendation of
thy fair Leonisa, that leaving to seem a Christian, thou will be taken for a
Gentile Let me hear those verses or Coplas, or what else you please to call
them, that we may afterward talk of other things that may be more pleasing,
and perhaps more profitable. In good time (said Ricardo) but let me once
again advertise thee that the Andaluz vented the first five verses, and the
Catalan the other five, both extempore, and these they be.

And. "Whilst I behold thy glittering golden hayre^,
"Disheveld thus, waving about thy ears,
"And see those locks thus loosed and undone,
"For their more pomp to sport them in the Sun,
"Love takes those threads, and weaves them with that Art,

Cat. "He knits a thousand knots about my heart,
"And with such skill and cunning he them sets,
"My soul lies taken in those lovely ^ets.
"Making me cry, fair pris^ the do hold
"My heart in fetters wrought of ^nisht gold.

I like them well (said Mahamut) but much better (my Ricardo) that you are in
this good humor of repeating verses, because the saying (...) making of them
requires the minds of men that are disapass^nated* Men likewise use (replied
Ricardo) to wayle over Hearses, as to sing verses, both are verse.

But laying this aside, tell me what thou mindest to do in this our business?
for though I understood not what the Bashaw's treated in the Tent, till thou
have carried away Leonisa; a Renegado of my Master a Venetian told me all, who
was then present, and understood the Turkish language very well. And therefore
above all things it is most needful and requisite to set our wits a work, and
seek out some plot to prevent Leonisa's coming to the hands of the
Grand-Signior.

That which is fittest first of all to be done (answered Mahamut) is that thou
come to be in the power of my Master. This being effected, we will afterward
consult on that which shall convene best for us. Whilst they were thus
talking, came the Guardian of the Christian Captives belonging to Hazan, and
carried Ricardo away with him.

The Cadi returned with Hazan to the City, who in a few days dispatched Ali's
Residencie* and gave it him rolled up and sealed, that he might carry it along
with him to Constantinople. He taking his leave, prepared forthwith to let
forward on his journey, being very instant with the Cadi, that he would hasten
the sending of the Captive, and withal write his Letters to the Grand-Signior
in his favor, for the better furthering of his pretensions: the Cadi promised
him he would, but with treacherous bowels which were almost turned into ashes,
so were they set on fire by the inflamed love which he bare to the Captive.

Ali being gone full of false hopes, and Hazan abiding behind not void of
them; Mahamut so brought the business about that ( Ricardo came into the power
of his Master. Hours and days ran on, the time past away and the longing
desire to see Leonisa, did so press and wring Ricardo, that he could not take
one poor short minute of rest.

Ricardo changed his own name into that of Mario, because his might not come
to Leonisa's ears, before that his eyes had seen her. And for to see her was
very hard and difficult; for that the Moors are extremely jealous, and keep
covered from all men the faces of their women; howbeit they do not much
mislike the showing of them to Christians, which happily may be; because being
Captives, they do not reck on them for men, but slight them as contemptible
creatures.

Yet one day it so happened, that the Lady Halima saw her slave Mario; and in
seeing him took such a good liking of him, that he remained deeply engraven
in her heart, and strongly fixed in her memory. And peradventure taking little
contentment in the cold and weak embracements of her aged husband, she the
more easily gave way to this her evil desire. And with the like easiness she
acquainted Leonisa therewith, whom she now dearly loved, and made exceeding
much of, for her sweet behavior, and discreet carriage; and likewise showed
her great respect, for that she was to be sent for a raritie to the
Grand-Signior. She acquainted her, how that the Cadi had brought and received
into his house a Christian Captive, of so gentle an aspect, and comely
presence; that in her eye, he was the handsomest man that ever she saw in her
life: and that they said he was a Chilibi, that is to say a Gentleman, and
Countryman to Mahamut, their Renegado; and that she knew not how to give him
clearly to understand the good will and affection which she bare unto him;
fearing least that the Christian should slight and neglect her, for declaring
and manifesting her love unto him at the first sight, before she had further
and better knowledge of him.

Leonisa asked her what was the Captives name: Hamila told her Mario: to whom
Leonisa replied; if he be a Gentleman, and of that place they say he is,
certainly I should know him; but of this name ( Mario,) I do not remember
that there is any such in Trapana. But if it shall stand with your Ladyships
pleasure that I may but see him, and talk a while with him, I shall be able to
inform you both who he is, and what may be hoped from him; It shall be so said
Halima, and on Friday next, when as the Cadi shall be at the Mezquita,
performing those Rites and Ceremonies which are then and there required in
their devotions, and adorations; I will take occasion to call him in hither,
where leaving you two together, you may talk alone by your selves; and if you
think fit, you may give him some inckling of my desires, and well wishings
toward him, and that you will do me this friendly office in the best manner
your wit and discretion can devise, of both which I have had already sufficient
trial, and therefore need not to express my self, or press you any farther
in this particular.

This Halima said to Leonisa, and within less then two hours after, the Cadi
called Mahamut, and Mario unto him, and with no less effecacie then Halima had
discovered her heart to Leonisa, did this enam oured old young man discover his
to his two slaves, craving their council and advise, what course he should
take for to keep the Christian to himself, and enjoy her; and yet cumply with
the Grand Signior whose she was: telling them withal, that he would rather
dye a thousand deaths, then deliver her up once to the great Turk.

With such affection did this Moore express his passions, that they left a
deep impression and belief in the hearts of his two slaves; whose thoughts
were fully bent to run a contrary course to that which he imagined. He
thought one thing, and they another; in the end, it was concluded between
them, that Mario, as being a man of her own Nation and Country (howbeit he
had told him that he knew her not) should take in hand the soliciting her, and
in declaring his fervent affection: And in case that by his fair means he
could not prevail and procure her good will, he should then use force, she
being now in his power: and this being done, to give out that she was dead, and
so he should excuse his sending of her to Constantinople.

The Cadi rested wonderful well contented with this devise of his slaves, and
out of the great joy which he had imagined to himself, he instantly gave
Mahamut his liberty; be queathing besides unto him after his death, the one
half of his goods. He likewise promised Mario, if he procured that which he
so earnestly desired* not only his liberty, but good store of Crowns,
wherewith he should return home to his own Country, rich, honored, and
contented.

If he were liberal in promising, his Captives were prodigal, offering to
hale down the Moon from Heaven, to do him service, how much more easily to
draw Leonisa to the bent of his Bow, and to condescend to his desire; so as
Mario by his leave might have the conveniencie offered him of speaking with
her. I will give him free leave of access unto her, answered the Cadi, even as
often as he will himself, if that will advance the business. For I will so
order it, that Halima shall go hence to the house of her Parents, who are
Greeke-Christians, where she shall stay some few days, or longer time (if
need be;) and she being abroad, I will command my Porter that he suffer Mario
to enter into the house, and to have free ingresse and egresse, as often as he
pleases. And I will tell Leonisa, that she may (if it please her) talk and
converse with her Countreyman.

Thus did the wind begin to chop about of Ricardo's misfortunes, blowing with
a gentle gale in his favor, his Master not witting which way he meant to
shape his course. This appointment being made and concluded on between these
three; the first that laid this plott was Halima, showing her self a right
woman, whose nature is facile, and whose wit quick, and sudden, for the
effecting of that which she has a mind unto; especially if her heart be
eagerly set upon it. That very self same day, the Cadi came to Halima, and
told her, that she might when she would go out of the Town to visit her
Father and Mother, and make merry with them, and the rest of her good friends;
and to stay there as long as she listed, or till he sent for her. But because
her heart was over-joyed with those good hopes which Leonisa had given her;
she not only would not go to her Parents house, nor yet to that feigned
Paradise of Mahomet: and therefore told him, that at this time she had no great
mind to go thither, When she had, she would acquaint him therewith; but
whenever she went, she would carry the Captive Christian along with her. O by
no means (replied the Cadi,) for it is not fit, that this Pledge of the
Grand-Signior should be seen of any; besides, it would do her more hurt than
good to converse with Christians, since that you know, that when she comes into
the power of the Grand-Signior, she must be shut up in the Seraglio, and turn
Turk whether she will or no. But if she go along with me, replied Halima, it
mattereth not much that she be in my Parents house, nor that she converse with
them, with whom my self couverse much more, and yet I cease not for all that
to be a good Turk. Besides, the longest time that I mean to spend with them
in their house, shall be at the farthest, but four or five days; for the
great love which I bear unto you, will not give me leave to be any longer
absent, and not see you. The Cadi made no reply, that he might not give her
occasion to breed some suspicion or other in her, of his intention.

Whilst this business was a brewing, Friday came, and he went to the
Mezquita, from whence he could not come forth in almost four hours; and
Halima had scarce seen him put his foot over the threshold of his house, but
she commanded Mario to be called for to come unto her; but a Christian of
Corsica would not suffer him to enter, who was then Porter and waited at the
gate of the outward Court; if Halima her self had not called out aloud unto
him that he should let him come in. And so he entered, but much troubled, and
trembling, as if he had been to fight with a whole army of enemies.

Leonisa was in the same dress and attire as when she entered the Bashaw's
Tent, sitting at the foot of a curious stayr case of polished Marble, which led
the way up to a large and spacious gallerie rounding the whole house; her head
hung downward toward her bosom, resting it self on the palm of her right
hand, and leaning her elbow on her knee, her eyes were turned another way quite
contrary to the door by which Mario entered; so that though he went toward
the place where she sat, yet did she not see him.

No sooner was Ricardo let in, but he walked through the whole house with his
eyes, yet could he not perceive any thing save a dumb and still silence, till
that he cast his eye aside where Leonisa sat: Instantly whereupon, so many
thoughts took hold on enamoured Ricardo, as did work in him both amazement
and gladness, conceiting himself to be a thousand paces and more distanced
from his happiness and contentment. He considered likewise with himself that
he was a Captive, and his glory in another power revolving these things with
himself, he made toward her by a little and a little, and with a fearful
love, a joyful sadness, and timorous courage, (for such passions accompany
true lovers) he came by degrees to the Center where his hearts joy was, when
by chance Leonisa turned her head aside, and fixed her eyes on those of Mario,
who looked very steadfastly on her.

But when both their looks had thus encountered each other, by different
effects gave evident signs of that which their several souls felt within.
Ricardo stood stock still and could not stir one foot further; and Leonisa,
who upon Mahamuts relation gave Ricardo for dead, and to see him now and that
so unexpectedly alive, full of fear, and amazement, without unfixing her eyes,
or turning her back, she stepped up backward four or five stayres, she blessed
her self as if she had seen some phantasma, or a thing of another World.

Ricardo returned from out his astonishment, and knew by that which Leonisa
did, the true cause of her fear, and therefore said unto her; it grieves me
to the very soul, (oh of all fair, the fairest Leonisa) that the news did
not fall out true which Mahamut gave thee of my death, for by it I might have
excused those fears which now I have, in thinking with my self whether that
rigor which heretofore thou have used toward me, continue still in the same
force and being? Quiet your self (dearest in my love) and come down again,
and if you dare do that which hitherto you never did, which is; to draw near
unto me, come and touch me, and thou shall see that I am no fantastical
body, no wandering ghost; I am Ricardo ( Leonisa) that unfortunate Ricardo whom
thou have made so.

Whilst he was speaking this, Leonisa puts her finger upon her mouth, whereby
Ricardo understood that it was a sign that he should be silent, or speak
more softly: and taking a little better heart unto him, he drew a little nearer
unto her in such a distance, that he might hear these words come from her.
Speak lower ( Mario) for so me thinks thou now call thy self, and treare
not of any other thing now, save what I shall treat with thee; and consider
withal that it may so happen that if we be over heard, we shall never see one
another any more: I verily believe that Halima our Mistress listeneth to
hear, if not hears us; who (to deal plainly and briefly with thee) has
told me that she adores thee, and has entreated me to be the intercessoresse
of this her desire: if thou will answer her wishes, it will be better for thy
bodi^ then thy soul. But if thou will not, yet must thou feign that thou do
embrace her love; as well because I entreat thee so to do, as also for that
the declared desires of a Woman ought not uncivily to be despised and utterly
rejected.

Hereunto Ricardo answered, I did never think nor ever could imagine (fairest
Leonisa) that there was that thing whatsoever which you should entreat me to
do, that should bring with it an impossibility of cumplying therewith: but
that which you now require of me, has dis^deceived me: Is peradventure man's
will so light, that it may be moved too and fro, and carried hither and
thither, whether the pleasure of others shall guide and direct it? or does it
stand with the honor and faith of a Gentleman, or with the repute of an honest
man, to feign and dissemble in things of such weight and high a nature as this
is? If it seem good unto you, that any of these things in this kind ought to
be or may be done; do that which shall be most pleasing in your own eyes,
because you are the sole Mistress of my will. But I now know that you likewise
deceive me in this, since that you never rightly knew my will, and therefore
know not how to dispose thereof; but because you may not say that in the first
thing you commanded me, you should not be obeyed; I will lose somewhat of my
self, and of being what I ought to be, I will satisfy your desire, and that
of Halima (as you say) feignedly, so that I may thereby gain the happiness to
see you. And therefore do you feign my answers to your own good liking, for
from hence forth my feigned will does ^irme, and confirm them. Now in
requital of this office which I do for you, which is in my opinion the
greatest that ever I can or shall be able to do, though I should give my soul
anew unto you, which I have so often given you; I beseech you, that you will
briefly tell me, how you escaped from the hands of the Pirates, and how you came
to those of the Jew, who so lately sold you.

The story of my misfortunes (answered Leonisa) require more leisure then time
will now permit to relate, yet notwithstanding I will not leave you wholly
unsatisfied. Know then, that the same very evening we parted, Yzuph's Galley
was with a stiff and strong wind driven to the same Isles of Pa^tanalea,
where we likewise saw your Vessel; but ours, we being not able to hinder it,
ran remedilesly upon the Rocks. My Master then having his destruction before
his eyes, and that there was little or no hope of safety left; with all
possible haste emptied two Hogsheads which were full of water, then stopped up
the bung-holes very close, and having bound the one to the other with good
strong cords, he seated me between them; that done he presently stripped
himself, and taking another Hogshead, spreading his arms over it, and binding
a rope about his middle, causing the same to be fastened to the Caskes whereon
I sat bound, with great courage he rushed into the Sea, towing me after him.
I had not the heart to rush in after him, which one of the Turks seeing,
pushed me forward with all his force, and sent me packing after Yzuph, where
I lay without any sense, nor came again to my self, till I found my self on
Land in the arms of two Turks; who bowing my head and body toward the
ground, held me so a pretty space, all that while great store of salt water
which I had swallowed down, coming forth at my mouth.

At last I opened mine eyes, but as one amazed, and looking about, who should I
see, but Yzuph lying by me with his brains beaten out against the Rocks when
he had almost recovered the shore, where he ended his life. This I
afterward understood by the Turks; and they likewise told me, that taking
hold of the Cord, they drew me on Land, without receiving any further harm
then what I mentioned before unto you; of all the whole company, only eight
persons escaped drowning. Eight days we abode in the Island, the Turks using
me with as much respect as if I had been their Sister, if not more. We kept
our selves close in a Cave, the Turks fearing that if they should be espied,
the Christians which had the command of the Fort which is in the Island, would
salley forth upon them and take them Captive. They sustained themselves with
wet biscuit which the Sea had cast upon the shore from out the broken bins of
the Galley, which they went forth to gather up by night that they might not be
discovered.

Fortune had so ordered it for my great ill, that the Fort was without a
Captain, who died but a few days before; and in all the Fort there were not
above twenty soldiers. This we came to know by a youth which was captivated by
the Turks, who came down from thence to gather Cockles by the Seaside. At
the eight days end, there arrived on that Coast a Vessel of the Moors, which
they call Caramucales; the Turks saw it is coming in, and that they lay at
Anchor a little off the Land and so made toward them, making such signs to
the Vessel which was not far off, that they who were in her knew they were
Turks that called unto them. Thereupon they sent out their Cock-boat, and they
recounted unto them their distress, and they received them into their Barque
wherein came an exceeding rich Jew* a Merchant; and all the lading of the
Vessel, or the most part of it was his, being fraughted with Carpets, and
Hides, and other commodities which they bring from Barbary, to the Levant. In
the said Vessel the Turks went for Tripoli, and in that Voyage they sold me
to the Jew for two thousand Ducats, an excessive prise, if his love toward me
had not made him so liberal, which the Jew afterward discovered unto me.

Leaving the Turks after all this in Tripoli, the Vessel tackt about to
perform her Voyage, and the Jew in most impudent manner fell to soliciting of
me; but I showed him such a countenance as his filthy desires deserved. Seeing
himself then in despair of obtaining his lustful ends, he resolved to rid
himself of me upon the first occasion that should offer it self unto him. And
it coming to his knowledge that the two Bashaw's, Ali, and (...) were in this
Island, where he might sell and vent his Merchandise as well as in X^o whither
he was bound; he came hither with intention to sell me to one of the two
Bashaw's; and for this cause put me into this dress and wear wherein you now
see me, for to affectionate them the more unto me who should buy me.

I am given to understand that this Cadi has bought me, with purpose to carry
me for a Present to the Great-Turke, whereof I am not a little afraid. Here I
came to know thy feigned death; and I must now tell thee if thou will believe
me, and believe me thou may, that it grieved me to the very soul, and that I
did more envy then pity thee; yet not out of any ill will that I bare unto
thee, though I did not answer thy love according to thy expectation, (for I
shall never be ungrateful and dis-respective, where I have found so much love
and respect) but because thou had then made an end of thy lives Tragedy.

Dear Leonisa, answered Ricardo, you say not amiss herein; if death had not
hindered the happiness of my coming again to see you, esteeming more this
instant of glory which I enjoy in seeing you; then any other happiness
(saving that which is eternal) which either in life, or in death, might assure
unto me my desire.

The Cadi now my Master, into whose power I am come, by no less various
accidents then yours, bears the like ^ervent affection unto you, as Halima
does to me; he has made choice of me to be the interpreter of his thoughts.
I entertained the motion, not for to do him any pleasure thereby, but that I
might gain the commodity and convenienci^ of speaking with you; to the end
that you may see ( Leonisa) to what hard terms our misfortunes have brought
us; you to be the means of working an impossibility (for you know my mind
touching the motion you made unto me) and me to be likewise set a work about
such a business as I least dreamed of, and for which I would give, rather then
obtain it, my life which now I esteem according to it is high worth and value,
since that it has had the happiness to see you.

I know not what to say unto thee Ricardo, replied Leonisa, nor how we shall be
able to get out of this intricate laborinth, whereinto (as thou say est) our
hard fortune has brought us; only I know to say thus much, that we must be
driven in this business to use that which is contrary to our condition, and
hateful to honest minds; to wit, dissembling, and deceit. And therefore say
unto thee, that I will acquaint Halima with some such words delivered by thee,
that shall rather entertain her with hopes, then drive her to despair. Thou
likewise shall say of me to the Cadi that which thou shall think most
convenient for the securing of mine honor, and the deceiving of him. And since
that I put mine honor into thy hands, thou may assure thy self that it is
yet as true and entire as ever; though the many ways which I have gone, and
the many assaults which I have endured might call it into question, though you
nor any else without great injustice, can make the least doubt of it. For our
speaking and conversing each with other, will be (by their means) most facile
and easy: always presupposed, that you never once open your mouth, nor treat
ought with me, which shall any way appertain to your declared pretension; for
in what hour you shall do that, in the same you shall take your leave of
seeing me any more. For I would not have thee think that my value is of so
little worth, and of so few quilates, that Captivity shall work that with me,
which liberty could not do. I will be (by heavens favor) like gold, which the
longer it is in the Chrysoll, comes forth thence the purer, and the finer: rest
satisfied and content thy self with that which I have already said unto thee,
least the very sight of thee should (as it has done heretofore) cause a
distance in me, if not a loathing. For I would have thee to know ( Ricardo)
that I always held thee to be too rough and arrogant, and to presume somewhat
more of thy self then was fitting. I confess likewise that I may be deceived;
and it may be that making this trial of thee, experience will set the truth
before mine eyes, and tell me I was deceived; and being put out of this
error, I may be more kind, but never less honest: go get you gone, for I
fear me Halima may have overheard us, who has some understanding of our
Christian language; at least of that mingled speech which is used, whereby we
all understand one another.

You say very well (Mistress of my heart) answered Ricardo, and I infinitely
thank you, and take in exceeding good part this dis-deceiving which you have
given me; and make as high esteem thereof, as of the favor you do me in
suffering me to see you. And as you say experience peradventure will make
known unto you how plain and downright my condition is, and how meek and
humble my disposition, especially for to adore you; and had you not put a bound
and limit to my carriage and treating with you, yet should it have been so
fair and so honest toward you, as you cannot wish or desire to have it better.

Touching that which concerns the entertaining of the ( adi, take you no care
of that, leave it to me, do you the like with Halima. And by the way, I would
have you (Lady) to know, that since I have seen you, there is bred in me such
a strong hope and confidence; as assures me that it shall not be long before
we procure our desired liberty, and so God have you in his keeping; at
another time, and better leisure, I shall relate unto you the revolutions, the
turnings and windings by which fortune has brought me to this estate, after
that she had put us a sunder and severed me from your sight: with this they
took their leaves each of other, Leonisa remaining well contented and
satisfied with Ricardo's plain proceeding, and he the most joyful man in the
world, that he had heard one word from Leonisa's mouth without tartness.

Halima had shut up her self in her oratorie, praying to her prophet Mahomet,
that Leonisa might bring her a good dispatch of that business which she had
recommended unto her. The Cadi, he was in the Mezquita, recompensing with his
desires those of his wife, they keeping him very solicitous, as wholly depending
on the answer which he hoped to hear from his Slave, to whose charge he had
committed his talking with Leonisa; and that he might better come to have some
speech with her, Mahamut should afford him opportunity, though that Halima
were in the house.

Leonisa increased in Halima her lewd lust and filthy desire, by giving her
very good hopes that Mario would condescend to her will, and do whatsoever
she would command him. But telling her withal, that she must have patience
till two Moons were first past over; before which time he could not cumply
with that which he much more desired then her self. And this term he
entreated of her* that he might make his prayers and supplications unto God,
for the freeing of him from his Captivity, and restoring him again to his
former liberty. Halima contented her self with the excuse and relation of her
beloved Ricardo, whom she would free from his slaverie, before the deputed
time, so as he would accomplish her desire. And therefore entreated Leonisa,
that she would treat with him, and see if she could work him to dispense
with the said time, and to cut off all delays; and she would furnish him with
as much money as the Cadi should require of him for his ransom.

Now before that Ricardo returned are answer to his Master, he consulted with
Mah^ what answer he should make him; and they agreed between them to tell
him, that the case was desperate, (...) hope of winning her, and that as soon
as possibly he could, he should carry her away to Constantinople; and that in
the way thitherward, either by fair means, or by force obtain his desire.
And as touching the inconvenience which might offer it self for his cumplying
with the Grand-Signior, he should do well to buy him another Slave; and in
the voyage to feign and cause it to be given out that Leonisa was fallen sick,
and making our advantage of a dark night, we may cast the bought Christian
over-boord into the Sea, saying; that it was Leonisa, the Captive of the
Grand-Signior that was dead* and that may be done, and should (...) in such
manner that the truth thereof should never be discovered, and so remain
blameless with the Grand-Signior, and fulfill his own will; and that for the
continuation of his pleasure, they would afterward devise some donvenient
course, that should make all safe and sure.

This poor man, this old Cadi, his love to Leonisa made him so blind, that
had they (...) a thousand other greater unlikelihoods (so as they were directed
to the fulfilling of his hopes) he would have believed them all, how much more
when it seemed unto him, that all which they said, was good and (...), and in a
very saire way, promising prosperous success. And so indeed it might have
proved, if the intention of these his two counselors had not been to make
themselves Masters of the Vessel; and to make an end of him, and his foolish
thoughts together.

But another difficulty offered it self to the Cadi, which in his own
opinion was greater then all the rest; it running still in his heat that his
wife Halima would not let him go to Constantinople, unless he would carry her
with him. But presently they did facilitate that, telling him, that in stead of
the Christian which they were to buy, and must dye and be turned over-boord
instead of Leonisa, Halima would serve excellently for that purpose, and none
better, of whom he desired to be freed more then from death. With the same
facility as he entertained this in his thought, with the like, did Mahamut,
and Ricardo, yield thereunto.

And being firmly resolved thereon, that very day the Cadi breaks with Halima
about the voyage which he thought to make to Constantinople, to carry the
Christian to the Grand-Signior; by whose liberality, he hoped he should he
made the great Cadi of Cayro, or of Constantinople. Halima told him that she
liked very well of his determination, thinking that he would leave Ricardo at
home. But when the Cadi had certified her that he would carry him along with
him, and likewise Mahamut; she began to change her opinion, and to
dis-advise him from that, which before she had advised him to do. In fine,
she concluded, that if he did not take her with him, she would in no hand give
way to his going. The Cadi would not cross her, but if she would needs have
it so, her will should be his; thinking then with himself that he would
quickly shake off that yoke, which lay so heavy on his neck.

All this while Haz^ Basham was not careless in soliciting the Cadi to deliver
up the Slave unto him, offering him mountains of gold, having besides given
him Ricardo before for nothing, whose ransom he prized at two thousand Crown^*
All these gifts and promises wrought no further good with the Cadi, then to
make him hasten the more his depar^ and so solicited by his desire, and by them
importunities of Haz^ together with those of Halima, who likewise build vai^
hopes in the ^yre.

Within (...) days he had fitted and rigged up a (...) of fi^ (...) thanks,
manning it with voluntary Soldiers, lusty young able men, partly Moors,
partly Greek Christians. Therein he embarked all his wealth, and (...) left
not ought a^ home in her house of any moment, and entreated her husband that he
would give her leave ^o carry with her, her Father and Mother, that they might
see Constantinople. Halima's intention was the same with that of Manamut;
meaning to deal with him and Ricardo, that when they were on their voyage,
they should make themselves Masters of the Bregantine, and go away with it.
But she would not open her mind, nor declare her self unto them, till she saw
her self embarked; and this too with with a full purpose and resolution to go
to the Christians Country, and to return to that Religion which she had first
been of, and to be married to Ricardo; being verily persuaded, that carrying
such store of wealth along with her; and turning Christian, he would not refuse
to take herto wife.

In this interim, Ricardo had speech with Leonisa, and declared unto her his
whole intention; and she again acquainted him with Halima's purpose, who had
imparted the same unto her They enjoined each other secrecy, and recommending
themselves to God, they stood expecting the day of their departure. Which being
come, Hazan went forth, accompanying them with all his Soldiers to the
Seaside; and did not leave them, till they had hoysed sail; neither did he
take off his eye from the Bregantine, till he had quite lost the sight of it.
And it seemed that the Air, and breath of those sighs which the enamoured
Moore vented forth, did fill and drive forward with greate^ force the sails,
which wasted away his soul.

But he, as one who a long time lived in such torment, oppressed by love that
he could take no rest, thinking on that which he was to do, that he might
not dye by the hands of his violent desires; omitted not ^o put that presently
in execution, which with long deliberation and a resolute determination, he
had forecasted. And therefore in a Vessel of seventeene banks which he had
made ready in another Port, he clapped into her fifty Soldiers, all his friends
and acquaintance, whom he had obliged unto him by many gifts and promises;
giving them in charge, that they should put forth to Sea, set upon, and take
the Cadi's Bregantine, and all the wealth that was in her, putting to the edge
of the sword as many as went in her, save Leonisa the Captive, for she was the
only spoil that he looked after, prizing her above all the other riches and
treasure which were in the Vessel. He likewise gave order that they should
sincke her, so that not any one thing might remain, that might give any the
least sign or token of their perdition.

The covetousness of the spoil added wings to their feet, and courage to
their hearts; howbeit they knew very well that they should find but little
resistance in those of the Bregantine, in regard that they were disarmed, and
without any the least suspicion that any such unexpected accident should befall
them. Two days had the Bregantins now gone in her intended course, which to
the Cadi seemed two Ages; for the very first day of all, he would feign have
put in execution his determination: But his Slaves advised him, that the
business must first be so carried that Leonisa should fall sick, to give
thereby some color to her death, and that this would require some days of
sickness. He did not like of that, but would have it given out that she died
suddenly, and so quickly make an end of what they had projected, by
dispatching his Wife out of hand, that he might allay the hear of that fire,
which by little and little went consuming his bowels. But in conclusion he must
condescend to that, which the other two thought fit.

Now in this mean while, Halima had declared her intent to Mahamut, and
Ricardo, and they were ready to put it in execution, as soon as they had
doubled the points of Alexandria, or passed by the Castles of Natolia. But the
Cadi was so hasty with them, and so sharp set, that they promised to perform
the task they undertook, upon the first occasion that should offer it self
unto them. And one day at the end of six, which they had sailed another
Voyage, and that now it seemed to the Cadi, that the feigning of Leonisa's
sickness was sufficient, he did importune his Slaves that they should conclude
the next day with Halima, and throw her (wrapped up in a winding sheet) into the
sea, saying; it was the Captive of the Grana-Signior.

The day afterward began to break, wherein (according to the intention of
Mahamut, and Ricardo) was to be the accomplishment of their desires, or the end
of their days; when lo, they might desery a Vessel, which with sail and
oar came chasing them. They were afraid that they were Christian Pirates, from
whom neither the one nor the other could expect any good. For being such, the
Moors feared to be made Captives; and the Christians, that though they should
get their liberty, they should lose their goods, and be stripped of all they
had. But Mahamut and Ricardo contented themselves with Leonisa's, and their
own liberty; yet notwithstanding this imagined hope, they much feared the
insolency of your Rovers at Sea, for they that follow such kind of exercises,
and make a common trade thereof, be they of what Religion or Nation so ever,
they usually are cruelly minded, and of an insolent condition.

They prepared to defend themselves, without forsaking their oars, and doing
all that might be done in such a case of necessity, and so sudden. It was
not long, a matter of two or three hours, little more or less, that they drew
nearer and nearer, till they came within Canonshot of them. Seeing this, they
struck sail, loosed their Oars, betook themselves to their Arms, and
expected their coming.

Howbeit, the Cadi bid them be of good cheer, and fear nothing, for the
Vessel was Turkish, and would not do them any harm. He commanded that a
white flagge in token of peace should presently be set up, placing it on the
yard* sail of the Poope, because they might the better discern it, who being
already blinded with covetousness and greediness of gain, made up with great
fury to board the ill defended Bregantine.

Whilst this was in acting, Mahamut by chance turned his head aside, and
perceived that from the Westward there was a Galley coming up, and to his
thinking of some twenty banks, whereof he certified the Cadi; and some
Christians which wrought at the Oar, said, that the Vessel they had descried,
was of Christians. All which did but double their confusion and fear, holding
them in suspense, not knowing what to do; fearing and hoping such success, as
God should be pleased to give them.

By this time I conceive that the Cadi would have given (being in that straight
that now he was) to have found himself again in Nicosia, all the hopes of
his pleasure, so great was the confusion and amazement wherein he was, tho he
were quickly put out of it by that first Vessel, which without respect to the
Flagge of peace, or that which was due to their religion, did set upon that of
the Cadi with such force and fury, that they wanted very little of sinking it.
The Cadi presently knew those that had thus set upon them, for his eyes gave
him assured notice that the Soldiers were of Nicosia. He soon guessed the
cause of their coming, and by whom set a work, and gave himself for a lost
and dead man: and had it not been that the Soldiers gave themselves more to
the spoil, then the slaughter, not a man of them had escaped alive.

But when they were most busy about their pillaging; a Turk cry'de out aloud
unto them saying, Arm, arm (fellow Soldiers) for a Vessel of Christians is
coming upon us. And he had good reason to say so, because the Vessel which
Cadi's Bregantine descried, bare Christian flags, and very fiercely did set
upon that of Hazan; but before they came to grapple with her, one from the
Prowe demanded of them in the Turkish language what vessel that was, and
whence? They made answer, that it was Hazans the Bashaw, Viceroy of Cyprus. Why
then (replied the Turk) you being Musoliman's have set upon and robbed this
vessel wherein we know goes the Cadi of Nicosia? Whereunto they answered,
that they knew no other cause, save that they were commanded to take her; and
that they as being his Soldiers, in obedience unto him had done his command.

The Captain of the second vessel who came in a Christian disguise; resting
satisfied with that which he desired to know, fell off from that of Hazan, and
made toward that of the Cadi; and with the very first volly of shot he gave
them, he killed ten of those Turks that were in her; and presently after
entered her with great courage and speed. But they had scarce set their feet on
the hatches, but Cadi instantly knew that it was not a Christian that had thus
set upon him; but Ali Bashaw who was in love with Leonisa, who with the same
intent as Hazan, stood waiting his coming; and that he might not be known,
had clad his Soldiers line Christians, to the end that by this devise, his
theft might not be discovered.

The Cadi, who knew the intentions of these Lovers, and traitors, began in a
loud voice to vent his malice, saying; what is this thou do, (thou Traitor
Ali Bashaw) that thou being a Musolimam, that is to say, a Turk, set upon
me as a Christian? And you Traitors, Hazans Soldiers, what a Devil has
moved you to commit so great an outrage? for that to fulfill the lascivious and
lustful appetite of him who sent you hither, will thus go against your
natural Lord.

Upon these words of his, all of them silenced their Arms, no more clattering
was heard; and looking one one upon another, they came at last to know each
other, because they had all of them been Soldiers of one and the same
Captain, and served under one and the same banner. And being now abashed at
the Cadi's word, and ashamed of their own bad act; the points of their
Cimiters were blunted, and the edges of them dulled, their courages were
q^elled* and their minds mightily dismayed. Only (...) shut his eyes, and
ears, to all that he saw, or heard; and falling upon the Cadi, he gave him
such a cut in the head, that if the blow had not been borne off by a hundred
yards of Calico wrapped about it, doubtless he had cleft his head asunder, yet
it struck him down between the banks of the Vessel; and being fallen, the
Cadi said: O cruelt Renegado, enemy of our Prophet, and is it possible, that
there is none that will chastise thy cruelty, and this thy great insolency?
How, (accursed as thou art) durst thou presume to lay hands and draw thy sword
against thy Cadi, and a minister of Mahomet?

These words added force, to force, and more fuel to the former fire; the
which being heard by Hazans Soldiers, and moved with fear that Ali his
Soldiers would take their prey from them (which they held yet to be theirs)
they determined to put all upon adventure; and one beginning first, and all the
rest following after, they set upon the Soldiers of Ali with such haste,
rancour, and courage; that in a little while they behaved themselves so
manfully, that though they were more by many then they, they reduced them to a
very small number; but they which remained of them, took heart unto them,
leaving (...) four of Hazans men alive, and those very sorely wounded.

Ricardo, and Mahamut stood looking on, who ever and anon put their heads out
of the scupper-holes of the Poope Cabin, to see what would become of this
great fray, which on both sides was so hotly pursued. And seeing that the
Turks were in a manner all slain, and they that were alive, sore wounded, and
how easily they might make an end of all of them, he called to Mahamut, and two
kinsmen of Halima whom she had wrought to embarque themselves with her, that
they might assist in going away with the Vessel, and with their help, and her
fathers, taking up the Cimiters of the slain, they showed themselves upon the
Deck, crying out, Liberty, Liberty; and being aided by the Voluntaries who
were Greek Christians, with a great deal of ease, and without receiving any
one wound, they cut the throats of them all; and boording Ali's Galley, which
they found without defense, they took it, with all that was therein. Of those
that dyed in the second encounter, one of the first was Ali Bashaw, whom a
Turk in revenge of the Cadi ran through the body.

Being now Masters of all the three Vessels, they consulted what was now best
to be done* in the end they yielded to Ricardo's advice, which was, that they
should take out all things that were of any price or value, both in their own,
and Hazans vessel, and stow them in Ali's Galley, which was a vessel of far
greater burden, and fitter to take in the lading, and make good their voyage;
and the rather, for that the Rowers were Christians, who resting well contented
with their recovered liberty, and with many other good things which Ricardo
liberally shared amongst them, offered to carry him to Trapana, and if need
were, even to the end of the World.

This being thus ordered, Mahamut and Ricardo full of joy for this their good
success, went to the Moore Halima, and told her, that if she would return to
Cyprus, they would man her own vessel with good valiant Voluntaries, and give
her the one half of the goods which she had embarked. But she, who
notwithstanding this so great a calamity, had not yet lost that itching love,
and amourous affection which she bare to Ricardo, told him; that she would
go with him to the Land of Christians, whereof her Parents were wondrous glad.

The Cadi was by this time come to himself, and having dressed and bound up his
wound, as their haste and the place would permit; they likewise told him that
he should make choice of one of these two, either to go with them to the Land
of Christians, or to return in the same Vessel he set forth to Nicosia.
Whereunto he answered, that since his ill fortune had brought him to such bad
terms, he would rather accept of the liberty which they gave him, and that
he would go to Constantinople, and make his complaint to the Grand-Signior, of
the great and grievous wrong which from Hazan, and Ali he had received. But
when he knew that Halima would leave him and turn Christian, he was almost
ready to run mad.

In conclusion, they manned his own Vessel, and furnished him with all things
necessary for his voyage, and gave him some Chequines, of those which once had
been his own. And so having taken his leave of all of them, being resolved to
return to Nicosia, he besought before he had hoysed sail, that Leonisa would
do him the favor to embrace him; for that grace and honor she therein
should show him, would of it self be sufficient to make him forget all his
misfortune. All of them entreated Leonisa to confer that favor on one that
loved her so well, since in so doing, she should not go against the decorum
and decency of her honesty. Leonisa yielded to their request, and the Cadi
further entreated of her, that she would but lay her hands upon his head, for
that he hoped that imposition would heal his wound. Leonisa to give him
content, condiscended thereunto. This done, and having bored many holes in
Hazans Vessel, a fresh East wind favoring them, which seemed to court the
sails, and woo them, that they might be admitted to come into them, did set
them going amain; so that in a very few hours they lost the sight of the
Cadi's Bregantine, who with tears in his eyes, stood looking how the winds
carried away his wealth, his Wife, and with Leonisa, his souls delight.

With different thoughts from the Cadi's sailed Ricardo, and Mahamut. And so
not being willing to touch any where; as they went along on Land, they past by
the Town of Alexandria, lanching through the deep Gulf; and without striking
sail, or being driven to make use of their Oars, they came to the strong
Island of Corsu, where they took in fresh water; and presently without any
farther stay, they passed by those noted high Cliffes, the Acrocerauros. And
the second day, they discovered afar off Paquino, the Promontorie of the most
fertile Tinacria: out of whose sight, and that famous Island of Malta they went
flying, for with no less swiftness did this happy bottom bear them.

In fine, compassing that Island, some 4. days after they descried Lampadosia,
and anon after the Island where they had like to have been wrack't, and the
Galley wherein Leonisa was split against the rocks* the very sight whereof made
her to tremble, calling to mind the danger wherein she had so lately seen her
self. The day following they might ken before them their desired and beloved
Country, which quickened that joy which was already in their hearts; their
spirits were transported with this new co^tentment, which is one of the
greatest which can be had in this life, to arrive after a long captivity safe
in their own native Country. And the next that may be equalled with it, is
that which men receive in getting the victory over their enemies.

They found in the Galley a great chest full of flags and streamers of silk of
sundry colors, with which Ricardo caused the Galley to be adorned in most
gallant manner. The day was but newly broken, when as they found themselves to
be within less then a league of the City, and rowing lustily, and sending
forth ever and anon, shoutings of joy and gladness; they slacked their Oars
the nearer they came to the Haven, making in very leisurely. In her entering
into the Port, an infinite number of people in an instant appeared; who having
seen how slowly that well trimmed Vessel made to Land, there was not any one
in all the whole City, which did not come forth hastening to the Sea side.

Whilst they were thus flocking to the shore, Ricardo, entreated Leomsa that
she would cloth and adorn her self in the same manner, as when she entered
into the Tent of the Bashaw's, because he would put a pretty jest upon her
Parents. She did so, and adding gallantrie to gallantrie, Pearls, to Pearls,
and beauty, to beauty, (which the hearts contentment commonly increases) she
attired and dressed her self in such sort, as caused a new admiration and
wonder. Ricardo also put himself into the Turkish habit, the like did Mahamut,
and all those Christians that ply'de the Oar, for there were rayments enough
of the slain Turks to serve all of them. When they arrived at the Port, it
was about eight of the clock in the morning, which showed it self so fair,
and so clear, that it seemed to appear so of purpose, for to behold that
joyful entrance.

Before their entering the Port. Ricardo made them to discharge their Pieces of
Ordnance belonging to the Galley; to wit, one Canon, and two Falcons, the City
answered them with the like. The people stood as thick as they could stand
together, expecting the coming in of this goodly Vessel, so bravely waving
her flying flagges and streamers, moving too and fro with a gentle gale of
wind. But when they were come so near them as to discern that they were
Turkish, by reason of those white Turbants that they wore on their heads, they
began to wax fearful, and jealous of some fraud and deceit. Whereupon they
betook them to their Arms, and as many as were trained Soldiers in the
City, hastened to the Port, whilst the Horsemen went some one way, some
another, scouring the coast. Of all which stir they took great pleasure, who
by little and little drew nearer and nearer till they entered the Haven, and
casting anchor near the shore, throwing out a plank, and pulling in their
Oars one by one, as it were in procession came on Land, which with tears of
joy they kissed again and again; an evident sign that they were Christians,
who had made prize of that Vessel. The last that landed* were the Father and
Mother of Halima, and her kinsmen, all (as we told you) clad after the Turkish
fashion. That which made up the total sum or final end of all, was fair
Leonisa, having a veil cast over her face of Crimson Taffata, led by Ricardo,
and Mahamut; which spectacle drew after them the eyes of all that infinite
multitude, who at their landing prostrating themselves as the rest did,
saluting the earth with their kisses.

By that time this was done, the Captain and Governor of the City was come
up unto them, who knew very well that they of all the rest were the chief and
principal persons. But he had scarce come fully near them, but presently he
knew Ricardo, and ran with open arms, and signs of exceeding great joy to
embrace him.

There came along with the governor Cornelio and his Parents, and those of
Leonisa, with all her kinsfolk, together with those of Ricardo; all which were
the greatest Persons of rank and quality in the whole City. Ricardo
embraced the Governor, and repayed them all with thanks, that gave him the
Parabien of his return.

He took Cornelio by the hand, who as soon as he knew him, and found that he
held him fast, his color began to change, and began to shake and tremble for
fear; and taking Leonisa likewise by the hand, he said: Gentlemen, of courtesy
(sirs) I beseech you, that before we enter the City, and into the Temple to
give due thanks unto our Lord God, for the great favors which he has done
for us in our misfortunes, you will be pleased to hear me speak a few
words, which I am desirous to deliver unto you.

Whereunto the Governor answered, that he might utter what he would; for they
should all with much content and silence, give him both a willing, and
attentive ear. Presently hereupon all the chiefest amongst them, placed
themselves round about him; and he raising his voice to such a height as he
might (not overstraining it) be well heard, spoke unto them after this manner.

Gentlemen, ye may well remember the misfortune which some months since
befell me in the Garden near the Salt Pits, together with the loss of
Leonisa; it cannot likewise have fallen out of your memory, the diligence
which I used in procuring her liberty, since that being forgetful of mine
own, I offered for her ransom all my whole estate. And though this perhaps to
your seeming, was then accounted great Liberality, yet can it not, neither
ought it to redound to my praise, since that I was to give it for the ransom
of my soul. That which from that time since has happened to both of us, will
require long time, a more seasonable conjuncture, and another tongue less
troubled then mine. Let it suffice for the present that I tell you, that after
many various and strange accidents, and after a thousand lost hopes of
remedying our misfortunes, Heaven taking pity of us without any merit of ours,
has returned us home to our native Country, as full of content, as abounding
in wealth: yet neither from this, nor my procured liberty is the end
answerable to my desire; nor do I take any great contentment in the enjoying
of these, but in that which I conceive, this both in peace, and war my sweet
enemy takes, as well for to see her self free, as to see here before her (as
she does) the image of her own soul. Yet notwithstanding I greatly rejoice in
this general rejoicing, which they receive who have been my companions in
misery; and though hard misfortunes, and sad mischances are wont to alter our
dispositions, and to depresse valiant minds. Yet was it not so with the
overthrower of my good hopes; for I may be bold to say it, that she amidst
these her miseries, has with the more undaunted courage and constant
resolution, endured the shipwreck of her disadventures, and the encounters of
my earnest, but honest importunings. Wherein that old Adage is verified; they
may change their Countries, but not their Customs who have once gotten a
habit of them. Of all this which I have said, I thence infer; that I offered
my whole estate for her ransom, gave her my soul in my good desires, plotted
the means of her liberty, and adventured more for her, then my self, my life.
And though from all these, (in the construction of noble, and ingenious
dispositions) may be raised engagements of some moment, yet will I not press
any one upon her, save only this one which I presume she will make good; and
in saying this, he puts up his hand, and in a very civil and mannerly way,
took away the scarf from before Leonisa's face, which resembled as it were
the removing of a cloud, which darkens the beautiful brightness of the Sun.
Then did he prosecute his speech, saying; Lo, here ( Cornelio) I deliver unto
thee such a jewel, which thou ought to esteem above all those things that
are esteemed worthy. And so here (thou fair Leonisa) I give thee that which
thou have ever had in thy memory. This if you please you may term
Liberality: In comparison whereof, to give away my estate, my life, my honor,
is all as nothing. Take her (oh thou fortunate young man) take her (I say;) and
if thy knowledge can but come to reach so high as to come to know her worth, I
shall hold thee to be the happiest man this day on earth. Together with her, I
will give thee likewise as much as comes to my share of all that which Heaven
has allotted to us all, which I make account will come to above 30. thousand
Crowns. All this may thou freely enjoy with much pleasure, quietude, and
content; and Heaven grant that it may continue many long and happy years. As
for my self, being made unfortunate by some squint-eyed star at my birth,
since that I must be without Leonisa, I am content to be poor; for he lives
too long who lives without Leonisa.

This said, he was silent, as if he had knit a knot upon his tongue. But within
a very little while, before that any other spoke, recollecting himself, he
said* Oh Heavens! how do pinching troubles disturb the understanding? I
(gentlemen) out of the desire which I have to do good, have not weighed well
what I said. For it is not possible that a man should show himself liberal of
that which is another, not his own. What jurisdiction or power have I in
Leonisa, for to give her unto another? or how can I make offer of that which is
so far from being mine? Leonisa is his, and so much his; that were her
Parents dead, (but long may they live) her affection would find no opposition.
And if there may stand perhaps in her way those obligations, which (being as
she is, discreet) she ought to think she owes me; from this day forward I
disclaim them, cancel them, and acknowledge them to be wholly void and of none
effect; and therefore unsay what I said before. I give then to Cornelio
nothing, because I cannot; only I confirm the grant of my goods made to
Leonisa, without desiring or looking for any other recompense, save that she
esteem for true my honest thoughts, and that she will have this belief of
them, that they were never directed, nor looked toward any other point, save
that which stood with her incomparable honesty, her great worth, and infinite
beauty. And here Ricardo ended his speech.

Whereunto Leonisa answered in this manner; if any favors (oh Ricardo) you
imagine I did Cornelio (when as you were enamoured and jealous of me) imagine
likewise, that it was both meet, and honest, as being guided by the will and
order of my Parents, who intending to make a match between us; laid their
command upon me to do him those favors. If you rest satisfied with this, well
may you satisfy your self with that which experience has made known unto
you of my honesty, and reservednes. I speak this, for to give you ( Ricardo)
to understand, that my will was always subject to another will; to wit, my
Parents, whom I now most humbly (as is meet) beseech, and earnestly entreat,
that they will give me leave and liberty, freely to dispose of that which your
valor and Liberality has bestowed on me. Her Parents with a very good will
gave her their leave so to do, relying on her discretion, that she would make
use thereof in such sort, as should redound always to her own honor, and
their profit.

Having obtained this license, discreet Leonisa proceeded thus. I shall
entreat you (as many as be here present) that you will bear me witness, that
I had rather incur the censure of lightness, and inconstancy, (which none
of you all can, or shall ever be able to charge me therewith) then to be taxed
(which is hateful both in the sight of God and man) of unthankfulness and
ingratitude. And therefore (oh valiant Ricardo) my good will and affection
hitherto so reserved, so perplexed and doubtful, shall now declare it self in
your favor. To the end, that you men may know that all women are not
ungrateful, by my expressing of my thankfulness to you. I am thine ( Ricardo)
and will be thine till death, if some better knowledge move thee not to deny
me thy hand; for I desire nothing more then to have thee to be my Husband.

Ricardo hearing these words, was so transported with joy, and in a manner so
besides himself, that he neither knew how, nor could not answer Leonisa in
any other language then humbling himself on his knees before her, and kissing
her hands which he held fast by force, bathing them often with his tender and
loving tears. Cornelio did shed tears too, but of grief, and sorrow; so did
Leonisa's Parents, but of joy and gladness; and of admiration and contentment
all the standers by.

The Bishop of that City was then there present, and with his Benediction, and
License brought them to the Cathedral Church, and dispensing with the time,
instantly married them. The joyful news of this wedding was quickly spread
over all Trapana, and that very night in token of rejoicing, infinite lights
were set up, and great bonfires made, accompanied with ringing of bells, and
diverse loud musical instruments. And for many days after there were Maskings,
Commedies, sporting with Canes. running of Bulls, and solemn invitations and
feastings made by the Parents of Ricardo, and Leonisa. Mahamut, and Halima were
reconciled to the Church, who impossibilited of fulfilling her desire in being
Ricardo's wife, contented her self in matching with Mahamut. To Halima's
Parents and kinsmen Ricardo gave liberally of those spoils which he had taken,
wherewith they might be enabled to live, not only sufficiently, but
plentifully. In conclusion, all of them remained fully contented and satisfied;
and the fame of Ricardo going beyond the bounds of Sicily, spread it self
through all the parts of Italy, and many other places under the name of the
Liberal Lover. And even to this very day continues fresh in those many
Children which he had by Leonisa, who was a rare example of discretion,
honesty, reservednesse, thankfulness, and beauty.

The end of the third Book.
THE FORCE OF BLOOD.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
IN a hot summers night, there returned from recreating themselves at the river
of Toledo, an ancient gentleman accompanied with his Wife, a little young
son, a daughter of the age of 17. years, and a maidservant. The night was
clear and bright, the hour eleven, the way open, and their pace slow, that
they might not loose through wearines, those pleasures which the meadows lying
along the river side of Toledo, did afford them. And relying on the security,
which the strict course of Justice, and the well disposed people of that City
did promise, the good old gentleman went walking leasurely along with his small
family, far from any thought of the least disaster that might befall them.
But forasmuch as misfortunes commonly then come when we least think on them,
contrary wholly to his thought and quite beyond all imagination, there happened
one which disturbed their present pleasure, and gave them occasion to weep
many years after. There was a gentleman of that City about the age of 22. whom
his great wealth, his noblenes of blood, his depraved disposition, his too much
assumed liberty, and the loose and licentious company that he kept, made him
to do such insolent and extravagant actions as did ill beseem his quality,
and gave him the attribute of impudent, and insolent.

This gentleman then (whose name for good respects we shall conceal, and call
Rodolpho) with four other friends of his, all young men full of iollitie, and
above all exceeding insolent, was coming down the same hill which the old
gentleman was going up. These two companies met each other, that of the sheep,
with that of the wolves, and in a most uncivil kind of manner, void of all
shame and honesty covering their own faces, they discovered those of the
mother, daughter, and Maid: the old man, (and I cannot blame him) was somewhat
moved thereat, reproved them for it, and told them they might be ashamed (had
they any shame in them) to offet such an affront to gentlewomen. They answered
him with mocks and scoffs, and without further misdemeaning themselves, they
went forward on their way. But the great beauty of that fairest which Rodolfo
had seen, which was that of Leocadia, (for that was the name of this
gentleman's daughter) began in such sort to be imprinted in his memory that it
drew his affection after her, and stirred him up in a desire to enjoy her, in
despite of all inconveniences that might follow thereupon, and in an instant,
as sudden as his passion, he imparted his mind to his Companions, and both he
and they presently resolved to return back, and take her from her parents by
force only therein for to please Rodolfo, for your great and rich men, which
are lewdly and licentiously given shall never want those that will canonize
their evil actions and qualify their bad courses for good. And therefore the
hatching of this wicked purpose, the communicating it, the approving of it, and
the resolving upon it, to carry away Leocadia, and the putting of it in
execution was done as it were all in an instant, they covered their faces with
their handkerchers, and drawing out their swords they came back, and had not
gone many steps before they had overtaken those, who had not as yet fully made
an end of giving thanks unto God for having freed them from the hands of those
bold and insolent persons. Rodolfo seized on Leocadia, and taking her up in his
arms, ran away with her, with all the have he could, who had not strength
enough to defend her from this violence, and the sudden passion that possessed
her was so prevalent that it took away the use of her voice, so that she could
not cry out, and likewise the light of her eyes, since that she being in a
swound, and without any sense, she neither saw who carried her, nor whether
they did carry her. Her father cried out, the mother shreeked, her little
brother wept and cried both together, the maid she tare her hairs and face;
but neither their cryings nor shreekings were heard, neither did their tears
move compassion, nor the tearing up of furrows in their faces do them any
good. For the solitarines of the place, the still silence of night and the
cruel bowels of the malefactors, concurred to give way to this deed of
darkness. In a word the one went their way glad and joyful; and the other sad
and mournful. Rodolfo came home to his house without any let or hinderance:
And the parents of Leocadia to theirs grieved, afflicted and full of despair:
They were blind wanting their daughters eyes, which were the light of theirs;
they were all alone lacking the sweet and pleasing company of Leocadia, they
were confounded, and amazed, not knowing what to do, whether they should give
notice of their misfortune to the Justice, or not: They were fearful least in
so doing, they should be the principal instrument of publishing their
dishonor. They saw themselves necessitated for any matter of favor as being
poor though nobly descended. They knew not on whom to complain, but their
own hard fortune. Rodolfo in the mean while, being subtle and crafty
brought Leocadia home to his house, and to his own private lodging. And though
she were in a swound when he carried her away; yet for the more surety did he
blindfold her eyes with a handkercher that she might not take notice of the
streets through which she passed, nor of the house nor lodging whereunto he had
brought her, having put her thereinto, without being seen of any body,
because he had his quarter in his fathers house (who was yet living) to
himself, and kept the key of his chamber door himself, and those of that his
whole quarter, An unadvised inconsiderateness of Parents, to suffer their
Sons to live in that retired manner, without witnesses of their conversation.

Before that Leocadia had recovered her swounding, Rodolfo had satisfied his
lustful desire; for the unchaste violences of youth sieldome or never respect
either time or place, but runs on headlong whether their unbrideled lust leads
them, letting loose the reins to all licentiousnes. Having the light of his
understanding thus blinded, he robbed Leocadia in the dark of the best jewel
that she had. And for that the sins of sensuality reach no further for the
most part, then the accomplishing and fulfilling of them Rodolfo presently
resolved to turn Leocadia out of doors, and it entered into his imagination to
lay her out in the street, being thus in a swound as she was, and going to put
this his purpose in execution, he perceived that she was newly come to her
self, and began to speak, saying.

Oh unfortunate wretch that I am! where am I? what darkness is this? what
clouds have compassed me about? Lord bless me, who is that that touches me?
am I in bed? what ayleth me? how comes this to pass? do you hear me dear
Mother? or you my beloved Father? Aye me, unhappie as I am! for I well perceive
that my Parents hear me not, and that my enemies touch me; happy should I be
if this darkness would endure for ever, not giving my eyes leave to see any
more the light of the World. And that this place wherein now I am, whatsoever
it be, might serve to be the sepulcher to my honor; since that better is that
dishonor which is not known, then that honor which is exposed to the opinion
of the vulgar. Now I call that to mind which before I could not, that but a
little while since, I was in the company of my Parents; now I remember that
some assaulted me; now I conceive and see, that it is not meet that the people
should see me. Oh thou! whosoever thou art that art here with me (and with
this she took fast hold on Rodofo's hands) if thou be such a one whose
soul will admit of entreatie, I entreat and beseech thee, that since thou have
triumphed over my Fame, that thou will likewise triumph over my life; quit me
of it instantly, for it is fit that I should lose my life, since that I have
lost my honor; and consider with thy self, that the rigor of that cruelty
which thou have exercised on me in offending me, will be tempered and
moderated by the pity which thou shall use toward me by killing me; and so
thou shall show thy self at once, both cruel, and pitiful.

The reasons which Leocadia alleged to Rodolfo, left him in amazedness, and
confusion; and like a raw young man unexperienced in the world, he knew not
either what to say, or do: whose silence made Leocadia the more to wonder, who
by her hands sought to dis-deceive her self, and to try by touching whether it
were a phantasma, or a ghost that was with her; but when she found that she
touched a body, a very body, and did call to her remembrance the force which
was done her going along with her Parents, she fell into a true reckoning of
her misfortune; and with the very thought thereof, she returned a new to sent
those words which her many sighs and sobbes had interrupted, saying.

Oh (...) bold daring man* for thy actions make me to judge thee to be of no
great years, I pardon thee the wrong thou have done me, and forgive thee that
foul offense thou have committed; so that thou will promise and swear unto
me, that as thou have covered it with this darkness, so likewise thou will
cover it with perpetual silence, without acquainting any body therewith. It
is a small recompense which I crave of thee, in comparison of so great an
injury. Yet to me (considering the case that I am in) it will be the
greatest that I can beg of thee, or thou can give me; consider besides,
that I never saw thy face, neither do I desire to see it. For though I cannot
but still think on the offense done me, yet will I not think upon my
offender, neither will I lay up in my memory the image of the author of my
hurt; I shall pour forth my complaints between my self and Heaven, without
desiring that the world should hear them, which does not judge of things by
their success, but according unto that which is settled in it is opinion. I
know not how it is that I utter these truths unto thee, which usually are wont
to be grounded upon the experience of many Cases, and on the discourse of many
years, mine amounting to no more then 17; yet do I understand thus much, that
grief and sorrow does alike tie, and untye the tongue of the afflicted; one
whiles exaggerating the received wrong that others may be thereby the better
induced to believe it, and another whiles burying it in silence, that others
may not give any remedy thereunto. So that which way soever it be, whether I
speak, or hold my peace, I persuade my self, that I cannot but move thee
either to believe me, or to remedy me, since that not to believe me were
ignorance, and to remedy me impossible. Yet may thou give me some little
ease of my grief, whereof I will not despair, since it will cost thee but
little to give it me. This then is that which I will say unto thee; see that
thou do not flatter thy self with expecting or hoping, that time shall allay
or pacify that just rage and indignation which I bear, and still shall
toward thee; neither do thou go about to heap more wrongs upon me, because
thou art not likely further to enjoy me; and having already enjoyed me, me
thinks thy evil desires should be the less enflamed. Make account that thou
offendest me by accident, without giving way to any good discourse, and I will
make account that I was not borne and brought forth into the world; or if I
were, it was for to be unfortunate Put me therefore presently forth into the
street, or at least near unto the great church, for from thence I shall know
how to go directly home. Moreover thou shall likewise swear unto me, that thou
shall not follow me, nor seek to know where I dwell, nor ask me, neither my
Parents, or mine own name, nor of my kinsfolk, and Allies; who for that they
are so rich, and so noble, they may not be in me so unhappy, and unfortunate.
Return me answer to these my demands, and if thou art afraid that I may hap to
know thee by thy voice, I would have thee again to know, that excepting my
father and my Confessor, I have not spoken with any man in my life, and very
few are they which I have heard speak in their ordinary talk and communication
that I could be able to distinguish them by the sound of their voice.

The answer which Rodolfo returned to the discreet discourse of afflicted
Leocadia, was no other save his embracing her, and making show that he had a
mind to renew in himself his lustful desire, and in her, her further
dishonor; the which being perceived by Leocadia, with greater force and
resistance then her tender age could promise, she defended her self with her
feet, with her hands, with her teeth, and with her tongue, saying.

Know traitor as thou art, and thou wicked man without soul or conscience
whosoever thou be, that those spoils which thou have had of me, were such
as thou might have taken from a stock, or stone, without any sense or
feeling; whose conquest and triumph which cannot but redound to thy reproach.
And therefore that which thou pretendest, thou shall not obtain but by my death.
When I was in a swound, thou took'st thy pleasure, and did what thou listest
with me, but now that I am come to my self, and have my spirits and wits about
me, thou shall sooner kill me, then overcome me; for if now being awake, I
should without resistance yield to thy abominable lust, thou might (and not
without just cause) imagine that my swounding was feigned, when thou wast so
bold and insolent in working my utter ruin and destruction.

In conclusion, Leocadia so bestirred her self, and made such stout and
resistance, that the strength and courage, and with it the desires of Rodolfo
began to flagge. And for that the insolency which he had used with Leocadia,
had no other beginning then from a violent lascivious impetuousnes, from which
never springs that true love which is permanent; but instead of that
impetuousnesse which passes away, there remains only repentance, or at
least a coldness of will to second it. Rodolfo then growing somewhat cooler,
but much more weary, without speaking any one word, left Leocadia in his bed
and lodging, and went to seek out his companions, for to consult and advise
with them what he were best to do.

Leocadia perceived that she was left all alone and fast shut up; whereupon
rising from the bed, she went roming about the room, groping the walls with
her hands, for to see if she could find a door to get out at, or a window to
leap down. She found the door, but too strongly locked for her to open it,
and she lighted on a window which she was able to unhaspe, by which the Moon
shined in so clear and so bright, that Leocadia could distinguish the colors
of certain Damasks which adorned the lodging. She could discern that the bed
was gilded, and so richly furnished, that it seemed rather the bed of a
Prince, then of a private gentleman. She reckoned the number of the chairs, and
stools, and of the Escritorios, and Cabinets; she noted the place where the
door stood, and though she saw tables ha^ging on the walls, yet she discerned
not the pictures that were drawn in them. The window was large, well garnished
and guarded with a great many bars, the prospect whereof was into a Garden,
which was likewise enclosed with high walls; difficulties which opposed
themselves to that intention which she had to leap down into the street. All
that she saw and noted of the capaciousnesse and rich furniture of the room,
gave her to understand, that the Master and owner thereof must needs be some
principal Person, and not of mean wealth, but exceeding rich. Upon a Cabbinet
which stood near to the window, she e^pied a little Crucifix all of silver,
the which she took thence and put it in her sleeve, not out of devotion, and
as little out of theft; but only drawn unto it by a discreet design which
she had in her head. This being done, she shuts the window, leaving it as it
was before, and returned back to the bed, expecting what end such a bad
beginning would have.

It was not to her seeming much more than half an hour, when she heard the
door of the lodging open, and that one came unto her, and without speaking so
much as one word, with a handkercher hoodwinked her eyes, and taking her by the
arm, took her out of the lodging, she hearing him shut the door after him.
This person was Rodolfo, who though he had gone to seek out his Companions,
yet was he not willing to find them; it seeming unto him, that it was not fit
that he should have any witnesses of that which had passed with that damosel,
but was rather resolved to tell them, that repenting himself of that ill deed,
and moved with her tears, he had put her off, leaving her in the midway.
Having thus bethought himself, he returned back with all speed, to place
Leocadia near unto the great Church, as she had formerly entreated of him
before it were day, least otherwise it might disappoint his purpose, and he be
enforced to keep her in his lodging till the next ensuing night; in which
space of time, neither was he willing to use any more force or violence, nor to
give occasion of being known. He brought her then to the place which they
commonly call by the name of Ayuntamiento, where the people publicly assemble
and meet together; and there in a counterfeit voice, and in a tongue half
Portughese, and half Spanish, he told her that she might thence go securely
to her own house, and that none should follow and tract her whether she went
And before that she had time and leisure to unknit and loosen the handkercher,
he had got himself far enough out of her sight.

Leocadia remained all alone, she took away the bend from before her eyes,
she knew the place where he had left her, she looked round about her on every
side, she saw no person living, but suspecting that some would follow her a
loofe off, at every step she made a stand, advancing her self in that manner
in her way homeward, which was not very far from the Church; and for to
deceive the spies, if b^ chance they should follow her, she entered into a house
that she found open; and from thence by little and little went to her own,
where she found her Parents amazed and astonished; and so far from preparing
themselves to go to bed, that they had not so much as entertained the least
thought of taking any rest at all; who, when they saw her, ran unto her with
open arms, and with tears in their eyes, lovingly received her. Leocadia's
heart boiling with passion, and being much troubled in mind, entreated her
Parents to withdraw themselves and to go a little aside with her; they did so.
And then, and there in a few words she gave them an account of that her
unfortunate success, with all the circumstances belonging thereunto, and that
she could by no means come to the knowledge of him that assaulted her, and
robb^d her of her honor. She accquainted them with all that she had seen in
that Theater, wherein was represented and acted that woeful Tragedy of her
misfortune. The window, the garden, the bars of iron, the Cabinets, the bed,
the Damaskes; and last of all she showed them the Crucifix which she had
brought thence with her. Before which Image they renewed their tears, made
deprecations, called for vengeance, and begged of God miraculous chastisements.
She likewise told them, that although she did not desire to come to have
knowledge of her offender, yet if it seemed good unto her Parents to have him
known by means of that Image, they might do it by causing the Clerks of all
the Parishes in the City, to publish at divine Service in their several
Churches, that he who had lost such an Image, he should find it put in the
hands of some such person as the party that lost it should nominate and appoint
for the receiving of it; and so by knowing the owner of the Image, they might
come thereby to know the he use, as also the person of their enemy. Hereunto
her Father replied, what you have said, had been well said (Daughter) if the
crafty and cunning now adays did not oppose it self to thy discreet
discourse, since that it is clear and manifest that this Image may not
suddenly be mist, or if mist, no great reckoning made of it; and the owner
thereof will certainly apprehend and imagine that the person who was with him
in the lodging had taken it away; and that if it should come to his knowledge
that some Religious man has it in his keeping* he will rather serve his turn,
and make use of his knowing who it should be that gave it to him that now has
it, then be willing to declare and make known the owner that lost it. And it
may likewise happen that another may come for it, to whom the owner thereof
has given some signs and tokens whereby to know and challenge it to be his.
And if this should be so, we should be in worse case then before, and remain
rather confounded, then informed, though we should use the same artifice and
cunning, which we suspect them for, by giving it to a Religious man by a third
person. That (Daughter) which is herein to be done, is to keep it; that as it
was a witness of thy disgrace, so it may become an evidence to procure thee
justice, and right the great wrong which thou have received. And with all
consider (dear Daughter) that one ounce of public dishonor does lie heavier
upon us, then a pound weight of secret infamy. True dishonor consists in
sin, and true honor in virtue. God is offended with our sayings, our doings,
and our desires; and since that thou neither in thought, word, nor deed, have
offended him, account thy self honest, for. I shall hold thee so, and shall
never look upon thee but like a kind and loving Father.

With these prudent reasons did this good Father comfort Leocadia; and her
Mother embracing her again, and again, did likewise endeavor to comfort her.
Whereupon she fell a fresh a weeping, and a crying, and hiding her head (as
they say) for shame; she betook her self to a private and retired course of
life, under the shelter and protection of her Parents, being honestly, and
decently, though but porely clad.

Rodolfo in the mean while being come home, and sitting him down in his
chamber, casting his eye aside, he found the Image of his Crucifix missing,
and presently imagined who might carry it away; but he made slight of it, and
for that he was rich, he did not reckon much of it, neither did his Parents
question him for it; when as (being within three days after to go for Italy)
he did deliver up by tale to one of his Mothers Chambermaids, all that which
he left behind him in the lodging, whereof she took a true Inventorie.

It was many days since that Rodolfo had resolved to travel into Italy; and
his Father who had been there in his younger years, persuaded him thereunto;
telling him, that they were not Gentlemen who were only so in their own
Country, but that they must likewise show themselves to be such abroad. For
these and other reasons, Rodolfo disposed his will, to cumply with that of his
father, who gave him Bills of credit for good round sums of money for
Barcelona, Genoa, Rome, and Naples. And he with two of his Comrad's presently
departed, being much taken with that which he had heard some Soldiers repeat
of the great store of Inn's in Italy, and France, and of the liberty which
Spaniards took in their lodgings. That sounded well in his ear; lo sir, here
be good tender Pullets, youug Pigeons, fine white fat Veale, a good Gammon of
Bacon, excellent Sausages, and the like; which the Soldiers did magnify in
mentioning them unto him; showing what a great deal of difference they found
when they came out of those parts into these, laying before him the scarcity
of Provision, and the discommodities of the Inn's of Spain. In conclusion, he
went away, so little thinking on that which passed betwixt himself, and
Leocadia, as if there had never been any such matter.

She in the interim, led her life in the house of her Parents with all possible
retyrednesse, without suffering her self to be seen of any, as one that was
fearful, least they might read her misfortune in her forehead. But within a
few months, she perceived that she was driven to do that by force and
constraint, which hitherto she had done willingly, and of her own accord. She
saw that it was fit and convenient for her to live closely, and retyredly,
because she found her self to be with Child. A success which occasioned
those tears which in some sort had been forgotten, to break forth a new from
the fountains of her eyes; and those sighs and lamentations which had layen
for a while calm, and quiet, began to rise, and like fierce winds, fell a
beating, and waging war one against another; her Mothers discretion, and gentle
persuasions, not being able to allay the violence of her passion, nor afford
her any comfort.

Time fled away with a swift wing, and the time of her delivery was come; but
with that secrecy, that they durst not trust a Midwife therewith, so that her
Mother usurping this office, brought forth to the light of the world a little
young Son, one of the prettiest, sweetest, and beautifullest babes that thought
it self could imagine; with the like wariness, circumspection, and secrecy
wherewith it was borne, they conveyed it to a Country Village, where it
continued four years. At the end whereof, with the name of Nephew his
Grandfather brought him home to his own house, where he was bred up, though
not very richly, yet at least very virtuously. The Child was (whom they named
Luys, that being his Grandfathers name) of a fair complexion, a pleasing
countenance, a sweet disposition, a gentle nature, a quick wit; and in all
those his actions which in that tender age he could do, he gave apparent signs
and tokens, that he was begotten by some noble Father; and in such sort his
wit, beauty, and pretty behavior, did make his Grandfather and Grandmother
so far in love with him, that they came to hold their Daughters unhappiness,
to be a happiness, in that she had given them such a Nephew. When he went
through the street they did shower down upon him a thousand benedictions; some
blessed his beauty, othersome the Mother that bare him, these, the Father that
begat, and those, him who had brought him up, and given him such good breeding.

With this applause of those that knew him, and knew him not, the Child grew to
be Seven years of age. In which time he had learned to read Spanish, and
Latin, and to write a very good hand. For his grandfathers and grandmothers
intention was to make him virtuous, and wise, since that they could not make
him rich; not being ignorant, that virtue, and wisdom, were the only riches
over which neither thieves, nor fortune had any power.

It happened one day, that the Child was sent by his Grandmother on a message
to a kinswoman of hers, and it was his chance to pass through a street where
some gentlemen were running careers with their horses, he stayed to look on
them, and for the getting of a better place; he ran athwart from the one side,
to the other, just in such an ill conjuncture of time, that he could not avoid
a Horses running over him, whose rider with all the strength he had, was not
able to keep back in the fury of his Careere. He ran over him, and left
him stretched on the ground for dead, pouring out much blood from his head.

This sad mischance had scarce happened, when lo, an ancient Gentleman, who
was beholding the Careere, with extraordinary dexterity leapt from his Horse,
and went where the Child was; and taking him out of ones arms that held him,
took him into his own, and without making any reckoning of his gray hairs,
or regarding his authority, which was much, neglecting the grave Spanish pace,
with large steps he hyed him home to his own house, willing his servants to
leave him, and to go and seek out a skillful Surgeon for to cure the Child.
Many Gentlemen followed him, grieving and pitying the misfortune that had
befallen so sweet and fair a Child. For it was presently voyced abroad, that
he that was thus trodden down, was Luisico, the kinsman of such a Gentleman,
naming his Grandfather. This voice ran from mouth to mouth, till it came at
last to the ears of his grandfather, and grandmother, and likewise to those of
his retired Mother; who being fully and truly certified of this unluckie and
lamentable accident, ran forthwith out of doors as if they had been mad, to
know what was become of their beloved. And because the gentleman that carried
him away, was so well known, and of such principal rank and quallitie, many of
those whom they met withal, told them where his house was, whether (being
carried between love and fear) they soon arrived just at that instant when the
Child was under the Surgeons hands. The gentleman and his wife, the owners of
the house, entreated those whom they thought to be his Parents, that they
would not weep, nor fill the air with the cry of their complaints, being
that it could do the Child no good. The Surgeon who was famous for his skill,
having dressed him with a gentle hand, and as a Master of his faculty, told
them that the wound was not so mortal, as at first he feared it had been.

When he was half dressed, Luisicos memory came to him, which until then had
left him; and was very glad and cheerie, in seeing his Grandfather and
Grandmother there, who with tears in their eyes, asked him how he did? He
answered, well, save that he was much pained in his body, and his head. The
Surgeon* advised them, that they should not speak unto him, but that they
would give him leave to take his rest. They did so; and then his Grandfather
began to give the Master of the House thanks, for that his great charity
which he had extended toward his Nephew. Whereunto the gentleman replied, that
he needed not to thank him; giving him to understand, that when the Child
fell, and was over-borne by the Horse, it seemed unto him, that he saw the
face of a Son of his own, whom he tenderly loved; and that this moved him
to take him up in his arms, and bring him home to his own house, where he
would that he should continue till he were fully cured; and that he should
not want cherishing, nor any thing else that the house could afford, that was
needful and necessary for him. His Wife who was a noble Lady, said (the
phrase a little varied) in effect the very same words, and did somewhat more
amplify and endeare her promises.

The grandfather and grandmother of the Child did much wonder at, and admire
this their great Christianity. And the Mother much more, for her troubled
spirit being somewhat quieted by the Surgeons comfortable words, she diligently
observed the lodging where her Son lay, and by apparent signs and tokens,
clearly knew that that was the room where her honor had it is end, and her
misfortune it is beginning. And though it were not now hung and adorned with
Damask, as then it was; she knew the form and fashion of it, she saw the
window with the iron bars which looked into a Garden; and though it were shut
that the Air might not offend the wounded Child, she did ask whether that
window did Butt or no upon some garden? and it was told her, it did; but that
which she most certainly knew, was, that that was the very same bed which had
been the Tombe-stone to her grave. And moreover, that that very Cabinet
whereon stood the Crucifix which she carried away with her, remained still in
the self same place. Lastly, the stayres brought to light the truth of all her
suspicions, which she had numbered and counted when she was led out of the
lodging blindefold; I say those stayres which were from her going out thence to
the street, which with discreet advisement she had told. And when she came
home (having taken leave of her Son) she fell to counting of them again, and
found the number of them to fall out right, and just; and comparing some signs
with other some, she was fully persuaded that this her imagination was
undoubtedly true. Whereof she gave a large account unto her Mother, who like a
discreet woman, informed her self whether this Gentleman where her Nephew now
was, had any Son, or no? And she found that he whom we call Rodolfo was his
Son, and that he was in Italy. And casting up the time, which (as it was told
them) he had been absent from Spain; they saw that they jumped just with the
same years of the Child. She gave notice of all this to her Husband, and
betwixt them two, and their Daughter, they agreed to expect how God would
dispose of the wounded Child, who within fifteen days was out of danger of
his received hurt, and at the end of thirty, was upon his feet, and able to
walk up and down the chamber. In all which time, he was visited by his
Mother, and Grandmother, and made as much of by the owners of the house, as if
he had been their own Child.

And now and then, Dona Estefania (for so was the Gentleman's wife called)
talking with Leocadia, told her, that this Child did so well resemble a Son of
hers who was in Italy, that she never looked upon him, but that it seemed unto
her that she had her own Son in her eye. From these words of hers, Leocadia
took occasion on a time to tell her when she was all alone with her, such
things as had before been debated and agreed upon by her Parents to signify
unto her, which were these, or the like.

That day (Madam) wherein my Parents heard that their Nephew was so grievously
hurt, they believed, and verily thought that Heaven had been shut against
them, and that all the World had fallen upon them; they imagined that they had
lost the light of their eyes, whom they loved so dearly, and in such an
extraordinary kind of manner, that by many degrees it exceeded that which
Parents commonly bear to their own Children. But (as we usually say) that
when God gives the wound, he likewise gives the medicine to cure it. This
Child has found it in this house, and I likewise therein call to mind
somethings which I shall never forget the longest day of my life. I (dear
Lady) am noble, because my Parents are so, and so have been all my
Ancestors; who with a mediocritie of the goods of fortune, have happily
upheld their honor and reputation wheresoever they lived.

Dona Estefania was stricken both with wonder, and suspension, heakening to
Leocadia's discourse, and how feelingly her words came from her, and could not
believe though she saw it, that so much discretion could be comprehended in so
few years, judging her to be but some 20. years of age, little more, or less;
and without saying any thing unto her, or replying so much as one word, she
stood expecting to hear what she would furthermore say, which was sufficient
enough for the informing her of her Sons waggishnesse, and wantonness, and of
her own disgrace, and dishonor; of his stealing, and carrying her away by
force, of his blind-folding of her eyes, of his bringing her to that very
lodging, and telling her the signs and tokens whereby she certainly knew that
the same was the room which so strongly confirmed her suspitition. For further
confirmation whereof, she took from out her bosom the Image of the Crucifix
which she had taken thence, and spakethus.

Thou Lord, who wast a witness of the force that was offered me; do thou
judge my cause, and make me that amends and reparation of my honor, as of
right is due unto me. From the top of that Cabinet I took this Crucifix, with
a purpose only to put me still in mind of the wrong I received, but not to
crave vengeance thereof, (for I pretend no such thing) only I shall entreat
and beg of thee, that thou will give me some comfort, whereby I may the
better be enabled to bear this my disgrace with patience.

This Child (Lady) on whom you have exercised the utmost of your charity, is
your true Grandchild; it was Gods will and the permission of Heaven, that the
Horse ran over him, to the end, that by his being brought to your house, that I
should find that therein which I hope to find; and if not the remedy, which
is most convenient for the curing of my misfortune* yet at least the means
which may help me to bear it the better.

Having said this, she fell down in a swound in Dona Estefania's arms; who
like a noble Gentlewoman, (in whom compassion, and pity is as natural, as
cruelty in men,) had scarce perceived Leocadia's swounding; but she joined
her cheeks to hers, shedding thereon so many tears, that there was no need o^
sprinkling any other water in her face to bring her again to her self. These
two being thus glued each to other, it was Dona Estefania's Husbands hap to
come into the room, bringing Luisico in with him, leading him by the hand, and
seeing Estefania weep, and Leocadia lying in a swound, he was very hasty in
inquiring what might be the cause thereof, and whence it proceeded. The Child
embraced his Mother as his Cosen, and his Grandmother, as his benefactresse;
and did likewise ask why they did weep? Great and strange things (Sir) I have
to tell you, said Estefania to her Husband; the whole sum whereof shall end
in telling you, that I must assure you that this gentlewoman who fell into a
swound, is your Daughter, and this pretty boy, your grandchilde. This truth
which I tell you, was delivered unto me by this good gentlewoman, and the
countenance of this sweet Child has confirmed it; wherein we have both of us
beheld as in a glass our own Son. If you tell me no more then this Wife,
replied her Husband, I do not understand you. By this time Leocadia was come
to her self, and holding fast still the Crucifix, she seemed to be turned
into a sea of tears. All which had put the gentleman into a great confusion
and amazement, from which he was freed by his Wifes recounting unto him all
that which Leocadia had imparted unto her; and he by the Divine permission of
Heaven, did believe it as verily, as if it had been proved and made good by
many substantial and true witnesses.

He comforted and embraced Leocadia, and kissed his grandchilde Luisico; and
that very day dispatched a Post to Naples, advising his Son to come home with
all possible speed, because he had concluded a marriage for him, with a
mavelous fair and beautiful gentlewoman; and such a one, as was most fit
and convenient for him. Nor would they by any means consent, and give way,
that Leocadia, or her Child should back again to her Fathers house; who
resting beyond measure contented with this good success of their Daughter,
gave infinite thanks therefore unto God. The Post returned from Naples, and
Rodolfo out of greediness to enjoy so fair a Wife as his Father had signified
unto him, within two days after that he had received his Fathers letters,
occasion of passage being offered unto him for his coming into Spain; taking
hold thereof, he embarked himself, with his two Comrades who had never left
him, and with a prosperous wind, in 12. days he arrived at Barcelona; and from
thence, taking Posthorses, in 7. more he came to Tolledo, and entered into his
fathers house in such a brave and gallant fashion as did exceed, for in him
were met together the extremes of both. His Parents were very much joyed with
the welfare and arrival of their Son.

Leocadia, who unseene, from a private place had a full view and sight of him,
that she might not transgress the order given her by Dona Estefania, was in a
quandarie, and in great doubt and suspension what would be the issue of this
business. Rodolfo's Comrades would needs go presently home to their own
houses; but Estefania would by no means let them, because she had need of them
for the effecting of her design. It was near night when Rodolfo arrived; and
whilst that supper was making ready, Estefania called her Sons Comrades
aside, being verily persuaded that these must needs be two of those three, who
(as Leocadia had told her) accompanied Rodolfo that night when they stole her
away; and with great and earnest entreaties* she besought them that they would
tell her, whether they did not or no remember that their Son on such a night,
so many years since stole away such a Woman? For to know the truth thereof
much concerned the honor and peace, of not only his Parents, but of all their
Alliance and kindred. And with such and so great e^dearments, she knew how to
crave this courtesy of them, and in such sort to assure them, that from the
discovering of this stealth, there should no damage follow thereupon; that in
conclusion, they held it fit to confess the truth, and so told her, that they
two, and another friend of Rodolfo's on a Summers night, the very fame which
she had named unto them; had stolen away a young gentlewoman, and that Rodolfo
carried her away with him, whilst they detained the rest of their company, who
without cries sought to defend her from that violence. And that the next day
following Rodolfo told them, that he carried her to his lodging; and that this
was all that they could say in answer to her demand.

The confession of those two, was the key which opened the door to all the
doubts, which in such a case could offer themselves; and therefore she resolved
with herself, to bring that good purpose which she had entertained, to a good
end, which was this* A little before that they were to sit down to supper,
Rodolfo's Mother went apart with her Son into a by-roome, and putting a
picture into his hands, she said withal unto him; Son Rodolfo, I will give
you a very savoury and pleasing supper, in showing thee thy Spouse. This is her
true picture; but I must tell you, and would have you to think well upon it;
that what is wanting unto her in beauty, is superabundantly supplied with her
virtues. She is noble, and discreet, and indifferently rich; and since that
your Father and my self, have made choice of her for you, assure your self
that she is such a one as is fitting for you.

Rodolfo viewed the picture with a searching and judicious eye; and after he
had done looking upon it, he said; if Painters who commonly are wont to be
prodigal of their bestowing of beauty on those faces which they draw, have
dealt so likewise with this; I dare be bold to say it, and verily believe it,
that the original to this counterfeit, must needs be foulness it self. In
good faith (Lady Mother) it is just and meet that Children should obey their
Parents in all that they shall command them; but withal it is likewise
convenient, and much more fitting, that Parents should put their Children into
such an estate and condition as shall give them content, and in a lawful way
stand with their liking. And since that Marriage is a knot which is not undone
but by death; it were not amiss, but rather much to be desired, that the
laces wherewith this knot is to be knit, should be equal and alike, and
wrought of one and the same threads. Virtue, nobleness, discretion, and the
goods of fortune, may well please and delight the understanding of him who
shall happen to have a wife so quallified. But that the foulness of such a
one should cheer and glad the eyes of her husband, in my opinion it is
impossible. I am but a young man, yet I understand my self very well in this
particular, and know that a just and due delight which married folks may enjoy
and take one in other, may sort and stand very well with the rites of holy
Matrimony and if that once fail and be wanting, Matrimony haltes and goes
lame, and contradicts it is second intention.

Now then to think or imagine, that a foul face which a man is to have at all
hours before his eyes at bed, and at board, may please and delight; I say
again and again, that I hold it impossible. Therefore as you are my dear and
loving Mother, I humbly beseech you, that you will give me such a companion,
and yoake-fellow, that I may take some delight in entertaining the time with
her; and not such a one as may cause a loathing in me as often as I shall look
upon her; to the end that without resting or turning away to this or that other
side, equally, and in a direct way, we may both of us the more easily draw
together, and bear that yoke the better, which Heaven has allotted and laid
upon us. And if this Gentlewoman be noble, discreet, and rich, (as your
Ladyship implies) she cannot want a husband that may happily be of a different
humor from me. Some there be, that seek after noblenes, others discretion,
others money, others beauty, and I am of the last. For noblenes, (thanks unto
Heaven, my ancestors, and my Parents) that is left to me by inheritance. For
discretion, so as a woman be not an ignorant, an Ass, or a Do^te; it
suffices that she do not break (as they say) her needles point; that she
be not so witty, as by the subtilnesse thereof, to run into some absurdity
or other to her shame and dishonor; so foolish, that she should not be of
some good use, and profit. For riches, those likewise of my Parents make me not
to be fearful of ever coming to be poor. It is beauty that I seek after,
it is one that is fair and well favored, that I desire; not regarding any
other Dowry then honesty, and a sweet and fair behavior: for if my wife
shall bring this with her, I shall serve God with pleasure and delight, and
give a good and contented old age to my Parents.

His Mother rested very well satisfied wi^h Rodolfo's reasons, because by them
she knew that it made all as she would have it for her design. And therefore
made him answer, that she would procure such a marriage for him, as should be
answerable to his desire, and that he should not trouble ^r afflict himself
about it; for it was an easy piece of business to undo that agreement which
was made for his marrying with that gentlewoman Rodolfo rendered her many
thanks, and the hour of supper being come, they went forth to supper, and the
father and mother and Rodolfo, and his Comrades being already sat down at
table, Dona Estefania, as if she had forgotten her self, O Lord (quoth she)
where was my mind? have I not used my guest kindly think you, to sit down
before she comes? go one of you presently, and tell Leocadia, that without
using any nicetie, or excusing her self that here are strangers, she come
presently hither to honor this my Table; and that they who sit at it, are all
of them my Children, and her servants. All this was her plott, and of all that
which was therein to be done, Leocadia had been before advertised. It was not
long ^re Leocadia came and entered the room, presenting on the sudden in her
person the fairest show, that either artificial, or natural beauty could
afford. She came in clad, (it being then Winter,) in a gown of black Velvet,
set with buttons of gold, and pearl; a girdle, and chain of Diamonds, her
own hairs which were long, and of an auborne color, did serve her instead of
her head-dressings, whose invention of ribbands, tufts of feathers, and
glitterings of Diamonds which were interwoven with them, did dazzle the eyes of
the beholders.

Leocadia was of a gentle disposition, and of a quick and lively spirit: she
brought her Son along with her, leading him by the hand, two Damosells going
before her, lighting her in with two wax lights, in two silver Candlestickes.
They al rose up to do her reverence, as if she had been some Deity sent down
from Heaven, which had thus miraculously appeared unto them. None of those that
were there, but stood astonished, beholding so rare a piece; and the more they
looked on her, the more they were amazed, insomuch that they were not able to
speak unto her; such power has beauty to impose silence.

Leocadia, with a graceful behavior, and discreet carriage, made lowly
curtisie and obeisance to them all; and Estesania taking her by the hand, (...)
her next unto her self, right over against Rodolfo. The little boy, he sat
by his Grandfather; Rodolfo who now at a nearer distance, beheld the
incomparable beauty of Lecadia, said within himself; if she had but the one
half of this beauty which my Mother has made choice of for to be my Spouse,
I should hold my self the happiest man in the World. What is this which I now
see? is it happily some Angel that I stand thus gazing on? And in this rapture
of his, the fair image of Leocadia went entering in by his eye, to take
possession of his soul. Who all the while that supper lasted, seeing him
likewise so near unto her self, whom she now loved more then the light of
those her eyes which now and then by stealth looked on him, she began to
revolve in her imagination, and to call to mind that which had passed
heretofore with Rodolfo. Whereupon those hopes began to wax^ weak in her
soul, which his Mother had given her of his being her Husband; fearing that
the shortness of her fortune would be answerable in the end to his Mothers
promises, She considered with her self how near she was of being happy, or
unhappie for ever. And so intense was this consideration, and so strong and
violent these her thoughts and imaginations, that they did in such sort trouble
and oppress her heart, that she began to sweat, and to change color in an
instant; whereupon suddenly followed a swounding, which enforced her to let her
head fall into Dona Estefania's lap, had she not received it within her
arms. Who as soon as she saw her in this trance, much startled therewith,
made her bosom her pillow.

A sudden passion seized on them all, and rising from the board, they addressed
themselves to procure her recoverie* But he who gave best evidence of his
sorrow was Rodolfo, who that the sooner he might comein to help her, out of
mere haste stumbled, and fell twice; but neither with unclasping her gown,
nor unlacing her petticote, nor with sprinkling water on her face, did she come
again to her self, but rather the rising of her breast, and the failing of her
pulse, which they could not find to move, or stir, went giving precise
signs, and apparent tokens of her death. And the men and mayd-servants of the
house, more passionate, then well advised, cried out aloud, oh she is dead, she
is dead.

This sorrowful news, accompanied with such woeful lamentations, came at
last to the ears of Leocadia's Parents; whom for a more pleasing occasion,
Dona Estefania had kept close and secret, till she saw a fit time for to bring
them forth in public; who together with the Priest of the Parish, (for he
likewise was shut up with them,) breaking the order given them by Estefania,
came forth into the room where they were. The Priest made in quickly, for to
see if by any signs, she gave any tokens of repenting her self of her sins,
to the end that he might absolve her of them. And whereas he thought to have
found but one in a swound, he found two. For Rodolfo was now in the like case,
lying with his face on Leocadia's breast; his Mother gave way unto him, and was
willing that he should draw thus near unto her, as unto a thing that was to
be his; but when she saw that her Son likewise was without sense, and lay as
it were for dead, she was likewise upon the point to lose hers; and had
questionless lost it, had she not presently perceived that Rodolfo began (as
he did) to come again to himself; who was much ashamed that they had seen
him run into such extremes.

But his Mother, as one that divined of that which her Son thought, said unto
him; be not ashamed (Son) of these extremes which thou have committed, but
be ashamed of those which thou should not have committed, when thou shall
come to know that which I will no longer conceal from thee, though I thought
to have deferred the doing of it, until a more joyful conjuncture.

I would have thee therefore to know (Son of my soul) that this gentlewoman
whom you see lying thus in a swound in mine arms, is thy true Spouse. I style
her thy true Spouse, because my self and thy Father have made choice of her to
be thy wife; for that which I presented to thee in the picture, was a false one.

When Rodolfo heard this, transported with his amorous, and enflamed desire;
and the name of Husband removing all those rubbes which the honesty and
decency of the place might lay in his way, he brake through the company, and
laying his face to that of Leocadia, remained as one expecting that his soul
should breathe it self forth, and either bring hers back again, or make it is
abode with hers for ever.

But when the tears of all, through extreme grief, went still more and more
increasing; and when through excess of sorrow, their lamentations and
outcries augmented more and more, and grew louder and higher, and that the
hayres of the head and beard of Leocadia's Mother, and Father, by taring and
pulling of them up by the roots, began to wax less and less, and that the
shrill exclamations of their Son Rodolfo, with their noise and clamor
peirced the Heavens. Leocadia returned again unto her self; and with her
returning to life, returned that joy and content, which had absented themselves
from the breasts of those that were about her. Leocadia found her self linked
close with fast embracings in Rodolfo's arms, and sought by honest force to
unloose her self from them. But he said unto her, no (sweet Mistress) it must
not be so; it is not meet that you should strive to get your self from forth
his arms, who holds you already fo fast in his soul. With these kind words
Leocadia came wholly to her self, and perfectly recovered her lost senses; and
Dona Estefania made an end of going any further forward with her former
determination; speaking to the Priest, that he should forthwith without any
further delay espouse her Son to Leocadia. He did so, because there was no
difficulty that interposed it self for the hindering of these Espousalls.

Which being now fully ended and finished, I leave it to some choycer Pen, and
to some other wit more refined then mine; to recount the general joy and
gladness of all those that were there present; the embracements which Leocadia's
Parents gave Rodolfo, the thanks which they gave to Heaven, and to his
Parents; the fair offers of love and friendship on their parts; the
admiration and wonder of Rodolfo's Comrades, who so unexpectedly saw the very
self same night of their arrival there, so fair a match made up. And they
wondered the more when they knew by Dona Estefania's discourse before them all
that Leocadia was the Damsel which in their company her Son had violently
stolen and carried away.

Nor did Rodolfo remain any whit less suspensefull; and for the better
certifying himself of this truth, he entreated Leocadia that she would
acquaint him with some sign or token, whereby he might come to the full
knowledge of that which he did not doubt of, because his Parents had so well
approved his matching with her, whereunto she made this answer. When I returned
and came to my self from out another swounding, I found my self (dear Sir)
in your arms without mine honor; but I think it now well employed, since
that in this my latter coming to my self, I find my self in the same arms
I did then, but with much more honor. And if this token be not sufficient, let
that suffice of the Image of a Crucifix, which none could steal from you but
my self, which you could not choose but miss the next morning. And if that be
the very same which your Mother has now in her keeping, you are the Image of
my soul which I highly adore, and you shall be still nearest and dearest unto
me as long (my dear) as God shall permit us to live together. Whereupon he
embracing her a new, their Parents bestowed their benedictions upon them, and
all the rest that were by, bid God give them joy.

Supper came in, and the Musicians were come, which were before hand provided
for this purpose. Rodolfo beheld himself in the looking glass of his Sons
face. The Grandfathers and Grandmothers on both sides, wept for very joy; nor
was there any corner in all the whole house which was not visited with a
Iubilee, with exceeding great content and gladness, And although night did
fly away with it is black nimble wings; yet it seemed to Rodolfo, that it did
go and walk, not with wings, but with crutches; so great was the desire which
he had to see himself all alone with his beloved Spouse; at last came that
desired hour. They all of them went to bed to take their rest, and the whole
house remained buried in silence. But so cannot the truth of this story, by
reason that the many Children will not give way thereunto* and that noble
offspring which they have remaining in Toledo. And yet these happy couple are
still living, and long may they live, to the joy and comfort of themselves,
their Children, and Grandchildren. All which was brought to pass by the
permission of Heaven, and by the force of that blood, which the valiant, noble,
and Christian Grandfather of Luisico, saw spilt upon the ground.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE SPANISH LADY.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
AMongst those many spoils which the Conquerours of the famous Northern Island
(governed then by a most noble Queen) carried away from the City of Cadiz;
Clotaldo, Captain of a squadron of Ships, brought along with him to Mundolin,
metropolis of that Isle, a Girl of the age of seven years, little more or
less, and this contrary to the will and knowledge of the General; who with
great diligence caused search to be made for the Child, that she might be
returned back to her Parents, who had complained unto him, of the wanting of
their Daughter; humbly beseeching him, that since his Excellency was pleased
to content himself with their goods, and out of his nobleness had left their
persons free; that they only might not be so miserable and unhappie, that
seeing they were now left poor, they might not berobb'd of their Daughter, who
was the joy of their hearts, the light of their eyes, and the fairest and
beautifullest creature that was in all the City. The General caused
Proclamation to be made throughout all the whole Fleet, that upon pain of
death, he whosoever had the Child, should restore her back to her Parents.
But no penalties, nor fears of punishment could move Clotaldo to obey the
Generals command. For he kept her very secret and close in his own Ship,
standing wonderfully affectioned, though very Christianly, to the incomparable
beauty of Isabella, for so was the Child called.

In conclusion, her Parents remained without her very sad and disconsolate, and
Clotaldo beyond measure exceeding glad and joyful. He arrived at Mundolin, and
delivered up this fair Maid as a most rich spoil, to his Wife. But as good
luck would have it, all they of Clotaldo's house were Christians in heart,
though in public they made show to follow the religion of the Country.

Clotaldo had a Son named Ricaredo, about some 12. years of age, taught by
his Parents to love and fear God. Catalina the Wife of Clotaldo, a noble
Christian, and prudent Lady, bare such great love and affection to Isabella,
(that as if she had been her own Daughter,) she bred, cherished,
industriated, and instructed her; and the Child had such good natural
abilities, that she did easily apprehend and learn whatsoever they taught
her. With time, and the kind usage she received, she went forgetting those
cockerings of her true Parents; but not so much that she did cease to think on
them, and to sigh often for them. And although she went learning the tongue of
the Island, yet did she not lose her Spanish. For Clotaldo took care to bring
Spaniards secretly to his house, to talk and converse with her. And so without
forgetting her own natural language, she spoke the other as well as if she
had been born in Mundolin.

After that they had taught her all manner of works, which a well bred
Damsel could, or ought to learn, they taught her to read and to write more
then indifferently well. But that wherein she did excel, was in playing upon
all those Instruments of Music, which might with most decency become a
woman; accompanying the same with such a voice which Heaven had bestowed on her
in so rare and singular a kind, that when she chaunted, she inchaunted all
that heard her.

All these her acquired graces, besides those that were natural unto her, went
by little and little, kindling the coals of love in Ricaredo's heart; to whom
as to her Masters Son, she wished all good and happiness, and carried her
self toward him with all fair respects.

At first love led him on with only a kind of liking and complacencie, in
beholding the unmatchable beauty of Isabella; and in considering her infinite
virtues and graces, and loving her as if she had been his Sister, his desires
not going beyond their honest and virtuous bounds. But when as Isabella began
to grow toward woman, (for then when Ricaredo burned in the flames of love
she was twelve years of age) that his former good will, and that complacencie
and liking, was turned into most fervent desires of enjoying and possessing
her, not that he did aspire thereunto by any other means, then by those of
being her Husband; since that from the incomparable beauty of Isabel (for so
did they call her) no other thing could be hoped for, neither would he
himself, though he could have expected that favor from her; because his
noble condition, and the high esteem wherein he held Isabella, would not give
the least way or consent, that any the least evil thought should take any
rooting in his soul.

A thousand times did he determine with himself to manifest the love he bare
her to his Parents; and again as often did he not approve this his
determination, because he knew that they had dedicated him for to be the
husband of a very rich and principal Gentlewoman, a Northern Damsel, who was
likewise (like them) a close and concealed Christian. And it was clear and
apparent, (as he conceived, and said with himself) that they would not be
willing to give unto a slave (if this name may be given to Isabella) that
which they had treated, and in a manner concluded on to give to a gentlewoman.
And therefore being much perplexed and pensive, not knowing what course to take
for to attain to the end of his good desire* he passed over such a kind of
life as had almost brought him to the point of losing it. But it seeming unto
him to be great cowardice and faint-heartednesse, to suffer himself to dye
without seeking out some kind of remedy for his grief; he did hearten and
encourage himself to open his mind, and declare his intent to Isabella.

All they of the house were very sad and heavy, and much troubled by reason of
Ricaredo his sickness. (for he was well beloved of them all,) but his Father
and Mother exceeding sorrowful, as well for that they had no other Child, as
also for that his great virtue, valor, and understanding did deserve it. The
Physicians did not hit right upon his disease, neither durst he, neither would
he discover it unto them. In the end, being fully resolved to break through
these difficulties which he imagined with himself; one day amongst the rest,
that Isabella came in to serve and attend him, seeing her all alone, with a low
voice, and a troubled tongue, he spoke unto her after this manner.

Fair Isabella, thy much worth, thy great virtue, and exceeding beauty, not
to be equalled by any; have brought me to that exteamitie wherein you see me;
and therefore if you will that I should leave my life in the hands of the
greatest extreamitie that may be imagined; let thy good desire be answerable
unto mine, which is no other then to receive thee for my Spouse. But this must
be carried closely, and kept hid from my Parents, of whom I am afraid (who
because they know that which I know, thy great deservingnesse) that they will
deny me that good which does so much concern me. If thou will give me thy
word to be mine, I shall forthwith pass mine, as a true Christian to be
thine. And put case that I should never come to enjoy thee, as I will not till
that I have the Churches benediction, and my Parents good will, yet with this
my imagining, that thou will be assuredly mine, it will be sufficient to
recover me my health, and to make me live merrily and contented, till that
happy and desired time shall come.

Whilst that Ricaredo discoursed thus with her, Isabella stood hearkening unto
him with down cast eyes, showing in that her modest and sober look, that her
honesty did equal her beauty, and her circumspection, her great discretion.
And seeing that Ricaredo had made an end of speaking, and was silent; this
honest, fair, and discreet Damsel made him this answer.

Since that the rigor or clemency of Heaven (for I know not to which of these
extremes I may attribute it) would ( Signior Ricaredo) quit me of my Parents,
and give me unto yours, (thankefully acknowledging the infinite favors they
have done me.) I resolved with my self, that my will should never be any other
then theirs; and therefore without it, the inestimable grace and favor which
you are willing to do me, I should not hold it a happiness, but a misery,
not a good, but a bad fortune. But if they being made acquainted therewith, I
might be so happy as to deserve you, from this day forward I offer unto you
that will and consent which they shall give me. And in the mean while that
this shall be or deferred, or not at all effected; let your desires entertain
themselves with this, that mine shall be eternal, and pure, in wishing you
all that good which Heaven can give you.

Here did Isabella put a period to her honest and discreet words, and there
began Ricaredo's recoverie. And now began to be revived those hopes of his
Parents, which in this his sickness were almost quite dead.

These two modest Lovers with a gseat deal of courtesy and kindness took
leave each of other; he with tears in his eyes, she with admiration in her
soul, to see that Ricaredo should render up his love, to hers. Who being
raised from his bed (to his Parents seeming) by miracle; he would not now any
longer conceal his thoughts, and therefore one day he manifested them to his
Mother, telling her in the end of his discourse, that if they did not Marry
him to Isabella, that to deny him her, and give him his death, it was one and
the same thing. With such words, and with such endearings Ricaredo did extol
to the Heavens the virtues of Isabella, that it seemed to his Mother, that
Isabella had not wrought upon her Son to win him to be her Husband. She did put
her Son in good hope so to dispose his Father, that he might like as well
thereof, as she did. And it so fell out, that repeating to her Husband word by
word, what her Son had said unto her, he was easily moved to give way to that
which his Son so earnestly desired, framing excuses to hinder that Marriage,
which was in a manner agreed upon for the Northern Damsel.

When this was in agitation, Isabella was 14. years of age, and Ricaredo 20.
And in these their so green and flourishing years, their great discretion and
known prudence, made them ancient.

There were but four days wanting to come, which being accomplished, Ricaredo
his Parents were willing that their Son should enter into the state of
Matrimony, holding themselves both wise, and happy, in having chosen their
prisoner to be their Daughter, esteeming more the dowry of her virtues, then
the great store of wealth that was offered with the Northern Damsel.

The wedding clothes were already made, their kinsfolk and friends invited
thereunto; and there was no other thing wanting, save making the Queen
acquainted with Marriage, because without her good will and consent, the
amongst those of noble blood, not any Marriage is effected; but they doubted
not of her good leave, and license, and therefore had so long deferred the
craving of it.

I say then, that all things standing in this estate, when there wanted but
four days till that of the wedding, one evening gave disturbance to all this
their joy. A servant of the Queens came and brought a message to Clotaldo,
with express command from her Majesty, that the next morning he should bring
to her Presence his Spanish Prisoner that he brought from Cadiz. Clotaldo
returned answer, that her Majesty's pleasure should most willingly be obeyed.
The Gentleman having delivered his message, and received his answer, went his
way, leaving the hearts of all the whole house full of passion, perturbations,
and fears.

Aye me (said the Lady Catalina) if it be come to the Queens knowledge that
I have bred up this Child in the Christian religion; and shall from thence
infer that all we of this Family are Christians. Besides, if the Queen
shall ask her what she has learned in eight years since that she was our
prisoner; what can the poor harmless soul answer, which shall not
(notwithstanding all her discretion) condemn us?

Which Isabella hearing, spoke thus unto her.

Let not (dear Lady) this fear give you any trouble at all; for my trust is
in God that he will put words into my mouth at that instant, out of his Divine
Mercy toward me; that shall not only not condemn you, but that shall much
redound to your good.

Ricaredo was much startled therewith, as divining thereby some ill success.
Clotaldo sought out meane^ that might give some courage to his great fear, but
found none, save in the great confidence which he had in God, and in the
wisdom of Isabella; who earnestly entreated her, that by all the ways she
possibly could devise, she should excuse her condemning of them to be
Christians; for though in spirit they were ready to receive Martyrdom; yet
notwithstanding, the flesh was weak, and were loath to drink of that bitter
cup.

Not once, but often Isabella assured them to rest assured, that for her cause,
or any default of hers, that should not succeed which they feared and
suspected. For albeit she then knew not what answer to make to those
Interrogatories and questions, which in such a case as this might be put unto
her; yet had she such a lively and assured hope that she should answer
thereunto in such sort (as she had at other times told them) that her answers
should rather do them good then hurt.

They discoursed that night on many things, especially on this particular; that
if the Queen had known that they were Christians, she would not have sent
them so mild a message; whence they might infer, that she was only
desirous to see Isabella, whose unequalled beauty and ability had come to her
ears, and to those of the Court, as it did to all those of the City. But
because they had not before this presented her unto her Majesty, they found
themselves faulty; of which fault, they thought good to excuse themselves, by
saying; that from that very instant that she came into his power, he had made
choice of her, and as it were marked her out for to be the wife of of his Son
Ricaredo. But in this too, they likewise ^ound themselves faulty, for having
made such a match without her Majesty's leave, and license; howbeit this fault
did not seem unto them worthy of any great punishment. With this they
comforted themselves, and agreed amongst themselves by a joint consent, that
Isabella should not go meanly clad to Court, but like a Bride, since that
she was the Spouse of his Son Ricaredo.

Being thus resolved, the next day they apparrelled Isabella after the Spanish
fashion; in a gown of green Satin cut upon cloth of gold, embroydered with
Esses of pearls, wearing a great chain of most rich orient pearls about her
neck, having a hatband of Diamonds, and a Fan in her hand, after the manner
of your Spanish Ladies. Her hairs of her head, which were full and long, and
of a bright pleasing color, sown, and interwoven with Diamonds, and Pearls,
did serve her instead of a coyfe. With this most rich dressing and lively
disposition, and admirable beauty, She showed her self that day in Mundolin,
riding in a fair Caroch, carrying along with her, taken by so beautiful a
sight, the souls and eyes of as many as looked on her. There were with her in
the same Caroch, Clotaldo and his wife, and Ricaredo, and on horse back many
noble gentlemen of their kindred, and Alliance. All this honor Clotaldo was
willing to do his Prisoner, for to obliege the Queen to use her as the Spouse
of his Son.

Being come now to the Court, and brought into the Chamber of Presence where
the Queen was, Isabella entered thereinto; presenting there the fairest show
which can fall within the compass of imagination. The room was large and
spacious, and the train that came with her had not gone above two steps
forward, but they stood still; and Isabella alone by her self, advanced her
self toward the State where the Queen sat; and being thus alone, she seemed
to appear just like that star, or exhalation, which by the region of fire is
wont to move it self in a clear and quiet night; or like unto a ray, or beam
of the Sun; which at the opening of the day discovers it self between two
mountains. All this did she seem to be, or rather like a Commet which did
prognosticate the inflaming and setting on fire many of those souls that were
present, which love had thoroughly heated, if not burned with the rays of those
resplendant suns of beautiful Isabella, who full of humility, and
courtesy, made her approaches by degrees, addressing her self to kneel down
before the Queen, and then after a short pausing said thus unto her. May it
please your most excellent Majesty, so far forth to honor this your servant,
that she may kiss your royal hand; so shall I ever hereafter hold my self to
be a Lady, since that I have been so happy, as to come to see your
greatness.

The Queen continued looking upon her a good while, without speaking one word;
it seeming unto her (as she afterward told a great Lady of her Bedchamber)
that she had a starrified heaven before her; whose stars were those many
Pearls, and Diamonds which Isabella bare about her. Her fair face, and eyes
were the Sun and Moon; and take all together in the whole piece, she was a
new wonder of beauty. The Ladies that attended about the Queens Person, wished
that they had been all eyes, that there might not remain any thing in, or
about Isabella, which they might not behold and view at full. Some commended
the quickness of her eyes, some the color of her face, and pureness of
complexion; some the propernesse of her body, and some the sweetness of her
speech. And some likewise, who out of mere envy, said; the Spaniard is a very
handsome gentlewoman, but her habit and dressing seems very strange, and out
of fashion. After some little suspension, the Queen causing Isabella to rise
up, she said unto her; speak (pretty Maid) unto me in Spanish, for I
understand it well, and shall take much pleasure therein. And turning her self
toward Clotaldo, she said unto him.

Clotaldo, you have done Us wrong, in keeping this treasure so long concealed
from Us; but it is such, and so rich, that it has moved you to covetousness;
you are bound to restore it unto Us, for by right it is Ours, and properly
belongs unto Us.

Madam (answered Clotaldo) it is true which your Majesty says; I confess my
fault, if it be a fault to have kept this treasure, that it might be preserved
in that perfection, as was fitting to appear in your Majesty's Presence. And
now that it is here before your eye, I thought to have much improved it, by
craving your Majesty's leave that Isabella might be the Spouse of my Son
Ricaredo, and to give your most excellent Majesty in these two, all that I am
able to give you.

Her very name gives Us very good content (replied the Queen) there could
nothing have been more wanting save the name of Isabella the Spanyard, to take
off something from that perfection which is in her. But how is it ( Clotaldo)
that without Our leave you have promised her to your Son?

It is true Madam (answered Clotaldo) I have made him a promise of her, but it
was upon the confidence that the many and notable services which my self, and
my Ancestors have done this Crown, might obtain of your Majesty other more
difficult favors, then this of your leave; and the rather, for that my Son
is not yet espoused unto her.

Neither shall he (said the Queen) Marry Isabella, till he by himself, and in
his own person shall deserve her. Our meaning is, that I will not that either
your own or your Ancestors services, shall any whit benefit him him in this
particular; but that he in his own person shall dispose himself to serve
me, and for to merit for himself, and by his own prowess, this sweet
pledge, whom we esteem and reckon of as if she were our own Daughter.

Isabella had scarce heard this last word delivered, when humbling her self
again on her knees before the Queen, she spoke unto her in the Spanish
tongue, to this effect.

As graces, which brings such graces with them (most noble Queen) are rather
to be accounted happiness, then misfortunes. And since that your Majesty has
been pleased to grace me with the name of Daughter upon so good a pledge; what
ill can I fear? or what good may I not hope for?

Look what Isabella uttered, came from her so gracefully, and so wittingly,
that the Queen stood extremely affected toward her; and commanded that she
should remain at Court in her service; and recommended her to a great Lady,
the chiefest amongst those of her Bedchamber, that she might train her up
according to the Court fashion.

Ricaredo, who saw that his life was taken away, in taking away Isabella, was
ready almost to have lost his wits; and therefore though overtaken with a
tumbling and sudden passion of heart, he went and fell upon his knees before
the Queen, and said unto her.

That I may serve your Majesty, I need not to be incited thereunto by any
other rewards, then by those which my forefathers, and Ancestors have gotten
by serving their Kings. But since that it is your Majesty's pleasure that I
should serve you with good desires, and pretensions; I would gladly know, in
what kind, and in what employment I may manifest that I cumply; with that
obligation which I owe unto your Majesty, and put my self to that which you
shall impose upon me.

I have two Ships royal (answered the Queen) ready to put forth to Sea,
whereof I have made General the Baron of Lansae, of one of these I make you
Captain, him Admiral, and you Vice Admiral. For the blood from whence you
come, and runs in your veins, does assure me that you will supply the
defect of your years; and consider well the favor which we do you, since
that therein I give you occasion, that corresponding with that which you are,
and doing things answerable to the race from whence you come; by serving your
Queen, you may show the worth of your noble disposition, and of your person;
and you shall receive thereby the greatest reward, which in your opinion you
can wish or desire. I my self will be Isabella's Guard, though she give Us
manifest tokens, that her own honesty will be her safest and surest guard.
God bless you in your Voyage; and since that you go^hence deeply (as I
imagine) in love, I promise great matters unto my self of your noble exploits.
Happy shall that King that goes to war be, who shall have in his Army ten
thousand Soldiers that are in love, for they will live in hope that the reward
of their victories, shall be the enjoying of their best beloved. Rise up
Ricaredo, and bethink your self if you will or have any thing to say to
Isabella, for to morrow you must be gone.

Ricaredo kissed the Queens hand, humbly thanking her, and highly esteeming
the favor which she did him, and presently went from her to Isabella, and
would feign have spoken unto her, but could not, for love and grief had knit
such a knot in his throat, and so tied his tongue, that had his life layen upon
it, he could not utter one word. But the water stood in his eyes, and were so
brimme-full, that they ran over, and silently trickled down his cheeks
which he thought to dissemble and smother them, all that he possibly could;
yet notwithstanding could he not hide them from the eyes of the Queen, and
therefore she said unto him.

Think it no shame Ricaredo to weep, neither value your self the less, for
having given at this your farewell such tender demonstrations of your heart.
For it is one thing to fight with your enemies, and another thing to take your
leave of her you love. Isabella, embrace Ricaredo, and give him your
benediction, for his excessive sorrow, and loathnesse to leave you, does very
well deserve it.

Isabella, who stood amazed and astonished to see Ricaredo's tender
heartedness, and how truly he did grieve, and all for her sake, whom she
loved as her Husband; did not understand what the Queen had commanded her, but
began to shed tears; so without thinking what she did, and stood so still, and
without any motion, that it seemed not to be a living soul, but a Statua of
Alablaster that wept.

The affections of these two true and tender lovers, made the standers by to
melt likewise into tears. And so Ricaredo without speaking a word to Isabella,
or Isabella to him, they turned each from other, and Clotaldo, and they that
came with him, doing reverence to the Queen, went out of the Presence full of
compassion, discontent, and tears.

Isabella now remained like a poor Orphane, coming from the burial of her
Father and Mother, and as full now of fear, as before of grief; least that
her new Lady to whom she was recommended, would make her to change those
manners and customs wherein she had been formerly bred up.

In conclusion, there she remained, and within two days after Ricaredo hoysed
sail, and put forth to Sea, beaten amongst many other with this thought, that
he must do some notable piece of service, that might entitle him the deserver
of Isabella.

But in conclusion, he besought Heaven to be propitious unto him, that such
occasions might be offered unto him; wherein by showing himself valiant, he
might cumply with the duty of a Christian, leaving the Queen satisfied, and
Isabella deserved.

Six days these two Ships sailed with a prosperous wind, shaping their
course for the Tercera Islands; a place where never are wanting, either Ships
of Portugal, from the East Indies, or some that come thither from the
West Indies. And at six days end there arose such a crossewinde full in the
teeth of them; and continued so long and so strong, that without suffering them
to reach the Islands, they were enforced to make for Spain; near unto whose
Coast, at the mouth of the Straight of Gihraltar, they descried three Ships;
the one a very tall and goodly Ship, and the other two much less. Ricaredo's
Ship made up to that which was Admiral, for to know of his General, whether
or no he would set upon those three Ships which they had descried. But before
that he came up unto them; he might discern that upon the top of the maine
mast, there was hung out a black streamer, and coming a little nearer, he
might hear Fifes, and Trumpets sounding faintly, and hoarsely; clear and
apparent signs that the General was dead, or some other principal person of
the Ship. At last coming within hearing, that they might speak one to
another, which they had not done since their first putting forth; they might
hear them from out the Admiral call out aloud unto them, to have the
Vice Admiral Ricaredo to come aboard their Ship, because the General the
night before died of an Appoplexie.

All upon this news were very sad, save Ricaredo,, who was inwardly glad, not
for the loss of his General, but to see that he was left at liberty, and
might freely command both Ships; for so was it ordered by the Queen, that
the General miscarrying, Ricaredo should succeed in his room. Who presently
went aboard the Admiral, where he found some that mourned for their dead
General, and others that rejoiced with him that was now living. In a word, both
the one and the other presently yielded him obedience, and with short
ceremonies cried him up for their General; two of those three Ships which
they had discovered not giving leave for greater, which going aloof from the
great Ship, made up to the two Ships. They straight knew them to be Galleys,
and Turkish Galleys, by the half Moons which they bare in their flagges,
which gave Ricaredo great contentment; it seeming unto him, that that prize if
Heaven should grant it him, would be of great benefit.

The Turkish Galleys came to know the Northern ships, who did not carry the
Arms of the Island in their flagges, but of Spain, for to deceive those that
should chance to descrie them, and might take them to be Ships of Piracie.
The Turks thought they had been Ships that had come from the Indies, wasted
and spent with their long voyage, and that they would quickly yield and be
taken. Whereupon, they came incroaching by little and little upon them, thinking
presently to board them, and Ricaredo suffered them to come nearer and nearer
unto him, till he had them in command of his Ordnance, and then let fly at
them, and giving them a broad side, discharged so luckily, and with such fury,
that he shot one of the Galleys through, and through; so that one half of it lay
all open, and naked, which forced them to fly, and make the best shift they
could for to escape boording. The other Gallie seeing it is fellows ill
success, made away in all haste, and strove to put her self under the side of
the great Ship. But Ricaredo, who had Ships that were light laden, and were
quick and nimble; and such excellent sailors, that they would turn and wind,
and come off and on, as if they had been plied with Oars; commanded them to
charge the Ordnance anew, chasing them even to the ship, showring upon them a
world of shot. They of the opened Gallie, as soon as they came to the ship,
forsook their Galley, and with all possible haste endeavored to get into the
ship. Which being perceived by Ricaredo, and that the sound Gallie imyloyed it
self in relieving the other* he sets upon her with both his ships, and without
giving her leave to tacke about, or to make any use of her Oars, he did put
her to that straight and exigent, that the Turks likewise that were in her,
were forced to flee for refuge to the ship, not with any hope to defend
themselves therein, or to stand it out in fight, but for to escape for the
present with their lives. The Christians wherewith those Galleys were manned,
tearing up their banks, and breaking their chains, intermingled with the
Turks, sought to recover their ship; and as they were clambring up by the side
of her, with musket shot from the ships, they went shooting at them, as at a
mark; but Ricaredo gave order that they should shoot only at the Turks, and
spare the Christians. Thus were all the Turks almost slain; and they who
entered the ship with the Christians, for they were mingled one amongst
another, making use of their weapons, were cut in pieces. For the force of the
valiant when they begin to fall, must yield to the weakness of those that are
rising. And therefore the Christians taking heart, laid about them with such
courage and mettle, that they did wonders for the working of their liberty;
thinking all this while that those Northern ships were Spanish.

In conclusion, the Christians having in a manner cut all the Turks throats,
some Spaniards showed themselves upon the Deck, and called out a loud unto
those whom they supposed to be Spaniards, that they would come aboard them,
and enjoy the reward of their victory. Ricaredo asked them in Spanish what
ship that was? they told him that she was a Portugal come from the
East Indies laden with spices, and as many Pearls, and Diamonds, as were worth
a Million, and that by a storm they were driven upon that Coast, all rent and
torn, and without any Ordnance, for the foulness of the weather, and high
working of the Sea, enforced them to throw it over-boord. That their men were
most of them sick, and almost dead of thirst, and hunger; and that those two
Galleys which were belonging to the Pirate A^pantemuam had taken her but the
day before, without making any defense at all. And that (as it was told them)
because they were not able to carry so great a quantity of riches in those
two small Vessels; they towed her along, with purpose to put her into the River
of Larache, which was near thereunto.

Ricaredo returned them answer, that if they conceived that those his two
Ships were Spanish, they were deceived, for they were nothing less, but
ships belonging to the Queen of the Northern Island. Which news gave those
that heard it, occasion of fear, and sorrow; imagining (and not without
reason,) that they were fallen out of one net into another. But Ricardo told
them that they should receive no harm, and that they should rest assured of
their liberty, on condition that they should not put themselves upon their
defense. Nor is it possible for us (replied they) so to do; for (as we
formerly told you) this Ship has no Ordnance, nor we any offensive Arms;
and therefore we must of force whether we will or no, have recourse to the
gentile and noble disposition of your General, and the liberality and
courtesy which he shall use toward us; since that it is meet and just that
he who has freed us from the insufferable captivity of the Turks, should
reap the reward and benefit thereof, and shall be famoused of all those to
whose ears the news shall come, of this memorable victory, and of his kind
usage toward them.

These words of the Spanyard did not found ill in Ricaredo's ears; and
therefore calling those of his ship to a council, he demanded of them how
he might send all the Christians to Spain, without putting themselves in
danger of any simister success; if being so many as they were, they should
take courage unto them for to rise up against them? Some were of opinion, that
he should pass them one by one to his own Ship, and clapping them under
hatches, kill them man after man; and so they might easily and without any
noise kill them all, and carry the great Ship along with them to (...)
without any further fear or care taking. But to this Ricaredo thus replied.

Since that God has done us this so great a favor, in giving us such great
riches, I will not require him with a cruel and unthankefull mind; nor is it
meet that that which I may remedy by industry, I should remedy it by the
sword. And therefore, I for my part am of opinion, that no Christian should dye
the death. Not because I wish them so well, but because I wish well to my
self, and would that this days noble action, neither to me, nor to you,
should mingle the name of valiant, with the surname of cruel; for cruelty
did never sort well with valor. That which is to be done, is this; that all
the Ordnance of one of these our Ships, be put into the great Portugal Ship,
without leaving the Ship any Arms, or any other thing, save sufficient
victual. And so manning that Ship with our men, we will carry it home, and the
Spaniards go in the other to Spain.

None durst contradict that which Ricaredo had propounded, and some held him to
be valiant, magnanimous, and of good understanding and judgment; and others
in their hearts, to be more courteous then he ought to have been,

Ricaredo then having resolved on this course, he put 50* Muskatiers into the
Portugal Ship all ready fitted and furnished, their Pieces charged with shot,
and their matches burning in their cocks. He found in the Ship well near 300.
persons, with those that had escaped out of the galleys. He presently called
for their Cocket, or bill of lading; and the same person who at first spoke to
him from the Deck made him answer; that the Turkish Pirate had already taken
their Cocket from them, and that it was drowned with him. He did instantly put
his pully in order, and bringing his lesser vessel and lashing it close to the
side of the great Ship with wonderful celeritie, and with the help of strong
ropes, they hoysed all their Ordnance with their Carriages, out of the lesser
into the greater Ship.

This being done, he forthwith made a short speech to the Christians; he
commanded them to go into the Ship that was now disincumbred, where they
should find good store of victual for more then a month, and more mouths
then they had. And as they went Imbarquing themselves, he gave to every one of
them four Spanish Pistolets, which he caused to be brought from his own Ship,
for to relieve in part their necessity when they came on land; which was so
near, that from thence they might kenne the high mountains of Avila, and
Calpe. All of them gave him infinite thanks for the favor he had done them;
and the last that went to embarque himself, was he who had been the mouth of
the rest, who said unto Ricaredo.

Most valiant sir, I should hold it a happiness for me, amidst these my
misfortunes, and the greater of the two; that you would rather carry me along
with you to Mundolin, then send me into Spain. For albeit that it be my
Country, and that it is not above six days since I left it, yet shall I not
find any thing therein which will not minister occasions unto me of reviving
my former sorrows, and solitudes. I would have you to know (noble sir) that in
the loss of Cadiz, which is now some 15. years since, I lost a Daughter which
some of the Conquerours carried away into their own Country; and with her, I
lost the comfort of my old age, and the light of mine eyes, which since they
might not see her, have never seen that thing which could be pleasing unto
them. The great coffeehouse wherein her loss left me, together with that
of my wealth, which likewise was taken from me; brought me to that low ebb,
that I neither would, nor could any more exercise the trade of Merchandise,
whose great dealings in that kind, made me in the opinion of the world, held
to be the richest Merchant in all that City. And indeed so I was, for besides
my credit, which would pass for many hundred thousands of crowns, the wealth
that I had within the doors of mine own house, was more then fifty thousand
Ducats. All which I lost, yet had I lost nothing, so as I had not lost my
Daughter. After this general misfortune, and so particularly mine; necessity
(the more to vex me) set upon me, never ceasing to give me over, till such
time as not being able any longer to resist her; my Wife and I (which is that
sorrowful woman that sits there) resolved to go for the Indies, the common
refuge of poor Gentlemen; and having embarked our selves but six days since
in a ship of Advise, we had no sooner put out of Cadiz, but that those two
Vessels of the Pirates, took our ship, and we become their slaves.
Whereupon our misery was renewed, and our misfortune confirmed. And it had
been greater, had not the Pirates taken that ship of Portugal, who
entertained them so long, till that succeeded which you have seen.

Ricaredo then asked him, what was his daughters name?

He answered, Isabella.

With this Ricaredo ceased to be confirmed further in that which before he
suspected; which was, that he who recounted this unto him, was his beloved
Isabella's Father; and without giving him any tidings of her, he told him, that
very willingly he would carry him and his Wife to Mundolin, where happily they
might hear some news of that which they so much desired. He made them
presently go aboard his own ship, leaving Mariners and soldiers sufficient in
that of Portugal.

That night they hoysed sail, and set themselves to get off from the coast of
Spain; and for that in the ship wherein were the freed Captives, there were
likewise 20 Turks, whom Ricaredo had also set at liberty; for to show, that
more out of his own noble disposition, and generous mind, he had dealt so
graciously with them, then enforced by that love which he bare to the
Christians; he entreated the Spaniards at their parting, that upon the first
occasion that should offer it self, they should set the Turks at liberty,
wherein they should show themselves thankful unto him.

The wind, which gave good tokens of being large, and prosperous, began to be
very much calmer, which calm did stir up a great tempest of fear in the
Mariners and Soldiers; who blamed Ricaredo, and his bounty, not sticking to
tell him, that they whom he had freed, might give advise of their success in
Spain; and that if happily they should have their Galeons lying there in the
Haven, they might put forth to Sea in search of them, and so put them to a
narrow straight, and in danger of losing, together with their lives, all that
Treasure which they had got.

Ricaredo knew very well that they had reason on their side, but overcomming all
of them with good words, he made them quiet; but that which did most quiet
them, was the wind which returned again to re-infresh it self in such sort,
that having as fair a gale as could blow in the sky, they clapped on all their
sails, without having need to strike any one of them, or but in the least
manner to restrain them; within Nine days they came within sight of Mundolin.
And when they were returned home thus victorious, there were thirty wanting of
those that went that Voyage.

Ricaredo would not enter the River with tokens of joy, by reason of the death
of his General; and therefore mixed his joyful, with sorrowful signs. One
while the Trumpets sounding loud, and shrill; and another while low, and
hoarse; one while the Drums did beat lively, and the Flutes go merrily, and
another while dead, and softly, answering each other with mournful and
lamentable notes. On one of the Cages of the ship hung the contrary way, a
flagge embroydered with half Moons; and on another, a long streamer of black
Taffata, whose points did mock the water.

In conclusion, with these and the like contrary extremes, they entered the
River with their ^wn ship, because the other drew so much water, that the
River could not bear her, and therefore lay at anchor in the Sea.

Th^se such contrary signs and tokens, held a world of people in suspense, who
beheld them from each side of the shore. They knew very well by some Arms and
Coats in their Colors, that that lesser ship was the Admiral wherein the
Lord of Lansac went; but they could not guess how that other ship should
come to be changed for that great vast ship which lay at Sea. But they were
quickly put out of this doubt, by Ricaredo's leaping out of his b^at o^ shore
in rich and resplendent Arms, like a Soldier; who a foot, without staying for
any other company, attended only with the innumerable vulgar that followed
him; he went directly to the Court, where the Queen being in a Gallerie, stood
expecting the news should be brought her of her ships.

There was* besides many other Ladies with the Queen, Isabella* apparelled
after the Island fashion, though with a little touch of the Spanish. Before
that Ricaredo came, there came another, who told the Queen that Ricaredo was
come. Isabella hearing the name of Ricaredo, began to change color, and seemed
to be somewhat troubled, and in that very instant did fear and hope, both the
evil and good success of his coming.

Ricaredo was ^ll of stature, a gentleman, and well proportioned, and for that
he came Armed with his Gorget, Corsele^, and Powderns, all Millaine work,
richly gilded and engraven, it became him extremely well* and did please the
eyes of the beholders. He had no Caske on his head, but abroad (...) hat of a
Lion color, with a great large feather, diversified with a few different
colors; abroad shortf^ord by his side, a very rich girdle and hungers, and his
breeches somewhat large, and full, like unto those of the S^zzers.

Being thus ac^utered, what with the goodlinesse of his p^sence, and
stateliness of his gate; some were so taken their with, that they compared him
to M^s the god of War; (...) taken with the beautifulness of his countenance
compared him to Venus, who for to put a jest upon Mars, had put this disguise
upon him. In conclusion, he came before the Queen, and humbling himself on
his knee, he said unto her.

Most renowned, and redoubted Sovereign, in the strength of your good fortune,
and in the consecution of my desire; after that our General the Lord of Lansac
was dead of an Apoplexy, I succeeding in his place (thanks be rendered
therefore to your Majesty) I lighted by chance on two Turkish galleys, which
went towing away that great ship which I have now brought home, and lies not
far off safe in the road. I did set upon them, your Soldiers fought as they
always use to do, very manfully; we sunck both the Turkish Vessels, and in
one of ours, I gave in your Majesty's royal name liberty to the Christians,
which escaped out of the hands of the Turks. Only I brought along with me one
man, and a woman, both Spaniards; who out of their own liking and election,
were wonderfully desirous to come with me into our Island, that they might see
the greatness of your Majesty's Person, and Court. That ship which is now
yours, is a Portugal, one of those great Carricks which come from the
East Indies, the which by a storm came to fall into the power of the Turks;
who with little trouble, or to say better, none at all, made her to yield her
self unto them; and as I am informed by some of those Portugals that came in
her, she is worth above a Million in gold, and Spice, and other rich
Merchandise of Pearls, and Diamonds, which are in her, whereof nothing has
hitherto been touched, neither did the Turks come to finger any thing therein;
because Heaven has dedicated i^ wholly unto you, and I have commanded it to be
kept and reserved whole and entire for your Majesty* which with one jewel
only that your Majesty shall be pleased to bestow upon me, I shall remain
indebted for ten such other ships. Which jewel your Majesty has already
promised me, which is, my good Isabella. With her I shall rest rich, and
rewarded; not only for this service that I have done your Ma^estie, but for
many other which I mean to do, for to pay some part of that great, if not
infinite worth, which in this jewel your Majesty offers me.

Arise Ricaredo (replied the Queen) and believe me, that if I should upon a
price give you Isabella according to that value I esteem her at, you would
never be able to pay it, neither with that which you have brought home in this
ship, nor with all that treasure which remains in the Indies. Well, I will
give her you, because I made you a promise of her, and because she is worthy of
you, and you of her, your valor only does deserve her. And if you have kept
those jewels of the Ship for me* I have likewise kept this your jewel for
you. And albeit it may seem unto you that I have not done any great mat^er for
you, in returning you that which is your own* yet I know that I do you an
especial favor therein; for those pledges that are bought by our desires, and
have their estemation and value in the soul of the buyer, they are worth a
World, there being no price that can countervaile it. Isabella is yours, there
she is; and when you will your self, you may take possession of her, and I
believe with her good liking and content; for she is discreet, and knows well
how to weigh the friendship which you do her, for I will not style it by the
name of favor, but friendship; for I will take that name only upon me of
doing favors. Go, and take your ease, and come and wait upon Us to morrow,
and then will I more particularly hear you relate unto Us what you did in
this* Voyage, and how valiantly you behaved yourselfe. And bring those two with
you, who you say were so willing to come and see Us, that We may than^ them for
their love.

Ricaredo thanked her Majesty for the many favors she had done him. And then
the Queen presently left the Gallerie, and retired her self. And the Ladies
came round about Ricaredo; and one of them which held great love and friendship
with Isabella* called the Lady Tansi; accounted the discreetest, the wittiest,
and pleasantest amongst them, said unto Ricaredo, what means this Ricaredo?
what Arms are these? Did you happily imagine that you came to fight with your
enemies? believe me, we all here are your friends, unless it be Isabella;
who for that she is a Spanyard, is bound not to hear you any good will. Sure
(my Lady Tansi) she bears me ^me; for since that she has me in her
remembrance (said Ricaredo) I know that her good will is toward me; for the
foulness of being unthankefull, cannot have the least footing in her so great
worth, understanding, and incomparable beauty.

Whereunto Isabella replied, Signior Ricaredo, since that I am to be yours, it
is in your power to take all satisfaction whatsoever you will of me, that I may
make you some small requital of those undeserved praises which you have given
me, and of those further favors which you intend to do me.

These and other the like honest discour^ngs, Ricaredo passed with Isabella,
and with the rest of the Ladies; amongst which, there was ^ pretty little
Damsel, young both in growth, and years, who did nothing but gaze upon
Ricaredo all the while he was there; she lifted up his ^ases, to see if he
had any thing under them; she tampered with his sword, and in a Childish
simplicity, would make his glittering Armor her looking Glass, coming very
near thinking to see her face in them. And when she went away from him*
turning her self to the Ladies, she said; Now (Ladies) I assure you, I
imagine that War is a most beautiful thing; since that even amongst Women ar^
m^n look lovely. And ^ow can they otherwise choose? (replied the Lady Tansi)
if not, look upon Ricaredo, who looks like the Sun, come down from Heaven
on earth, and in that habit goes walking up and down amongst us. They all of
them laughed at the little Maids simplicity, and no less at the ridiculous
Rodamantado of the Lady Tansi. And some murmurers were not wanting, who held
it an impertinencie, that Ricaredo should come armed to Court. Though other
some sought as much to excuse him, saying; that as a Soldier he might do it,
for to show his braverie and gallantrie.

Ricaredo was by his Parents, friends, kinsfolk, and acquaintance received,
with lively expressions of singular love and affection. And that night there
were made general bonfires throughout Mundolin, and other public tokens of
their joy. The father and mother of Isabella were already in Clotaldo's house,
whom Ricaredo had acquainted who they were; but entreated his Parents that they
might not have any the least notice given them of Isabella, till that he
himself should give it them; the like advise was given to all the servants of
the house.

That very night, accompanied with many boats, barges, and barques, and with no
fewer eyes to look on them. The great Ship began to discharge her lading,
which in eight days could not be disburthened of her Pepper, and other rich
Merchandise which she had in her bulk. The next day after Ricaredo went to
Court, carrying with him the father and mother of Isabella, both of them being
newly clad after the fashion of Mundolin, telling them that the Queen desired
to see them.

They came all of them where the Queen was sitting amidst her Ladies expecting
Ricaredo, whom she was willing to grace and favor, by placing Isabella next to
her, having on the same attire and dressing which she wore when she came
first to the Court; appearing therein no less beautiful now, then she did
the The Parents of Isabella were stricken with admiration and wonder, to see so
much greatness, and braverie met together. They settled their eyes on Isabella,
but did not know her, though their hearts (presagers of that good which was so
near them) began to leap in their bosoms; not out of any sudden passion that
might cause sorrow or grief in them, but out of I know not what pleasure and
contentment, which they could not hit upon to understand aright.

The Queen would not suffer Ricaredo to continue kneeling before her, but made
him rise, and willed him to sit down in a velvet chair, which was by her
appointment set there for that purpose; an unusual favor, considering the
stately condition of the Queen. And one whispered in another ^are, Ricaredo
sits not on the chair which was brought him, but on the Pepper which he
brought in. Another says unto him that stood by him; now is that old Proverb
verified, Que dadivas, que brantan pennas, that gifts will break through stone
walls; for those that Ricaredo has given her Majesty, has softened and
mollified our Queens hard heart. Another tells his next fellow, now that he is
well seated, more hands then two must go to it to heave him out.

In conclusion, from that grace and honor which the Queen was pleased to do
Ricaredo; envy took occasion to grow in many of those Courtiers breasts, who
were eyewitnesses of this her Majesty's extraordinary favor extended toward
him. For there is not that favor which a Prince confers on his Favorite,
which is not a spear that pierces the heart of the envious.

The Queen was desirous to know from Ricaredo, point by point, how that fight
passed with the Turkish Pirates Galleys; he recounted it a new, attributing
the victory to God, and the valor of his Soldiers; endearing the services of
them all jointly* and particularizing the valiant acts of some of them, who had
put themselves most forward, and done her Majesty very notable service;
wherhee obliged the Queen to do all of them favors, and in particular,
those particular persons.

And when he began to speak of the liberty which in her Majesty's name he had
given the Turks, and Christians, he said unto her. That Woman, and that Man
who stand there (pointing to Isabella's Parents) are they whom yesterday I told
your Majesty, who out of the great desire which they had to see your
greatness, and magnificence; did so earnestly entreat me that I would bring
them along with me. They are of Cadiz, and by that which they have told me,
and by that likewise which I have seen and observed in them, I know that they
are of especial rank, and worth.

The Queen commanded them that they should draw near unto her; Isabella
lifted up her eyes that she might see these who said they were Spainyards, and
more particularly of Cadiz; out of a desire that she had to learn if happily
they knew her Parents. And just as Isabella lifted up her eyes, her Mother
fixed hers upon her, and stood still a while, that she might view and behold
her the more attentively. And on the other side there began to be awakened in
Isabella's memory, some certain confused notions, which gave her to
understand, that heretofore she had seen that Woman which stood before her. Her
Father was in the like confusion, without daring to determine to give credit to
that truth which his eyes represented unto him.

Ricaredo was very attentive to see and observe the affections and motions of
these three doubtful and perplexed souls, which were so confounded and
amazed, between the yea and nay of knowing each other. The Queen took notice
of both their suspensions, as also of Isabella's distractions, by her
inter-while sweatings, by her changing color, and by her lifting up her hand
to order and compose her ^ayre.

Isabella thus troubled, not knowing well what to think of it, did earnestly
wish that she would speak, whom she imagined might be her Mother; for perad
venture her ears would put her out of that doubt whereinto her eyes had put
her. The Queen willed Isabella that she should speak. Spainish to that woman,
and that man; and they should tell her what was the cause that moved them not
to accept and enjoy that their liberty which Ricaredo had given them; being
that liberty is a thing above all other, the dearest and best beloved, not
only of reasonable creatures, but of those that want it. All this Isabella
demanded of her Mother, who without returning her any one word, suddenly, and
half stumbling for haste, came unto Isabella; and without regarding respect,
fear, or the Courtiers looking on her, with her hand she lifted up Isabella's
right ear, and having there discovered a black mole; which mark confirmed her
suspicion, and plainly perceiving that it was her Daughter Isabella, she could
no longer contain her self, but embracing her, cried out aloud, saying; Oh
Daughter of my heart! Oh dear pledge of my soul! and not being able to utter
a word more; her speech failing, she fainted and fell into a swound in
Isabella's arms.

Her Father no less tender then prudent, gave manifest signs how sensible he
was of all this; but with no other words then a silent shedding of tears,
which softly trickling down bedewed both his cheeks, and beard. Isabella laid
her face to that of her Mother, and turning her eyes toward her Father, in
such a kind of manner looked on him, that thereby she gave him to understand
the pleasure and contentment her soul took in seeing them there.

The Queen wondering at this so rare and strange an accident, said to
Ricaredo; I conceive (Ricaredo) that this interview was thus preordered in your
discretion; but I must tell you, I know not whether you did well in so doing.
For we see by experience, that a sudden joy as soon kills, as a sudden sorrow.
And having said this, she turned her self to Isabella, and took her apart
from her Mother, who having a little water sprinkled in her face, came again to
her self; and calling her wits a little better about her, humbling her self
on her knees before the Queen, she^ said unto her.

I beseech your Majesty to pardon my boldness, for it is no mervaile that I
should forget my self, and lose my senses, with the overmuch joy I have
received in the finding out this my beloved pledge.

The Queen made answer, that she had a great deal of reason on her side
(making use of an Interpreter that she might the better understand her.)

Isabella came in this manner (as I told you before) to the knowledge of her
Parents, and her Parents of her; whom the Queen commanded to reside in the
Court, to the end that they might with the better leisure, both see, and talk
with their Daughter, and rejoice and make merry with her. Wherewith Ricaredo
was wonderful well pleased, and craved a new of the Queen, that she would be
pleased to make good her promise, by bestowing Isabella upon him, in case he
did deserve her; and if not, he humbly besought her Majesty, that she would
be pleased presently to put him upon some other employment, that might make
himself worthy of obtaining that which he so earnestly desired.

The Queen understood very well, that Ricaredo rested well satisfied of
himself, and of his great valor; insomuch that there needed not only new
proofs for to qualify him. And therefore told him, that four days from that
present being fully ended, she would deliver Isabella unto him, doing both of
them all the grace and honor she possible could. Upon this answer, Ricaredo
took his leave, being the most joyful, and most contented (...) i^ the world;
transported with that near (...) which (...) now had of having Isabella in his
power, without any fear of losing her, which is the last and utmost desire of
Lovers.

Time ran, but not with that light and nimble foot as he wished. For they
who live by the hope of promise to come; do evermore imagine, that time does
not fly with wings swift enough, but that he has lead tied to his heels, and
treads the steps of slothfulness it self.

Well, at last came that desired day, not wherein Ricaredo thought to put an
end to his desires, but to find in Isabella new graces which might move him to
love her the more, if more he could, then he did already. But in that short
time, when as he thought the ship of his good fortune sailed with a
prosperous wind toward the desired Port; a contrary chance, and cross
accident, raised up in this calm sea such a tempestuous storm, that he feared
a thousand times to see it suncke.

The case then is this. The chief Bed chamber Lady to the Queen, to whose
charge Isabella was committed; had a Son of the age of 22. years, called the
Earl of Arnesto. The greatness of his estate, the nobleness of his blood,
and the great favor which his Mother held with the Queen, made him not only
do those things which did not become him, and to break out into excesses; but
also made him arrogant, proud, haughty, and confident of himself.

This Arnesto then was enamoured of Isabella, and so ens^edly* that his very
soul did burn in the sparkeling light of Isabella's eyes. And albeit in that
time that Ricaredo was absent, he had by some signs discovered his desires;
(...) was he never admitted by Isabella, or received any the least
encouragement. And how be it that repugnancie, and disdaines in loves infane
ie, are wont to make lovers to desist from their enterprise; yet in Arnesto,
the many and known disdaines which Isabella showed him, wrought the clean
contrary; for he was set on fire with his own jealousies, and burned with
desire to attempt her honesty.

And for that he saw that Ricaredo in the Queens opinion had deserved Isabella,
and that within so little a while she was to be given unto him for Wife, he was
ready to run into despair, and to offer violence to himself. But before
that he would go about to use so infamous and cowardly a remedy, he brake
with his Mother, entreating her that she would speak unto the Queen to give
him Isabella to be his Wife; which if she did not bring to pass, that he
would then have her to know, and assuredly believe, that death stood knocking
at the doors of his life.

The Mother wondered to hear such words fall from her Son, and for that she
knew the roughness of his harsh nature, and headstrong condition, and the
fastness wherewith these desires did cleave unto his soul, she was afraid
that this his love would end in some sinister success, and unhappie issue; yet
notwithstanding, as a Mother (to whom it is natural to desire and procure the
good of her Children,) she promised to prefer his pretension to the Queen,
though not with any hope to obtain such an impossibility of her, as the
breaking of her Princely word; but that she might not omit to try in so
desperate a case the utmost remedy.

And Isabella being that morning apparrelled by order from the Queen, so
richly, that my Pen dares not presume to deliver the manner thereof unto you;
and the Queen her self having put a chain of Pearl about her neck, the
best that was brought home by Ricaredo in the Ship, valewed at twenty
thousand Ducats; and a Diamond Ring on her finger worth six thousand or
thereabouts. And the Ladies being assembled and met together for to celebrate
the approaching feast of this glorious wedding, came in the chief Bedchamber
woman to the Queen* and besought her on her knees that she would be pleased
to suspend Isabella's espousalls two days more. For with this favor only
which her Majesty should do her, she should hold her self well satisfied and
recompensed for all whatsoever she deserved, or hoped for her service.

The Queen would first know of her why she did so earnestly desire this
suspension, which went so directly against her word, which she had given to
Ricaredo. But that Lady would not render her the reason, until that she had
granted her request; and that then she would make it known unto her. The
Queen longed to know the cause of that her demand. And therefore after that
the Lady had obtained that which she much desired, she recounted to her
Majesty the love that her Son bare to Isabella; and how that she feared that
if she were not given him to wife, he will either grow desperate to his utter
undoing, or do some scandalous act or other. And that whereas she had craved
those two days of delaying the business, it was only to this end and purpose,
that her Majesty might have time to think upon some course, what might in her
Majesty's wisdom be most sit and convenient for her Sons good.

The Queen made answer, that if she had not past unto her her royal word, she
would easily have found a way to get out of that laborinth. But that she would
neither break her promise with her nor yet defraud Ricaredo of his hopes, for
all the interess of the World.

This answer the Lady of the Bedchamber gave her Son, who flying instantly
from his Mother, ^rying in the flames of love and jealousy* armed himself at
all points; and being mounted upon a fair and strong limmed Horse, pr^ented
himself before the house of (...). And with aloud voice, requested that
Ricaredo would come to the window that he might speak a word with him* who at
that instant was all in his gallantrie, like a bridegroom, and was even upon
the point of going to Court, with such company as such a solemnity required.
But having heard a loud call, and being told who he was that called unto him,
and in what kind of fashion he came; being somewhat troubled with it, he came
to the window; whom as soon as Arnesto saw, he said unto him.

Ricaredo, hearken well unto that which I shall now tell thee. My Mistress the
Queen commanded thee to go forth in her service, and to do such noble
exploits as should make thee worthy of deserving, the not to be paralelled,
incomparable Isabella. Thou did go, and returnedst with thy ships laden
with gold, wherewith thou think that thou have bought, and deserved Isabella.
And albeit the Queen my Mistress has promised her unto thee; it was as being
persuaded, that there was not any one in Court that has done her better
service, nor any that with better title may deserve Isabella; and herein it may
very well be that she was deceived. And therefore leaning to this opinion,
which I hold for an approved* truth, I tell thee; that thou have neither done
such things as may make thee to deserve Isabella; neither can thou do any
which may be able to raise thee to so great a height of happiness. And
therefore in regard that thou nor do, nor can deserve her; if thou shall
avouch the contrary, I challenge thee the field, and defy thee to the death.
And here the Earl ended his speech; and Ricaredo made answer thereunto after
this manner.

This challenge (my Lord) does in no manner of wife concern me; for I
ingeniously confess, that I not only not deserve Isabella; but that there is
not that man (...) living in the world that does deserve her. So that I
confessing that to be true which you say, this your challenge (...) way
touches me; yet notwithstanding I accept of it, for that your insolency, and
indiscretion which you have showen in this your challenging of me.

And with this he withdrew himself from the window, and called in all haste for
his Arms. This unexpected cross accident much troubled his Parents, and all
those that were come to Clotaldo's house, to accompany Ricaredo to the Court.

Amongst those many that had seen the Earl Arnesto armed, and had heard the
challenge he had made; there were not some wanting who acquainted the Queen
therewith. Who commanded the Captain of her Guard that he should go presently
and apprehend the Earl. The Captain made such good haste, that he came just
in the very nicke, when as Ricaredo was going out of his house, armed with
those arms wherein he disimbarqued, being mounted on a goodly Horse.

When the Earl saw the Captain of the Guard, he forthwith imagined the cause
of his coming; and determined (if possibly he could avoid it) not to be
apprehended. And speaking aloud to Ricaredo, said.

Thou now feast ( Ricaredo) the impediment which hinders us from deciding this
quarrel. If (notwithstanding this interruption) thou shall have a mind to
chastise me, thou will seek after me* and I shall have the like mind to
chastise thee, and seek likewise after thee; and since two that seek after
each other, are easily found; let the execution of our desires ^urecase for the
present.

Content, replied Ricaredo.

By this time the Captain was come in with all the Guard, and told the Earl
that he must yield himself his Prisoner; for in her Majesty's name he was to
apprehend him* The Earl yielded himself unto him; and told the Captain that
he submitted himself to her Majesty's Command; but with this condition, that
he should not carry him to to any otherplace, save the Queens Presence.

The Captain remained therewith satisfied, and carrying him in the midst of
the Guard, brought him to Court before the Queen. Who had already been
informed by his Mother, of the great love which her Son bare to Isabella; and
with tears besought her Majesty that she would pardon the Earl, who being a
young man, and deeply in love, was liable to far greater errors. Arnesto
was brought before the Queen, who without entertaining any speech with him,
commanded his sword to be taken from him, and afterward sent him to Prison.

All these things tormented the heart of Isabella, as likewise of her Parents,
who so suddenly saw the sea of their quietness troubled.

The Lady of the Bedchamber, Arnesto's Mother advised the Queen, that for to
remove that mischief betwixt her house, and that of Ricaredo, that the cause
thereof might be taken away; which was Isabella, by sending her into Spain,
and so those effects would cease, which now were to be feared.

Whereunto the Queen answered; that for the sending of her into Spain, she
should treat no more on that point; because her fair presence, and her many
graces and virtues* gave her great content; and that doubtless, if not that
very day, the next following, without all fail she would marry her to
Ricaredo, according to the promise she had made him.

With this resolution of the Queens; Arnesto's Mother was so disheartened and
discomforted, that she replied not so much as one word. And approving that for
good, which she had already forecasted in her mind, that there was no other
way, no other means in the world, for the mo^ifying of that rigorous condition
of her Son, nor for the reducing of Ricaredo to terms of peace, save by
^aking away of Isabella. She determined to put in practice one of the greatest
cruelties that could ever enter into the thought of any noble woman, and
especially so principal a one as she was. And this her determination was, to
make away Isabella by poison. And because it is commonly the condition of women
to be speedy, and resolute in what they go about; that very evening she gave
Isabella poison in a certain Conserve, forcing her in a manner to take it,
telling her that it was excellent good against those passions of the heart,
wherewith she seemed to be troubled.

Having satisfied her importunity, within a little while after that Isabella
had taken it, her tongue and her throat began to swell, and her lips to grow
black, her voice hoarse, her eyes troubled, and her stomach and bowels
tormented with gripings; all manifest signs and tokens that she was poisoned.

The Ladies came to the Queen, acquainting her Majesty how it was with her;
and certifying her, how that the Lady of her bedchamber who had the charge of
Isabella, had done her this ill office. There needed not much pressing to
induce the Queen to believe that it was true; and therefore went presently to
see Isabella, who was almost breathing her last.

The Queen commanded her Physicians should be sent for in all haste, and in
the mean* while before they came, she caused a quantity of the powder of
Vnicornes-horne to be given her, and some other preservatives* against poison,
which great Princes use always to have ready at hand, upon the like cases of
necessity. The Physicians came and applied their best remedies, and besought
the Queen that she would be pleased to cause that Lady of her Bedchamber to
make known unto them what kind of poison that was which she had given her;
for it was not to be doubted that any other person but her self had poisoned
her. She did discover what she had given her; and having notice of it, the
Physicians applied so many and such effectual remedies, that by the in and
Gods helping hand, Isabella remained with life, or at least in good hope of
having it.

The Queen commanded her Bedchamber woman to be apprehended, and to be locked
up in a straight and narrow lodging in her Court, with intention to punish her
according to the nature and quality of this her soul offense. Although that
she sought to excuse her self by saying, that in killing Isabella she did
sacrifice to the gods, by ridding the earth of a Christian; and together with
her, removing the occasion of her Sons further quarrels.

This sad news being brought to Ricaredo, made him almost out of his wits;
such were the things he did, and such were the complaints he made.

In conclusion Isabella did not lose her life, yet the poison had gotten that
power over her, that she lost the hair of her head, and of her eyebrows, her
face was strangely pufft up, the grain of her skin spoiled, her complexion
marred, her whole body mightily swollen, and her eyes distilling watery humors.
In a word, she was grown so soul and ill favored; that she, who till then
seemed to be a miracle of beauty, did now seem to be a monster of ugliness.
And they who knew her before, held it the greater misfortune of the two, that
she remained in this evil plight, then if she had dyed of the poison.
Notwithstanding all this, Ricaredo sued a new unto the Queen for her, and
besought her Majesty that she would give him leave to carry her home to his
house, because the love which he bare her, passed from his body to his soul;
yet comforted himself with this, that though Isabella had lost her beauty, yet
could she not lose her infinite virtues.

Thou say o^t crew, replied the Queen, go take her home with thee Ricaredo,
and make account that thou carryest with thee a most rich jewel in a course
case. I would have given her as sayre to thee, as thou deliveredst her unto me.
But since this is not possible* forgive me that faul^* happily the chastisement
which I shall give to the com^ of this soul (...), shall in part satisfy thy
desire of ^nge.

Many things did Ricaredo say unto the Queen, seeking to excuse the Lady of
her Bedchamber, beseeching her Majesty to pardon her, since that the reasons
she alleged in her excuse, were sufficient for to move her to forgive her
greater excesses then these.

In conclusion, Isabella and her Parents were delivered unto him, and Ricaredo
carried them home, I mean to his Fathers house. To those rich Pearls, and
that Diamond, the Queen added other jewels, and other changes of raiment;
which were such, and so costly, that they discovered the great love which she
bare to Isabella, who remained for the space of two months, without being able
to be reduced to her former beauty. But the time being past, her skin
began to peele and fall away, and a fair and smoothe grain of skin to
disclose it self.

In this interim, Ricaredo's Parents presuming that it was not possible that
Isabella should become the same woman which heretofore she was; resolved to
send for that Northern Damsel, with whom before that ever they treated with
Isabella, Ricaredo (by agreement) was to marry. And all this they did without
his knowledge, not doubting, but that the present beauty of this new bride,
would blot out of his Sons remembrance, that of Isabella, which was now past;
whom either they purposed to send into Spain, together with her Father and
Mother, giving them such store of wealth and riches, as should fully recompense
their former received losses*

There passed not above a month and a half, when as without Ricaredo's
privitie, the new spouse entered within his Fathers doors, accompanied like her
self, very well, and so fair and beautiful a creature, that next to
Isabella, when she was in her prime, there was not the like unto her in all
^dclin. Ricaredo was mightily startled with the sudden and unexpected sight of
the Damsel, and feared least the suddenness of her coming* would put
Isabella into some passion, and make an end of her life. And therefore, for to
remove this fear, he went to the beds-side where Isabella lay; and finding her
only accompanied with her Father and Mother before them, he spoke unto her
after this manner.

Isabella of my soul; my Parents out of the great love which they bear unto
me, being not as yet well informed of that exceeding love which I still bear
unto thee, have brought a Damsel into this house, with home they have treated
and concluded to marry me, before that I should know the worth that is in
thee, or that thou should recover thy lost health. And this they have done
(as I verily believe) with intention, that the great beauty of this Damsel
should blot thine out of my soul, which is therein so deeply engraven. I (
Isabella) from the very instant that I loved thee, it was with another kind of
love then that which has its aim, and end, in satisfying the sensual
appetite. For albeit, that thy corporal beauty did captivate my senses; yet
thy infinite virtues were they which imprisoned my soul; so that if being
fair I did love thee, being now foul I adore thee. And for the further
confirming of this truth, give me this hand, and she giving him her right hand,
and and he holding it fast in his, prosecuted his speech, saying. By that faith
which my Christian Parents taught me; and by that true God who hears what we
say, I promise thee (my dear Isabella) the one half of my heart, I vow my
self thy Husband, and am so even from this very hour, if thou will raise me
to that height of happiness to be thine.

Isabella remained in some suspense upon these words of Ricaredo, and her
Parents amazed and astonished, she knew not what to say, nor do any other
thing, save her often kissing of Ricaredo's hand, and telling him with a voice
intermingled with tears, that she accepted him for hers, and rendered her
self to be his servant. Ricaredo kissed that her foul face, which when it
was fair, he durst never presume to touch. Isabella's Parents with tender and
many tears solemnize this nuptial feast. Ricaredo told them, that he would
put off his marrying with the Northern Damsel which was now in the house, in
such manner as he would hereafter give them to understand. And in case that his
Parents should send all three of them into Spain, that they should not decline
it, but by all means get them go; and that they should look for him within
two years, either in Cadiz, or Sevilla; assuring them in the word of a
Gentleman, that ere that time were expired, he would not fayleto be with
them, if Heaven should so long lend him life: and that if the time prefixed
should be preterlapsed, they should then rest assured, that some great
impediment or death, which was the more certain, had crossed his intended
journey.

Isabella made him answer, that she would not stay only two years for him,
but all those of his life, till that she were truly certified, that he had
left this life. And that, in that instant that this should come to her
knowledge, the same likewise would be her death.

With these kind words, fresh tears fell from them all. And Ricaredo went and
told his Parents, that he would by no means be married, nor give his hand to
the Northern Damsel to be his Spouse, till he had quieted his mind by a
years travel. He knew well how to express himself, and gave them such good
reasons for it; as likewise to the Parents that came with Clisterna (for that
was the Damosells name) that being (as they were) all Christians, they did
easily give credit unto them; and Clisterna was contented to remain in her
Father in Laws house, till Ricaredo should return, who craved a years time.

This being thus concluded and greed upon, Clotaldo told Ricaredo, how that he
was resolved to send Isabella and her Parents to Spain, if the Queen would
give him leave so to do. For (said he) peradventure the air of her own
Country will hasten and facilitate her health, which she now began to
recover. Ricaredo, that he might not give any the least inckling of his
designs, answered (though but coldly) his Father, that he should do that
which seemed best in his own eyes; only he besought him, that he would not
take ought of those riches from Isabella, which the Queen had bestowed on her.
Clotaldo promised he would not; and that very day he went to crave license of
the Queen, as well for the marrying of his Son to Clisterna, as for the
sending of Isabella with her father and mother into Spain.

The Queen was well contented with both his requests, and approved Clotaldo's
determination. And that very day, without calling her Bedchamber woman in
question* She dismissed her of her service, and condemned her (besides the
loss of her place) in ten thousand Crowns to Isabella. And the Earl Arnesto,
for his challenging of Ricaredo, She banished him for six years. Four days
were scarce spent and gone; but that Arnesto was upon the point to go to cumply
with his banishment, having already taken order for the returning of his money.

The Queen commanded a rich Merchant to come unto her that dwelt in Mundolin,
who had very good correspondencie in France, Italy, and Spain; to whom She
delivered ten thousand Crowns, and required of him bills of exchange, for the
returning of them to Isabella's Father in Sevilla, or in any other part of
Spain. The Merchant discounting his interrest and profit, told the Queen that
he would make certain and sure payment of them in Sevilla, by bills of
exchange upon another French Merchant, his correspondent, in this manner and
form, viz That he would write to Paris, to the end, that the bills might be
made there by another correspondent of his, because they would accept and allow
of those that came from France, but not from this Island; by reason of the
prohibition of commerce betwixt those two kingdoms* (...) that a letter of
advice from him should serve the turn, by (...) mark that passed between them
two; and that without any more ado the Merchant of Sevilla should give him the
moneys, who should be advised thereof ^om Paris.

In fine, the Queen took such good security of the Merchant, that she made
no doubt of the true payment of it. And not contenting herself with this, She
sent for the Master of a Flemish ship that lay in the River, and was to put
forth the day following for France, only to take testimony thereof in some
Port, that he might be the better able to pass into Spain, under the title
of coming from France, and not from the Island; whom she earnestly entreated
to carry with him in his ship Isabella, and her Parents, and that he should
use them well and kindly, and land them in Spain at the very first place he
should come at on that Coast.

The Master who desired to give the Queen contentment, told her that he would
do it, and that he would land them either in Lisborne, Cadiz, or Sevilla.
Having taken sufficient security of the Merchant, and assurance from the
Master; the Queen by way of message, sent unto Clotaldo, that he should not
take any thing of that away from Isabella which She had given her, as well in
jewels as in clothes.

The next day came Isabella, with her Father and Mother to take their leave of
the Queen, who received them with a great deal of love. The Queen gave them
the Merchants letter, and many other gifts, as well in money, as other curious
dainties for their voyage. And Isabella with such courtshippe thanked her
Majesty, that she left the Queen a new obliged unto her, for to continue her
favors still toward her. She took her leave likewise of the Ladies; who now
that she was grown disfigured, would not that she should have left them,
seeing themselves free from that envy which they bare unto her beauty, and
would have been very well content to enjoy her gifts of wit, and discretion.
The Queen embraced all three of them, and recommending them to their good
fortune, and to the Master of the Ship; and desiring Isabella to advertise
Her, of her safe arrival in Spain, and from time to time, of her welfare,
by the way of the French Merchant; She took her leave of Isabella, and her
Parents; who that very evening Imbarqued themselves, not without the tears of
Clotaldo, and his Wife, and of all those of the House, of whom she was
extremely beloved.

At this their taking of their leaves, Ricaredo was not present, who that he
might not make show of his tender heartedness, and manifest his sorrow;
procured some of his friends to go abroad that day a hunting with him. The
Regalos which the Lady Catalina gave Isabella for her voyage were many, her
embracings infinite, her tears in abundance; her entreatings that she would
write often unto her, without number. And the thanks rendered by Isabella and
her Parents, were answerable thereunto; so that though weeping, they left each
other well satisfied.

That night the ship hoysed sail, and having with a prosperous gale of wind
touched upon the coast of France; and there taking in such provisions as were
necessary for their voyage into Spain; within 30. days after they entered the
bar of Cadiz, where Isabella and her Parents dis-imbarqued themselves. And
being known by all those of the City, they received them with expressions of
much content. They received a thousand parabienes of the finding out of
Isabella, and of the liberty which they had gotten, being first captivated by
the Moors, and afterward by the Northern Islanders. Having been made
acquainted with all the passages of that business, by those Captives whom the
liberality of Ricaredo had set free.

Now Isabella in the mean while began to give great hopes of returning to
recover her former beauty. They remained but a little more then a month in
Cadiz* refreshing themselves of their weariness in their voyage; and then they
went to Sevilla, for to see whether the payment would prove good of the ten
thousand Crowns* which were to be put to the account of the French Merchant,
who had undertaken for to see it disbursed. Two days after their arrival at
Sevilla, they enquired after him, and found him, and gave him the French
Merchants letter, he did acknowledge the bill; but told them, that until he
had received letters from Paris, and a letter of advise, he could not let them
have the money, but yet that he looked every moment to be advertised thereof.

Isabella's Parents had hired a very fair house, right over against Santa
Paula; by reason that there was a Nun in that Monastery, a near kinswoman
of theirs, who had the only rare and sweetest voice in all Spain; as well that
they might be near unto her, as also for that Isabella had told Ricaredo, that
if he should come to seek her, he should find her in Sevilla; and that her
Cosen the Nun of Santa Paula would direct him to her house. And that for to
know where to find her, he needed not to give himself any further trouble,
then to enquire after that Nun which had the best voice in the Monastery,
because this token could not easily be forgotten.

It was forty days, before letters of advise came from Paris, and within two
days after they were come, the French Merchant delivered the ten thousand
Crowns to Isabella, and she them to her Parents; and with them, and some other
which they had got together, by selling some of those many of Isabella's
jewels; Her Father began again to follow his trade of Merchandise, not without
the admiration of those who knew his great losses.

In conclusion, within a few months, he went repayring his lost credit, and
Isabella's beauty returned to it is former perfection. Insomuch, that when any
speech was had of fair Women, all of them gave the Laurel to the North Isle
Spaniard, who was as well known by this name, as she was for her beauty
throughout the whole City.

By the order of the French Merchant of Sevilla, Isabella, and her Parents writ
letters to the Queen of the North Isle, of their safe arrival in Spain; with
such acknowledgments, and submissions at her Majesty's feet, as the many
favors from her received, did require. They likewise writ to Clotaldo, and to
his Lady Catalina, Isabella styling them her Father and Mother, and her father
and mother them their lords. From the Queen they received no answer, but from
Clotaldo and his Wife, they did; whom in their letters gave them the parabien
of their safe arrival. Certifying them besides, how that their Son Ricaredo
the next day after that they had hoised sail, was gone for France, and from
thence to pass to some other parts of Christendom, whether it was fitting for
him to go, for these ttling and securing of his conscience. Adding to these,
other discourses and complements of much love, and affection, besides many
other fair and friendly offers. To which letters of theirs, they made answer
with another, no less couteous and loving, then thankful.

Isabella presently imagined, that Ricaredo's leaving his Country, was to come
to seek her out in Spain, and feeding her self with this hope, she began
to lead the most contented life in the world, and studied to live in such sort,
that when Ricaredo should come to Sevilla, he might sooner hear the good
report that went of her virtues, then come to the knowledge of her house.
Seldom or never did she go out of doors, unless it were to the Monastery;
she reaped no benefit by any other Jubilees, save those which she gained by the
Monastery. From her house, and from her oratorie, she went more with her
meditations, then her feet. She never visited the River, nor walked to the
Triana; she never went to see the common pastimes in the field de Tablada* nor
to see the parts of Xeres; nor to go if it were a fair day, to the feast of
Saint Sebastia, celebrated by so many people, as can hardly be reduced to any
number. But spent all her whole time in retyrednesse, in prayers, and good
desires, still looking for the coming of her Ricaredo.

This her great retyrednesse, did set on fire and inflame the desires, not
only of those young gallants of that street where she dwelt, but of all those
that had but once had a sight of her. Hence grew night-musicke at her window,
and day careers with their ^ennets. And from this her not suffering her self
to be seen, and from others much desiring to see her, increased their seeking
out of cunning Bawdes which were Mistresses in their Art, and promised to show
themselves no less in soliciting Isabella. And there were not some wanting,
who endeavored to bring this their wicked purpose to pass by witchcraft,
charms, sorcerie, and the like lewd courses. But against all these, Isabella
was like a rock in the midst of the Sea, against which the waves and the
winds dash and beat, but do not move it.

A year and a half was now past, when the approaching hope of those two
years promised by Ricaredo, began with more earnestness then hitherto it had
done, to vex and grieve the heart of Isabella. And whiles she was now and
then thinking with her self that her Husband was come, and that she had him
before her eyes, and asked him what was the cause that hindered his coming,
and had kept him so long from her. And while again she imagined the just
excuses that Ricaredo made her for his long absence, and how willingly she did
believe, and receive them, and how lovingly she embraced him in her arms, and
hugged him in her bosom, as being the half part of her own soul. Then, even
then when she was thinking on these Love fancies, a letter came to her hands
from the Lady Catalina, bearing date from Mundolin some 50. days since. It
was written in the tongue of the Island, but she reading it in Spanish, saw
that it spoke thus.

Daughter of my foul, thou know very well Guillarte (...) Page, he went
along with him in this his journey. And by a Former of mine unto you, I
advertised you, that Ricaredo made for France the second day after your
departu^* and from thence was to travel farther. Now this his servant
Guillarte at the end of sixteen months; in all which time, we had no news of
our Son, came home to us yesterday, and brought us these sad tidings, that
the Earl Arnesto had by treachery killed Ricaredo in France. Now then
(Daughter) consider in what case his Father, my self, and his Spouse are in
with this heavy news; being such, I say, that they have not left us any hope
of putting this our misfortune in doubt. That which Clotaldo, and my self
entreat of you again, and again, is; that you will truly and earnestly
remember Ricaredo, who well deserves this good office from you, considering
how dearly he loved you, as you your self best know. You shall likewise
beg of God, that he will give us patience, and bring us to a good death; to
whom we likewise will make the same request; and humbly beseech him, that he
will give unto you, and your Parents, many long and happy years of life.

By the letter, hand, and seal, there was not any the least doubt left to
Isabella, for not giving credit to the death of her Husband. She knew very well
his Page Guillarte, and knew that he was true and trusty, and that in his
own nature he hated a lie, and that he had no reason in the World for to
feign that his death; and as little, his Mother Lady Catalina; being that it
imported nothing to send her such sorrowful news. In conclusion, no discourse
that she could make with her self, nothing that she could imagine, could put
it ou^ of her thought, that this unfortunate news was not true.

Having ended the reading of her letter without s^ng a ^are, and without
showing any signs of ^ow* with a composed coun^nance, and with (to appearance)
a quieted and contented mind, (...) a^se (...) the (...) where she (...)* and
kneeling down (...)* she man a solemn v^w to live a single li^e, (...) that
(...) ^ght lawfully do it being now a widow.

Her Parents dissembled t^ir grief, and covered that sorrow, with the cloak
of discretion, which this sad ^ewes had caused in them, that they might be the
better able to comfort Isabella in this bitterness of her soul. Who being now
as it were fully satisfied of her sorrow* moderating it with the resolution
which she had put on, she fell to comforting of her Parents, to whom she
discovered her intent. But they did advise her, that she should not put it in
execution, until that those two years were over-past which Ricaredo had set
down for the term of his coming; for thereupon much depended the confirming
of the ^uth of Ricanedo's death, and she might then with the more safety and
security, change this her estate.

Isabella followed their counsel, and the six months and a half which
remained for the accomplishing of the two years, she spent them in the
exercises of a religious Damsel; and for the better preparing and ^itting of
her self for her entering into the Monastery; having made choice of that of
Santa Paula, where her Cosen was.

The term of the two years was expired, and the day was come wherein she
was to take upon her the habit; the news whereof was spread throughout the
whole City, amongst those who knew her by fight, and by those that knew her
only by repor^ Now the Monastery stood not far off from (...) house* and her
farther ^viting (...) friends* and they others* (...) had one of the noblest
and most honorable train^s to accompany her thither, as in the like occasions
was ever seen in Sevilla.

There accompanied her the Assistante, the Deane of the Church, and the
Vicar-generall of the Archbishop, and all the Ladies and gentlemen of title
and quality that were in the City; so great was the desire that all of them
had, to see that sun of Isabella's beauty, which had so many months been
ecclipsed. And because it is the custom and fashion of those Damosells which
go to take the habit, to be as gallant and as bravely adorned as possibly
they can devise; who as one, that ever after from that instant sets up her
rest, and takes her leave and farewell of all braverie, and wholly discards it.
Isabella was willing (that she might not break so ancient a custom) to trick
and set forth her self in the best and most curious manner that possibly she
could invent. And therefore she did put on that gowene and kirtle, and those
rich dressings which she had on when she went to Court, which we have
heretofore told you, how rich, how sightly, and how magnificent it was. There
came forth to public view, those orient Pearls, and that glittering Diamond,
with the Carkanet, chain, and girdle, which likewise were of great value.

Isabella went out of her house on foot, for her being so near unto the
Monastery, excused Coaches, and Caroches. The concourse of the people was so
great, that it repented them that they had not taken Coach, for they would not
give them way to get to the Monastery. Some blessed her Parents, others Heaven
that had enriched her with so much beauty; some did stand on tiptoe for to see
her, others, having seen her once, ran to get before, that they might see her
again.

But he that showed himself most solicitous in this kind, and so much, that
many took notice of him for it; was a man clad in one of those habits which
they wear, who return home redeemed from their Captivity. This Captive then
at that very time that Isabella had set one foot within the Porch of the
Covent, whether were come forth to receive her (as the use is amongst them) the
Prioresse, and the Nuns; with a loud voice he cried out, stay Isabella, stay;
for whilst that I shall be alive, thou can not enter into any Religious
order. At the hearing of these words, Isabella and her Parents looked back,
and saw that cleaving out his way through the thickest of the throng, that
Captive came making toward them; whose blew round bonnet being fallen off,
which he wore on his head, he discovered a confused and entangled skeine of
golden wyered hayres, curling themselves into rings, and a face intermixed with
crimson, and snow, so pure red and white was his complexion; all of them
assured signs and tokens, inducing all of them to take, and hold him to be a
stranger.

In effect, one while falling through too much haste, and then getting him up
quickly again, he came at last where Isabella was; and taking her by the hand,
said unto her. Know thou me Isabella? look well upon me; behold, that I am
Ricaredo thy Husband. Yes, I know thee (replied Isabella) if thou art not a
phantasma, a walking spirit, or some false assumed apparition, that is come to
disturb my repose. Her Parents drew nearer and nearer unto him, and did view
and eye him very narrowly; and in conclusion, came certainly to know that this
Captive was Ricaredo; who with tears in his eyes, falling down on his knees
before Isabella, besought her that the strangeness of that habit wherein she
now saw him; might not be a bar to her better knowledge of him; nor that this
his mean and baser fortune, should be a hinderance to the making good of that
word and faithful promise, which they had given and plighted each to other.

Isabella (maugre the impression which Ricaredo's Mothers letter had made in
her memory, sending her the news of his death,) chose rather to give more
credit to her eyes, and the truth which she had present before her, then to
trouble her self to make a further needless inquiry. And therefore kindly
embracing the Captive, she said unto him. You doubtless (sir) are the man who
can only hinder my determination; since that you are truly my husband* you
can be no less then the better half of my soul. I have thee imprinted in my
memory, and have laid thee up in my heart. Come therefore (sir) unto my
Fathers house, which is yours; and there I will deliver up unto you the
possession of my person.

All these words the standers by heard, together with the Assistante, the
Deane, and the Archbishops Vicar-generall of Sevilla. At the hearing whereof,
they were all of them stricken with admiration, and stood a while as men
astonished; and were desirous that it might presently be told them, what
history this, and what stranger that was, and of what marriage they treated.
Whereunto Isabella's father made answer, saying; that that history required
another place, and some time for to tell it. And therefore besought them, since
that they were so willing to know it; that they would be pleased to return
back with him to his house, being that it was so near, and that there it
should be recounted unto them, and in such a manner, that with the truth
thereof they should remain satisfied, and at the strangeness of that
success, amazed.

This was no sooner said, but that one of those there present, spoke aloude,
saying. Gentlemen, this young man is a great Pirate, for I know him well
enough; and this is he, who some two years since, and somewhat more; took from
the Pirates of Argiers, that ship of Portugal, which came from the Indies. Ye
need not doubt that this is the man, for I confidently tell you that I know
him; for he gave me my liberty, and money to bring me home to Spain; and did
not only free me, but 300. Captives more, furnishing them with victuals, and
moneys. With these words the vulgar were in an uproare, and the desire afresh
revived, which all of them had to know and see such intricate things as these
to be fully cleared.

In fine, the Gentlemen of more especial rank and quality, with the
Assistante, and those two principal Churchmen, returned back to accompany
Isabella to her house, leaving the Nuns sorrowful, and weeping, that they had
lost so ^ayre a Sister, and companion as Isabella. Who being come home, and
having brought the Gentlemen into a spacious large Hall, entreated them to sit
down; and albeit Ricaredo was willing enough to take upon him the relating of
this desired history; yet notwithstanding it seemed good unto him, rather to
trust Isabella's tongue and discretion with it, then his own, who did not very
perfectly speak the language of Spain. All that were present were in a still
silence, and having their cares and souls ready prepared to hear what
Isabella would say, she began to recount the story; Which I reduce briefly to
this; that she delivered all that unto them, which happened from the day that
Clotaldo by stealth carried her away from Cadiz till her return thither
again. Not omitting the battle which Ricaredo fought with the Turks, and the
liberality and bounty which he had used toward the Christians, and the faith
which both of them had plighted each to other, to be man and wife. The promise
of two years, the news which she had received of his death; and that so
certain to her seeming, that it put her into that course which they had so
lately seen, of professing her self a Nun. She did endeare the Queen of
the North Islands bounty toward her, and the Christianity of Ricaredo, and his
Parents. And ended her speech, with desiring Ricaredo that he would relate what
had befallen him, from the time that he left Mundolin, until this very
present; wherein they saw him clad in the habit of a Captive, and with a badge
in his breast, betokening that he was redeemed by way of Alms.

It is true as you say, replied Ricaredo; and in a few short words, I will
sum up unto you my many and great troubles. After that I went out of Mundolin
for to excuse the marriage which I could not make with Clisterna, with whom
Isabella told you my Parents would have me to marry, taking Gu^arte along with
me; that Page, who (as my Mothers letters made mention) brought the news to
(...) of my death. Crossing France, I came to Rome; where off those two
thousand Crowns which I had in gold, I delivered a thousand and six hundred
to a Banker, who gave me a bill to receive so much in this City, upon one
R^qui a Florentine. And with those 400 which remained* with me, with intention
to come for Spain, I made for Genoa; whence I had notice given me, that there
were two Galleys of that Signorie to go for Spain.

I came with Guillarte my servant, to a certain Town called Aquapendien^e*
And in an Inn where I alighted, I found the Earl Arnesto, my mortal enemy;
who with four servants went disguised, and went (as I conceive) to Rome, I did
verily believe that he had not known me, I shut my self up in my lodging with
my servant, and there kept my self close, and with a great deal of care and
vigilancie, and with a determination and purpose, at the shutting in of night
to get me gone, and to change that my lodging for a safer. But I did not do
it, because the great carelesenesse which I observed in the Earl, and his
followers, did assure me that he did not know me. I supt in my lodging, I made
fast the door, stood upon my guard with my sword in my hand; I recommended my
self to God, and would not that night go to bed. My self and my servant lay
down on a bench to take a little rest and sleep, and my self was half
fallen a sleep.

But a little after midnight, they awakened me with purpose to make me sleep
an eternal sleep. Four pistolls (as I afterward understood) the Earl and
his servants discharged against me, leaving me for dead; and having their
horses already in a readiness, they presently put ^oot in stirrup and went away;
bidding the Host of the Inn, that he would see me fayrely buried, for that I
was a man of principal note and quality. My servant (as mine Host afterward
told me) awakened with the noise, out of very fear leapt down from a window*
that looked out into a base Court, crying out; oh miserable and unfortunate
that I am! they have slain my Lord and Master; and having said this, he hyed
him out of the Inn, and that with such fear, and haste, that he did not so
much as look back, or make any stay till he came to Mundolin; so that it was
he who brought the news of my death.

They of the Inn got up, found me shot athwart my body with four bullets,
and wounded with many other lesser shot; but all of them lighting on such
parts, that there was not one mortal wound amongst them all. They cured me,
but it was two months and better, before I was able to travel.

At the end whereof, I came to Genoa, where I found no other passage, save in
two small boats, which my self, and two other principal Spaniards hired; the
one to go before as a Vessel of advise for discovery, and the other we went
in our selves. With this security, we embarked our selves: sailing along the
shore* with intention not to ingulfe our selves; but coming over against that
place which they call Las Mtres arias, or the three Maryes, which is on the
Coast of France. Our first boat going forward to see if she could discover any
thing; in an unluckie hour, two Turkish Galleys that lay lurking there in a
little creek of the Sea under the Rocks; and the one of them putting her
self forth to the Sea, and the other keeping close by the land; when they saw
our drift that we meant to run a shore, we were prevented in our course, taken
by the Turks, and stripped of all that we had even to our naked skins. They
rifeled the boats of all that they had, and suffered them to run a shore,
without offering to sincke them, saying; that they would serve another time to
bring them another Galima, (for by this name they call those spoils and
booties which they take from the Christians.)

Ye may very well believe me, if I tell you that I felt in my soul the
soreness of my captivity; and above all, the loss of those certificates, and
provisions I received at Rome, which I brought along with me, lapt up in a
little box of plate; as likewise my bill of exchange for a thousand and six
hundred Crowns. But as good luck would have it, they lighted into the hands
of a Christian Captive a Spanyard, who kept them safe; for if they had once
come to the Turks fingering, I should at least have given for my ransom, as
my bill made mention of. They brought me to Argiers, where I found the Fathers
of the order of the blessed Trinity, treating of the redeeming of Christian
Captives; I spoke with them, I told them who I was; and moved out of charity,
though I was a stranger unto them, they redeemed me in this form and manner
following. They gave for me three hundred Ducats, one hundred to be laid
down presently; and the other two, at the next return of the Ship that
should come to redeem the Father of that society, who remained in Argiers,
engaged in four thousand Ducats more then those that he brought with him; for
to such great pity and compassion extended the charity of these men, that
they give their own, for other folks liberty, and remain themselves Captives,
for to free others from Captivity. And for an addition of this happiness of
my liberty, I found my lost box, with my certificates, and my bill also of
Exchange. I showed it to that holy Father who had ransomed me; and I offered
him five hundred Ducats more then my ransom came to, toward the payment of
his engagement.

It was almost a year ere the Ship of alms returned; and that which in the
interim happened unto me, if I should go about to recount it now unto you, it
would be another new History. Only I will tell you that I was known of one
of the 20. Turks whom I had set at liberty, with the rest of the Christians
before mentioned* But he was so thankful, and so honest a man, that he would
not discover me. For had the Turks known that I was the man that suncke their
two Galleys, and took out of their hands that great ship of In^ia; they
would either have presented me to the great Turk, or have taken away my life.
And to have presented me to the great Turk, had been the loss of my liberty
during life.

In conclusion, the father that did ransom me, came to Spain with me,
together with other 50. redeemed Captives. In Valencia we made a general
procession, and from thence every one went his own way which he liked best,
with these ensigns and tokens of their liberty, which are these poor kind of
habits. This day I came to this City, with so great and earnest a desire to
see my espoused Isabella; that without any other thing detaining me. I
enquired for this Monastery, where I was to have notice given me of my Spouse.
That which herein has befallen me, ye have already seen; that which
remains to be seen, are these certificates in the plate-boxe which I told
you of; and with that he put them into the Deanes hand, who preserved them
together, with the Assistante, who did not find any thing in them, that might
make doubt of the truth of that which Ricaredo had delivered unto them. And for
further confirmation thereof, Heaven had so ordained it, that the Flore^
Merchant was present at all this, upon whom the bill was for the payment of
1000. Ducats; who entreated that they would let him see the bill; and they
showing it him, he presently acknowledged, and accepted it, for it was many
months since that he had order for it. All this was but to add admiration to
admiration, and amazement to amazement.

The Assistante embraced Ri^, and (...) Pa^, and her self; all of them in very
courteous language offering them their service. The like did the (...) Clergy
(...), and (...) (...) that she would set down (...) story in writing, that
the Archbishop might read it, which she promised she would. The people from
the highest to the lowest giving the parabien to Isabella, Ricaredo, and their
Parents, they took their leaves. And they on the other side besought the
Assistante, that he would honor their wedding with his presence, which some
eight days hence they did purpose to celebrate. The Assistante was very well
pleased with the motion; and within eight days after, accompanied with all the
highest and principal persons of the City, he waited on them to Church.

By these turnings and windings, and by these circumstances, Isabella's Parents
recovered their Daughter, and were restored*to their former wealth; and she
assisted by her many virtues, in despite of so many inconveniences, lighted
on a husband, of such especial rank and quality as Ricaredo. In whose
company (it is said) she still lives in that house which they rented right
over against Santa Paula, which since they bought of the heirs of a gentleman
of B^rgos, called Hernando de Cifuentes.

This Novell may teach us, what great power virtue, and beauty have, since
that both of them together, and each of them by themselves are of force, to
make even their enemies in love with them. As likewise how that heaven knows
from the greatest adversities and afflictions, to draw the greatest benefits,
and comforts.

The end of the fifth Book.
THE JEALOVS HUSBAND.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
IT is not many years since, that out of a certain Town in Estremadura,
issued a Gentleman borne of noble Parents; who like another Prodigal, through
diverse parts of Spain, Italy, and Flanders, went spending and wasting as well
his years, as his wealth. And in the end, after his many perigrinations, and
travells, (his Parents being already dead, and his patrimony consumed;) he
came at last to reside in the great City Sevilla, where he found sufficient
occasion to waste and consume that little of his substance which he had left.

Now seeing himself in some want of moneys, and not having many friends, he
had recourse unto that remedy whereunto many other decayed persons, and such
as are broken in their estates commonly have recourse. To wit, to go for the
Indies, the refuge and protection* of all your (...), and (...) people of
Spain, the sanctuary of Banker-rupts, the safe conduct of murderers, the
cloak and cover for your cunning gamesters, to whom some give the name of
cheaters; the common lure whereunto your looser women stoop, the general
deceiving of many, and the particular relieving of few.

In conclusion, coming thither in that time, and just as it were in the very
nicke when as the Fleet was putting forth to sea, to make for the West Indies,
or Tierra-F^me (as the Spaniards call it) having agreed with the Admiral
thereof, (upon what terms and conditions I know not) he furnished himself
with all such necessary sea-provisions as were fitting for so long a voyage;
and having sent them aboard, embarked himself at Cadiz, bidding Spain
farewell. They weighed anchor, and with a general joy (having as fair a wind
as heart could wish) they hoysed sail, and it was not long before they had
lost the sight of land, and found themselves prosperously ploughing the waves
in those spacious plains of that Grandfather of waters, the vast Ocean.

This our thoughtfull passenger revolving in his mind, and calling to his
remembrance the many and diverse dangers which in those former years of his
travells he had passed, and the ill courses which he had taken throughout the
whole course of his life, and what an ill governed young man he had been;
having fallen into this account with himself; and seeing what a bad reckoning
he was like to make of it, did put on a firm and constant resolution to change
his former course of life, to turn over a new leaf, and to alter his wonted
style in spending, and to look a little better then heretofore he had done, to
that wealth and means which God should be pleased to bestow upon him, and to
proceed with a little more wariness and circumspection then hitherto he had in
those his loose and expencefull entertainments of women.

The Fleet was in a manner becalmed, when Feli pede Carrizales (for that is his
name who ministers occasion of matter to this our story) had this storm and
tempest within himself. Well, the wind returned to take new breath, putting
the ships forward with such force and violence, that they left no man surely
fetled in his place. And therefore Carrizales was enforced to leave his
imaginations, and to suffer himself to be carried away with those cares only,
which this his voyage offered unto him; which was so successful, that without
receiving any bylets, or hindrances, they happily arrived at the Port of
Cartagena.

And for to let pass all that which makes not for our present purpose; I say
that when Felipe went for the Indies, he was 48* years old. And in those ^0.
ensuing years whilst he remained there; by his industry and diligence, he
grew to be worth a hundred and fifty thousand Ducats.

Now then, seeing himself in so rich and plentiful an estate* touched with
that natural desire which all men have to return home to their own native
Country, not regarding the great proffers, both for his private profit, and
his public preferment which were offered him. Leaving Per^, where he had
gotten such great store of wealth bringing it along with him, all in bars of
gold and silver* and seeing it registered, for to quit all inconveniences, he
returned for Spain, landed at S. Lucars, and came unto*(...) villa, as well
laden with years, as wealth. What he brought thence appropriated to himself,
at the unlading of the Galleons he had quiet possession given him, without any
the least disturbance or interruption of officers. He inquired after his
friends, and found them all dead; he had a great mind to go to his own
Country, though he had already received news that death had not left him any
one kinsman alive.

And if when he went for the Indies poor and necessitated, many thoughts
troubled his brains, not suffering him to be at quiet one minute of an hour
in the midst of the waves of the Sea, no less did they now vex him being on
land, though the cause were different; for then he could not sleep for
thinking on his poverty, he could not now take any rest for thinking on his
wealth. So heavy a load is riches to him that has not been acquainted
therewith, nor knows not how to use them, as poverty is to him who lives in
continual want. Gold brings cares with it, and cares oppress him who wants
it; but the one are remedied by having some moderate quantity thereof; and the
other augmented, by having too much of it.

Carrizales his mind did run often upon his wedges of gold, and did as often
eye them, but not that he was miserable* because in those few years wherein he
had been a Soldier and followed the wars, he had learned to be free, and
liberal; but what he should do with them, because for to keep them still in
their being, would be altogether unprofitable; and to keep them at home in his
house, would be but a bayte for the covetous, and atempting prey for theifes.

The desire of returning to the troublesome and unquiet trade of merchandise
for the gaining of more wealth, was wholly dead in him; and considered with
himself, that being of those years that he was, he had money more then enough
to maintain him well and plentifully, during the remainder of those days that
he had to live*

Otherwhiles, he was minded to carry it with him into his own Country, and to
put it out to profit, spending therein the years of his old age in rest and
quietness, giving unto God that which he could, since that he had given to the
World more then he should.

On the other side, he bethought himself of the scarcity and poverty of his
own Country, and that the people round about him were very poor and needy;
and that for to go to live there, was but no make himself the^ But^, and
mark of all those importunities which the poor do commonly give the rich,
who is near neighbor unto them; and more especially, when there is no other
in that place, to whom they may repair for the relieving of their miseries.

Again, he would feign have one, to whom he might leave his wealth after
his own days were ended* This desire running often in his head, and having
now taken fast hold on him; he consulted with his own strength, finding
himself (to his seeming) able enough to undergo and bear that heavy yeake
of^ wedlock. But he had no sooner entertained this thought of Matrimony, but
instantly such a great fear came upon him; that as a Cloud is scattered and
driven away by the wind, so vanished this his thought. For in his own
natural disposition, he was the most jealous man in the world, though being
as yet unmarried; and now with only the bare imagination of being a married
man, jealousies began to offend him, suspicions to trouble him, and strange
fancies to vex and torment him; and with such great effecacie and vehemency,
that he was now quite off the hinges* and fully resolved with himself never
to Marry*

And having put on this resolution, but not being resolved what course to
run, or what manner of life to lead; his fortune had so ordained it, that
passing one day along the street, he should cast up his eyes, and see a
Damsel standing in a window; being to his seeming about thirteen or
fourteen years of age, being of so pleasing a countenance, and so fair and
beautiful, that good old Carrizales being not able to defend himself any
longer; yielded up the weakness of his many years to those few of Leonora,
(for this was the name of that beautiful Damsel) And presently without any
further detention, he began to heap discourse upon discourse, and talking
with himself, said.

This young maiden is very fair, exceeding hansome, and very well favored* and
by the outward show which this house makes, I conceive they are none of the
richest that dwell therein; she is young, her tender years may secure my
suspicions; I will marry her, shut her up close, and mold her to my mind; by
which means she shall not come to have any other condion, save that which I my
self shall ^each her. I am not so old, that I should lose the hope of having
Children to inherit my estate; whether she bring a dowry with her or no, it
mattereth not, neither make I any reckoning of it, since that Heaven has dealt
so liberally with me, that I have (if enough be enough) enough and to spare.
And such as are rich, ought not in their marriages to seek after wealth, but
their own liking and content, for this lengthneth man's life; whereas the
contrary is the bane of wedlock, and shortens the days of those that are so
coupled together. No more I say, the Die is cast, and this is the chance which
Heaven has given me.

And having this soliloquie with himself, not once, but a hundred times over
and over. After some few days were over-past, he had speech with the Parents
of Leonora, and came to know that though they were poor, yet were they of a
noble Family; and giving them an account of his intention, and of the quality
of his person, and means; he entreated them to give him their Daughter to wife.
They required time of him for to inform themselves of that he had delivered
unto them; and that he likewise should do the like, for the better assuring
himself of the truth of their nobleness.

So for the present they parted; and the parties having well informed
themselves each of other, they both found what they had said to be true. And so
in conclusion, Leonora came to be the Spouse of Carrizales; having first
endowed her with twenty thousand Ducats, so hotly was the heart of this jealous
old man, set on fire with the love of L^a. Who had scarce given his hand to be
her Husband, but that on the sudden a troop of ^aging jealousies set upon him,
and began without (...) cause given him, to shake and tremble* and to be
afflicted with more and greater ca^es, then ever he ^ad been (...) bled with
heretofore.

And the first manifestation which he made of his jealous condition, was; that
he would not suffer a Taylo^ to (...) measure of those many changes of garments
which he was minded to make for this his young wife. And therefore went eying,
if he could mee^ with any other woman that was little more or less of the
same size and stature; answerable to that of Leonora; at last he lighted on a
poor Maid, near about her pitch; causing a Taylour that was a very good
workman, to take measure of her, and to make one whole suit fitting to her
body; that done, bringing it to his wife, he wished her to put it on; she did
so* In fine, he found that it did fit her to a hair; and thereupon, according
to that measure, he caused the rest of her clothes to be made; which were so
rich, and so many, that the Parents of the espoused, held themselves exceeding
happy, in having lighted upon so good a Son in Law, both for their own, and
their Daughters better good and maintenance.

The young married wife was much amazed, wondering to see such a deal of
gallantry; because in all her life before, her best wear was a gown of Rash,
and a Taffata-Kirtle.

The second token of his jealousy was, that he would not bed his wife, till
he had brought her home to his own house, which he had ordered in this form
and manner. He bought one, which cost him Twelve thousand Ducats, being seated
in a most principal place of the City, with a curious Garden belonging unto
it; in the midst whereof was a fountain, beautified round about with Grapes,
Oranges, and Lemmons; diversified with sundry sorts of flowers, and fruits p^g
to the eye, and pleasant to the taste. He d^mmed up all the windows that
looked out toward the street, and had no other light, but what the rooms
received over head from Heaven. The like course he took with all the rest in
his house. In the Po^all of the street (which in Sevill they call Casa-puerta)
he made a stable for one Mule, and over it he built a little Tallet, or
Hay-loft, with a lodging chamber joining close to it, where he was to lie and
make his abode, who had the charge thereof, being an old Negro, and an ^unuch.
He raised up his walls to a great height, leaving the roof open; so that he
whosoever he were that entered into the house, must behold Heaven by a direct
line, without being able to see ought else. He made a Tornill (such as your
Nuns have in their Monasteries) which from the Casa-puerta, or open Portall,
did butt upon the inner Court* He had bought very rich housholdstuffe
wherewithal to adorn his house; so that for hangings, Carpets, Canopies,
Chaires, Stools and all other utensills, all was Lord like, costly, and
substantial.

He bought likewise four white female slaves, and burned them with a hot iron
in their cheeks and forehead, setting his mark upon them; and other two
Blacke-Moore she slaves, who knew no other language but their own, save a
little broken Spanish. He covenanted with a certain Caterer to buy and bring
him in his household provision so his diet; but with this condition, that he
should not lodge in the house, nor enter thereinto no further then the Tornill,
where he was to deliver in what he brought.

This being done, he put out part of his moneys to use, in good and sure hands;
and part of it in bank, reserving a good round sum to lie still ready by
him upon all occasions that should offer themselves unto him. He also caused
one master-key to be made for all the whole house, and did lock up under that,
all that whatsoever he did buy in gross and in their due seasons, for the
provision of the whole year.

And having thus ordered and disposed all things according to his own mind,
he went to his Father in la^s house and demanded his wife. Her Parents
delivered her up unto him; not with a few tears, because it seemed unto them
that they carried her to her grave. Tender h^ted Leonora, both in heart, and
years knew not as yet what had happened unto her; and so weeping for company
with her Parents, she craved their blessing; and taking her leave of them,
attended by her slaves and servants, her Husband lending her his arm, led her
home to his house.

Whereinto he was no sooner entered, but Carrizales made a speech unto all his
servants; recommending the guard of Leonora to their charge, willing them that
in no hand they should admit any one to enter within the second door, no not
the Negro, though an ^unuch. And she to whom more especially he reco^mended the
keeping and cherishing of Leonora, was a Beldame of much prudence, and
gravitie; whom he had entertained to be as it were a governesse to Leonora, and
a superintendent, or over-seer of all whatsoever was to be done in the* house,
and to have command over the slaves, and other two Damosells of Leonora's age;
to the end that she might entertain her self with those of her own years,
whom he had made choice of for that purpose.

He promised that he would treat and use them well, and that he would regular
them all in such sort, giving them such good content, that they should not
risent this their retyrednesse. And that on festival days, they should
without fail go to hear Mass; but that was so early in the morning, that
the light could scarce come to see them.

His servants and slaves promised him that they would do whatsoever he should
be pleased to command them, without any the least repining, with a very prompt
and willing mind. And the new married wife shrinking up her shoulders, and
bowing down her head, said; that she had no other will save that of her
Husband, and Lord, whereunto she would ever be obedient.

This prevention being made, and good Carr^zales n^w fully se^led in his own
house; he began to enjoy as well (poor man) as he could, the (...) o^ (...)
a^rimonie.

Thus did she pass away the time with her Governesse, Damosells, and Slaves;
and they, that they might pass it over the bet^es, (...) themselves with good
cheer; and few days past over their heads, wherein they did not make a
thousand Q^hoses, whereunto their honey, and their Sugar which they had in most
plentiful manner* gave a very da^tie and delicate relish.

There was no lack of any thing that was needful, they had enough, and more
then enough, and their master was willing that it should be ^o; opinionating
with himself, that by this his liberal and large allowance, he should keep
them entertained and occupied without having cause given them, whereby to call
to (...), or so much as once think of this their close imprisonment.

Leonora, look what her servants did, the same did she; she had no other
company, and was therefore forced to entertain the time with such
entertainments as they thought fittest. Nay such was her simplicity, that she
fell to making of babies, and other the like childish things, which showed the
plainness and harmlessenesse of her disposition, and the tenderness of her
years. All which gave exceeding great satisfaction to her jealous husband; it
seeming unto him, that he had hit right in chosing the best kind of life that
he could possibly devise, or imagine; and that by no manner of means, either
humane industry, or malice, could disturb his quiet; and therefore did only
study and beat his brains, to bring home rari^ies, and dainties to please
and content his wife, entreating her that whatsoever she had a mind to, she
would acquaint him with it, and she should have it whatsoever it cost him,
holding nothing she desired to dear for her.

Those days wherein she went to Mass, (which was as has been said, between
the two lights) her Parents came, and there in the Church talked with their
Daughter, but still before her husband, that he might be an ^are-witnesse of
what they said; who gave them so many gifts, that although they did much pity
their Daughter, and inwardly grieve at that restraint wherein she lived; yet
did they dissemble this their distaste, and bare their sorrow the more
patiently, by reason of those many great gifts and favors which their liberal
Son in Law Carrizales continually conferred on them.

He used to rise betimes in the morning, staying within till the Dispensero
came, whom over night by a scroll or bill which he left in the Tornell, advised
him what he should bring the next day. And as soon as the Dispensero was come,
and and dismissed; Carrizales instantly got him out of doors, and for the most
part a foot, leaving those two doors toward the street shut, and that in the
middle, and between both remained the Negro.

He went abroad about his businesses, which being few, were soon dispatched, so
that he quickly returned home again; and shutting up himself, he retained
himself in regalaring and making much of his wife, and in cheering up his
servants, who loved him very well, and wished him all happiness; because his
carriage was plain, and pleasing; as also, for that toward all of them he was
so liberal and bountiful. Thus had they now passed one whole year of their
Noviciation, or Probationorshippe, and now made profession of that kind of
life; having resolved with themselves to continue therein till the end of his;
and peradventure would have made good this their determination, if that subtle
and cunning perturber of humane peace had not hindered it, as by and by you
shall hear.

Tell me now, he who takes himself to be the discreetest and wariest amongst
men, what better or surer preventions could old Carrizales have used for to
make all safe and secure, since that by no means he would not permit that
within his house there should be any one creature that was a Male? no, not so
much as a Cat to persecute the Mice, nor a little dog to lie in his wifes
lap to sport and play withal, all these were of the feminine gender, none of
the masculine; save only himself. In the day he mused much, in the night he
slept little; he was the watch and centinell of his house, and the Argos, who
had still a vigilant eye over her whom he so dearly loved. Never did any man
come within his doors, no not so much as into the outward Court. With his
friends and acquaintance he did negociate and treat in the open street.

The figures in those his hangings which did adorn his Hall, and other his
with drawing rooms, and chambers, were all Females, Flowers, Trees, and the
like Boscageworke. All his whole house did smell of honesty, retyrednesse, and
reservednesse; yea, even in those ^ales which in the long and tedious nights of
winter his servants told by the fire side, to pass away the time; for that he
was present, not in any one of them was uttered any the least kind of
lafcivious or wanton word.

The silver of the old man's hoary hayres, to the eyes of Leonora seemed to be
of pure gold; because the first love which Virgins enjoy, leaves an impression
in their soul, as a seal does in wax. His strict guard upon her, seemed to
her to be advised circumspection; for she did think and believe, that what
passed with her, the like passed with all those that were newly married. Her
thoughts never went a gadding beyond the walls of her own house; nor did her
will desire any one thing, save what was her husbands pleasure. Only those
days which she went to Mass, she saw the streets; and this too was so
^arely, that unless it were in her return homeward from Church, there was not
light enough to behold them. Never was there seen any Monastery so close kept,
never any Nu^s more retired, nor those golden Apples of old so narrowly watched;
and yet notwithstanding all this, he could in no ^ise prevent nor avoid the
falling into that which he so much feared, at least in thinking it to be so.

There is a certain kind of idle people in Sevill, handsome proper young men,
well both borne, a dclad, who in a braverie and gallantry, take great pride and
glory in cou^ing women; seeking by all possible means to win those beauties
to their will, whereunto they stand affected. This they make their study, and
therein employ the utmost of their wits.

Now one of these gallants (a single man) had taken notice of this house of
wary Carrizales, and finding it always shut; he had a great itching desire
to know who lived there within: and using his best diligence, but with a great
deal of caution, and cunning, he came to a full knowledge of that which he
desired; informing himself of all the particular passages point by point. All
which did but kindle a greater and more enflamed desire in him, to see if it
were possible to win by force, or industry; a fort so well and strongly
guard^.

And acquainting two or three other of his friends of the some feather with the
business, and of his purpose; they did encourage and hearten him on, for to
put it in execution* for in such kind of actions, counselors, and helpers
are ^ildome wanting. The maine difficulty which offered it self unto them,
was the manner that was to he held* for the a^pting and undertaking of so hard
and dangerous a (...) of service. And having entered often into consulration,
and sat in counsel what cours^ we^ ^st to be taken, with a joint consent,
they agreed as ^st on ^his.

That I (...) (^or so was this young gallant called) ^ning to go out of Town
for some certain time should remove himself from the sight of his friends and
acquai^ (...), and so he (...) ^his being done (...) pu^ (...) on a pair of
drawers next to his body of very (...) white linen, and a clean shirt of
curious (...) Holland; but on the top of them, he had such ragged and
tattered clothes, so patched, and so peeced, that the poorest beggar in the
City, had none so (...) He had cut away a pretty part of his beard, clap^
over one of his eyes a black patch, bound up one of his legs very straight
with swathes one upon another; and resting his body on two crutches, he
personated a poor lame cripple; and acted that part so well, that none that
were truly so taken in their limbs, could come near him.

In this disguise and posture, night by night he prayed at Carrizales his
door, which he found still shut. The Negro (whose name was Luys) remaining
mewed up between the two doors; there Loaysa leaning his back against it,
took out a little Ghitterne out of a greasy ^ase, the instrument being none
of the cleanest, wanting besides some strings; and for that he had some smatch
of music, he began to play some merry and lively tunes, and to sing
thereto certain pretty songs, and choicest ditties that he could, changing
the tone of his voice that he might not be known.

Things being thus ordered, he fell anon after to sing some pleasant witty
Ballads of Moors, and Mo^sh Women; and that with such an odd^ kind of grace,
and gesture, and varying of the (...), that as many as past along that street,
made a stand to he^ him; and all the while he continued singing, your boys
and gi^les, and younger sort of people flocked about him, hemming him in on
every side. And (...) ^he Negro, laying his ea^ as close as he^ could (...) two
doors; was so mightily taken with this m^sicke, that he would have opened the
door wi^h a (...) good will, and did endeavor it ((...)) that he might to his
greater contentment more fully hear it; such, and so great is the inclination
which your Negro's naturally have unto music. And when Loaysa was willing
that they who heard him, should leave him; he left off his playing and singing,
put up his Ghitterne, and betaking him to his crutches, went his way.

Four or five times he had given music to the Negro, and only for his sake
did he give it; it seeming unto him, that the place where he was to begin to
make a breach in in this building, must be by the Negro, nor did his thought
therein deceive him; for coming one night as he was wont to the door, he
began to fall a tuning of his Ghitterne, and perceived that the Negro was
already very attentive; and drawing near to the hindge of the door, in a low
voice he called unto him, saying; I prithee (good Luys) if it be possible give
me a little water, for I am ready to perish for thirst; and am so dry, that I
am not able to sing one note.

No, I cannot (replied the Negro) though my life lay upon it; for I neither
have the key to this door, nor is there any the least hole or crannie whereby
to give it thee.

Who then (said Loaysa) has the key? My master (answered the Negro,) who is
the most jealous man in the World. And if he should but know that there were
any body now speaking here with me, it were as much as my life were worth, he
would not let me live one hour longer. But who are you that beg this water of
me?

I (replied Loaysa) am a poor cripple, lame on one of my legs, which is so
benumbed, that I have no sense or use of it, getting my living by begging for
Gods sake, an alms of good and well-disposed people. And besides (which is no
small comfort and help for my better maintenance) I teach some Moors, and
other poor people to play on the Ghitterne, and now at this present I have
three slaves, all Negro's, some young, some elder; whom I have taught in such
sort, that in any Tavern or other drinking school wheresoever they come, they
can sing to any tune and play any dance they call for, who have paid me very
well for my pains.

I would pay you much better (said Luys) had I but the opportunity to learn;
but that is not possible, because my Master when he goes forth in the morning,
shuts the door to the street; and when he returns he does the like, leaving
me immured between two doors.

I swear unto thee Luys (replied Loaysa) for he kn^w before hand the name of
the Negro, if thou could but think upon, or devise any means how I might
get in, in the night time, to teach thee to take out some lessons, I would in a
fortnight make thee play so well on the Ghitterne, that thou should not be
ashamed to play at the corner of any street whatsoever in Sevill; for I would
have thee to know, that I have an excellent gift in teaching. And moreover,
(which will be a good help) I have heard that thou art very apt to learn, and
of a nimble and quick apprehension; and by that which I perceive already, if I
have any judgment in me, that organ of thy voice tells me, that it is a
treble, and should therefore sing wondrous clear and well.

I have none of the worst voices I tell you, (answered the Negro) but what good
does that do me, since that I know no other tune, save that of Estrella de
Venus, and that of Por un verd^ prado, and that which is now most in use; A los
hierros de una reia la turbada mano a^ida.

All these are toys (quoth Loaysa) and not worth a pin, in comparison of those
that I can and will teach thee. For I know all those of the Moore Abiudarraez
with those of his Lady Xarifa, and all those which are sung touching the story
of the Grand So^i Tomuni^eyo, together with those of the Zarabanda, so highly
esteemed; which are such ^avishing tunes, that the Port^eses themselves are
rapt therewith, and are for the time as it were in a t^ance. And these I teach
with such dexterity, and facility, that though t^ou should be somewhat hard
in apprehending them, and not beat thy brains much about them, thou shall
scarce have eaten three or four bushells of salt; but thou shall see thy self
so improved, that thou shall pass current for one of the best players on the
Ghitterne, of all the Negro's in this Country. Hearing him say so, the Negro
sighed, and said; what booteth all this, since I know not how I shall get thee
into the house?

We may (said Loaysa) find a good re^medy against that rub. Do you but
work the means to get your Masters keys, and I will give you a piece of soft
wax, wherein you shall take the print of them in such manner, that the wards
may remain imprinted in the wax. And then out of the great affection which I
have taken to thee, I will procure a cunning Lock* smith, a friend of mine, to
make the keys accordingly; and so in the night I may come in unto thee, and
teach thee to play better then Prester Iohu of the Indies; for it is a thousand
pitties, that such a voice as thine should be lost, for want of being helped by
the Ghitterne. For I must tell thee (brother Luys) that the best voice in the
World loses of its quilates, when it is not accompanied with some instruments,
be it either Ghitterne, Lute, Harp, Organ, or the like. But that which will
fit best with your voice, is that of the Ghitterne, for that it is the more
handy, and less costly of all other instruments.

I am of your mind for that (replied the Negro,) but that which you propound
can not be done, because the keys never come to my hands, nor does my Master
let them go out of his, day nor night, they sleep with him underneath his
pillow.

Then do this other thing Luys, (said Loaysa) if thou have a mind to be a
perfect and complete musician; if not* I have done, and will not trouble my
self any further in advising thee. Have a mind (answered Luys;) yes marry
have I, and so great, that I would leave nothing undone, no st^ unmoved, on
that condition it were possible that by your means I might come to be a good
Musician. Doubt you not of that, replied Loaysa; I will give you therefore in
at this door, you making way for them, by removing some little quantity of
stone, or earth near the hinges; I will give thee I say, a pair of pi^sars;
and a hammer, wherewith thou may in the dead of the night, pluck out the
nails of the lock with a great deal of facility, and with no less
easiness, fasten them again to the plate in such sort, that it shall not be
perceived that it had been unnayled and taken off. And I being shut up with
you in your Hay-loft, or there where you lodge, and you shall see very shortly
what I can do, and sooner perhaps then I have said, or you can imagine; for
the making good of my promise, the increasing of mine own credit, and your
improvement. And for to have wherewithal to eat and sustain our selves; take
you no care, for I will bring provision enough with me for both of us, which
shall serve us for eight or nine days; for I have scholars and friends (I
thank God) who will not see me want any thing.

As for our diet (replied the Negro) that is the least thing we need to fear;
for what with my Masters allowance, and that which my fellow servants give me
of that which is left, we shall have victuals enough, and to spare, for two
more besides our selves. Do you bring the hammer and p^sars you speak off,
and let me alone for to make way for the getting of them in, and for the
damming up of the place again, that it may not be perceived. And although I
shall be driven to strike some blows with the hammer in taking off the plate;
yet my Masters bedchamber where he sleeps, is so far off from this door,
that it must be either a great miracle, or misfortune, if he hap to hear us.

Well (said Loaysa) let us put that to the venture, and within these two days
( Luys) thou shall have all that is necessary for the putting of this thy
virtuous purpose in execution. And let me advise you to refrain from such
(...) as breed fleag^e; for besides that, in themselves they are not wholesome,
they are very hurtful for your voice. No one thing (replied Luys) makes me so
much hoarse as wine, yet will I not be debarred my drinking of it, for all the
voices in the world.

No by no means (said Loaysa,) it was the least of my thought; God forbid that
I should forbid you so good a thing. Drink (my son Luys) drink, and much good
may it do thy heart; for wine that is drunk with measure, does never cause
any harm. Nay I drink it with measure I assure you (replied the Negro;) for I
have a jarre, which being filled to the very brimme, holds just three quarts,
and no more, nor no less. And this my fellow slaves bring me unwirting to my
Master. And the Dispense^o ever and anon, but very secretly, furnishes me with
a bottle which holds just a gallon, for a new supply when my jarre begins to
grow low. I tell thee (said Loaysa) just such a k^nde of ^ife do I lead; and
there is no living without it; for, L^ ^ca (...), (...) ^canta, A dry throat,
cannot sing a no^e.

Well, fare you well (laid the Negro;) but one word with you before you go,
see you do not miss singing here night by night, till you bring those ^ooles
with you to work your entrance in hither, for my fingers ends i^ch to be
fingering of the Ghitterne. Mi^e singing (said Loaysa) no, I will dye first;
and to give you the more content when I come next, I will tickle your ears
with other new ^nes. Oh by all means (replied Luys) that will be ex^ New
(...)? tho^ make my heart leap for joy. But I pray th^e do not go hence,
before ^hou have sung (...) song mo^, that I may sleep the better after i^;
and f^ paying you for your pains, believe me though I am (...) poor, I will
pay you better then those the ^re (...)* I d^e (...) upon that (answered
Loaysa) for according (...)* so shall you (...) ^e, and no (...). (...) now
hearken to this tune, and I hope you will like it; but if it be my good hap
once to get in to you, thou shall see wonders; with a very good will (answered
the N^gro.) This large colloquie being ended, Loysa sung a witty conceited
dittie, wherewith the Negro was so well pleased, and satisfied, that he
thought every hour a thousand years, till he might see the door opened.

Loaysa was scarce gone from the door, when as with much more nimblenesse then
his crutches promised, he hastened to give an account to his companions and
counselors, of this his good beginning, as a prognosticke of the good end
which he hoped for. He met with them, finding them altogethe, and recounted
unto them what he had concluded with the Negro. And the next day following, he
fitted him with such instruments, as should pull out any nail, or knap it
asunder, as if it were some small stick. But in the mean while, Loaysa was
not careless in his coming to give the Negro music; nor was the Negro
negligent in making a hole for the receiving of those tools which his Master
should bring him, and to cover it in such sort; that if it were not looked on
with a malicious and suspicious eye, it could never be espied.

The second night Loaysa gave him those instruments, and Luys tried his
strength, and in a manner without putting any force at all, he found the
nails, some pulled out broken, and some whole, and the (...) in his hands, he
oppened the door, and let in his Orphe^s, and new master. But when he saw him
with his two crutches, and so ragged and torn, and his ^egge so hound about
with ^wathes, he was wonder str^ken. Loaysa had not clapped his black patch upon
his eye* because then it was not needful; and thus accountered, as soon as
(...) entered in, (...) hugged his good scholar in his arms, and kissed his
(...) and presently put into his hands a great bottle of wine, and a box of
conserves, with some other sweet meats which be had brought in a ^allet along
with him. And (...) his crutches away from him, as if he had not any
infirmity at all, he began to cut two or three capers, whereat the Negro was
much more amazed then before, admiring what manner of man this should be, and
to what end or purpose he had put on this disguise. To whom (to put him out of
his musing) Loaysa said;

Know (brother Luys) that this my lamenesse, and numbnesse, does not grow from
any infirmity that I have, but of set purpose, I feign my self to be thus
ill affected whereby I get my living, and bread to put in my mouth, begging for
Gods sake. And helping my self with this trick, and my music, I pick out a
pretty means to maintain my self, and lead the merriest life of any man in
the world; whereas they who are not their craft-masters, and use not the like
kind of industry, are ready to starve, and often dye out of mere hunger.
And this thou shall find to be true, as in the discourse of this our
new-founded friendship I shall discover and make clear unto thee.

Time will show it, answered the Negro; in the mean while let us take order to
put this plate again in its own place, that what we have done may not be
discerned. With a very good will, replied Loaysa; and so taking nails out of
his wallet, they fastened the plate so neatly to the lock, that it was just
the same as it was before; wherewith the Negro rested wonderful well
contented. And so Loaysa going up to the Negro's loft, accommodated himself
the best he could. Luys presently tinded a wax candle, and without any longer
tarrying, Loaysa drew out his Ghitterne, and playing upon it with a soft and
sweet touch, suspended the Negro in such sort, that hearing it, he was almost
out of his little wits. Having played a pretty while, he took out a new
collation, and gave it unto his Scholar, who in swallowing down his sweet
meats, drank so deep of the bottle, that it made him more besides himself
then the music.

This being past and ended, he would in all haste, that Luys should begin to
take out his first lesson; and because the poor Negro had four fingers thick
of wine swimming in his brain, he could not hit right upon any one of the
frets, or make any true stop; and yet notwithstanding Loaysa made him believe
that he had learned already two tunes, and the jest was, that the good silly
Negro did verily think so indeed. And all that night, he did nothing else but
fumble on a Ghitterne out of tune, and worse strung, wanting its most
necessary strings thereunto belonging.

That little of the night which was left them, they slept. And about six in
the morning Carrizales came down and opened the middle door, and likewise
that toward the street, and stood waiting there for the Dispensero, who came
anon after; and putting in the provision for the house at the Tornell, he
went thence and called to the Negro that he should come quickly down and take
in the provender for the Mule, and with it his allowance for himself. Which
he had no sooner done, but old Carrizales went his way in great haste, leaving
both doors locked, not perceiving that which was done in that toward the
street; whereof the Master, and his Scholar were not a little glad thereat.

Scarce had the Master of the house got him out of doors, but he hastily
snatched up the Ghitterne, and began to play so loud thereon, that all the
Maids in the house heard the sound thereof; and calling unto him, asked him at
the Tornell. What is this Luys? whence had you this Ghitterne? who gave it you?
Who gave it me (answered Luys) the best Musician living in the world, and one
that has faithfully undertaken to teach me in less then six days, more then
six thousand tunes. But where is this Musician said the old beldame that was
mother of the maids? Not far off, replied the Negro; and if it were not for
shame, and the fear I have of my Master; peradventure I could show him you
with a wet finger, and I vow you would be very glad to see him. But where may
he be, that we may see him, answered the beldame? since that into this house
never entered any other man, save our own Master. You say well Mistress (said
the Negro) but I will say nothing till you see that which I know, sure I am he
has taught me what I told you, in so short a space. Certainly (said the old
Dame) if it be not the Devil that has taught thee, I know not who can make
thee turn so good a Musician, in so short a time. Go, get you gone (quoth the
Negro) for one of these days, you shall both hear, and see him. That cannot
be, replied another of the maids; for we have no windows out toward the
street, either to see, or hear any thing. Very good, quoth the Negro; but yet
let me tell you, that there is a remedy for all things, save against death;
and so much the rather, if you can, or know how to hold your peace. Hold our
peace, (replied one of the slaves,) we will be more silent, then if we were
dumb. I assure thee (brother Luys) that like one that has a longing, I am
ready to dye, to hear a good voice; for since that we have been here mewed
up like so many Hawks, we have not so much as heard the singing of birds.

All this prattle Loaysa heard, to his passing great contentment, it seeming
unto him, that they all tended to the perfecting of his purpose; and that good
fortune had put to her helping hand, in cutting out the cloth according to the
measure of his own will. The Maids went their way upon the Negro's promising
them, that when they least thought on it, he would call them to hear a very
good voice. And fearing least his Master should return* and find him talking
with them* he left them for the present, retyring himself to his lodging. He
would feign have been tampering with a new lesson, but he durst not touch the
Ghitterne in the day time, least his Master might chance to hear him, who came
a little while after; and shutting the doors as he was wont, locked himself up
in his house.

When the Negro had his dinner given him that day at the Tornell, Luys said to
the Negro that brought it him; that that night after that his Master was a bed
and asleep, they should all come down to the Tornell, and that without all
fail they should hear the voice he promised them. True it is, that before he
told them this, he had with most earnest entreaties, besought his Master that
he would be pleased to play and sing that night at the Tornell, that he might
make good his word, and cumply with the promise he had made, that the Maids
should hear an admirable voice; assuring him, that he should be much made of
by all of them.

His master after a great deal of entreating, yielded at last to do that
which the Negro, or rather himself so much desired. Howbeit he made show that
it was only at his scholars request, and to give him content, without any
other interest of his own. The Negro embraced him, and gave him a kiss on the
cheek, in token of the contentment, which that his promised favor had caused
in him; and that day he feasted Loaysa, and made him better cheer then
peradventure he should have found at home.

The night came, and in the midst thereof, little more or less, they began to
hear a whispering about the Tornell; whereby Luys presently understood, that
the whole pack of them were gathered there together. And calling to his
Master, they came both down from the Hay-loft, with a well strung, but better
tuned Ghitterne. Luys ask't who, and how many there were of them that were to
hear him? They answered, they were all there save only their Mistress who was
in bed with her husband; for the which Loaysa was very sorry; yet
notwithstanding, he was willing to give an induction to his design, and to
give satisfaction to his scholar; and so touching with a soft and gentle hand
his Ghitterne, he did play so sweetly, that the Negro wondered thereat, and the
women that heard him were ravished therewith. What shall I say? they thought
when they heard him play loath to depart, and that taking tune of the Zarabanda,
the newest then in Spain. There was not the oldest amongst them which did not
fall a dancing; nor the youngest which did not trick it with their arms a
kembo; but very softly, and with a strange kind of silence, having set
Sentinels, and spies, to give them notice, if the old man should chance to wake.

Loaysa likewise sung a merry pleasant Ballad, wherewith he sealed up the ears
of his Auditors, who earnestly entreated the Negro, that he would tell them,
who was this so rare a Musician? The Negro told them; That he was a poor
beggar, but withal, the gallantest, and bravest gentleman, of all that
beggarly Corporation in Sevill. They then entreated him, that he would so order
the business, that they might come to have a sight of him, and that for a
fortnight he should not let him go out of the house, and that they would
entertain him all that while very well, and that he should lack nothing, that
was needful for him. Then they asked him, how he came to get him into the
house? Hereunto, he returned them not one word; but told them, that if they
had a mind to see him, they should make a little hole in the Tornell, which
afterward they might stop up with Wax; and that he would take it upon him, to
keep him in the house.

Loaysa spoke likewise unto them, offering them his service, in such good
language, that thereby they did perceive, that such words could not come from
the wit of a poor beggar. They entreated him, that he would repair another
night to the same place, and that they would procure their Mistress to come
down to hear him, maugre the light sleep of their Master, which lightness
grew not from his many years, but from those many jealousies that he had in
his head.

Whereunto Loaysa answered, that if he would hear him without fearing the old
man's troubling them, he would give them a powder to put into his wine, that
should make him sleep soundly above his ordinary time. God bless me said one
of the Damsels, if this prove true, what good fortune has entered within our
doors, without our dreaming, or deserving it. This will not be so much a
powder of sleep for him, as a powder of life for all of us; and more
particularly for our poor Mistress Leonora, his wife, who is never from her, ni
a sol, ni a sombra, neither night, nor day, not suffering her to be out of his
sight one sole minute. Oh sweet sir, if ever you will do any thing for us, and
that our best wishes may wait on you in all that you desire or endeavor; bring
this powder, delay no time, bring it, bring it I beseech you, and it shall be
my task to mix it with his wine, I will be his skinker; and I wish it with
all my heart that the old ladde may sleep three whole days, and so many
nights, that we may have as many of mirth and jollitie.

Doubt ye not but I will bring it, said Loaysa, and such a one shall it be,
that it shall do him no other hurt that takes it, save to provoke him to a most
profound sleep. Then all of them jointly besought him, that he would bring it
as soon as possibly he could. And so resolving the next night to bore a hole
with an augour in the Tornell, and to draw their Mistress thither, that she
might see, and hear him, they took their leaves.

And the Negro, though it were near upon break of day, would needs take
forth a new lesson which Loaysa gave him; and withal made him believe, that of
all the scholars that ever he taught, not any one had a better ^are then
himself* yet the poor Negro knew not, nor ever would come to know what a
musical note meant. Loaysa his friends took it to their care, to come nightly
to listen between the two doors of the street, to see if their friend had any
thing to say unto them, or if he needed ought; and making a certain sign,
agreed upon between themselves; Loaysa knew that they were at door, and at the
hole before mentioned. He gave them a short account of the good terms whereon
his business stood; earnestly entreating them, that they would seek out
something that would procure sleep, for to be given to Carrizales. For he had
heard some say, that there were some powders which would work this effect.
They told him that they had a Physician a friend, that would give them the best
that he knew, or had, for that purpose* And so animating him to prosecute the
enterprise he had undertaken, and promising him to bring it him the next
ensuing night they speedily took their leave.

Night came, and the whole flock of Pigeons came at the call of the Ghitterne;
together with them, came that simple soul Leonora, fearful and trembling
least her husband should awake; for though she, overcome with this fear, was
not willing to come; yet so many persuasions did her servants use, and more
especially her Governesse spoke so much in the praise of the sweetness of the
music, and the good disposition of the Musician, that although she had never
seen him, yet she lifted him up above the clouds, and preferred him before
Absalom, and Orpheus. So that the poor Gentlewoman, convinced, and overswayed
by them, yielded to do that which she had no will to do, nor ever would have
had.

The first thing they did, was to bore a hole in the Tornell for to see the
Musician, who was not now in the habit of a poor mendicant, but in a suite of
colored Taffata, bedawbed all over with gold lace, and a hat answerable
thereunto, with exceeding neat linen in his band and cuffes wherewith he came
provided in his wallet; imagining that he might happily meet with some such
good occasion wherein it might be fitting for him to change his habit. He was
young, of a gentle disposition, and a good presence. And (because he had so
much time to friend, that all of them had taken a full view of him,) comparing
him with their old Master; he seemed unto them to be an Angel, one peeped
through the a^gar-hole to see him, and then another; and in conclusion all, one
after another. And to the end that they might view him the better, the Negro
waving his wax candle, one while this way, another while that way, from side to
side, from top to toe, gave them a full and perfect sight of his person.

Now when as they had made an end o^ feeding their eyes, and left further
looking on him; Loaysa betook him to his Ghitterne, and sung that night so
far beyond those other heretofore, that he struck them all, old, and young
with a strange astonishment. And all of them besought Luys, that he would
invent some means how to bring in his Master amongst them, that they might
hear, and fee him nearer hand, and not at that distance, and through so narrow
a hole; as likewise that they may be rid of their fear by being so far off
from their Master, who might suddenly come stealing in upon them and take them
napping; which could not so succeed, if they took him into the house, and hid
him closely amongst them.

But this course was crossed by their Mistress, who mainely withstood it, and
would by no means give way to his admittance amongst them, saying; Content
your selves, can we not as well see and hear him here; sure I am we may do
both with more safety, and ^esse hazard of our honor. What do you talk of
honor? said her Governesse, the King has enough for us all; go I pray and
shut up your self with your Methusalem, and leave us to make merry and enjoy
our selves as we may. And the rather may we give him free entrance, for that he
seems to be so honest a gentleman, that he will no other thing of us, then
what we will our selves.

Hence Loaysa taking his rise, said; Gentlewomen, I am come hither with no
other intention, save only to serve you wi^h my soul, and my life; condoling
with you this your unheard of, and never until now seen the like close
shurting up, pitying the time which in this strickt kind of life ye lose. I
am a man (I swear unto you by the life of my Parents) so mild, so meek, so
plain in my dealing, of so good a condition, and so obedient, that I shall
never do any thing more then what you shall command me. And if any, even the
meanest amongst you shall but say unto me, Master sit down here and stir
not, master pass to this, or that other place of the house, keep you close in
such a corner, lie down and wagge not, I will do as you bid me, and with more
nimblenesse and celeritie, then the tamest dog that is taught to leap and
dance for the King of France.

If he will do as he says (said the as ignorant as innocent Leonora) what
means may we use that this our musical Master may have access unto us? Very
good means, replied Loaysa; do you but get the print of this middledoore-key
in wax, and against to morrow night, I will get another made like unto it,
which shall serve our turn. In taking this one key out in wax, we take out
all the rest to the whole house; because this is the master-key that opens and
commands all, answered one of the Damosells. So much the better (said Loaysa;)
You say true said Leonora. But sir you shall first swear, that you shall not
do any other thing when you are entered in, save only sing, and play when you
shall be commanded; and that you shall submit your self to be shut up, and
to rest there quiet where we shall put you, till we release you. I swear to
keep all this truly, answered Loaysa. Nay, this oath is nothing worth
(replied Leonora;) you shall swear (said she) by the life of your father, and
by the life of your mother* I swear (said Loaysa) by the life of my father,
and by the life of my mother. This done, another of the damosells said unto
him; see (sir) that you do^ not forget the powder, for that is tu autem of all.

With this, ceased the conversation of that might, all resting wondrous well
contented with the consentment which they had made amongst themselves. And
fortune, who from good to better, went furthering Loaysa's affairs, who
brought his friends to that street two hours after midnight; who making
their wonted sign, playing on a Iewes-trumpe. Loaysa spoke unto them, telling
them how things stood with him, and how far he had proceeded in his
pretension; entreating them that they would bring him the powder, or some other
thing which he had formerly spoken for, for to cast Carrizales into a sound
and deep sleep. He acquainted them likewise with that of the master key;
they told him, that either the powder, or an ointment should be brought him
the night following, being of such force and virtue; that the pulses and
temples being anointed therewith, would cause a most heavy sleep, out of
which there was no awaking of a man in two days, save by washing with vinegar
all those parts which had been anointed; and that if he would give them the
key in wax, it should be made out of hand.

This short dialogue being ended, they withdrew themselves; and Loaysa, and
his scholar slept that little part of the night which remained. Loaysa
expecting with great longing that which was to come, to see if they would
cumply with their word concerning the promised key. And tho time seem slow and
lazy to those that wait upon it, yet at last it goes along with our thought,
and comes to meet in that point as we would have it, because it never stands
still, but is still going on.

Well, the expected night was now come, and the accustomed hour of repayring
to the Tornell, whether came all the servants of the house, great, and small,
black, and white, for all of them were desirous to see this our Musician
within their Seraglio, but Leonora came not. And Loaysa asking for her? answer
was made, that she was in bed with her Husband, who had locked the door of his
lodging; and after that he had thus shut it, when he had laid himself down to
sleep, he clapped the key underneath his pillow, and that their Mistress had told
them, that when the old man was fallen fast asleep, she would take from under
him the masters key, and imprint the same in wax; and that for that purpose
she had already prepared it, and made it soft for impression; and that within
a little while after, they should come and fetch it at the out side of the
hole, which was made of purpose in the door, for a Doc-Cat to come in at.
Loaysa wondered much at the wariness of the old man, yet for all this their
desire was not daunted.

Now whilst they were talking of this subject, he heard the Iewes-trumpe; he
hastened to them at that call, and found that they were his friends, who gave
him a little box of ointment, having that property before specified. Loaysa
took it, and wished them to stay a while, and he would bring them a pattern
of the key. He returned back again to the Tornell, and told Leonora's
Governesse, who was she that with most earnestness desired his entrance of
the box* and that she should carry it forthwith to her Mistress, acquainting
her with the property it had; and that she should annoint her husband so
gently with it, that he might perceive it, and she should see it work
wonders. The Governesse did so, and coming to the Cats hole, she found that
Leonora was expecting her, lying all along on the ground, with her face
toward the hole; whether her Governesse being come, she stretched her self
out at length after the same manner, and clapping her mouth to her Mistress
ear, and speaking in a low voice, told her, she brought the ointment, and
after what manner she was to make trial of its virtue. She took the ointment,
and told her Governesse that by no means she could come by her husbands keye,
for he had not put it under his pillow as he was wont, but between the two
Cholcon's, and in a manner under the very midst of his body* but would have
have her tell the Master of music, that if the ointment should work that
effect as he said it would, then very easily could she take the key from under
him as often as she pleased; and therefore it would be needless to take it in
wax. She willed her to go instantly and tell him so, and that she should
return back again to see how the ointment wrought, for presently she would
anoint him therewith. The governesse went down and did her Mistress message to
Loaysa, and thereupon he dismissed his friends, who stood waiting for the key.

Trembling and quaking very softly, and not daring to draw her breath; Leonora
went gently annoynting the pulses of her jealous husband, and likewise
anointed the windows of his nosthrills, and when she came to them, it seemed
unto her that he did startle at it, and was almost dead for fear, that she
should be taken with the theft in her hand. In conclusion, in the best manner
she could, she made an end of annoynting all those places which they had told
her were needful; which was all one as to have embalmed him for his burial.

It was not long ere the ointment had given manifest signs of its virtue; for
anon after the old man began to snore so loud, that the music thereof might
be heard without in the street, which was sweeter in her ears, then that of
the Master in those of the Negro. And yet as one not fully secured by that
which she saw, and heard; she drew unto him, she jogged him first a little,
and then a little more to see if he would a wake; and grew at last to be so
bold, that she turned him from the one side to the other, without waking him.

When she saw this, she went to the hole in the door, with a voice, not so low
as before, she called to her governesse, who was there waiting, and said unto
her; give me albricias, some reward for my good news. Carrizales sleeps as
soundly, as if he were dead. Why then (Mistress) do not you take the key from
under him? said the governesse, the Musician has been waiting for it this
hour, and more* Stay a little (replied Leonora) I am now going for it; and
turning up the bed, she thrust her hand between the two Colchon's, and took
out the key from out the midst of them, without the old man's feeling it. And
holding it in her hand she began to leap for joy, and without any more ado,
she opened the door and presented it to the governesse, who received it with
the greatest gladness and contentment in the world.

Leonora commanded they should open to the Musician, and being let in they
should carry him to the gallery, not daring to be far from thence for fear
of what might happen; and that in any case they should take a new oath of him,
that he should not do ought save what they appointed him, and that if he
should not ratify and confirm it a new, in no manner of wise should they open
the door unto him. It shall be done (said the Governesse,) and I vow unto you
that he shall not enter till that he has sworn, and sworn again. Do not
limit him (said Leonora;) but more especially be you sure that he swear by the
life of his father, and his Mother, and by that which he loves best, for so
shall we rest secure, and we shall have our fill of hearing him sing, and
play; and as I live he does both very delicately. Be gone therefore, without
delaying the business any longer, least we pass away the night only in
talking.

The good Governesse tucked up her clothes, set her best foot forward, and in
a trice came to the Tornell where all the people of the house stood expecting
her. And having showed them the key which she brought along with her, so great
was the contentment they all took, that they all took, that they lifted her
up above ground in their arms, crying, ^ivat, ^ivat, long live our governesse.
And much more were they joy^d, when she told them that there was no need of
counterfeiting the key; for according to the rate of the sleeping of the
anointed old man, they might have the key as often as they would. Good, very good
said one of the Damosells; open this door I pray, and let this gentleman in,
that we may once see him. Be not so hasty (replied the governesse) there is
more in it then to see him, for we must take an oath of him, as we did the
other night. He is so good, and so honest (said one of the slaves) that he will
not stick upon oaths. Hereupon the governesse opened the door, and keeping
it half open, and half shut, she called to Loaysa, who had heard every word
they said through the hole of the Tornell; who coming to the door, would have
entered all at once, but the governesse stopping him by putting her hand against
his breast, said unto him.

Sir, I would have you to know, that all they who are within the doors of this
house, are as true Virgins, as when their Mothers brought them forth, except my
Mistress. And howbeit I may seem unto you to be forty years of age, having
not as yet seen thirty, for I want two months and a half of it. And though
happily I look somewhat old, I may thank the many troubles and crosses which
have followed me; and those you know will add one figure more, if not two to
our years, according as they have been more, or less. And this being so as
it is, it stands not with reason, that in exchange of hearing two, three, or
four songs, we should put our selves to the hazard of losing so much
Virginity, as is here shut up within these walls; for even this Negra, whose
name is Guiomar, is a virgin. And therefore sir, though my heart stands well
affected toward you; before you enter here into our kingdom, you must take a
solemn oath, that you shall do nothing, save what we shall ordain. And if it
seem unto thee, that much is that which we require; consider that much more
is that which we adventure. And if i^ coming hi^her your intention be good,
you need not to be so nice and scrupulous in swearing. Que albu^n paga^r, no le
duelen prendas. For he that is a good paymaster, will never be loath to lay
down a pawn.

Well, exceeding well has our Mistress Marialonso spoken, said one of the
Damosells; and like a discreet woman, as well in this, as all other her
actions; and therefore Mistress if he will not swear, let him not him come in.
Hereupon said Guiomar the Negra, who could speak a little broken Spanish; for
my part swear, or swear not, be he what he will be, let him come in; for
though he swear never so much, when he is once in, he will forget all his
oaths.

Loaysa, with a great deal of patience and temper, hearkened to Marialonso her
long Harvenga; and with a grave reposednesse, returned this answer.
Certainly, (my much honored and respected friends) my intention never was,
is, or shall be other, save to give you liking and content, as far as my
poor abilities can reach; and therefore shall not with an ill will take this
oath you require of me, yet would I rather that you would have trusted me on my
bare word; since that being given by such a one as I am, it should have been
as good, and as warrantable as any bond, or obligation whatsoever. I would have
you to know that under a coarse cassocke, may be a Satin suite; and that a
threadbare cloak, may cover a good drinker. But that all of you may rest
secure of my good desire, I am resolved to swear like an honest man. And
therefore I swear by all that, which in its Proeame the true history of
Charlemaine contains, together with the death of Giant Fierabras, not to
transgress, nor go beyond the bounds of the oath that I have taken, nor to
swerve from the command of the least and meanest of these Virgins; upon pain
that if I shall either in act, or in my desire do otherwise, from this
present, till then, and from then till now* I give it for void, and of no
effect and validity.

So far went Loaysa on with his oath, when as one of the Damosells, who with
attention had given ear unto him, spoke out aloud, saying; this is an oath to
move the hardest stones to tender pity; ill fortune befall me, if I suffer
you to swear any farther, for with that which you have already sworn you may
enter into the sign of Capricorn. And taking hold of his breeches, she pulled
him in, and presently all the rest came flocking round about him; and one of
them went instantly to advertise their Mistress thereof, who stood centinell,
observing her husbands sleeping. And when the messenger told her that the
Musician was come into the gallery, she was at one and the same instant both
joyful, and sad, and demanded if he had taken his oath? She answered, yes; and
in such a new form, as never in all her life she had heard the like. Well
(said Leonora) if he has sworn, we have bound him fast enough. Oh how
advisedly was it done of me, to put him to his oath.

In this interim, came up all the whole troop, and the Musician in the midst
of them; the Negro Luys, and the Negra Guiomar, lighting them up the stairs.
And Loaysa no sooner saw Leonora, but he made speedily toward her, making
show to throw himself at her feet, and tender his service unto her. She
continued silent, and by signs willed him to rise; and al of them were as it
were mute, without daring to speak a word, fearing least their Master should
hear them; which being taken notice of by Loaysa, he told them; that they
might boldly speak aloud, because the ointment wherewith their Master was
anointed, had that force and virtue, that saving the taking away of life, it
made a man for the time, as dead as a doore*nayle.

I believe it said Leonora, for if it were not so, he had awaked twenty times
ere this; since that his many indispositions, cause in him short sleeps, but
since that I anointed him, he snores like a horse* Seeing it is so (said
Marialonso) let us go to that hall which is right over against us, where we
may hear him sing, and recreate our selves a little. Be it so said Leonora;
but let Guiomar stay here and watch that she may advise us, if Carrizales
should chance to awake. Whereunto Guiomar answered; the black must stay,
whilst the white must play. The Negra stayed behind, the rest went to the
hall, where there was a rich Estrado, covered with Turkey Capets, and costly
Cushions whereon to sit; and placing the Musician in the midst in a Chair of
Crimson velvet, they took their places and sat down.

And Marialonso, mother of the maids, taking a light in her hand, she began
to take a view of Loaysa from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot.
Then said one of them; oh what a fine foretoppe, how well colored, and how
stiff it is! Oh said another, what a set of white teeth he has! what a bad
year will this be for blanched Almonds? for his teeth are more clean and
white then they. Then another; oh what a full and clear eye he has! I swear
by the life of my mother, that they are like sparkling Diamonds. This,
commended his mouth, comparing his lips to Rubies; she his leg and foot.
And all of them together dissected the several parts of his body, as if they
had meant to make an Anatomy of him. Only Leonora she was silent, but took
a fuller view of him then any of the rest, fixing her eyes steadily on him; and
the more she looked on him, the more did he seem unto her to be of a better
presence then her aged Husband.

Whilst these things went taking up their contemplations, Marialonso took the
Ghitterne which the Negro held, and put it into Loaysa's hands, entreating him
that he would play thereon, and that she would sing a song which was then in
great request, and mightily applauded in Sevill. The burden of the song which
she sung was; Mother keep me not un^er lock and key. Loaysa cumplyed with
her desire. They all of them rose up, and began to prepare themselves to dance.
Marialonso had the whole ditty by heart, and sung the same with a better will,
then voice. The Verses were these.

Mother, Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
If I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is all in vain.
Set thou never so many spies,
Ore looking me with Argos eyes;
Yet will I find time and leisure,
For to work my will and pleasure.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
If I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is all in vain.
If that mine own well settled will,
Shall not shield me from what is ill;
It is not fear, nor ye^ reward,
That can a woman's honor guard.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
Is I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is all in vain.
Things for bidden we most desire,
Your flames suppressed, augment the fire;
Rivers restrained, do higher rise,
So much does Nature freedom prize.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
If I do not my self contain.
Your watch and ward is al in vain.
The God of Love, will find a trick,
Spite of your teeth, your lock to pick;
Love nere could yet restrained be,
Whose nature it is for to live free.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
If I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is al in vain.
Like to a bodkin in a bag,
Like to a horn in a Stagge,
Or like to blushing in the face,
Love to get out, will find a place.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can h^la what will away?
If I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is all in vain.
Danae shut up in a Tower,
Cupid to show his mighty power,
Caused Jove in a golden shower,
To come and crop her Virgin flower.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
If I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is al in vain.
The Air imprisoned in the earth,
Rips up it is womb to force it is birth;
Thunder tears the clouds, disdaining
Ought should offer it is restraining.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
If I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is all in vain.
A full vessel that has not vent,
Breaks hoope, and rests all torn and rent*
Then strive thou not Nature to force,
For it will return and have it is course.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
If I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is all in vain.
Wherefore (Mother) let me be free,
And live at mine own liberty;
Since there is not that lock and kay,
Which can hold fast what will away.
Keep me not under lock and kay,
For who can hold what will away?
If I do not my self contain,
Your watch and ward is all in vain.

The song being ended, and with it their dancing, wherein the Governesse
Marialonso was their leader; they had scarce un-handed themselves, when lo,
Guiomar their centinell came running in mightily troubled, quaking hand and
foot, as if she had a shaking palsy; and with a hollow and low voice, said; my
Master is awake Mistress, Mistress, my Master is awake; hye you hence, for he is
up and coming hitherward He, who has seen a flock of Doves feeding in the
field, eating without fear what other men's hands have sown* when at the
cracking report of a discharged Piece, are affrighted, and rise and forgetful
of their food, astonished and amazed, betake them to their wings, cleaving
therewith the air* Just so let him imagine remained this flock, and company
of Dancers* frighted and amazed with the unexpected news which Guiomar had
brought them; and every one severally studying their excuse, and all of them
jointly seeking after their safety; one ran to one place, another to another
for to hide themselves in the roofes and corners of the house, leaving the
Musician all alone; who leaving his Ghitterne, and his singing full of
perurbation, knew not in the world what to do, or how to dispose of himself.

Leonora she wrung her fair hands, buffeted the face, tho but softly, of her
Governesse Marialonso. In a word, all was confusion, amazement, and fear. But
the governesse as one more subtle, and had her wits better about her then the
rest; so ordered the business, that Loaysa should be put into her lodging
chamber, and that her self, and her Mistress should abide still in the hall,
and that an excuse should not be wanting to be given to her old Master, in
case he should come and find them there.

Loaysa made presently the best shift he could to hide himself; and the
governesse she was very attentive in listening whether her Master were coming,
or no; and not hearing any the least noise, she began to take heart, and by
little and little, step after step, she went drawing nearer and nearer to the
chamber where her Master lodged, and heard that he snored as he did before. And
being assured that he was asleep, she tuck't up her clothes before, and
returned running, craving albricias of her Mistress, of her Masters being
asleep, whom she willingly rewarded.

The good governesse would not lose that fair opportunity which offered it
self unto her, of being the first enjoyer of those good parts which she
imagined the Musician had. And therefore telling Leonora that she should stay
awhile in the hall, till she went to call him; she left her and went where
he was no less amazed, then pensive expecting the news of what was become of
the anointed old man, and what he did. He cursed the falsenesse of the
ointment, and complained of the credulity of his friends, and accused his own
indiscretion, that he had not first made trial thereof upon some other, before
his experimenting of it upon Carrizales.

Whilst he was thinking on these things, in comes the Governesse, and assured
him that the old man slept more, and better then he did before. His heart was
much quieted herewith, and was very attentive to many amorous words which
Marialonso uttered unto him, whereby he collected her evil intention; and
determined with himself, to make her the hook and line where withal to fish
her Mistress.

Now whilst these two were talking together, therest of the servants who had
hid themselves in diverse parts of the house; one bolted out here, and another
there, to see if it were true that their Master was awake. And perceiving that
all was buried in deep silence, they came to the Hall where they had left
their Mistress, of whom they understood their Masters continuing still asleep.
And asking for the Musician, and the Governesse, she told them where they were;
and all of them with the self same silence and stillness which they brought
with them, went fair and softly, hearkening at the door what they two treated
of.

The Negra Guiomar was not missing at this their parley, but the Negro Luys was
wanting, for he no sooner heard that his Master was awake; but taking his
Ghitterne along with him, he hastened to hide himself in his Hay-loft, and
covering himself over head and ears with his poor bedblanket; he sweated,
and did so sweat for fear, one drop overtaking another, that his shirt was
dung-wet. And yet for all this, he did not forbear tampering on the
Ghitterne, which he hugged close in his bosom, wronging the strings with his
untunable fingering; such and so great (now fie upon him) was the affection
which he bare to Music.

The wenches overheard the courtings and love tricks of the old Beldame,
every one of them sent their bad wishes after her, some in one ill favored
phrase, and some in another; and not any one of them did call her old, but with
an addition of Hagge, Witch, Bawd, and some other worse (if worse could be)
which for good respects I silence.

But that which moved most laughter in those that heard them, were the words
which Guiomar the Negra uttered; who for that she was a Portuguesse, spoke no
good Spanish, yet very unhappily, and in a strange kind of witty manner did
play upon her, taxking her loose and wanton carriage. In effect, the conclusion
of the discourse between these two, was; that he would condescend to her will,
on condition, that she should first deliver up her Mistress to his will. She
offered to effect what he desired; so that in requital thereof, he would
cumply with her desire; for he had already taken such full possession of her
soul, that she cared not what impossibilities she promised, in an imaginary
hope of procuring her own lustful pleasure.

On these terms she left him, and went forth to speak with her Mistress; and
seeing at her first stepping out that all the servants were got together about
her door, she commanded them that they should withdraw themselves to their
several lodgings; and that the next night they should have time enough to
enjoy both their wishes, and the Musician with less disturbance, since that
this night the fear they were put into, had much abated the edge, and sowred
the sweetness of their sport and jollitie.

All of them understood on what foot the old trot halted, and this was but a
shift to rid them thence, that she might be left alone by her self; yet durst
do no otherwise but obey her, because she was mother of the maids, and had the
rule and command of them.

The maids they were gone; the coast being now clear, she came into the hall
to persuade her Mistress to yield unto Loaysa's will; and that in such
partheticall manner in a long continued speech, and in such a smooth and well
ordered a style, as if she had studied it many days before. She indeared unto
her his gentile carriages, the sweetness of his disposition, the vigor of his
youth, his valor, his wit, and his many other graces and good parts.
Furthermore painting forth unto her, how much more sweet and pleasing would
the embracements of a young lover be, then those of an old decrepit husband;
assuring her of all secrecy and duration of delight, with diverse other such
like things as these, which the Devil had put into her tongue; shadowed over
with rethorical colors, and what varnish eloquence could lay upon them; so
demonstrative and so effectual, as might have moved not only the tender heart
of simple and unwary Leonora, but even that of the hardest marble. Oh ye smooth
filed tongues! Oh ye pleyted vayles! the honorable wear of grave Matrons,
chosen out of purpose for to authorize the rooms, and the Estrados of your
principal Ladies; how contrary to your place and duty do ye exercise this
your powerful, nay rather in a manner enforcing office!

Marialonso took her Mistress by the hand, and as it were by force (her eyes
being full of tears) brought her thither where Loaysa was; and shutting the
door after her, she left them there together, but went her self and laid her
down upon the Estrado, to see if she could take a little sleep, but for that
she had watched two nights before, overcome with drowsinesse, she fell fast
asleep on the Estrado.

Now, if at such a time and season as this a man should have asked Carrizales,
had he not been asleep, what is become now of your well advised
circumspections? your fearful jealousies? your wise animadversions? your
pi^hie persuasions? your wise and grave admonitions? What of those high walls of
your house? what of there not entering thereinto any thing that should have the
name, no not the shadow of a man? what of your close kept Tornell? your
master-key? and your window without light? and that your strange and unheard of
shutting up of all your people under lock and key? What of that great Dowry
wherewith you endowed Leonora? Those Regalos, and dainties, wherewith you
continually entertained her? the good usage and liberal allowance of your
servants, and slaves? and your not failing in any one title in all that which
you imagined they could possibly wish, or desire? But we have told you
already, that there was no asking of him these and such other like questions,
because he slept somewhat a longer time then was needful and expedient for
him.

But admit he should have heard all this, and put case he should have made
answer thereunto; he could not have given a better, then in shrinking up his
shoulders, in knitting of the browe, and in saying; All this building, the
subtitle of a wanton and vicious young man, the wickedness of a false and
Devilish Governesse, meeting with the unadvisednesse of an over entreated, and
persuaded young Woman, has utterly demolished, and in an instant thrown down
to the ground.

But yet notwithstanding all this, the virtue and goodness of Leonora was
such, that in that time which was most needful for her, she showed her valor
against those villainous enforcements, and base strivings of this cunning
Impostor; and that with such strong and powerful a resistance, that he was
not able to overcome her, but wearied himself in vain, so that she went away
with the victory; and both of them being quite tired out, and having over
watched themselves, fell fast asleep.

Now when all was thus hush and quiet, Heaven had so ordered it; that
Carrizales in despite of the ointment, awaked; and (as his usual custom and
manner was) he stretched out his arms, and with his hands went feeling the bed
from side to side, and not finding therein his beloved Wife; he leapt out of
the bed all amazed and astonished, with much greater nimblenesse then his many
years promised; and when he found her not in the Chamber, and saw the door
open, and that the key was wanting between the Colchones, he was ready to
run out of his wits. But recollecting himself a little better, he went out
into the Gallerie, and going thence as soft as foot could fall, that he might
not be heard, he came into the Hall where the Governesse was sleeping; and
seeing her all alone without Leonora, he made to the lodging of the
Governesse, and opening the door very softly, he saw that which he could
have wished he might never have seen; he saw that which he would have held a
great happiness that he had no eyes for to see it. He saw Leonora in the arms
of Loaysa, sleeping so soundly, as if the ointment had wrought upon them, and
not on the jealous old man.

Carrizales had quite lost the beating of his pulses, with the unexpected sight
of what he saw, his voice cleaved to his throat, his arms fell down through
faintness, so that he stood still like a Statua of cold Marble. And though
choler did its natural office, seeking to quicken and revive those his almost
dead spirits; yet sorrow did so over-sway his anger, that it would scarce give
him leave to fetch his breath. And yet notwithstanding, would he have taken
such revenge, as so great a wickedness deserved; if he had any weapon about
him wherewith to have avenged himself of the wrong that was done him. And
therefore resolved with himself to return back again to his chamber to
fetch a dagger; and at his return, to take out the stains of his honor, with
the blood of these his two enemies, and together with theirs, that of all that
infamous rabble of his house.

Having put on this honorable and necessary resolution* he returned with the
self same silence, and wariness wherewith he came to his lodging, where
grief and anguish so wrung and oppressed his surcharged heart, that without
any further power to do any thing, he fell down in a swound upon his bed.

In this interim the day appeared, and caught these supposed new adulterers,
entangled in the net of each others arms. Marialonso she awaked, and would
have gone for that to Loaysa, which for the good service she had done him,
she thought of right appertained unto her. But seeing that the day was now
fully in, she was willing to defer the receiving of her recompense, till the
coming of the night.

Leonora was much troubled and perplexed, seeing it was now broad day, cursing
her own carelessenesse, and that of her accursed Governesse, whilst both of
them with hasty steps hyed them thither where her husband was; praying to
themselves as they went along, that they might find him still snoring. And
when they saw him lying on the bed, and not a word come from him, they did
verily believe that the ointment continued its working, since that he slept;
and with great rejoicing, Leonora and Marialonso embraced each other.

Anon after, Leonora drew nigher and nigher to her husband, and taking hold of
one of his arms, she turned him from the one side to the other, to try whether
he would awake, without putting her to the pains to wash him with vinegar, as
she had been told was needful to bring him again to himself. But with that
tumbling and tossing of him too and fro, Carrizales returned from out his
swounding, and fetching a deep sigh, said with a lamentable weak voice; Oh
miserable and unfortunate man that I am! to what bad terms has my fortune
brought me!

Leonora did not well understand what her husband said, but as soon as she
perceived that he was awake, and that he spoke, wondering to see that the virtue
of the ointment did not last so long as was signified unto them; she came unto
him, and saying her face to his, muching him with strickt embracements, she
said unto him; What ayl'st thou sweetheart? me thinks I hear you complain
as if you were not well.

The good old man heard the voice of his sweet enemy, and opening his eyes in
a wild kind of fashion like one amazed, and startled out of some fearful
dream, he fixed them on her with great earnestness, and without moving the
least hair of his eyelids, he looked wissely and steadily on her a great
while, and then at last he said unto her; Let me entreat thee (my dear) that
you presently out of hand send for your father, and mother to come hither to
me, for I feel I know not what in my heart which does pain me exceedingly,
and I fear it will speedily shorten my life: and I would feign see them
before I die.

Doubtless Leonora did certainly believe that what her husband said, was
true; thinking that rather the strength of the ointment, then that which he
had seen, had put him into this trance. And telling him, what he commanded
should be done. She sent away Luys the Negro, willing him that he should
forthwith go to her Parents, and hasten their speedy coming hither, for that
the business required much haste, and their personal presence. Having
dispatched the messenger, she came to her Husband, embraced him, kissed him, and
used toward him greater expressions of kindness then ever she had made show
of heretofore; asking him how he did? where his grief lay? and that with such
tender and loving words, as if he had been the only thing in the world which
she most loved and esteemed. He looked on her in the same kind of wild manner
before mentioned; every word that she uttered, and every muching which she made
of him, being a lance that smote him to the heart, and a sword that wounded his
very soul.

In this mean while, the governesse had acquainted the servants of the house,
and Loaysa with her Masters sickness; indearing unto them, that it would quickly
make an end of him, since that he had forgotten to command the doors toward
the street to be shut, when the Negro went forth to call her Mistress Parents;
wondering withal, why they should be sent for in such post-haste, since that
neither of them had put their foot within that house, since they first married
their Daughter.

In a word, they were all of them very silent, and knew not well what to make
of it, none of them lighting on the true cause of their Masters sickness, who
ever and anon did fetch such deep and doleful sighs, as if every sigh would
have broken his heart strings, and rent up his soul by the roots from his
body. Leonora wept to see him sigh in such sort, and he smiled to himself,
like one that was not well pleased, considering the falsehood of her tears.

Now by this time Leonora's Parents were come, and for that they found the
door to the street, and that to the inward Court open, and the house buried in
silence, and no body to be seen, they wondered at it, and could not tell what
to think of it, no small fears possessing their minds, several passions
housing themselves in their distracted imaginations. Thus troubled, they went
to their Son in Law's lodging, and found him (as already has been
delivered) with his eyes nailed to his wife, whom he held fast by the hand,
both of them shedding many tears. She, on no other occasion, save seeing her
husband shed them; and he, to see how feignedly his wife did let them fall.

As soon as her Parents were entered within the chamber, Carrizales saluted
them, and said; I pray sit you down, and let all the rest void the room, only
I will that the goveruesse Marialonso stay here; they did so. And only these
five remaining there without expecting that any body else should speak, in a
low and soft vocye, (wiping first his eyes) Carrizales spoke unto them after
this manner.

I am well assured (dearest father and mother) that it shall not be needful to
bring any witnesses for to make you believe a truth, which I shall deliver unto
you. You may very well remember (for it is not possible it should slip out of
your memory) with how much love, and with how great tenderness a year now
since, one month, five days, and nine hours, you delivered up unto me your
beloved Daughter, to be my lawful wife. Ye likewise know what a great dowry
I made her; which was such, and in so liberal a manner, that three or four of
the same quality as her self, might therewith have been married, with the
opinion of rich. Ye may also call to mind the care and diligence I took in
apparelling her, and adorning her with all that she can desire or imagine; or
that I could come to know was most fitting and convenient for her. In like
manner (my very good friends) ye have seen, how carried away by mine own
natural condition, and fearful of that ill, which doubtless will be my
death; and experienced by reason of my great age, in the strange and various
accidents of the world; I was desirous to keep this Jewel which I had made
choice of, and ye gave me, with the greatest chariness, and wariness, as
was possible for me to do. I raised up the walls of this house to a great
height? I took away the sight and light from the windows toward the street;
I made double locks to the doors; I made such a Tornell, as they have at your
Monasteries; I banished perpetually therefro, all that which had but the
shadow, or name of man, or male-kinde. I gave her servants and slaves to attend
her person; nor did I deny them, or her, ought that they did ask of me; I
made her my equal; I communicated with her my most secret thoughts, and made
her Mistress of all my wealth and means. All these were such works, being
rightly and duly considered, as might have fully secured me of enjoying of
that without disturbance, which has cost me so much; and that she should have
made it her study, not to have given me any the least occasion of letting any
kind of jealous fear to enter into my thought. But because the chasticement
cannot be prevented by humane diligence, which the divine will of Heaven is
willing to inflict on those who do not wholly place therein their desires, and
hopes, it is no marvel that I remain defrauded in mine. And that I my self
have been the Confectioner of that poison, which now goes shortning and taking
away my life. But because I perceive the suspension wherein all of you stand,
upon these words proceeding from my mouth; I will conclude the long preambles
of this my discourse, with telling you in one word, that which is not possible
to be uttered in many thousands. I tell you then (my noble friends) that all
that which I have said, and done, ends in this; that this woman I found (borne
into the world, for the disturbing of my quiet, and loss of my life) (poynting
to his wife) in the arms of a lusty young man, which is now secretly shut up
in the lodging of this pestiferous Governesse.

Scarce had Carrizales ended these words, when as Leonora having her heart
suddenly clouded, fell into a swound between her husbands knees. Marialonso
lost her color, and looked as pale as ashes; and Leonora's Parents had such a
knot knit athwart their throats, that it would not give them leave to speak
one word.

But Carrizales going on where he left, said, the revenge which I purpose to
take for this foul affront, is not, nor shall be such as ordinarily in the
like cases are wont to be taken. And therefore I will, that as I was extreme
in that which I did; so likewise shall be the vengeance which I will take* by
taking it on my self, as most culpable in this offense. For I should, and
ought to have considered with my self, that ill could agree and sort together
the fifteen years of this young Woman, with the almost fourscore of mine; I
was he, who like the Silke-worme, wrought the house wherein I must dye. Nor do
I blame thee ill advised young soul, (and in saying this, he bowed down his
head, and kissed the cheek of Leonora) I do not blame thee, I say; because
the persuasions of subtle old Beldames, and the love-trickes of amorous young
men, easily overcome and triumph over that little wit which thy few years
afford. But because all the world may see and know the worth and value of that
good will and affection wherewith I ever loved thee; in this last passage of my
life, I will show it in such sort, that it may remain in the world for an
example, if not of goodness, yet at least of such simplicity of heart, as was
never heretofore heard of, or seen. And therefore I will that a Scrivener be
presently sent for, to make a new my last Will and Testament; wherein I will
double Leonora's Dworie: and shall entreat her after my days are ended, which
will be but a few; that she dispose her will (since that she may then do it
without enforcing) to marry with that young man, whom the gray hairs of this
unfortunate old man never offended. And so shall she see, that if living I did
never go one jot from that which I thought might give her content; now dying,
I am desirous to do the like; that she may take that felicity with him whom
she seems to love so dearly. And to you (kind Father and Mother) I will
have a great care to leave you so well, and so rich, that you shall live
plentifully during both your lives. The rest of my wealth shall go to godly
and pious uses. Cause the Scrivener to come presently unto me, for the passion
which has already taken hold of me, does so oppress and torment my heart,
that it goes increasing, and will in a very short time cut off the thread of my
life.

Having said this, he fell into a worse swounding then the former, and fell
down so near to Leonora, that their faces were joined each to other. A
strange and sad spectacle for those her Parents, who with mournful heart and
eyes looked on their beloved Daughter, and their kind Son in Law. The
naughty Governesse would not stay to receive the rebukes and the reprehensions,
which she thought Leonora's Parents would bestow upon her; and therefore she
got her out of the lodging, and went to advertise Loaysa of all what had
passed; advising him, to get him instantly out of the house, and that she
would take care to certify him by the Negro, of the success of this
business, since that now there were no doors, nor keys to hinder his
passage. Loaysa was wonder-strucken with this strange news, and following her
counsel, returned to put on his old rags like a poor beggar; and hastened to
give an account to his frieds of the success of his love.

In the interim that those two were thus transported with their several
passions; Leonora's Father sent to call a Scrivener, an inward friend of his,
who came just at that time that his Daughter and Son in Law were come again to
themselves. Carrizales made his Will in that form and manner as we told you
before, without declaring Leonora's error; more then that for some good
respects, he earnestly besought and entreated her that she would marry, in
case he dyed, with that young man, whom he had told her of in secret.

When Leonora heard this, she fell down at her Husbands feet, and her heart
panting within her breast, she said unto him; Live (my dear husband, and my
chiefest bliss) live many, many years. For albeit you are not bound to
believe me in ought that I shall say unto you; know, that I have not offended
you, save only in thought; and beginning to excuse her self* and to recount
at large the truth of the case; she could not move her tongue to speak a word
more, but fell a new into a swound.

Being in this dismayment, her grieved Husband embraced her; her loving Parents
embraced her; and all of them wept so bitterly, that they obliged, and even in
a manner, enforced the Scrivener to accompany them in their tears, who made
the Testament. Wherein he left sufficient maintenance to all his
houshold-servants; he manumitted, and set at liberty his women-slaves,
together with the Negro: but to false Marialonso, he bequeathed no more, but
her bare wages.

Having thus settled his estate, the seventh day following, he was borne to his
grave. Leonora remained a very sad and mournful Widow, but was left very rich.
And when as Loaysa well hoped, that she would cumply with that (whereof he was
not ignorant) which her Husband had recommended unto her in his Testament; but
afterward saw, that within a seven-night after his death, she became a Nun,
and was admitted into one of the strictest Monasteries of all the City; being
frustrated of his hopes, and ashamed to show his face, lest he should be made
a laughing stock, and byword to all that knew him, he left Sevill, and went
for the Indyes.

Leonora's Parents were full of sorrow, and heavines, though somewhat comforted
with that, which their kind son in law had left them in his last Will, and
Testament. The Maidservants cheered themselves, as well as they could, with
the liberal Legacies he had given them; And those his shee-slaves, together
with Luys the Negro, rested the better satisfied with their infranchisement and
freedom.

But that wicked, and accursed Governesse, she was left (as she well deserved)
very poor, and defrauded of all her evil thoughts, and lewd purposes. And I
my self rest very well pleased, that I am now come to the end of this
success, Example, and Mirror of the little confidence, which is to be put in
Keys, Locks, Tornells, and Walls, when as the will continues free, and at
liberty. And how much less we are to trust, and rely on green and tender
years, when are exhibited to their ^ares, the exhortations, and persuasions of
such ill-disposed Governesses, whose habit and attire is grave and Matron-like,
but their tongues and hearts, full of deceit and mischief.

Only I do not know what was the reason, that Leonora did not express her
self more at large, in excusing her self, and in giving her jealous Husband
to understand, how clear, and unspotted she was, and how clear from doing
him any wrong in that kind: but perturbation, it should seem, had knit a knot
on her tongue, and the haste her Husband made to dye, did not give her time
enough to make her just excuse.

FINIS.

