Nocturnall Lucubrations: OR MEDITATIONS DIVINE and MORAL.

Whereunto are added EPIGRAMS AND EPITAPHS: WRITTEN BY ROB: CHAMBERLAIN.

In mundo spes nulla boni, spes nulla salutis:
Sola salus servire Deo, sunt caetera frauds.
LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Daniel Friar, at the sign of the Red Bull in
Little-Brittaine. 1638.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, And his honored Master, PETER BALLE Esquire, Solicitor
general to the Queens Majesty.
SIR,
THE envious condition of these carping times (like a frost in the Spring) so
nips Invention in the bud, that for the most part she dies like a blasted
Plant, and never lives to see her proper fruit. Many are the Volumes of
History, Antiquities, and other Pieces of learning your Worship has volved
and revolved, and yet I think scarce ever saw the person or work has not one
time or other had the long lash of censure. Dic quibus in terris, and eris mihi
magnus Apollo. Feign would I know where the man lives, on whose works or repute
are not to be seen some stripes of detraction. May your Worship therefore be
pleased to spread the wings of your protection over these poor thoughts,
whereby they may be sheltred from the critical crew of Zoilus, which will be
not only an inexpressible obligation, but a great encouragement to

Your humble servant, ROB: CHAMBERLAIN.

Nocturnall Lucubrations: OR MEDITATIONS Divine and Moral.
LEARNING is like Scanderbegs Sword, either good or bad according to him that
has it: an excellent weapon if well used, otherwise like a sharp razor in the
hand of a child.

Where impossibilities are apparent, it is indiscretion to nourish hopes.

The gentle hand of Patience in the strongest streams of Adversity, makes our
afflictions sweet and easy. Gloriosius est injuriam tacendo fugere, quam
respondendo superare.

Patience out-faceth the lowering front of the most dismal fate.

To insult over misery is the undoubted character of barbarous inhumanity.

To incur Gods displeasure for man's favor, is for a man to kill himself to
avoid a hurt.

Roaring oblations with sighing tears fetched from a faithful spring, are only
able to penetrate the everlasting gates.

Good rewards in the end, never fail to crown the end of a well prosecuted
good.

Though the ways of virtue seem rough and craggie, yet they reach to heaven,
and in the end invest humanity in the bright robes of immortality. Tendit in
ardua virtus.

Humility is a grace it self, and a spotless vessel to entertain all other
graces.

As the ball rebounds according to the force wherewith it was thrown; so the
more violent the afflictions of a good man are, the higher mount his thoughts.

A good conscience seats the mind in a rich throne of endless quiet; but
horror waits upon the clogging burden of a guilty soul.

Face commendation sets a fool in the chair of ostentation; but dies the
cheek of wisdom a scarlet blush.

The richest treasure mortal times afford, is the spotless garment of an
untainted reputation. Quando actum est de nomine, actum est de homine.

Nature has too slow a foot, closely to follow the heels of Religion; and it is
too hard a task for dull flesh clogged with corruption, to wing with the high
flying quill of the heavenly soul.

Sorrow for ills past brings back man's frailty to its first innocence.

Majesty is like Lightning, it never hurts but where it finds resistance.

Man is a Ship laden with riches, the world's the sea, heaven the intended
haven: hell sends out his Pirates to rob him, sometimes indevours to run him
upon the rocks of his ruin, but yet heavens eye guards him: His soul is the
Pilot, which through various seas of time and fortune, brings him to the long
desired Port of his endless quiet.

I have read of the Heart, in the time of his liberty and jollity, of all
creatures will not come near a man; but when he is hunted by the dogs, he
will fly for succor to the next man he meets: So it is with man; Prosperity
cannot engender so high a timpanie of pride, but misery can abate it.

Halcyon days make a man forget both God and himself: but afflictions make us
run to seek GOD early.

To master a man's self is more than to conquer a world; for he that conquered
the world, could not master himself.

The malicious thirst of revenge out of a flinty cowardice strikes the hot fire
of manlike unmanly valor.

The falling of a house is more perilous than the rising of a flood. Evils
foreseen are half cured; but mishap coming with the sudden thunderclap of
inexpectation, scares the minds faculties, from all consideration of wise
prevention.

Learning is the only precious jewel of immortality; it well becomes the
outward frame, and with immortal glory decks and adornes the never dying part.
Non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.

The most transcendent offenders transgress not so much against the rules of
humanity, as do the black monsters of prodigious ingratitude.

Happy, thrice happy were man's condition, could he but ransom home the
lamentable loss of that pristin command over his intemperate passions.

Man is the Emblem of misery, the subject of sorrow, and the object of pity;
and so will be so long as he wanders up and down in the gloomie fenn of this
weeping wilderness. (...).

Success seldom fails to crown the enterprise according to the integrity of
the cause.

All men wear not one habit of the mind, nor are all dispositio^s clothed
alike with natures habiliments.

Posterity may well be called the eternity of life: he may be said never to
die, whose name the eternal providence never fails to underprop with the
lasting pillars of a numerous issue.

There is not half so much danger in the desperate sword of a known foe, as in
the smooth insinuations of a pretended friend.

Unwise is that man that will be either dejected or exalted with the frowns or
smiles of various fortune.

Mortals must subscribe to whatsoever is writ in the adamantine tables of the
eternal providence. Quic quid patimur venit ab alto. Seneca:

The greatest canker that can be to love, is the bosom nursing of a concealed
grudge.

Reason at first produces opinion; but afterward an ill received opinion may
seduce the very soul of reason.

Strange is the nature of an ill opinion: it stands fast when it is once set,
though grounded upon nothing. Miraculous is that water that scowres away the
seeming dirt from the object of an ill conceit.

Let thy desires have the length and breadth of reason, and at length thou
shall have the breadth of thy desires.

That man is commonly of a good nature, whose tongue is the true Herald to his
thoughts.

A prejudicate opinion makes the judgment look asquint, and the most
injurious informer is an ill conceit, because it is ever ready to blemish the
beauty of the best intended action.

In the clearest sunshine of fair prosperity, we are subject to the boystrous
storms of gloomie adversity.

He that always observes the censuring murmur of idle people, shall never let
the suspected blush depart from his cheek.

A malevolent mind is like a boystrous sea tumbling in the swelling billows of
indignation, till dire revenge sets it in a conceited liberty, and never till
then is it locked in the griping gins of soul tormenting captivity.

Devilish is that disposition, which to wait an opportunity of revenge, will
seem, to rake up its malice in the cinders of oblivion; but when the time
serves will not stick to give fire to the whole heap of its hell-bred mischief.

It is a prodigious thing to see a devilish disposition put on a godly face,
and loathed baseness clothed with a scarf of unstained purity.

The Suns eye never saw the man that lived not under the controuling hand of
Fate.

Many gaze on the glorious outside of a Princes diadem, but few consider the
tempestuous affairs that do environ it.

Hope of remedy, and continuance of grief, should be both of one length: when
hope of remedy is past, grief should make an end.

Too much to lament a misery, is the next way to draw on a remediless
mischief.

Bootlesse grief hurts a man's self: but patience makes a jest of an injury.

He that is indebted to Grief, let him borrow of Patience, and he shall soon
be out of debt.

Patience rides it out in the most boisterous storms of adversity, and is
armor of proof against the thick flying bullets of the most malicious
assaults.

Where the scale of sensuality waighs down that of reason, the baseness of our
nature conducts us to most preposterous conclusions.

It is a madness to be much affected with vanity: for though in youth we
neither do nor will consider it, yet in the end the winter of age comes, and
with the besome of time sweeps away the summer of our youthful follies.

Quicquid Sol oriens, quicquid and occidens,
Novit, caeruleis Oceanus fretis,
Quicquid vel veniens, vel fugiens lavat,
Aetas Pegaseo corripiet gradu.
Senec. in Troade. Opinion is the sovereign mistress, or rather the sole
Midwife of either good or bad effects.

It is not fit for an^ man though never so miserable to despair of his own
future good hap: for many are the events that lie in the teeming womb of Time.

Ill words bewray foul thoughts: but sweet behavior is the index of a
virtuous mind. Praecipitis linguae comes est poenitentia.

Labor in good things is sweet in the issue; but pleasure in evil things
turns to a torment.

Fair words without good deeds to a man in misery, are like a saddle of gold
clapped upon the back of a galled horse.

A foolish man in wealth and authority, is like a weak timberd house with too
pondrous a roof.

Heaven without earth is perfect but earth without heaven is but the porch of
hell.

There are no riches like to the sweetness of content, nor no poverty
comparable to the want of patience.

I have read of the Heart, that he weeps every year for the shedding of his
head, though the loosing of the old be the way to make room for a better:

So is it with worldlings, they weep to part with any thing here, though it be
for never so great a treasure hereafter: though no less a matter than the
eternal joys of heaven crown the end of faith and good works, yet that, i,
vende totum quod habes, and read pauperibus, is such a durus sermo, that it
makes them block up their ears against the wisest Charmer.

The Heart likewise when he sees himself taken by the hounds, or other devise,
will shed tears, thinking thereby to intenerate the hearts of the hunters, and
move them to pity, or else because he sees himself irrecoverably caught:

So every true penitent, whens he sees himself overtaken by the wiles of
Satan, should never stop his tears, till he sees his own blessed recoverie out
of the claws of the devil: for he that is on high, keeps our tears in his
bottle, and though his tender mercy will not press upon a broken heart, yet he
is always pleased to see a sorrowful soul baptize himself in the trickling
drops of repentant dew.

He that consults with his body for the saving of his soul, shall never bring
it to heaven. If we hope to reap in joy, we must sow in tears.

He that stands up against the vices of great Ones, had need to be treble
guarded with Law, Friends, and Authority.

The longer we live, the more misery we endure: life is like a span forced from
a gouty hand, the more the hand is extented, the more pain it suffers.

Supposed goodness, by the blab of time, will have her close baseness set
upon the scaffold of public shame.

The fierce flash of too violent fire, soon burns out it self.

The old proverb says, Fair and softly goes far: but he that spurs too fast,
tires betimes.

It is a wise man's part in a case of extremity, with patience to swallow down
the bitter potion of indignity.

Harsh reproof is like a violent storm, soon washed down the channel: but
friendly admonitions, like a small shower, pierce deep, and bring forth better
reformation.

A wise man will digest with patience the sad tidings of calamity, when a fool
by grumbling at a cross, hurts himself.

Life is a continual march toward the grave, and a dangerous sailing toward
death through the bellowing waves of a troublesome world.

Labitur omnis homo, momento extinguimur uno,
Namque oleo lampas deficiente perit.
Within the very crown that adornes the sacred temples of a King, death has
his lurking den.

Pallida mors aequo pulsat pede
Pauperum tabernas, regumque turres.
Horat. A willing mind is able to steer a man against the stream of the
strongest impediments.

Neither the shot of Accide^t, nor dart of Chance, penetrates the impregnable
walls of a resolved Patience.

Love, when his links are once cracked, turns to the so wrest and most dismal
Hate.

Sordid manners in a comely feature are like black clouds in a fair sky.
Outward perfection without inward goodness, sets but the blacker die upon the
minds deformity.

If the hand of Omnipotency should please to try us with all manner of
affliction, to lock us in the griping gins of misery, to steep us in the dregs
of poverty, to rain down shame and defamation on our heads; we are to fly only
in this depth of extremity, to the safe sanctuary of faith and a good
conscience, which turn the bitter waters of affliction into the sweet Nectar
of never dying comfort.

Goodness with a smiling patience shakes off the dust that is thrown in the
face of her despised fortune.

Tears and smiles are not always the badges of grief and patience.

There is no anger or sorrow like to that which boyls with a constrained silence.

Thoughts tending to ambition, are always wont to plot unlikely wonders.

It is the easiest thing in the world to be invective; and amongst all sorts of
men, none are so quick at censuring as the ignorant: he will still give the
first lash, whilst himself is at the best but a lump of ignorance, a pretender
to learning, and his head stuffed full of nothing but titles of books: for if he
be questioned beyond the Epistle Dedicatory, he is presently like an Egyptian
valley in the latter end of June.

From an immaculate Fountain (by reason of an ill passage) may proceed
unwholesome and corrupt water.

A Tradesman had need to be a good husband; for it is somewhat a difficult task
in these times, for a man with his nails or bare hands to tear himself a
passage through the flinty ways of this hard world.

I commend a man that will draw like a horse, but not him that will carry every
thing that is put upon him like an ass.

Sacred learning is Wisdoms prudent Queen; studied arts are degrees unto some
wished ends, and steps whereby we ascend the high top of our hopes and
thoughts.

An ill beginning is commonly the prodigious sign of a dismal end.

Anger makes the tongue bewray the most secret thoughts.

The top of honor is a narrow plot of ground, where if a man tread but one
careless step, down he tumbles into the jaws of ruin.

The darkest clouds of misery or affliction, cannot over-shadow the bright
shining luster of a clear conscience.

The only way to wash off the guilt from a spotted conscience, is to lay open
her bosome-crimes to the worlds broad eye.

Ill news flies with Eagles wings, but leaden waights are wont to clog the
heels of gladsome tidings.

Inconsiderate desires rashly fulfilled, are able to set the world in an
unquenchable combustion.

He that wanders too far into the wilderness of this world, cannot when he
please creep back to the lodge of safety.

It is not in the power of man when he please to tread the happy steps of
heavenly repentance.

He that desires a good, and suspects his right to it, is bold and turbulent in
the pursuit, whilst the man that is conscious to himself of good, rests happily
content till time crown with the guerdon of a patient expectation.

Time, Patience, and Industry, are the three grand Masters of the world: they
bring a man to the end of his desires, when a turbulent murmur oftentimes jerks
him out of the way to his proposed ends.

The best complement is but a kind of a hansome foolerie; and crooching feats
are so far from testifying the hearts inward loyalty, that they carry in their
front the lineaments of flattery.

As it is a sorrowful thing when a man's means is too low for his parts, so is
it a preposterous sight to see a man whose mind is too big for his fortune.

There is not a more lamentable spectacle than to see a man of parts in misery,
especially if the fault be not in himself: The worst sight in the world is a
rich Dunce and a poor Schooller.

The more actions of depth are preconsidered, the worse sometimes they are
performed.

The spurs of necessity are almost able to put a nimble spirit into the
senseless body of a dead stock.

It is Love that makes the Eternal Mercy to bear so much the foul crimes of
transgressing humanity.

Sea, nor land, nor gates of brass, are able to withstand the indefatigable
hand of a willing mind.

So violent is the beastly passion of inordinate lust, that it subjects a man
to base thoughts, perturbs his Spirit, and never leaves him till it hurrie him
headlong into the chambers of death.

Patience is the best Midwife to a disastrous misfortune.

Beauty is but a vain thing, though nere so rich: for in the fairest woman it
is but skin deep: under the skin there is no more than ordinary.

If a man be not so happy as he desires, let this be his comfort, that he is
not so wretched as he deserves.

The only reason why some men have not what they desire, is because their
desires are not grounded upon reason.

It is better to be well deserving without praise, than to live by the air of
undeserved commendation.

Happy is man that his time is but short, because it is miserable.

Happy are those miseries that terminate in joy, happy those joys that know no
end, and happy is his joyful end whose dissolution is eternal joy.

As he that climbes is in danger of falling, so is he that lies on the ground
subject to be trampled on by every peasant: he is in the happiest condition,
that moves in the middle region of the world, considering that as want is a
misery, abundance is but a trouble. Medio tutissimus ibis. Ovid. Meta.

As Contemplation altogether without Action is idleness, so constant Action
altogether without Contemplation is too bestiall.

Wise is that man that steres an even course betwixt the Scylla and Charibdis
of this world, prodigality and covetousness; that on the one side will not
lavishly consume Gods blessings, nor on the other side embrace covetousness,
knowing that riches at the best are but necessary impediments.

As the smart of the wound is recompensed by the cure of the body, so the
punishment of the body is sweetened by the health of the soul.

He that has a friend, and sees him out of the way, and labors not by timely
counsel to call back his wandering steps, renders himself unworthy of so rare a
blessing.

He that snufs at friendly reprehension, and can better relish the oil of
flattery, makes himself the pitiful abstract of too late repenting folly.

Not to speak what a man knows, is sometimes discretion; but to speak, and
not to know, is always folly, sometimes dishonesty. Audi, vide, tace, si tu
vis vivere pace.

As it is more honor to teach tha^ to be taught, so it is less shame to learn
than to be ignorant.

We should all follow the world, as a Servingman follows his Master and a
stranger; whilst they go together, he follows them both; but when the
stranger leaves his Master, he leaves the stranger, and follows his Master:
So should we follow the world: as long as the world goes with God, we should
follow them both; but when the world leaves God, we should leave the world, and
with prepared hearts follow our Master God.

Disce mori, nec te ludat spes vana salutis,
Nam nescis statuant quem tibi fata diem.
As there is a misery in want, so there is a danger in excess: a man may as
soon die of a surfeit, as of hunger.

It is good for a man to have praise when he deserves it; but it is better to
deserve praise when he has it.

Honor is like a Palace with a low door, into the which no man can enter but
he must first stoop.

The staff of man's comfort is Hope; which once broke, bids a final farewell
to the most sweetened cogitations.

The most lasting comfort is this sweet companion Hope; which once departed,
makes poor man either desperately to plunge himself into the gulf of horror
and despair, or with sighing tears to spend the remainder of his pilgrimage in
the mournful valley of discontent.

God has an infinite number both of sacred and secret ways as well to punish
as to pardon.

As the eye of Gods providence protects the just, so the bright rays of his
divinity pierce the dark and secret caverns of the most hellish intendments.
Our breasts and actions are as transparent to his eye, as his Decrees are
invisible to ours.

Though a plot of malice be never so cunningly contrived, a twinkling of Gods
eye is able both to detect and punish it.

He that sails by the star of Virtue, shall in time land himself upon the
shore of Honor.

Affections founded on Virtue, have happy ends; but built on lust and vice,
begin pleasantly, but terminate in misery.

It is a base thing to erect Trophies of Honor to our selves upon the ruins of
another reputation.

High time it is to flee vanity, when the drum of age beats a quick march
toward the silent grave.

It is for the most part but lost labor to bend a man's force against the
stream of another affections.

Justice is the soul of a Commonwealth: for as a Body without a Soul soon
stinks, and is noisome; so a Commonwealth without Justice, quickly turns to a
lump of corruption.

There are certain Springs, that when the Sun shines hottest, they are
coldest: at midnight when the Sun is gone, they are then hottest:

So it is with Man, his zeal is coldest in the Sunshine of prosperity; but in
the gloomie days of dark adversity, begins to gather heat.

It is said of the Sea Elephant, that sometimes he will come ashore, and sleep
amongst the rocks; where as soon as he is espied, the people surround him with
nets and gins to take him; which done, they awake him, who as soon as he is
awake, leaps with a violent rush, thinking to leap again into the Sea, but
cannot.

So it is with those, who straggling out of the ways of piety, oftentimes fall
asleep in sin, which (when by death, or sickness they are awakened) think
presently to rush into heaven, or upon the instant to leap into the paths of
Repentance, but then it is too late; for they are oftentimes caught as surely,
as suddenly; like the fool in the Gospel, that had laid up goods for many
years.

We should taste worldly pleasures running* like the Egyptian dogs upon the
banks of Nile; for as they, if they stand to drink long in a place, are in
danger of that Serpent the Crocodile; so are those that stay to take full
draughts of worldly pleasures, in danger of that serpent the Devil.

It is a bootlesse thing to endeavor the reformation or conversion of a
perverse man: there is no meddling with him that loves to be transported with
the stream of his own opinions.

Heaven is the admired instrument of the glorious God; by the influence whereof
he rules and governes the great mass of this corruptible world.

It is said of those quagmires of honey, which some say to be in Muscovia, that
there are gins and snares set about them, by which the Bear (which out of a
love to the honey frequenteth those places) is oftentimes caught, and thereby
constrained to forfeit his life, by pleasing the curiosity of his taste.

Nocet empta dolor voluptas The sweetness of sin is the death of the soul.
The pleasures of sin carry a fair show; but as the shadow of the richest
color, yea of scarlet it self is always black; so be the colors of sin nere
so glorious, its shadow is black and hellish; though in taste it be wondrous
pleasant, yet in digestion it is bitter as wormwood: the deadly Arsenicke of
the soul, and the bane of all our happiness, against which no Antidote
prevails, but the precious blood of the Immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus.

It is not good to be always busied in the toilsome shop of Action; that man
has but an earthly soul, which maugre the importunity of the greatest
business, will not sometimes sequester himself into the withdrawing chamber of
Meditation.

Credulity is oftentimes the dream of fools, the drunkards ape, and the blind
nurse of dangerous security.

Bonaventure tells us, that the damned shall weep more tears in hell, than
there is water in the sea; because the water of the sea is finite, but the
tears shall be wept in hell are infinite, never ceasing as long as God is God.

Men are not rich or poor according to what they possess, but to what they
desire; the only rich man is he that with content enjoys a compete^cie.

Mensa minuscula
Pace referta,
Melior divitiis
Lite repletis.
Miserable is he that chooses a wife either for by or base respects; but happy
is that marriage when the soul is matched as well as the body.

Wise is he that shapes his expe^ces by his means, and cuts the wings of his
desires in pleasure, that they mount not above the flight of his fortunes.

Nothing more unsatiable than men's desires; he that is poor would be rich, he
that is rich would be a gentleman, a gentleman would be a nobleman, a noble man
would be a King, a King would be the Monarch of the world, and he that was so,
wept, because there was no more to conquer.

Heu quod mortali non unus sufficit orbis! It is not want makes men poor, nor
abundance renders them rich; the rich man may say of himself, as Narcissus
said when he saw his own beauty in the water, which made him fall in love with
himself, Inopem me copia fecit,
Ovid. Meta. -- quid gentibus auri
Nunquam extincta sitis?


As there are no better rules than good examples, so there is nothing more
pernitiously dangerous than bad.

Longum iter per praecepta, breve per exemplum. It is good for a man to be
industrious in his youth, and to know that if by honest labor he accomplish
any good thing, the labor is soon past, but the good remains to his comfort;
and if for his pleasure he do any thing that is ill, the pleasure is gone in a
moment, but the evil remains to his torment*

Impia sub dulci melle venena latent.
Ovid. de Pont. The strongest argument of a wise man is to be a good husband of
his time; for amongst all the things that God created, there is nothing more
precious

Tempora labuntur, tacitisque senescimus annis,
Et fugiunt fraeno non remorante dies.
Lent is a time of fasting; but the souls great festival: for the pampering
of the body is the starving of the soul; and when we macerate the body, we
make the soul a feast: if depressio carnis lead not the way, elevatio mentis
will never move.

There is a creature, says Pliny, in the North parts of Sweden called a
Ierfe, of so ravenous and devouring a nature, that though his belly be nere so
full, he is not satisfied; he will eat till by his fullness he is scarce able
to go, and then run to the trees that grow near together, and there by
forcing his body through, disgorgeth himself, purposely to repair his stomach
for a fresh prey: those that are minded to take him, throw a carkas in his way,
and then observe the trees that he runs to when he is full, when they once
perceive him fast betwixt the trees, they run to him, and kill him.

So it fares with those that never think of any thing but how to please their
senses, which the devil observing, throws diverse temptations before their
eyes, which they never suspecting are oftentimes confounded in the very act of
sin.

Of all other things necessity has the largest patent: maugre the greatest
commands, necessity will first be observed.

To husband well a small talent is the only way to mount a low fortune.

To be too full of complement is ridiculous: to be altogether without it,
rusticity.

Of all conditions the most lamentable is that of ignorance: an ignorant man is
like one of those that live directly under the North or South Pole, with whom
it is always night.

The only way to be rid of a domineering vice, is to avoid all occasions
thereto tending.

Prosperity cast at the feet of the wicked, is like a rich carpet cast over the
mouth of a bottomless pit, which allures the feet of the ungodly, along the
path of security, into that bottomless tophet of eternal misery.

A ruinous end attends a riotous life. Well were it for the drunkard, as he
has lived like a beast, if he could so die.

If the world did but truly consider that there is a Tophet prepared for the
wicked, it would rather run mad through fear and despair, than thus wallow in
dreadful security.

The rich may offend more for want of charity, than the poor in stealing
things necessary.

He that rectifies a crooked stick, bends it the contrary way; so must he that
would reform a vice, learn to affect its mere contrary, and in time he
shall see the springing blossoms of a happy reformation.

It is dangerous in holy things to make Reason the touchstone: he that
disputes too much with God about things not revealed, all the honor he gets,
is but to go to hell more learnedly than the rest. It is good to be pius
pulsator, for then the more importunate, the more pleasing; but a temerarius
scrutator may be more bold than welcome.

He that would hit the mark he aims at, must wink with one eye: Heaven is the
mark, he that would hit it, must wink with the eye of Reason, that he may see
better with that of Faith.

Action is the crown of Virtue, Perseverance the crown of Action, Sufferance
the crown of Perseverance, a good cause the crown of Sufferance, and a crown of
Glory the crown of a good cause. Esto fidelis usque ad mortem, and dabo tibi
coronam vitae.

FINIS.
EPIGRAMS AND EPITAPHS Written by ROB: CHAMBERLAIN.

Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis,
Vt prisca gens mortalium
Paterna rura bobus exercet suis,
Solutus omni foenore.
To his honored, and dearly affected Master, Mr WILLIAM BALLE, Son and Heir
to the Worshipful PETER BALLE Esquire.
SIR,
I Am the more emboldned to Present you with these fragments of Poetry, in
regard you begin to be one of the little darlings of the Muses. It is not the
least of my comforts to see from a sprig of my own pruning, such timely
blossoms of Poetical ingenuity: somewhat rare it is to see Plants of wit agree
with the hard coldness of our Climate; for this aurum cuncta movens has so
stupefied the times, that Ignorance has almost outfac'd Invention. Apuleius
may wander up and down the Arcadian plains to find Parnassus or the Heliconian
Well, and meet none but the dull brood of Midas to direct him. Go on therefore
hopeful Sir, toward that sacred Spring; you shall never want the prayers,
assistance, and manuduction of

Your humble servant, Rob: Chamberlain.

To his well beloved friend, Mr ROBERT CHAMBERLAIN, the Author, in praise of
his following Poems.
THe wisest of Philosophers conclude,
Best Contemplations spring from solitude:
And vvanting outward objects, the minds eye
Sees cleerest into every mystery.
Scipio's last life, in's Villa spoke him man
More than his conquest of the Affrican.
So are the seasons helpers unto Art;
And Time to industry applies each part.
These thou have made the subjects of thy Lays;
And they for praising them, return thee praise.
So that to praise again would show to be
But repetition, and Tautologie.
And thine own works allow thee better note
Than any friends suspected partial vote.
Thomas Nabbes.

In praise of a Country life.
THe winged fancies of the learned quill,
Tell of strange wonders, sweet Parnassus hill,
^astalia's Well, the Heliconian Spring,
^^ar-spangled valleys where (...) Muses sing.
Admired things another Story yields,
Of pleasant Tempe, and the Elysian fields;
Yet these are nothing to the sweet that dwells
In low built cottages, and country cells.
What are the Scepters, Thrones, and Crowns of kings,
But gilded burdens, and most fickle things?
What are great offices but cumbring troubles
And what are honors but dissolving bubbles
What though the gates of greatness be frequented
With chains of glittring gold? he that is contented
Lives in a thousand times a happier way,
Than he that is tended thus from day to day.
Matters of State, nor yet domestic jars,
Comets portending death, nor blazing stars
Trouble his thoughts; he will not post have run
Through Lethe, Styx, and fiery Phlegiton
For gold or silver: he will not affright
His golden slumbers in the silent night
For all the precious wealth, or sumptuous pride
That lies by Tiber, Nile, or Ganges side.
Th'imbroidred meadovvs, and the crawling stream
Make soft and sweet his undisturbed dreams:
He revels not by day, nor in the nights,
Nor cares he much for Musical delights;
And yet his humble roof maintains a quire
Of singing Crickets round about the fire.
This harmless life he leads, and I dare say
Does neither wish, nor fear his dying day.
On the Worshipful, and worthy of all honor, Mrs ANNE BALLE, Wife of Peter
Balle Esquire.
IF worth can mortals to advancement bring,
If birth, or beauty be a precious thing,
Meekness be great Honors Palace gate,
and the forerunner of some happy fate,
^appy, then happy thou, that art the sweet
and little center where all these do meet.
In Dominum Gulielmum Ball filium and haeredem Petri Balle Armigeri.
Graeci laudantur, Musis laudatur Apollo,
Virgilii fama et scandit ad astra poli:
Laud vigent multi, sed jam puerilibus annis
Ingenio supexas tu Gulielme senes.
En mare tu terras, urbes atque oppida fando
Laurigerum nostro temporenomen habes.
Magna canunt magni pueris incognita parvis
Umbris quae mortis non adeunda nigris.
Sed teneris doctrina tuis non convenit annis,
Bis puerique senes, tu puer atque senex.
Astra fuere tuo natu foelicia coeli,
Lauo quoque nunc foelix est adhibenda tibi.
Laurum toll, latet quod pectore teque docebo,
Et dii dent studiis vela secunda tuis.
The same in English.
APollos skill, the Grecian pen for wars,
And Virgils too, transce^d the glittring stars:
Praise makes men live, but thou a child unfit,
Transcends the limits of an old man's wit.
Both sea and land thou know, and for thy praise
Our times shall give thee thy deserved bays.
Great Poets sing great things that children know not,
Which to the places of oblivion go not.
Thy learning fits not with thy tender mold,
Old men are children, thou a child, art old.
The heavenly stars upon thy birth did shine,
To make thee happy, now the praise is thine.
Take up thy bays, I Will teach thee what is in me,
And may the Gods give prosperous fates to thee.
In praise of Learning.
HAppy, thrice happy, o ye sisters still,
That love and live on sweet Parnassus hill;
Blessed be your times and tunes, that sit and sing
On flowrie banks by Aganippes Spring.
Blessed be the shadie groves where those do dwell
Which do frequent that Heliconian Well,
Where learning lives, whereby when men expire,
They are made chanters in the heavenly quire.
That sacred learning, whose inspired notions
Makes Mortals know heavens high alternat motions:
Tru^pets their names unto the crystal sky
Though in the grave their bones consuming lie.
Thrice happy those then, to who^ learning's given,
Whose lives on earth do sympathize with heaven.
Whose thoughts are still on high, longing to see
Heavens Tabernacles of Eternity;
Sleighting the world, and spurning at its praise,
Which like Meander runs ten thousand ways.
They (when pale death to dust their corpse shall bring)
With quires of Angels shall in heaven sing.
To his honored friend, Mr Giles Balle Merchant.
On the Spring.
THe lofty Mountains standing on a row,
Which but of late were periwigd with snow
D'off their old coats, and now are daily seen
To stand on tiptoes, all in swaggering green*
Meadows and gardens are prankt up with buds,
And chirping birds now chant it in the woods.
The warbling Swallow, and the Larks do sing,
To welcome in the glorious verdant Spring.
To his dear friend and cousin, Mr Allan Penny, Citizen of Exeter.
On the Morning.
THe morning golden horse rush forth amain,
Spending their breath, sucked from the Eastern plain;
And posting still with speed through gentle air,
Hurl their perfumes from out the glittring chair.
The Suns bright Steeds come running up again
To Taurus top, still glad to see the plain
Of Indolstan: and now begins t'approach
The winged Messenger of heaven, in's Coach
Of ruddy flames; night-wandring stars have done
Their straggling course, and now the day's begun.
Bright burning Luna drags her dazzling tail
Into the dungeon of a darksome veil.
To his dear friend and brother, Mr Thomas Bowdon.
On the Evening.
RIse, rise, ye sootie horse from duskie dale,
And draw your Mistress in a sable veil:
Who rides it out with her knot curled hair,
Like to an Aethiope in an Ebonie chair:
Whose dark unseemly face is wrapped in shrowds,
With Styx died curtains of congealed clouds.
Rise thou pale Queen of night, prepare thy carres,
And climb you glittring glorious mount of stars.
To his dearest brother, Mr. William Holmes, Citizen of Exeter.
Deaths impartiality. Carmen Hexametrum.
HIgh minded Pyrrhus, brave Hector, stout Agamemnon,
Hannibal, and Scipio, whom all the world did attend on,
That worthy Captain, world conquering great Alexander,
That tender, constant, true hearted, lovely Leander,
That cunning Painter, that curious handed Apelles,
Mirmidons insatiate, that kept the Tent of Achilles,
Alphonsus Aragon, that great Mathematical Artist,
That stately Queen of beauty, that Lady Mars kissed,
Wit, wealth, and beauty, yea all these pomps that adorn us,
Must see black Phlegiton, rough Styx, and fatal Avera^s.
To his kind and loving friend, Mr Henry Prigg, Citizen of Exeter.
On the sweetness of Contentation.
THe world still gazeth on the glittering show
Of Scepters, Crowns, and Diadems, but few
Consider truly the tempestuous cares,
And tumbling troubles of the State affairs.
Honor's the spur that pricks the ambitious mind,
And makes it puff and swel with th'empty wind
Of self conceit: But yet me thinks I see
A state more full of sweet security.
The russet Farmer, more contentment yields
Unto himself, whilst toiling in his fields,
Beholds upon the pleasant fertile banks,
Wise Natures flowrie wonders in their ranks.
And when the half part of the day is spent,
His wife her basket brings, they with content
Do both sit down by some sweet straggling Spring
And make a Feast, whilst 'bout his table sing
The chirping birds; he when the day is past,
Home to his children, and his wife makes haste:
The children joy to see their father there;
The father joys to see his children dear:
Then they begin to him their pleasant prattle,
One shows his pins, another brings his rattle.
With these contents the good man's overjoyed,
When thus he sees his dear affections cloid,
Whilst others toil for honor, and in vain
Deny themselves those sweets they might obtain.
O then thou great Commander of the skies,
That dings down pride, and makes the poor man rise,
Let them that will dote on these gilded toys,
Let me account it chiefest of my joys
TO enjoy a mean estate, and nothing more,
If It be thy pleasure that I still be poor.
Give me this sweet content, that I may die
A patient servant to thy Majesty.
To his dearly affected friend, Mr George Leach of Broadelist in Devon.
On the vanity of Man.
LIke to the Swan on sweet Meanders brink,
Like flowers that flourish in the morn, and shrink
Down with their heads, when sable night appears;
Such is our frailty in this vale of tears.
The gilded gallant, and the tortured slave
Cut down by death, come tumbling to the grave.
Not Europes riches, nor an Ajax bold,
Nor men, nor Angels, nor our bags of gold,
Nor he that was the spacious worlds Co^mander,
Caesar, Pompey, nor an Alexander,
Nor can green youth, well, wit, or tender age,
The raging fury of thy Sword assuage.
O then thou Star Commander, dreadful King,
Whose Fiat makes the trembling world to ring,
Teach us, o teach us so to know our days,
Thereby to rectify our crooked ways;
That when with Angels, and Archangels thou
Shall come to judge the world, and make it bow,
We then may render up a good account,
And live with thee upon that starrie mount.
In Hyemem.
PApula canescunt, tremebundi turbinis horror
Fulminat, heu Boreas nimbosa grandinatira
Torva laboriferi fulgentia cornua quassi
Tauri nix tegit, pelagus vult tangere stellas,
Cerberus horrendo baculo nunc Tartara plangit,
Flammiferosque locos dicit spoliasse pruinam.
On the death of Mr. Charles Fitz-Geffrays, Minister of Gods Word.
O Thou the saddest of the Sisters nine,
Add to a sea of tears, one tear of thine.
Unhappy I, that am constrained to sing
His death, whose life did make the world to ring
With echoes of his praise. A true Divine
In's life and doctrine, which like Lamps did shine
Till they were spent and done, did never cease
To guide our steps unto eternal peace.
Thy habitation's now the starry mount,
Where thy great Maker makes of thee account.
Farewell thou splendour of the spacious West,
Above the Aetheriall clouds for ever blessed:
The loss of thee a watery mountain reares,
With high springtide of our sad trickling tears.
On Sack.
O Thou so much admired by every soul,
That lives 'twixt the Artick and the Antartick Pole;
Apollo's drink, drawn from the Thespian spring,
Whereof the silver Swans before they sing
Do always drink: though thy sweet simpring smiles
Some mortal creatures of their coin beguiles,
Yet from black Limbo's gate thou bring'st man's soul,
And makes his spirits knock the highest Pole.
On Tobacco.
THou hell-bred lump of sin, infernal drink,
Pernicious, damned, soule-fascinating stink,
Time's great consumer, cursed child of hell,
Scum of perdition, sprung from Pluto's cell:
Thy barbarous nature likes no soil so well,
As where the Devil and his Pagans dwell.
Bewitched then are those that stand-up for thee,
Till they have grace t'abandon and abhor thee.
IN OBITVM HENRICI BLUETT Generosi.
RVsticus in agro,
Opifex in pago:
Omnes hoc mundo
Nituntur in vano.
Mercator in mare,
Vir officina,
Cum vult pulsare
Mors, quid medicina?
FINIS.
Imprimantur hae Nocturnae Lucubrationes.

SA: BAKER.
Ex Aedibus Londin. Apr. 2. 1638.

