THE SECOND PART OF THE DEFENSE OF THE REFORMED CATHOLIC.

Wherein the Religion established in our Church of England (for the points
here handled) is apparently justified by authority of Scripture, and
testimony of the ancient Church, against the vain cauillations collected by
Doctor Bishop Seminary Priest, as out of other Popish writers, so specially out
of Bellarmine, and published under the name of The marrow and pith of many
large volumes, for the oppugning thereof.

By ROBERT ABBOT Doctor of Divinity.

Tertul. de praescript. aduer. haeret. Haereses de quorundam infirmitatibus
habent quod valent, nihil valentes si in been valentem fidem incurrant.

ANCHORA SPEI


LONDINI, Impensis Georg. Bishop. 1607.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH, MY MOST DREAD and Sovereign Lord, JAMES
by the grace of God King of great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
faith.
MOST puissant and renowned King, albeit my quality and gifts are of meaner
sort and worth, then that I should thereupon presume thus often to solicit
your Majesty's acceptance of my foretimely and undigested fruits: yet since
this business was by your Majesty's appointment first commanded, and one part
thereof is already become sacred unto you, the remainder could not in duty be
recommended to any other then to the same most benign and fosterous aspect of
your Royal Grace. In the former part I have endeavored to clear those mists
and clouds which Doctor Bishops maleuolent breath, out of the foggie vapors of
their Romish filthy lakes, had blown amongst us in his Epistle Dedicatorie to
your Highness, whereinto he had contrived in a generality very many malicious
and blind cauils, whereby he would persuade your Majesty, that the Religion by
your laws established is not consonant to the ancient and first approved
truth. In this latter part I have labored the examination and confutation of
his whole book, wherein as he has taken upon him more particularly to oppugn
the doctrine of our Church in diverse and sundry points which are questioned
betwixt us, so I have studied according to the talent which God has given me,
to make it plainly appear in the same points, that the cause which he
maintains has very slender and weak support, that his fortifications of
defense are but earth and clay, and his offensive weapons but as strawes and
rushes, and that he had more care to write a book, then conscience to weigh
the force and truth of that he wrote. Which that it may not be imputed to any
inhabilitie of his, but to the badnesse of the cause it self, he himself
professes that he gives to his Reader therein Preface to the Reader.
the marrow and pith of many large volumes, having indeed transcribed the
greatest part thereof out of Bellarmines disputations, who is now become their
common oracle, and the chief fountain whereat they all draw. Which may well
be wondered at in Doctor Bishop, that he being a secular Priest, and with the
rest lately carried with that importunate fury against the Jesuits, and having
been in that cause a principal undertaker above the rest, should
notwithstanding now be content to grace them so far as to furnish himself
out of their armourie to fight against us. But it has well enough appeared,
that their quarrel was but to serve a turn, wherein failing of their purpose,
albeit they have discovered the Jesuits to be so wholly composed of fraud and
villainy, as should justly cause all men to shun and detest them, yet they
have yielded to be gathered with them again to the feathering of one wing, and
though happily they be no otherwise tied together but like Judge. 15.4.
Samsons foxes, tail to tail, their rancor inwardly continuing such as that
they can hardly one with good countenance behold the other, yet they agree
together to carry fire betwixt them to burn and consume the heritage of the
Lord. Which fire notwithstanding we hope by the mercy of God, through your
Majesty's religious and godly care, shall be but as the fire of gunpowder
against the wind, returning upon the faces of them by whom it was kindled. For
although the endeavors of these malignant spirits seem apparently to tend to
the detriment and danger of the Church of Christ, yet that God who in the
beginning 2. Cor. 4.6.
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, and when he had made all things
very good, and nothing but good, yet gave way to sin and evil, that thereout
he might draw some further good, the same God even now turns to the good of
many, that which they intend for evil, it coming hereby to pass that the
Scriptures are more diligently searched, the truth more instantly preached and
defended, the Pastors of the Lords flock occasioned more carefully to stand
upon their watch, the desires of many people inkindled to find certain
resolution of the things which are so greatly questioned; and though some fall
away, who being but Tertull. de praescr. Auolent quantum volent paleae leuis
fidei, etc.
chafe of light belief, have but wanted wind to blow them out of the floor,
yet many more by the displaying and laying open of the trecheries and deceits
of such impostors are confirmed in the faith, and do learn the more deeply to
detest the mystery of iniquity, whilst they see the poisoned and deadly
fruits that grow out of that ground. Which since they have been grown to so
full and perfect ripeness, could not but have their time to fall, and the fall
thereof having been hitherto so happily begun, we hope shall under your
Majesty's government much more prosperously succeed, and that God will go
forward to shake off Deuteronomy. 32 32, 33.
the bitter and cruel grapes of the vine of Sodom, that men may no longer
gather thereof to their own destruction. In the mean time your Majesty has
seen and must expect yet further to see Apoc. 12.7.
the dragon and his angels fighting against Michael and his Angels, and ver. 15.
out of his mouth as it were out of a brimstone lake, casting out malice and
slander as floods of water, to drown the woman and her seed, and so much the
more enraged, because he conceiueth in likelihood ver 12.
that he has but a short time, and that the day is at hand which the Lord has
promised, which shall Iere. 51.6.11.
bring upon Babel the vengeance of the Lord and the vengeance of his temple.
The Lord make good his word; the Lord hasten his work, that we may see it, that
that Apoc. 17.4.
purple harlot first founded in blood and paricide, and having since by an
unquenchable thirsting after blood made her self the slaughter house Ibid.
18.24.
of the Saints and Martyrs of Christ, may of her own children drink blood her
belly full, that ver. 20.
the heavens may rejoice and the holy Apostles and Prophets, seeing the
judgment of God upon her, casting her with violence into the sea, never to
rise again. And you, most noble King, in whom God has turned the period of
time which threatened alteration and danger to our state and government, to the
further strength and establishment thereof, and has lifted your throne far
above the thrones of your royal Progenitors, and has made you in a manner the
balance of the Christian world, consider that it is undoubtedly for some great
work that in his providence he has so disposed it, and thereto apply those
singular ornaments and endowments of the mind, wherein you excel all that have
been before you. God has made your Highness able to epsy and discern the
conicatching devices of those bastard Catholic seducers, and we assure our
selves, that in your self and in your royal posterity it shall be found, to
the great advancement of the faith and kingdom of Jesus Christ. Wherein that
our hope may not be frustrate, we most humbly beseech almighty God to put into
your Majesty's heart not to be too secure of them who account it a martyrdom
to die for the murdering of Christian Princes, and in the shedding of your
sacred blood would think themselves to have gained the one half of their
desires, content perhaps by instructions for a while to temporize, and to make
show of meaning no harm, till the memory of their late villainy being somewhat
ouerblowne, they may be the less suspected, but having already given to
understand what your Majesty shall look for at their hands if opportunity
should second their designs. The Lord auert and turn that judgment from us,
and 1. Sam. 25.29.
bind your Majesty's soul in the bundle of life with the Lord your God, that
your eyes may long behold that noble Impe of grace, the branch of our hope,
together with the other branches of your royal line, growing before the Lord
to the further dismay and terror of your enemies, and the greater security and
assurance of the church of Christ. As for the service which according to your
Majesty's commandment I have here performed, albeit it be far from that
perfection which the weight of the cause requires, yet I doubt not but it is
sufficient to show on whether part the truth is to be found, and to justify
the proceedings of your Majesty against the cauillations of wilful men,
desperately shutting their own eyes, that the light of the Gospel may not shine
unto them. Whatsoever it is, it most humbly craves your Majesty's acceptance
and royal protection and favor, whereto with all loyal duty I recommend it
and your Highness self to the protection of the most high God, whose cause it
is that is defended thereby.

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful subject ROB. ABBOT.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
GEntle Reader, thou will I hope impute it in some part to the condition of the
time, that I give thee this answer not altogether so well featured and shaped
as thou happily would desire it. Though it be a fruit that may seem to have
been long in growing, yet as the case stands with me, the length of time has
but served to bring it to his greatness, and therefore howsoever it comes
forth with defiance to the adversaries, yet I confess it seems to me not so
thoroughly digested and seasoned as I would have wished it, to content thee. In
this defense of Gods truth, the things that are specially to be respected
against the importunity and advantage of our adversaries, are strength and
expedition. I have had care, as the matter would permit, to satisfy thee in
both these respects, and let my care herein obtain pardon of thee, if I seem
unto thee to fail in some complements otherwise. If thou think this my answer
needless because another man has already taken pains therein, thou must
remember that no man's private prevention could yield me dispensation to be free
from doing that which public authority required of me. I doubt not but in the
reading of either, it shall appear unto thee what spirit it is wherewith these
Romish factors are led in their opposition against us, and that it is not truth
and saving of souls whereto they bend themselves, but only the upholding of
their faction; whether by truth or falsehood, by right or wrong, it skilleth
not, so that that may be performed. That thou may the better see and judge of
all, I have inserted the whole text of Doctor Bishops book, altogether
condemning that falsehood and guile which he has used toward M. Perkins, and
they al use in their pretense and show of answering our books, in that they
never set down the copy of that to which they answer. Which policy serves
them to blind the Reader, and to gain liberty to themselves to conceal and
dissemble what they list, to pervert, to vilify, to falsify, and by absurd
imputations to calumniate without being controlled. As our fidelity and good
conscience of the cause which we handle, manifestly appears in that we never
forbear to publish our adversaries books to the world, when we have adjoined
an answer to them; so their guilt and guile is manifest by the contrary, for
that they fear to put forth our books with their answers, as doubting least
the books being at hand should bewray and show the insufficiency of the
answers. As for Master Perkins book, being loath too much to increase the
greatness of the volume, I have forborne to put it in, the rather for that the
substance thereof for the most part may appear by that that Master Bishop has
set down, and where he faulteth, I have taken occasion in my answer to
declare, if not the words yet the sum and effect of it, the book it self
also being easily had by any that is desirous more exactly to compare them. The
authors conceit for the form and manner of that work was greatly to be
approved, and whereas it has had the liking of very many for the brief and
plain delivery of our controuersiall grounds, they shall see now that it was
not without cause that they carried so good opinion of it, inasmuch as the
malice of an enemy out of their many large volumes can find so little matter
of weight and substance to say against it. I doubt not but it had been well
that in some places he had given it some better strength, but it is to be
considered, that as the midwife judges better of the birth then the mother
that trauelleth with it, and in gaming, the stander by sometimes sees more
then he that plays, so it is in writing of books, that the Reader and
examiner sees sometimes a defect, where the busied and entangled mind of the
writer observed none: and therefore of welwillers and men indifferent, it is to
be expected that that which it somewhat imperfectly delivered in one place, be
no impeachment of that which is sufficiently fenced and fortified in another.
Thou shall find it (gentle Reader) to have been so written, as that Master
Bishop is feign to use very shameful and miserable shifts to give show of
answer to it. Do thou learn hereby to love the truth, which thus triumphs in
the adversaries own camp, and even in their own books insulteth over them,
whilst either perforce they subscribe it, or show themselves so exceedingly
distressed to resist or stand against it. Take no offense whosoever thou art at
the continuance of this fight, because the order must stand which God set down
in the beginning betwixt the Woman and the Serpent, Genesis 3.15.
I will put enmity betwixt her and thee, betwixt her seed and thy seed; and
therefore there shall never want 2 Thessalonians. 3.2
absurd or unreasonable men, 1. Tim. 4.2.
having their consciences seared with a hot Iron, with whom no evidence of
truth shall prevail to make them desist from oppugning the seed that is
contrary to them. The beginning of which absurdity is to be seen in wicked
Cain toward his brother Abel, whom the voice of God personally speaking to him
could not divert from that malice whereby he had intended the destruction of
his brother. The succession whereof we may behold in the Scribes and Pharisees,
and Elders of the Jews, whom neither the innocence of the life of Christ,
neither the authority of his doctrine, neither the glory of his miracles, nor
any evidence of the hand of God working with him, could any way move, but that
they were still cauilling and quarelling against him, still accusing and
condemning him, and never ceasing even against their own consciences to fight
against him. What marvel is it then that the voice of God speaking to us in
the scriptures, and testifying what the faith and religion is that we are to
yield unto him, does not end the quarrel and appease the fury of our adversaries
against us, but that in a mad conceit of themselves and of their Church, they
go on still to make of religion what they list, and with impudent faces labor
to persuade men, that howsoever in plain words the Scriptures seem to make
for us, yet in meaning they are against us. And surely incredible it were, but
that we see it, that men having use of wit and will, should dare in that sort
as they do to mock and delude the word of God. At their pleasure they bring in
their abominations into the Church, and when the Scriptures are alleged
against them, they tell us by lame distinctions which stand one leg in the
Scriptures the other quite beside, that the Scriptures mean thus or thus, but
in no sort touch that which is done by them, though the very letter of the
text do apparently contradict them. As if the adulterer should say, that the
Scripture condemns not his adultery with a Christian woman, but only that
which is with Infidels and Pagans; or the drunkard should allege that it
means nothing of his drunkenness, but only of the drunkenness of them who
have not wherewith to maintain their drinking. How many distinctions have
they, whereof there is no greater reason to be given then may be given of these
answers? Now what heresy, what idolatry, what damnable fancies have there
ever been in the world, which may not find means for their defense if this
licencious kind of distinctions and devices may take place? If these mockeries
be deemed intolerable in the laws of men, what impiety, what wickedness is it
thus to dally with and to mock the word of God? But the light of the Scripture
does plainly discover the vanity of these shifts, and that is the cause why
they hate and shun the Scriptures, as the thief does the gallows and the
Bear the stake. What a work do they make, how many devices do they use, how
ready are they to apprehend every pretense, to discourage the people from
meddling with the Scriptures, and to breed in them an uncertainty and doubt of
resting their faith there? But there is no cause for thee to be moved at such
bugs and scar-crowes, wherewith these malignant adversaries seek to fright
thee out of the garden of Jesus Christ, desiring to have thee rather to
continue upon their stinking dunghils, then to gather the sweet and
delightsome flowers that yield the savor of life unto eternal life. Assure
thy self, that the most absolute assurance of truth is in the voice of truth
it self, and thou may be secure, that howsoever men may speak partially,
and may deceive thee, yet God who speaks to thee in the Scriptures, which the
adversary himself dares not deny, will never deceive thee. They pretend
great difficulties and obscurities in the holy Scriptures, but is it a reason
for thee to forbear to drink and to wash thy self in the shallow places of
the rivers of God, because there are also gulfes and depthes, the bottom
whereof thou art not able to search or sound? August. epis. 3. In ijs quae
aperta sunt tanquam familiaris amicus sine fuco loquitur ad cor indoctorum
atque doctorum.
In those things which are manifest in the Scriptures, says Saint Austine,
Ide^ de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9. In ijs quae apertae posita sunt in
Scripturis inueniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque viuendi.
In which are contained or found all things that belong to faith and behavior
of life, God speaks as a familiar friend, without glosing or guile to the
heart both of the learned and unlearned; Hieron. in Psalm. 86. Non vt pauci
intelligerent, sed vt omnes.
not that a few, says Hierome, but that all may understand, the Scripture
being Gregor. ad Leand. de exposit. lib. Job. Fluuius in quo agnus ambulet and
Elephas natet.
a river, says Gregory, wherein both the lamb may wade and the Elephant may
swim, August. de vtil. cred. ca 6. Plane ita modificata vt nemo inde haurire
non possit quod sibi satis est, si modo ad hauriendum deuote ac pie vt vera
religio poscit accedat.
the doctrine thereof being so tempered, says Saint Austine again, as that
there is no man but may draw from thence that that is sufficient for him, so
that he come to draw with devotion and piety, as true religion requires he
should do. When they then seek to bar thee from the use of this heavenly
light, what can thou conceive but that they are the agents and factors of the
Prince of darkness? The Tertul. contra Marcion.
Sepia or Cuttle-fish, Tertullian says, when he is in danger to be taken,
casts about him a black inkie matter, wherewith he darkeneth the water that
the fisherman cannot see him. What is the reason why those men in that sort
seek to compass themselves about with the black and dark clouds of ignorance
of the scriptures, but that their own consciences tell them that their
devotions must needs be descried to be superstitious and damnable if they come
to be viewed and surueyed by the light thereof? Now albeit this be the true
light Ephesians. 5.13.
which makes all things manifest, and the only sure foundation whereupon we
can rest our faith (for what is it what the whole world says if God say not
the same? yet against the importunity of the adversary, and for thy better
satisfaction, thou shall see our assertions and expositions thoroughly munited
and fenced with the acknowledgment of the ancient Church. Wherein although we
cannot but say, that by the Fathers and Bishops of those times, many things
were conceived and delivered amiss (and are not our adversaries forced, will
they, will they, to confess the same?) yet God has so provided, that his
truth ex abundanti is justified by them, and no antiquity or authority of
humane error has so defaced it, but that still the track thereof even by the^
who sometimes have deemed somewhat against it, is plainly to be discerned. Yea
in sundry articles of our faith the whole stream of antiquity runs so
oppositely and directly against the doctrine and practice of the Roman church
that now is, as that we may wonder at their extreme impudency and wilfulnes,
who against so clear and evident testimony do still persist in the maintenance
thereof. Which, in some part thou shall see in the treatise here following, and
shall understand according to the occasion here offered, that howsoever they
cry with wide mouths, The fathers, the fathers, yet their cry is greater then
their strength, and that the Fathers have not left us unfurnished either of
armor to defend our selves, or of weapons to conquer them. And the more to
secure thee hereof, I have set down the testimonies of the Fathers for the
most part in their own words, either in Latin or translated into Latin, or
in the Greek tongue sometimes where I had the copy at hand, and saw the
Latin translation not fitly to express the Greek. I have had a sincere and
faithful care to deal uprightly herein, and not to trouble thee with
impertinent allegations, but only such as are pregnant and clear to that
purpose for which they are alleged. That God (by whose providence this service
has befallen unto me) make the same profitable both to thee and me, and grant
us by writing and reading to increase in the light and assurance of his truth,
that we may more and more see and discern the frauds of these Mountebanks and
iuggling Sophisters, who by insolent ostentation of words, and casting of false
and deceitful colors, take upon them to be able to charm the world, and by
their wits to iuggle all other men beside their wits, treading under foot the
word of God, pretending the fathers names, and betraying the faith of the
fathers, subiecting all religion to their own fancy, and saying after the
manner of wicked men, Psalm. 12.4.
With our tongues we will prevail, we are they that ought to speak, who is
Lord over us? And thou, O merciful Father, who only art the refuge and
dwelling place of thy poor and maligned Church, Psalm. 68.18.
stablish for thy names sake the thing that thou have wrought in us, go forward
with the work which thou have so graciously begun, to dissolve the captivity
of Babylon, and to free the remnant of thy Church from the yoke of the slavery
and bondage of Antichrist, that all stumbling blocks of Popish prophanations
and idolatries being removed, there may be a way prepared for the return of
the forlorn seed of Abraham into the society of thy people, that
thencefoorth we may expect and look for the coming of thy Son Jesus Christ
to make an end of these evil days, and to gather us everlastingly to that
hope which in him thou have set before us. Apoc. 22.20.
Amen, Lord. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

The special Contents of this Book.
THat the Church of Rome makes Christ in effect no Christ. page 14. etc. That
Rome is Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist. page 39. Of Free Will. Chap. 1. page
86. Of original sin after Baptism. Chap. 2. page 163. Of the certainty of
Salvation. Chap. 3. page 255. Of Justification. Chap. 4. pa. 379. in which are
handled these points: 1. That righteousness before God is imputed, not
inherent. page 387. 2. What manner of faith it is whereby we are justified. p.
434. 3. That Faith only does justify. page 468. 4. How we affirm it
impossible to keep Gods commandments. page 550. 5. That our good works are
not free from stain of sin. p. 573. 6. That true faith cannot be without
charity and good works. page 605.
Of Merits. Chap. 5. page 629. Of Satisfaction. Chap. 6. page 729. Of
Traditions. Chap. 7. page 839. Of Vows, and namely of the Monkish vows of
chastity, poverty and obedience. Chap. 8. page 992. Of Images. Chap. 9. page
1105.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER, BY DOCTOR BISHOP.
GEntle Reader, I mean not here to entertain thee with many words: the
principal cause that moved me to write, was the honor and glory of God, in
defense of his sacred verity, then the employing of his talent bestowed upon
me: as well to fortify the weaker sort of Catholics in their faith, as to call
back and lead others (who wander up and down like to lost sheep, after
their own fancies) into the right way.

I took in hand particularly the confutation of this book, not only for that
I was thereunto requested by a friend of good intelligence and judgment, who
thought it very expedient: but also because perusing of it, I found it penned
more schollerlike then the Protestants use to do ordinarily: For first the
points in controversy are set down distinctly, and for the most part truly.
Afterward in confirmation of their opinion, the chief arguments are produced
from both Scriptures, Fathers and reason: Which are not vulgar, but culled out
of their Rabbis, Luther, Peter Martyr, Calvin, Kemnitius, and such like,
though he name them not. Lastly, he places some objections, made in favor of
the Catholic doctrine, and answers to them as well as he could. And (which I
speak to his commendation) does perform all this very briefly and clearly. So
that (to speak my opinion freely) I have not seen any book of like
quantity, published by a Protestant, to contain either more matter, or
delivered in better method. And consequently more apt to deceive the simple:
especially considering, that he withal counterfeiteth to come as near unto the
Roman Church as his tender conscience will permit him, whereas indeed he
walks as wide from it as any other noueller of this age.

Wherefore I esteemed my spare time best employed about the discovering of it,
being (as it were) an abridgement of the principal controversies of these
times, and do endeavor after the same Scholasticall manner, without all
superfluity of words, no loss to maintain and defend the Catholic party,
then to confute all such reasons as are by M. Perkins alleged for the contrary.

Read this short treatise (good Christian) diligently, for thou shall find in
it the marrow and pith of many large volumes, contracted and drawn into a
narrow room. And read it over as it becomes a good Christian, with a desire
to find out, and to follow the truth, because it concerns thy eternal
salvation: and then judge without partiality, whether Religion has better
grounds in Gods word more evident testimony from the purest antiquity, and is
more conformable unto all godliness, good life, and upright dealing (the
infallible marks of the best Religion) and spedily embrace that. Before I end
this short preface, I must entreat thy patience to bear with the faults in
printing, which are too too many, but not so much to be blamed if it be
courteously considered, that it was printed far from the Author with a Dutch
composer, and over seen by an unskillful Corrector, the greatest of them shall
be amended in the end of the book.

Before the printing of this part was finished, I heard that M. Perkins was
dead. I am sort that it comes forth too late to do him any good. Yet his
work living to poison others, a preservative against it, is never the less
necessary.

R. ABBOT.
IF you had respected the glory of God, M. Bishop, it should have appeared by
your respect to yield sovereign honor and authority to the word of God. God
is in heaven, and we are upon the earth: we have no knowledge of him, no
acquaintance or dealing with him but by his word. Therein we seek him, and
find him; therein he speaks unto us, and thereout we learn to speak to him.
If we have the word of God, God is present with us; if we be without the word
of God, God himself is absent from us. Therefore by our honor and obedience
to the word of God, it must appear, that we truly and sincerely intend and
seek for the glory of God. Hereby it appears that you, M. Bishop, in this
your book, have not fought for the glory of God, but rather to glorify
Extrauag. Joan. 12. Cu^ inter. in glossa Credere dominum Deum nostrum Papam sic
non potuisse statuere, etc. haereticum censeretur.
your Lord God the Pope, as your Gloss of the Canon law most blasphemously
has styled him. You have in this work of yours used all manner of untruth and
falsehood, to uphold and justify his wicked proceedings against the word of
God. Whatsoever God has taught us, whatsoever Christ and his Apostles have
delivered, all is nothing if your Lord God the Pope, and your master Bellarmine
his proctor general, do say the contrary. Howsoever simply and plainly they
speak, yet they mean not as they speak, if the Pope and Bellarmine will tell
you another meaning. As for your talent, we take it to be greater in your own
opinion and the opinion of your fellows, then it is indeed. But whatsoever it
is, you have abused it to the wrong of him that gave it, not to edification,
but to destruction, not to fortify any in the faith, but to nourish and harden
them that depend upon you, in error and misbeleefe; not to lead any into the
right way, but to entice men to Prou. 2.15.
crooked ways and lewd paths, which Chapter 7.27.
go down to the chambers of death, and the end whereof is confusion and shame;
not to withdraw men from fancies, but to draw them to other fancies, from
fancies in conversation, to fancies in religion; that so being fed wholly with
fancies, they may perish in the end for want of true food. And indeed men that
wander in fancies, are the subject for your malice and treachery to work upon.
Many that live in the opportunity of the knowledge of Christ, yet neglect and
despise the same. The light shines into their eyes, and they regard it not:
God offers himself unto them, and they say in their hearts, We have no
delight nor pleasure in thee. Therefore being empty and void of truth, they
lie open to be filled with error and lies; and having unthankfully withholden
themselves from God, God by just judgment gives them over to the hands of
impostors and deceivers, that it may be verified which the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1^
Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved,
therefore God shall send them strong delusion that they may believe lies, that
they may be damned which believed not the truth, but took pleasure in
unrighteousness.

Your friend of good intelligence and judgment, that thought it very expedient
that you should take in hand the confutation of M. Perkins book, spoke thereof
happily as Caiphas did of the death of Christ, meaning it one way which was to
fall out another way. I doubt not but it will fall out to have been very
expedient which you have done, because you give hereby occasion of discovering
your false doctrine, and of justifying the truth of Christ, which M. Perkins
was careful to maintain. I doubt not but many by this occasion will take
knowledge of your corrupt and treacherous dealing, your patching and shifting,
your cosening and deluding of men, and will discern the weakness and
absurdity of that bad cause, which with glorious and goodly words you labor so
highly to advance.

As for your commendation of M. Perkins book, it is but the imitation of some
vainglorious captains, who to grace their own victories, do set out to the
uttermost the adversaries power and prowess, thinking their glory to be the
greater, by how much the greater men shall conceive the might and valor of
them to have been whom they have overcome. You dreamed of a victory here, and
you thought it to be much for your commendation, that your adversary should be
deemed of as great strength as any is to be found amongst us. But we would have
you to understand, that the Church of England never took M. Perkins book to
be a warrior in complete harness, or a chalenger for the field, but only as
a captain training his soldiers at home, where he wants much of that
munition and defense wherewith he should endure the brunt of battle. He wrote
it very schollerlike indeed, for an introduction only to the true
understanding and judgment of the controversies betwixt us and you, but knew
well, that it wanted much that might have been added, to give it full and
perfect strength. You have taken hereof some advantage, as you conceive, and
yet how pitifully are you distressed many times both to uphold that which he
obiecteth for you, and to answer that which he alleges for us. Now if for the
compiling of his book he bestirred himself as the Be, going into other men's
gardens for the gathering of honey into his hiue, yet he made no Rabbines of
them, to take any thing for honey, because it grew in the garden of such or such
a man, but used careful and advised consideration of that which he wrote,
esteeming the weight of his arguments and of his answers, that he might
faithfully perform what he did undertake. But far otherwise have you dealt, M.
Bishop, in your marrow and pith as you call it of many large volumes contracted
and drawn into a narrow room. You have made Bellarmine specially your
Rabbine, your magister noster; you take all upon his, word; if he say it, you
will swear it: if he have once written it, you will write it again without
any further examination whether it be true or false. We are beholding to you
for translating so much of him into English for their sakes that do not
understand the Latin tongue. But Bellarmine mocketh and abuses you M. Bishop,
as he does every one that gives him any trust. He was a man of corrupt and
evil conscience, wholly prostituted to Antichrist, and sold to his deceits, by
which means he makes you to ly many times when you do not think ye lie. For
which cause I would advise you, when you will write any more books out of
Bellarmine, to make due trial of that which he says. It may happily do you
good, to make you detest his fraud and falsehood, and to hate that profession
which cannot be vpholden but by such means. There is cause you should so do,
who from many large volumes can gather no better marrow, no sounder pith, then
that which you have sent us for the marrow and pith of many large volumes. Your
marrow is but dust, your pith is but rottenness: there is nothing in your
book fit to satisfy the conscience of a man desirous to be instructed in the
truth. It will I hope sufficiently appear, that you have neither grounds from
the word of God, nor any approved testimony of antiquity, to warrant any man
to embrace that which you maintain. He that reads your book as it becomes
a good Christian to do, and conferreth it with M. Perkins book and our defense
thereof, to judge without partiality, I presume he will take you for a lewd
and naughty man, impudent and unshamefast, regarding only to uphold a side,
without any entire regard to learn or to teach the truth. In your postscript
you tell us that you are sorry M. Perkins being dead, that your book comes
forth too late to do him any good. Whereby we conceive, that you have a good
opinion of it, but we must tell you as touching doing him good in your sense,
he was not a man so weak as to be moved with such a toy. Indeed if he had
lived, we need not doubt but it would have done him much good, and been great
joy to him, to see that in the marrow and pith of many large volumes there
should be so little matter of moment to be said against that which he had
written, so little and so bad, as that we hope that your preservative will
become your own poison, and the bane of that which you thought to strengthen
thereby.

M. BISHOPS ANSWER TO MASTER PERKINS HIS EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
MAster Perkins in his Epistle Dedicatory says, It is a policy of the devil,
to think that our religion and the religion of the present church of Rome, are
all one in substance, or that they may be united. Before I am to deliver my
opinion concerning this point, I had need to be informed what this Author
means by these words our Religion: For there being great diversities of
pretended Religions current in the world, all contrary to the Church of Rome,
how can I certainly know whether of them he professes? Wherefore (good sir)
may it please you to declare what religion you understand when you say our
Religion? Is it that which Martin Luther (a licentious Friar) first preached in
Germany? or rather that which the martial minister Zuinglius contended with
sword and shield to set up in Zwitzerland? or perhaps that which John Calvin by
sedition wrought into Geneua, expelling the lawful magistrate thence, and by
the aid of Beza (a dissolute turnecoate) spread into many corners of France?
Or if by your Religion you mean only to comprehend the Religion now practiced
in England, yet are you farther to show, whether you understand that
established by the State, or the other more refined (as it is thought by many)
and embraced by them who are called Puritans, for of their leaven sauoureth
that position of yours, That the article of Christ's descent into hell crept into
the Creed by negligence, and some other such like in this book. These
principal divisions of the new Gospel (to omit sundry subdiuisions) being
famous, and received of diverse in England according to each man's fantasy, it
is meet you express whether of them you speak of, that it may be duly
considered how the Roman Religion and it agree, and what union may be made
between them. Now if you mean the hotchpotch and confusion of all these new
Religions together, as by the opposition here unto the Church of Rome, and by
the articles following may be gathered, then I am clear for you in this, that
there can be no more concord between these two Religions, then there is between
light and darkness faith and infidelity, Christ and Belial. Notwithstanding I
think that the reason by you produced to prove the impossibility of this
(...) is of no value, to wit, that they of the Roman church have razed the
foundation, for though in words they honor Christ, yet in deed they turn him
into a PseudoChrist, and an Idol of their own brain. A very sufficient cause
(no doubt) of eternal breach and division, if it could be verified. But how
prove you, that we Roman Catholics, who believe Jesus Christ to be perfect
God and perfect man, and the only Redeemer of mankind, make him a false Christ
and an idol? or before you go about to prove it, tell me (I pray you) how this
can well stand with your own definition of a reformed Catholic in your
Preface? There you affirm him to be a Catholic reformed to your liking, that
holds the same necessary heads of Religion with the Roman Church. Now can
there be any more necessary head of Religion, then to have a right faith in
Christ? can any other foundation be laid besides Jesus Christ? 1. Cor. 3.
If then your reformed Catholic must agree with the Roman Church in
necessary heads of Religion, as you hold he must: either the Roman Church
razeth not the foundation, and makes not Christ a PseudoChrist, as you say
here, or else you teach your disciples very perniciously, to hold the same
necessary heads of Religion with it. But to leave you to the reconciliation of
these places, let us examine briefly how you confirm your paradox, that the
Church of Rome makes Christ a false Christ, which you go about to prove by
four instances: The first is, because the servant of his servants may change
and add to his commandments, having so great power that he may open and shut
heaven to whom he list, and bind the very conscience with his own laws, and
consequently be partaker of the spiritual kingdom of Christ. Here are diverse
reasons hudled up in one, but all of little moment: for all these eueral
faculties which the Pope enjoys, being received by the free gift of Christ,
and to be employed in his service only, and to his honor and glory, are so
far off from making Christ a PseudoChrist, that they do highly recommend his
most singular bounty toward his followers, without any derogation to his own
divine prerogatives. The particulars shall be more particularly answered in
their places hereafter. Now I say in a word, that Christ's Vicar cannot change
any one of Gods commandments, nor add any contrary unto them, but may well
enact and establish some other conformable unto them, which do bind the
conscience: for that power is granted of God to every sovereign governor, as
witnesses S. Paul, saying, Let every soul be subject to higher powers, Romans
13.
And that (as it is in the fifth verse following) of necessity, not only for
wrath, but also for conscience sake. So that to attribute power unto one that
is under Christ, to bind our consciences, is not to make Christ a PseudoChrist,
but to glorify him, much acknowledging the power which it has pleased him to
give unto men. In like manner, what an absurd illation is that, from the power
to open and shut heaven gates (which all, both Catholics and Protestants
confess to have bin given to S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles) to
infer, that Christ is made a PseudoChrist, as who should say, the master
spoiled himself of his supreme authority, by appointing a steward over his
household, or a porter at his gates: he must be both master and man to, belike.
And thus much of the first instance.

R. ABBOT.
We may well think that M. Bishop did not well enjoy his wits, that would
write a book, and not know what it is whereof he writes. He has written a
whole book, such a one as it is, purposely against our religion, and yet will
seem here in the beginning not to know what our religion is. But he knows it
well enough, and although by an apish limitation of the foolery of some of his
companions, he would make it seem of many fashions and sorts, by diversity of
names, and by terms of divisions and subdiuisions, yet he sees and they all
see, and by the harmony of confessions of all the reformed churches it appears
to their exceeding great grief, that there is amongst them as great
uniformity and consent of religion, as ever was to be found in their
confederacy and banding of themselves against religion. Yea there are many
more material differences to be found amongst them, then can be reckoned
amongst us. He that would follow M. Bishops vein, might demand of him, what
they mean by the religion of the Church of Rome, whether it be the religion of
Pope John the 23. who publicly maintained that Constable ^^tiens. Council sess 11.
Per^n^cu^^ dixit, asseruit, dogmati zauit and adstruxit vitam aeternam non
esse, neque aliam post hanc, etc.
there is no eternal life, no resurrection, and that the soul of man
perishes with his body, as does the soul of the brute beast: or whether it
be the religion of Pope Bale de Act. Romans Pontif. in Leo 10. Quantu^ nobis ac
coetui nostro profuit ista fabula de Jesus Christo.
Leo the tenth, that held all the faith of Christ to be but a fable. Whether it
be the religion of the Council of Sess 4. Generali concilio quilibet
cuiuscunq, status vel dignitatis, etiamsi Papalis fuerit, (...) tenetur.
Constance, maintaining the Council to be above the Pope: or the religion of
the Council of Basil, decreeing the Pope to be above the Council. Whether it
be the religion of them Erasus. epist. ad oper. Hilar^ Asseueraus virginem
matre^ immunem a peccato originis apud Dominicales haereticus est, apud
Scoustas oribotanus.
that hold the virgin Marie to have been conceived without original sin, or
of them that hold her to have been conceived in sin. Whether it be the
religion of Thomas Aquinas, that holds Thom. Aquin; p. 3. q. 80. art. 3. ad 3
that a dog or a swine eating the Sacrament does eat the very body of
Christ: or the religion of the Sent 4. did. 13.
Master of the sentences, who cannot tell what the dog eats: or the
religion of them that say, as Vt supra.
Aquinas reports, that so soon as the dog or the mouse touches the
Sacrament, straightwayes the body of Christ is taken up into heaven. Whether
it be the religion of Pigh. de peccato originali. Catharin. de lapsu hominis,
etc. cap. 6.
Pighius and Catharinus, who hold original sin to be a mere privation: or
the religion of Dominicus a Soto, who holds it as his fellows do, to be a
positive corruption. Whether it be the religion of the Colon. in Antididag.
Divines of Colein, who with Pigh. de fide and instif.
Pighius hold, that we are justified by the imputed righteousness of Christ as
the Protestants, or of the rest that hold that we are justified by a formal
inherent righteousness of our own. Whether it be the religion of Osor. de
Just. lib 9.
Osorius, condemning the doctrine of S. Austine concerning predestination: or
the religion of Baron. Annal. lib. 6.
Caesar Baronius, who acknowledges the same to be true. Whether it be the
religion of Alfons. aduer. haeres. lib. 1 cap. 4 and 8.
Alfonsus de Castro, affirming that the Pope may err: or the religion of them
that affirm he cannot err. Whether it be the religion of the Jesuits,
maintaining Declarat. saecerd ad Clement. 8. page 29.
that a man who is no Christian may be Pope, and that stews are as lawful at
Rome as the Pope himself: or the religion of the Seculars, that condemn these
for wicked and false positions. Whether it be the religion of Dureus contra
Whitaker. lib. 1.
Dureus the Jesuit, defending that the Church may make a book canonical
Scripture, which from the beginning was not so: or the religion of Andrad.
defens. fidei Trident lib. 3.
Andradius, affirming that the Church has no such authority. I might lead
him along through Bellarmines controversies, and show how he alleges two,
three, four, and sometimes more opinions amongst them of sundry points of
their religion, and in every of them I might question, whether or which we
shall take to be the religion of the Church of Rome? Now if he will answer,
that men may have private opinions and followers therein, which yet may not be
urged as prejudicial to the current and commonly received doctrine of the
Church, in which sort their Alfons. de Caestro aduersus haer. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Thomists, and Scotists, and Occamists have been divided one from another in
the bosom of their Church, then let that little discretion that he has serve
him against another time to understand, that it is no prejudice to our
religion, that there is in some matters some diversity of opinions amongst us,
or that some men be exorbitant from that which is commonly amongst us approved
for the truth. There is an universality of doctrine with them, for which men
are esteemed of their religion, in the particulars whereof notwithstanding
there are many differences for which they will not be thought to be one of one
religion and another of another. What infinite variety of observation and
discipline is there found amongst their Friars and Monks, and yet they take
them to be all of one religion? There was of old a great dissension betwixt
Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 22.23.
Polycrates the Metropolitan of the Asian Churches, and Victor Bishop of Rome,
concerning the observation of the feast of Easter; betwixt Cyprian. ad
Pomptium. cont. epist. Stephani et Council. Carthag. apud Cyprian.
Cyprian and Stephanus Bishop of Rome, with their Churches on each part, about
the rebaptizing of them that were baptized by heretics; betwixt Socrat hist.
lib. 6. cap. 13.
Chrysostom and Epiphanius first, and after betwixt Hieron* aduer. Ruffin.
Hierome and Ruffinus, concerning the condemning of the works of Origin,
betwixt Socrat. lib. 7 cap 19.
Chrysostom and many other Bishops, concerning the often restitution of
penitents to the communion of the Church; betwixt August. epist. 18
Hierome and Austine, concerning Peter's dissimulation, and yet were they never
taken to be of diverse religions until this day. And what? are we then in worse
case then all these, that because there is some variance betwixt some of us in
some points of doctrine, or betwixt some others in matters of ceremony and
circumstance concerning the discipline of the Church, therefore we must be
sorted into so many Religions as M. Bishops idle head can devise differences
amongst us? This is to be contemned, as a peevish and impertinent cauil of
contentious and wrangling Sophisters, bewraying more malice then learning or
wit, making show to the unlearned of obiecting somewhat against us, when their
objection makes more against themselves then it does against us. Now then if
M. Perkins either concerning Christ's descending into hell, or some other like
matters subject to variety of opinion, were otherwise minded then stands
with truth or the common judgment of our Church, we do not therefore account
him a man of other religion, but a maintainer of our religion, and we will say
of him as Austine said of Cyprian, August.
Therefore did he not see somewhat, that by him a greater matter might be seen,
namely that in difference of judgment we are not to be contentious, but labor
with all our might to preserve the public peace and unity of the Church, and
with modesty and love to carry our selves toward them that in opinion dissent
from us. A notable example whereof we see in M. Calvin, who when Luther upon
some matter of question, behaved himself somewhat intemperately against him
and some others alike minded as he was, was wont to say, Calvin. epi. 57.
Though he should call me devil, yet will I do him his honor, to acknowledge
him an excellent servant of God. As for the imputations which here M. Bishop
lays upon him and the rest whom he names, we account them but as the barking
of a curre dog against a Lion; they are stale and threedbare cauils, and too
well known to cause them that reproach that he desires. If Luther were
licentious for marrying a wife, what were their Popes and Cardinals, their
Bishops, and Priests, and Monks, for keeping other men's wives, and retaining
concubines and harlots of their own? If Zuinglius went armed into the field to
give encouragement to his countrymen for their just and necessary defense, is
he thereupon to be taxed for a martial minister, more then Julius the second
for a martial Pope, who himself went in person against the French, and going
over the bridge of Tiber, cast his cross keys into the river, and took his
sword in his hand, saying, Bale. in Iul. 23
Seeing Peter's keys will do no good we will try whether Paul's sword will serve
the turn; or then Philip the French Bishop in the time king Richard the first,
for a martial Bishop, who bare arms against king Richard, and was taken in
battle, in whose behalf when the Pope wrote to the King, requesting favor
for his son, the King sent to him the Bishops armor with this message,
Matthew. Paris. in Richard. 1.
Vide an tunica filij tui sit an non, See whether this be thy sons coat or
not? Nay it is no rare matter to find examples of martial Popes and martial
Cardinals and Bishops in the Church of Rome, and therefore we need say no more
to M. Bishop as touching this cavil, but only to bid him look at home. As
for that which he says of Caluins expelling of the lawful magistrate out of
Geneua, it is a very malicious and false tale, it being very evident, that the
Bishop of Geneua whom he means, with his clergy, perceiving the people to
be minded for the abolishing of Popish superstition and receiving of the
Gospel, voluntarily fled from thence before Caluins coming to that place.
Last of all, he calls Beza a dissolute turnecoate: but if a man should ask
his wisdom, why he does so, he cannot tell. All the matter of this
dissolutenes is, that being under twenty years old, or a little above, he
wrote a book of Epigrammes, in which by imitation of Catullus and Ovid, he
expressed some things more licentiously and wantonly then was fit. The writing
thereof he afterward when God had called him to the knowledge of his truth
Beza Confess. Epist. Dedicat.
repented much, and when he was requested that the same might be reprinted,
denied it utterly, and wished the remembrance thereof to be wholly buried. In
his conversation otherwise he was never to be touched with any blemish of that
lightness, which in those poetical exercises he made show of. And is not this
a great matter, that these men object so often to his disgrace? Surely if the
lives of sundry of the ancient Fathers were looked into with such eyes, before
they were come to Christ, there would be found worse matters to vpbraid them
with, even by their own confession, then this is. S. Austine when the
Donatists dealt with him, as M. Bishop and his fellows do with Beza, gave
answer to them thus: August. constable. lit. Petil lib. 3. cap. 10. Quantum cunque
ille accus^t vinum meum, tantum ego laud medicum meum.
Look how much they blame my fault, so much do I commend and praise my
Physician. To which effect, I have heard that Beza himself answered one as
touching that columniation: Hic homo inuidet mihi gratiam Christi, This man
enuieth me the grace of Christ. Surely, that should have been no fault, though
it had been much greater, if he had continued one of them. But what would they
have said, if Beza had done as Bale. Act. Rom Pontif. in Iulio 3.
Ioannes a Casa their Archbishop of Beneuentum did, who wrote an Italian Poem
in commendation of Sodomie, and printed it at Venice, professing himself to be
delighted with that horrible filthinsse, and that he knew no venerie but that:
or as Jbid. in Sixth. 4 ex Orat. Heur. Agipp ad Loua.
Pope Sixtus the fourth, who built a Stews at Rome for the exercise of that
unnatural and monstrous lust? How many such filthy dogs are there found
amongst the Roman Sages, who yet with them must go for sacred and holy
Fathers, whilst Beza for a few verses written when he was yet but a boy, must
be subject to their reproachful malice all his life, yea and after his death
also. But the thing that troubles M. Bishop indeed is, that Beza became a
turncoate, for that he cast off the liuerie of Antichrist, the badge and
cognizance of the man of sin, and betook himself to the profession and
service of Jesus Christ. Well and happy were it for him, if he had turned his
coat in the like sort, if he had put on the garment of Christ crucified; which
though it might seem base in the eyes of the proud harlot of Rome, yet should
make him glorious in the eyes of God, and yield him acceptance before him. Now
the Articles of our religion set down by M. Perkins, he calls the hotchpotch
of all those new religions, because he well knows, that we on all sides agree
in the maintenance of these Articles, and therefore are indeed but one religion.
Whereby the Reader may easily conceive, how idle his objection is of divisions
and subdiuisions. But of this hotchpotch he has tasted, and by this time it
has made his stomach very sick, and I believe will cast him into a disease,
from which he will never be able to recover again.

Of the religion in these articles expressed, he confesses, that it can admit
no reconcilement with the Church of Rome, but he likes not the reason which M.
Perkins alleges of the impossibility of this union. His reason is, because
they of the Roman Church have razed the foundation, and though in words they
honor Christ, yet indeed do turn him into a PseudoChrist and an Idol of their
own brain. Against this reason M. Bishop alleges the explication that M.
Perkins makes of his Reformed Catholic, to be any one that holds the same
necessary heads of Religion with the Roman Church; whereto is added by M.
Perkins which M. Bishop omitteth: Yet so, as he pares off and reiects all
errors in doctrine, whereby the same religion is corrupted. Hereupon M. Bishop
asks, Can there be a more necessary head of religion, then to have a right
faith in Christ? which is very clerkely and well applied, and shows him to be
a man of deep insight into dark points. Surely to have a right faith in Christ
would not be understood for a head of religion, but for the whole effect (in a
manner) and substance of it. M. Perkins by necessary heads of religion
understands those generalities and principles whereof there is no question
betwixt the Church of Rome and us, which for the points that he handles, he
has set down under the name of our consents in the beginning of every
question. These he will have his Reformed Catholic still to hold with them,
but to detest the absurdities and errors, which they teach in the deduction and
application of these generalities. Therefore he does not say as touching those
principles, that they raze the foundation; but the razing of the foundation
consists in the indirect use and applying thereof. There is a generality
doctrine to which Heretics accord, and under the cloud whereof many times they
cover their heresies, even as the Pelagian Heretics hid the poison of their
heresy under the acknowledgement of the grace and help of God, but be wrayed
the same notably when they were urged to specify what they meant by the same
grace. So does the Church of Rome acknowledge the incarnation of Christ, his
passion, death and resurrection, his ascension, and intercession at the right
hand of God, but in assigning the use and effect of all these things and the
rest, they make Christ in a manner no Christ at all. M. Bishop therefore might
easily have seen, but that he was willing to show either his ignorance in not
understanding, or his learning in cauilling, that M. Perkins might well say
without any contradiction, that the Church of Rome had razed the foundation,
and yet wish his Reformed Catholic still to hold those necessary heads of
religion, which still remain in the acknowledgement and profession of the
Church of Rome. Now M. Perkins g ueth four instances of their iustling of
Christ out of his place. The first stands in the Popes usurping of the
spiritual kingdom of Christ, by changing his commandments and adding to
them: by taking upon him to open and shut heaven to whom he will; by binding
men's consciences with his decrees. But M. Bishop tells us, that Christ's
giving of these faculties to the Pope, does most highly recommend his singular
bounty toward his followers, and is no derogation to himself. Which he
tells us upon his own word; but as for me I have read over the new Testament
diverse times, and yet could I never light upon any place where Christ has made
any mention of the Pope, or of any faculties that he would bestow upon him. We
read of Antichrist the man of sin, that 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
he should sit in the temple of God, and take upon him to command as God; but
we find not that Christ did ever appoint any man to execute any such place. Out
of doubt Christ would somewhere or other have spoken of it, if he had intended
any such course. But M. Bishop takes it to be a great glory to Christ, to
have a Vicar here upon earth with a triple Crown, clothed like Dives in purple
and fine linen, and faring deliciously every day: bespangled with gold, and
besparkled with Jewels, and carried about like an Idol upon the shoulders of
men, having Emperors, and Kings, and Princes to attend him, to hold his
stirrup, to power him water, to kiss his foot, and all at his devotion, either
to set them up, or to pull them down; yea having power over heaven, and earth,
and Purgatory, (the only spite is, that he has no power to keep himself
from hell) and that he should make laws, and give dispensations against Gods
laws, and like a Lord of misrule, turn all things vpside down. O what a
goodly matter had it been, that Christ should have made all his servants like
Popes here in the world, and all other people vassals and tributaries unto
them? what a golden world would that have been, and how much would it have
renowned the bounty of Christ? Well, M. Bishop, we wish you to consider
thoroughly of the matter; we cannot see in the Gospel, but that you may as well
take upon you to be a Pope as he that is Pope, and you may as stoutly allege
for your self, that your Popedom does highly recommend the bounty of Christ.
But it seems to us, that you do too much abridge the Popes using of his
faculties, when you mention the employing of them only in Christ's service, and
to his honor and glory. Let him, M. Bishop, first serve himself, let him
enlarge S. Peter's patrimony, and advance the glory of his own seat; let him
proclaim Iubiliees and Pardons, that he may gather gold and treasure; let him
claw them that claw him, and wreake his anger upon them that resist him: as for
Christ he is but a poor man, let him attend for the reuersion, a little will
serve him. This device of theirs is wholly to be derided: their words are the
words of shameless hypocrites, not blushing to avouch the bounty of Christ in
an authority, which though there were from time to time after five or six
hundred years diverse degrees and steps unto it, yet in that sort, as they
now defend it, was not known in the world for the space of eight or nine
hundred years after the time of Christ: which has no warrant of the Gospel
of Christ, nor favors at all of the kingdom of Christ: which the ancient
Fathers never dreamed of, and could not have gone without most illustrious and
clear testimony and witness amongst the^, if ever it had been practiced in
their times. Let them in all antiquity parallel the Pope, and we will never
open mouth further to speak against them: but because they cannot so do, let
them confess themselves to be false wretches, and him to be a Pseudochrist, a
false and counterfeit Christ, in truth very Antichrist himself, who by
hypocrisy has intruded himself to sit in the place of Jesus Christ. But M.
Bishop tells us, that their Vicar cannot change any one of Gods
Commandments, nor add any contrary unto them. Where we see, that the Pope
apparently does that which they are ashamed to defend. They well know that he
sets nothing at all by the laws of God, and that whilst he takes upon him
to be the expounder thereof, he makes what meaning he list thereof, and there
by gives himself liberty to do what he list, and yet to say, he does nothing
against the law of God. It has been holden for a rule amongst them, as Bodin
mentions, Bodin de republ lib 1. cap 8. Qui a pont^si e maxim diuinis
legibus salutus sic huis apud deu^ immortalem satis cautum esse. Canonic.
regula.
That he is safe enough with God, who by the Pope is freed from the laws of
God. Thus they have told us, and according to that they have told us they have
practiced, that Decret. Greg. de concess. prebend. ca 4 Proposuit. secundum
plenitudinem pocestatis de iure possumus supra in dispensare.
the Pope above law can dispense of law by the fullness of his power; that
Ibid. in glossa. Papa^dispe sas contra Apostolu^, and contra Canones Ap stoli.
and contra vetus Testamentum.
he can dispense against the Apostle, against the Canons of the Apostle, and
against the old Testament; that 25. Sunt quidam in glossa. satis potest
sustineri quod Papa contra Apostolum dispensat.
it may well be maintained, that he does dispense against the Apostle. Shall we
not think that he changes and thwarteth the commandment of Christ, who with
a Non obstante takes that away which Christ has said, Drink ye all of this:
Council. Constamiens. sess. 13. Hoc non obstante
This notwithstanding the Church does thus and thus? Does not he contrary Gods
commandment, who requires us to worship Idols and Images, when God has
forbidden so to do? When God has charged subjects to be obedient to their
Princes and Governors, does he not cross the commandment of God, who takes
upon him to dispense with them 15.7.6 Authoritatem. and ibid. Alius.
for their oaths of allegiance, and gives them license to rebel? Does not he
make the law of God of no effect, who gives license of marriage in those
degrees of affinity and blood, in which God has forbidden any marriage to be
accounted lawful, as was here done in England to king Henry the eight for the
marriage of his brothers wife, and to Philip the late king of Spain, for the
marriage of his own sisters-daughter? Many such other matters are there wherein
this Vicar of Rome grossly and palpably bends himself against God, and yet
these hypocrites are so impudent, as that either by expositions they will seem
to defend them, or else if they can find no means for defense they utterly
deny them. Thus M. Bishop will here make us believe, that the Pope makes laws
only conformable to Gods laws, when as by that which he himself adds, he
proves him therein presumptuously and arrogantly to put himself into the
place of God. For to make laws and publish doctrines to bind the conscience,
belongs only to Christ, who in that respect is called the Iam. 4.12.
one Lawgiuer, Ephesians. 4.5.
one Lord, Mat 23 8.10.
one Doctor and master. Yet M. Bishop makes this a thing common to every
Sovereign governor, and takes upon him to prove it by S. Paul, saying, Romans
13.1.5.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, and that for conscience sake.
But he abuses the words of the Apostle, which have no intendment concerning
their Vicar, but are spoken of the higher powers, that is, of the temporal and
civil governors, either 1. Pet. 2.13.
the king as the superior, or other rulers that are sent by him, as S. Peter
gives us to understand the meaning thereof. Therefore Chrysostom expounds
the words thus; Let every soul be subject; Chrysostom. 14 Romans hom 23.
though thou be an Apostle, though thou be an Evangelist, though thou be a
Prophet, thereby informing us that Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, are of the
souls that are to be subject, and not the higher powers to which the
subjection there spoken off is required. The Apostle did not write it to
challenge thereby a subjection to S. Peter, or to himself, but to acknowledge a
subjection due to be performed by them and others to the civil power. Again,
the Apostle teaches us for conscience sake to be subject to the higher powers;
he teaches us not, that the conscience is bound as touching the things
themselves wherein we are to show our subjection to the higher powers. Laws
are said to bind the conscience, when they tie the conscience to the things
themselves which they command, as to be persuaded of a religious and necessary
duty and service therein immediately performed unto God; the transgressing
whereof to be a sin against God, not only mediatly by not yielding
subjection to the Lawgiuer, but immediately, in the very thing it self, which
it has done or left undone. It is the prerogative of God only to tie the
conscience in this sort, and whosoever else takes upon him thus to do, he is
an usurper against God. And thus does the Pope bind men's consciences; he makes
his laws matters of religion, and of the worship of God, and will have men
believe, that in the very doing of the things which he commands, they
immediately please God, merit at the hands of God, make satisfaction to him for
their sins, and purchase eternal life. On the other side, that in the
trespass thereof, not only in respect of disobedience to the higher powers,
but for the very not doing of the things themselves, there is sin against
God, a breach and wound of conscience, and the guilt of everlasting death. This
is one special matter for which we justly detest that Romish idol, and do
challenge him, not only for sitting in the Temple of God, by usurping an
outward superiority in the visible state of the Church, but also for 2. These.
2.4.
sitting as God in the temple of God by chalenging to himself and possessing
in such sort as has been said, the consciences of men, in which God only
ought to reign. As for Princes and temporal governors, if they keep them
within their bounds, they make no laws in that kind: for causes seeming good
unto them, they require outward conformity and obedience to their laws for
conscience sake of the authority committed unto them of God, but they leave the
conscience free from any inward opinion or persuasion of the things themselves
wherein they require to be obeyed. Here therefore a man is outwardly bound and
servant to the law, but inwardly he still continues free to God, being
persuaded, that the doing or not doing of such or such a thing, in and for it
self, makes him to God neither the better nor the worse, and therefore the
thing in it self being either way indifferent to God, he yields himself in
the outward man upon conscience of giving obedience to the power serviceable
and comformable to the law. And this is that Christian liberty which the
Scripture teaches; which is not, as some men would have it, a licentious
immunity in outward things, to do every man what we list, but a freedom of the
heart from any servile opinion of any thing that we do. The doctrine whereof
Luther very excellently propounded in two paradoxes, as they seemed to them
that understood them not, as touching conversation in outward things, that
Luther de libert. Christiana
a Christian man is free from all men, a Lord and subject to no man; And again,
that a Christian man is a diligent servant and vassal to all men, and subject
to all. Inwardly in conscience he is free and bound to nothing, but says, 1.
Cor 10.23.
All things are lawful for me. Outwardly in conversation he is bound to that
that is expedient and serves for edification; whereby he may yield obedience
to governors, love to neighbors, instruction to the ignorant, strengthening
to the weak, comfort to the strong, good example to them that are without,
avoiding all scandal whereby he should cause the liberty whereof he is
inwardly persuaded, to be blasphemed and slandered. Now therefore Princes in
their laws are to be obeyed upon conscience of their authority, being from
God; but this hinders not, but that the Pope is justly accused for thrusting
Christ out of his place, by requiring obedience upon conscience of the things
themselves which he commands. As for the opening and shutting of heaven, we
doubt not but that the Pope, if he be the minister of Christ, may challenge the
office and function thereof, according to the tenor of the commission wherewith
Christ has left it to his Church. But he not contented with that authority
which Christ has left indifferently to the ministry of the Church, immediately
from Christ himself derived in common to the whole body of the Church,
usurps unto himself a singularity in this behalf, making himself in
Christ's steed the head from whence the power of binding and loosing is derived
to all the rest, and in that respect at his own pleasure reserving to himself
a prerogative of special cases and causes, which are most for his advantage,
wherein no man may meddle but himself. It is true, that the master by
appointing afterward over his household or a porter at his gates, does not
diuest himself of his supreme authority, but since it is the peculiar honor
of the Lord to give that power and to determine the offices and places of his
servants, surely he who being left but afterward of a house, will lift up
himself to be a Lieutenant general of a Realm, and of a porter will make
himself a Potentate, and take upon him to be even as the Lord himself, he is
to be taken for no other but a traitor to his Lord, and therefore is by his
fellow servants to be resisted in his course. This is the Popes case. He had
the keys of heaven committed unto him in common with his fellow servants, to
every man for his part and portion of the Lords house: and to the great
disturbance and disorder of the house, he has challenged unto himself the
sovereignty and Lordship of the whole. He has made himself master of the
Church, and all the rest servants unto him. By this extrauagant and exorbitant
power he handles all things as he list, and abuses the keys to shut them out
of heaven, so far as he can, who in the behalf of their master do seek to
hinder his wicked and ungodly proceedings. What then shall we adiudge him, but
a traitor to his Lord and master Jesus Christ, usurping that which is proper
to Christ alone? In a word, M. Bishop must understand, that though the Popedom
were drowned in Tiber, and Babylon were cast as a millstone into the sea, yet
Christ needs not to be master and man to, but without the Pope has servants
enough to attend him in his service.

W. BISHOP.
Come we now to the second: It is, that we make Christ an Idol, for albeit we
call him a Savior, yet in us, in that he gives his grace to us, that by our
merits we may be our own saviors, etc. I marvel, in whom he should be a
savior if not in us: What, is he the Savior of Angels or of any other
creatures? I hope not, but the mischief is, that he gives grace to us, that
thereby we may merit and so become our own sauiors. This is a phrase unheard
off among Catholics, that any man is his own savior, neither does it follow
of that position, that good works are meritorious; but well that we apply unto
us the salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, by good woe kes; as the Protestants
avouch they do by faith only: In which sense the Apostle S. Tim. 4.
Paul says to his dear Disciple Timothy. For this doing thou shall save both
thy self, and them that hear thee. And this, does no more diminish the glory
of our Sovereign Saviors infinite merits, then to say that we are saved by
faith only: good works no less depending, if not more advancing Christ's
merits, then only faith, as shall be proved hereafter more as large in the
question of merits. Now that other good men's merits may stood them, who want
some of their own, may be deduced out of an hundred places of the Scriptures,
namely out of those where God says, That for the sake of one of his true
servants, he will show mercy to thousands, as is expressly said in the end of
the first Commandment.

In like manner I answer unto your third instance, that for Christ to have
taken away by his blessed Passion the eternal pain due unto our sins, and
to have left a temporal to be satisfied by us, is not to make himself a false
Christ, but a most loving, kind, and withal a most prudent Redeemer, Wiping
away that by himself, which passed our forces, and reserving that to us, which
by the help of his grace, we will may and ought to do: not only because it
were unseemly, that the parts of the body, should be disproportionalle to the
head: but also because it is reasonable (as the Apostle holds,) Romans 2.
that we s ffer here with Christ before we reign with him in his kingdom. In
your last instance you say, that we make Christ our mediator of intercession to
God, thinking out of your simplicity, that therein we much magnify him, and
sing Osanna unto him. Whereas we hold it for no (...) ^^^agement unto his
divine dignity, to make him our Int rcessor (...) to pray him to pray for us,
who is of himself, right able to help in all we can demand; being as well
God, as Man. And albeit one in thought singling out the humanity of Christ
from his divine nature and person, might make it an intercessor for us; Yet
that being but a Metaphisicall conceit, to separate the nature from the
person; since the Arian heresy (which held Christ to be inferior to his
Father) it has not been practiced by Catholics, who always pray our Savior
Christ to have mercy upon us, never to pray for us. And consequently make him
no mediator of intercession, but of redemption.

R. ABBOT.
The second instance given by M. Perkins, to prove that the Church of Rome
makes Christ but even as an Idol, giving him a name without the substance and
effect thereof, is this, that they call him a Savior, and yet make him a
Savior only in us and by us, not in himself or immediately by himself. For
this is all that they attribute unto him, that he puts us in case and state,
to save our selves, and to become our own Saviors. The meaning of the
instance being plain, M. Bishops question is very idle, In whom he should be a
Savior if not in us. He should be a Savior in himself, and by that that he
does himself, and not in us, or by that that we do for our selves. But to the
matter, he tells us, that it is a phrase unheard of among Catholics, that
any man is his own savior. Which we confess as touching the phrase and word,
but yet by their doctrine they do in truth make a man his own Savior. If they
should so say in words, they well know that all Christian ears would abhor
them, and many that now admire them, would spit in their faces, and account
them accursed and damnable hypocrites, who under pretense of doing honor unto
Christ, do rob him of his honor, and bereave him of the truth of that name
wherein the Sovereignty of his glory does consist: therefore they forbear the
words, though that which they teach is the same in effect as if they said so.
It is commonly known, that the effect is always attributed to that which is
the immediate and nearest efficient cause. We say in Philosophy, Sol and homo
generant hominem, The sun and a man do beget a man, because by the vegetation
and influence of the Sun and heavenly powers, it is deemed that a man has
power to beget a man. Yet we know that the Sun or the heaven is not called
the father of the child, but only the man by whom the child is begotten. So is
it therefore in the matter that we have here in hand. M. Bishop says, that God
Of merits. sect. 1.
freely bestows his grace upon us in Baptism, but all that arrive to the
years of discretion must by the good use of the same grace either merit life,
or for want of such fruit of it, fall into the miserable state of death. God
then gives us whereof to do it, but we our selves of that which God gives
must effect and deserve our own salvation. Therefore M. Bishop again
compares the grace of God to a Ibid. sect. 3.
Farm, which the father bestows upon his son, who of the commodities that
arise of the good usage thereof, grows to be able to make a further purchase
at his fathers hands, even of any thing that his father will set to sale. In
which case the father cannot be said to be the purchaser, or to make the
purchase for the son, but the son is the purchaser for himself, though by
that which his father gave him, through the well ordering of it, he became able
to make the purchase. Seeing then that Christ does only give us that whereof
we our selves are to raise merits to deserve and purchase salvation, as they
teach, it must needs follow by their doctrine, that Christ is made the more
remote and antecedent cause, but we our selves are properly and immediately the
true causes of our own salvation. Howsoever therefore they use not the phrase,
yet they teach the thing it self, that Christ is not our Savior properly, but
we our selves by the good usage of his gifts, are the Saviors of our selves.
Which absurdity M. Bishop saw, that standing to their own grounds, he could
by no means avoid, and therefore is content with Pighius (as it seems) for
a present shift, to retire into our harbor; albeit I verily think, he
understands not himself, nor can tell, what meaning to make or that he
says. The thing that follows of the assertion of meritorious works, he
says, is this, that by good works we apply unto us the salvation which is in
Christ Jesus, as (says he) the Protestants avouch they do by faith only. But
he should here have told us, how his meaning is, that this salvation is in
Christ. For if he mean, (as commonly he does) that it is in Christ, because
God for Christ's sake gives us grace whereby to merit and deserve our
salvation, then he dallieth altogether, and mocketh his Reader, as if he should
say, It follows not of the position of meritorious works, that we are our
own saviors, but that we apply unto our selves by good works, that whereby
we are made our own sauiors. But if he mean, as the Protestants do, when they
avouch, that by faith only we apply unto our selves the salvation which is in
Christ Jesus, that is, that this salvation is entirely in the merits of Christ,
deserving and purchasing the same for us, and that merely and immediately for
Christ's sake God bestows the same upon us; that we do but only stretch
forth the hand (and that by his gift also) to receive that which freely and of
his mere mercy he gives unto us, then his meritorious works are come to
naught, and he bestows a great deal of labor in vain for the proof
thereof. We would gladly see which way he will shift. Surely if our good works
do but apply unto us the salvation which is in Christ, then they cannot be said
to merit salvation themselves. For that that applies, does not work the
effect of that which it does apply. The hand that applies the medicine, cannot
be said it self to work the cure: for if it perform the effect it self, to
what end does it apply another thing for the same purpose? But if our works do
merit salvation themselves, then they do more then apply unto us the salvation
which is in Christ Jesus, and we must be said according to the absurdity
before mentioned, to be thereby our own saviors. Let the Reader well observe,
how he steals away in a cloud of ambiguous words, which notwithstanding
howsoever he expound, do work inconvenience to himself. But by his own words
he gives answer to the place which he obiecteth of Paul saying to Timothy,
that 1. Tim. 4.10.
so doing, he should both save himself and them that heard him, that he did
not mean, that Timothy should do that for himself, by virtue whereof he
should be saved, but only that he should apply unto himself the salvation
which is in Christ Jesus. He was to save them that heard him, not by meriting
their salvation for them, but by preaching unto them 1. Cor. 15.2,
the Gospel by which they were saved. So was he also to save himself, by
continuing in the same faith and doctrine of the Gospel, whereby the way of
salvation is set forth unto us. In the same manner S. Peter exhorts the
Jews, who were pricked in their hearts at the hearing of his preaching, Act.
2.10.
Save your selves from this wicked generation: namely, by receiving and
accepting the message of salvation by Jesus Christ. We are said to save our
selves, as we are said to feed our selves, and to cure our selves. We feed our
selves, not by being food and nourishment to our selves, but by receiving that
which is our food. We cure our selves, not by being a medicine to our selves,
but by taking and applying to us that whereby we are cured. So we save our
selves only by embracing Jesus Christ, by whom only we are saved. And this we
intend, when we say, that we are saved by faith only: namely, that faith only
is the instrument whereby we lay hold of Jesus Christ, in whose only merits
our salvation wholly and immediately does consist. Which doctrine of faith wholly
aduanceth the glory of Christ, because it refers all entirely to him, not
only for that we confess that faith is the gift of Christ, but also because
we teach that it is not by any virtue of faith it self by which we are saved,
but only by the merit and power of Christ, whom we receive by faith. How then
does M. Bishop say, that their assertion of our merits does no more diminish
the glory of the merits of Christ, then it does that we say, that we are saved
by faith only, when as they leave so much for man to glory of in himself,
his assenting to grace, and working therewith by his own free will, and his
well using thereof to merit and deserve salvation for himself; when as we say,
that we are saved merely by the merits of Christ, and have nothing in any sort
to attribute to our selves, and they say, that we are not saved merely by the
merits of Christ, but the merits of Christ do only make us able by free will
to deserve our own salvation. But of this (as he says) we shall have further
occasion to speak in the question of merits. Now here M. Perkins notes it for
a further absurdity of their doctrine of merits, that they do not only make
men their own saviors, but make one man also the savior of another, whilst
that in the want of our own merits, we may be partakers in the merits of the
Saints. M. Bishop being a man of a wide throat to swallow, and of a strong
stomach to digest without any trouble all the filth of the Romish Church,
sticks not at the matter, but plainly affirms, that other good men's merits
may steed them that want some of their own, and says, that it may be deduced
out of an hundred places of Scripture, whereas of that hundred there is not so
much as one, that will yield him ground of any such deduction. For as for that
which he alleges out of the first Commandment, that God shows mercy unto
thousands in them that love him, and keep his commandments, how he should
draw man's merit from thence, where God professes only his mercy both to the
fathers and the children, no wise man can easily conceive. It is true, that God
sometimes in the Scriptures is said for one man's sake to show mercy to another,
it is never said, that it is for one man's merits that he shows mercy to
another, but only for his own love and promise sake. Thus do the people of God
sometimes make mention of Deuteronomy. 9.^7.
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Psalm. 132 10.
David, not as to beg of God for their merits sake, but as to urge God with
his covenant and promise, that he made unto these, who showed all that mercy
and love unto their seed, Deuteronomy. 7.8. and 9.5.
because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto their fathers. And
surely seeing it was only for his mercies sake, that he respected the fathers
themselves, it is unlikely that for the fathers merits he should respect the
children. Oecumen. in Rom cap. 4. Siquis illum demostrare nita^urper opera
dignum fuisse, etc. Vides quod nihil omnino h^beat, ne vestig^um qu^dem operum
adhuiusmodi beneficia quae ipse a Deo accepit. Vnde ergo his dignus habitus
est? Ex sola side.
Abraham (says Oecumenius) was not by his works worthy of the benefits of
God: he had nothing at all, not any show of works, to the benefits that he
received of God; but was accounted worthy thereof by faith only. The cause of
all was that which Moses said; Deuteronomy. 4.37.
He loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed. And what, was it for
their merits that he loved them? What merits had Abraham, when God called him
from Iosuah 24.2.
serving other gods, and even at the first gave him Genesis 12.1.2.
an absolute promise of all that mercy and goodness that he showed him
afterward? It was therefore that which the same Moses also says: Deuteronomy. 7 7 8*
He set his love upon you, because he loved you: there was nothing to move him
to love but only love. To which purpose he says by the Prophet Malachy: Mal.
^.2.
Was not Esau Jacobs brother? yet I loved Jacob and hated Esau; signifying,
that there was no cause in Jacob himself, why God should love him more then
Esau; and yet of mere grace and favor he vouchsafed so to do. Here is nothing
then to serve M. Bishops turn, that one man's merits may steed another, because
these had no merits to steed themselves, but whatsoever they were, they were of
mercy, and it was only mercy whereby God bound himself to show mercy to
others for their sakes. And well we may wonder, but that these are impudent and
shameless men, that they should dare so far to advance the righteousness of
man, as to make him able* not only to merit and deserve at Gods hands for
himself, but also for other men. Wherein their perverseness and iniquity is
so much the greater, for that they attribute and yield that to the spotted and
imperfect works and righteousness of man, which they wickedly deny to the
immaculate and most perfect merits and righteousness of the Son of God. For
they hold it absurd, that the righteousness and merits of Christ should be
imputed and accounted unto us; and yet they blush not to say, that a man may
have merits of his own, sufficient for himself, and an overplus beside to be
reckened and imputed unto others to supply their want. The Popes dispensation
can apply the merits of one man to another, but the faith of Christ cannot
apply to us the merits of Christ. The Scripture teaches the imputation of
Christ's merits, and that they deny: it denies the imputing of other men's
merits, and that they affirm against the Scripture. Which, beside that it
teaches an insufficiency and imperfection in all the works of men, and
therefore bereaueth them of all power and ability of merit, does also give us
to understand, that Ezech. 18.20
the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon himself, and therefore
shall not be reckened to another: that Romans 14.12.
every man shall give account of himself unto God, and therefore shall have
nothing to do with other men's accounts; that Gal 6.5.
every man shall bear his own burden, and therefore shall not have his
burden borne by others: that the Mat. 25.9.
wise virgins have no superfluity of oil which they may impart to them that
want. Tertull de pudicit. Qu^^ a^^nam mortem sua soluit, ^^solus Dei filius^
sipeccatores, quomodo oleum faculae tuae sufficere and ti^^ and mi^^ poteri^?
Who has by his death released another man's death, says Tertullian, but only
the Son of God? If thou be a sinner, how should the oil of thy little candle
be sufficient both for thee and me? He spoke it truly in the proposition,
though he misapplyed it to a wrong conclusion, and therefore Leo bishop of Rome
says in like sort, that Leo Epist. 81. Acceperunt quip^^^ ^ust^, non d^derunt
coronas and def^r^^^dine fi^^lium exempla (...) iust^^^^, etc. nec alter^^
quisqua^ de^ (...) Domi^^^ ^^ster Jesus Christus (...), in quo o^nes crucifixi,
etc.
the just have received crowns, they have given none; and of the fortitude of
the faithful are grown examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness;
neither has any man by his end paid the debt of another man, seeing it is
only our Lord Jesus Christ amongst the sons of men, in whom all have been
crucified, dead, buried, and raised again. Far was he from that blasphemous
doctrine, which now prevails in the Church of Rome, that some men have merits
and gifts of righteousness, whereby to be helpefull to other men. But yet M.
Bishop tells us, that they that receive this help must be such as want but
some of their own. For we must understand belike, that heaven is merited by
peecemeale. Some merit it quarter part, and some the one half, and some all,
and some more then all. By which means it must come to pass, that some, who
have merits to keep them from hell, and yet not enough to bring them to
heaven, must hang betwixt heaven and hell, unless the Vicar of Rome will do
them a favor, out of his treasury to endow them with the merits of some of
the Saints, or some of the Saints themselves will undertake out of their
superfluities to make up that that is wanting unto them. This secret the
Divines of Rhemes uttered, that Rhem. Testam. Annot. Mat. 25.8.
if we have not our own merits* we shall not be helped by other men's deserts
at the day of judgment, leaving it to be understood, that if we have merits of
our own, we may then look for the supply thereof in other men's merits.
Wretched hypocrites, impostors and deluders of ignorant men, who Hieron. in
Esa. lib. 6 cap. 14. Cum dies iud^ cij ve^dormitionis aduenerit, dissoluentur
omnes manus, quia nullum opus dignum Dei iustitia reperietur and non
iustificabitur, etc.
when all hands shall fail (as Hierome says) because no work shall be found
worthy of the justice of God, and no man living shall be justified in the sight
of God, yet make men believe, that some shall have that superabundance of
righteousness and merits, as that they shall be able to relieve them that want
merits of their own. Is this the honor that they do to Christ, to thrust him
out of place when we have greatest need of him, and to make men trust to the
imaginary merits of sinful men? And what, shall not Christ be as ready then
to succor us as the Saints? or shall his merits be found insufficient to
deliver us? or what should be the cause, that we should thus be put over one to
be helped by another, rather then by him that is the helper and Savior of us
all? But this is the horrible apostasy and darkness of the Romish Sinagogue,
which has made no end of multiplying her fornications, wherewith she has
bewitched men, and made them to doat upon strange and monstrous fancies, and
hidden from them the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, by which they should be
saved.

As touching the third instance, it shall not here be need to say much. We
affirm that they derogate from the merit of Christ's passion, and do make him
but a Parti-christ, in that they deny him to have made a full and perfect
satisfaction for our sins, and say, that he has left us in part to satisfy
for the same. M. Bishop says, that in the reserving of temporal satisfaction,
he has showed himself a most prudent redeemer, as if his foolish brains were
the measure of the wisdom of Christ, or the self-will conceits of carnal
men were to determine the power and effect of the cross of Christ. Christ is
Ioh. 1.29.
the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, and if he take away
our sins then they remain not by us to be satisfied for. The forgiveness of
our sins by Christ is 2. Cor. 5.19.
the not imputing of our sins; but how are they not imputed, if satisfaction
thereof be required? This falsehood of theirs he gloseth with a truth. We must
be made Rom 8.29.
like unto Christ as members to the head. We must 2. Tim. 2.12.
suffer with Christ, that we may reign with Christ. But what of this? We deny
not, but that by suffering, when God will and as he will, we must be conformed
to Christ our head, but we deny this conformity in suffering to be any
satisfaction for our sins. Which as it has no show of proof out of those
words of the Apostle, so that it cannot otherwise be proved, shall be showed
God willing* in the question concerning that matter.

In the third and last instance M. Perkins charge them, that though they be
content to acknowledge Christ to be a Mediator of intercession, yet they
reserve to his mother the blessed Virgin, their Queen of heaven, an authority
to rule him and command him there. This M. Bishop thinks to be a matter of
simplicity in M. Perkins, that he should think it a magnifying of Christ to
acknowledge Christ a Mediator of intercession, whereas they make him, as he
tells us, no Mediator of intercession, but a redeemer. Now in this we see his
honest mind, that he is loath that M. Perkins should say better of them then
they deserve, and will have us to know, that they bereave Christ of one
special part of his office and Priesthood, which is to make intercession for
us. The reason is, because they must have a dignity belonging to the Saints,
and therefore because they know not how to do it otherwise, they divide the
office of Christ's mediation, and reserving unto Christ, though not that wholly
neither, to be our Mediator of redemption, do assign the mediatorship of
intercession to the Saints. And yet the Scripture expressly tells us, that
Christ Romans 8.^4.
sits at the right hand of God to make intercession for us; that Heb. 7.25.
he is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by him. seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Thus S. Austin says, that Aug. in Psalm.
85. Orat pro nobis, and orat in nobis, and oratur a nobis. Orat pro nobis vt
sacerd^s nost^r, orat in nobis vt caput nostrum; oratur a nobis vt Deus noster.
Christ prays for us, and prays in us, and is prayed unto of us. He prays
for us as our Priest; he prays in us as our head; he is prayed unto of us as
our God. Yea he says, that Jn Psalm. 64. Solus ibi ex his qu^ carnem
gustauerunt i^terpell^^ pro nobis.
in heaven Christ alone of them that have been partakers of flesh makes
intercession for us, insomuch that C^nt epist. Par^^en. li. 2. ca 8. Si Joan^es
^ta diceret, siquis peccauerit, aduocatum^ne habe ^is apud patrem; ego exore
pro p^^cat^s vestris, quis eum sicut dis^^pulum C^risti and non sicut
Antichristum ipsum iniueretur?
if S. John should have said, If any man sin, ye have me for an advocate with
the father, I make intercession for your sins, he should have been holden not
for a Disciple of Christ, but rather for Antichrist himself. Thus he does not
only make Christ our Mediator of intercession, but also the only Mediator of
intercession, and therefore condemns M. Bishop of wicked sacrilege, that
takes away this part of his office from him, to bestow it upon the Saints. But
this prayer and intercession Christ performs not now by vocal words, as in
the time of his humiliation here upon the earth, neither does he infinitely
busy himself by renewing his petitions and supplications to the Father when we
call upon him, but his intercession for us is his Heb. 9.24.
appearing in the sight of God for us; whereby as Cyprian. ser. de bapt.
Christi and manifestat. Tr^nit.
the sacrifice which he offered upon the cross is no less effectual now,
then it was the day when water and blood issued out of his wounded side, still
requiring our salvation as the reward of his obedience, even so the voice of
his intercession in the days of his flesh, still sounds aloud in the ears
of God, and by the power thereof, both we our selves, and all our prayers and
requests are most effectually recommended to his mercy. Therefore we do not
now pray to him to pray for us, but we John 16.23.
ask the father in his name, as he himself has taught us, presenting still
the memory of the merit and intercession that he has performed for us. And
because John 5 27.
the father has given him power to execute judgment even as he is the son
of man, even Mat. 28.18.
all power both in heaven and earth, and Ephesians. 1.22.
has made all things subject under his feet, and set him as head (and ruler)
over all things, to the behoof of his Church, therefore we do not only pray
to the Father, but we pray to him also, even as he is the son of man; we do
not only Bernard super Mis^us est. Hom. 3. Jpsum ocul^s patris; ipsum
offeramus and suis.
offer or present him to his Fathers eyes* but we present him also to his own
eyes, that for that intercessions sake which August. in Psalm. 34. In meipso
humanitas in meipso diuinitatem interpellat.
in himself as man he made to himself as God, he will both God and man be
merciful unto us. As for M. Bishops Metaphysicall, or rather Nestorian-like
and heretical conceit of singling out the humanity of Christ from his
divinity, to make it an intercessor for us, let him bury it in his own
brains where it was bred: but for us we know, that to pray to Christ to be our
intercessor to the Father, according to that he promises, John 14.16.
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, does no more
require the singling or separating of the manhood from the Godhead, then do all
other his works for our reconciliation unto God, in which the union of two
natures does always give force and strength to that which is properly acted
but in one.

W. BISHOP.
And to come to your grievous complaint, that withal his Mother must be Queen
of heaven, and by right of a mother command him there: Who can sufficiently
marvel at their unnatural gross pates, who take it for a disgrace to the
Son, to advance his own good Mother? or else who well in his wits,
considering Christ's bounty to strangers and his enemies, will not be
persuaded, that on his best beloved mother, he did bestow his most special
favors? For having taken flesh of her, having sucked her breasts, and received
his nuriture and education of her in his tender years, and being as well
followed of her, as of any other, Is it possible that he should not be as good
to her, as to others, unto whom he was not at all beholding? Again, the very
place of a mother, requiring pre-eminence, before all servants and subjects, of
what dignity soever: does not the right-rule of reason lead us to think,
that Christ the fountain of all wisdom, replenished the blessed Virgin Marie
his dear Mother with such grace as should make her fit for that place? it
lying in his hands, and free choice to do it. And therefore is she truly
termed of holy and learned Antiquity, Our Lady and Queen, exalted above all
quiers of Angels. That which you impute unto us farther, that she must in the
right of a mother command her Son, it no doctrine of the Romish Church, nor
said in all her service: We say, Show thy self to be a mother: but it is not
added by commanding thy Son: that is your gloss, which is accursed, because
it corrupts the text, for it follows in that place, Sumat per te preces,
etc. Present our prayers to him, that vouchsafed to be borne of thee, for us.
If any private person by meditation, piercing more profoundly into the mutual
love and affection, of such a Son toward so worthy a Mother, do deem her
prayers as forcible in kindness as if they were commandments, and in that
sense call them Commandments, according to the French phrase. Vos priers me
sont des commandments, that may be done without derogation to Christ's supreme
dignity, and with high commendation of his tender affection, unto his reverent
and best beloved mother. Wherefore to conclude this Epistle, if there be no
waightier cause then this by you here produced, why you and your adherents do
not reconcile your selves unto the Church of Rome: you may shortly (by Gods
grace) become new men. For we are so far off, from making our Savior Christ
a Pseudochrist, or from drawing one jot of excellency from his sovereign
power, merits, or dignity: that we in the very points by you put down, do
much more magnify him then you do. For in maintaining the authority by him
imparted unto his deputies, our spiritual Magistrates, and of their merits and
satisfaction: We first say, that these his servants prorogatiues be his free
gifts, of mere grace bestowed on whom he pleases; which is no small praise of
his great liberality: And withal affirm, that there is an infinite
difference between his own power, merits, and satisfaction, and ours: wherein
his Sovereign honor is preserved entire to himself without any comparison.
Now you make Christ's authority so base, his merits and satisfaction so mean,
that if he impart any degree of them unto his servants, he loses the honor
of all from himself. Whereupon it follows inuincibly, if you unfeignedly
seek Christ Jesus his true honor, and will esteem of his divine gifts
worthily, you must hold out no longer, but unite your selves in these
necessary heads of Religion unto the Catholic Church of Rome, which so highly
exalts him, both in his own excellency, and in his singular gifts to his
subjects.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop tells us a goodly and a fair tale out of their old wives
devotions, and shows himself more absurdly and grossly superstitious, then
were almost to be imagined in a learned man. It is strange to us, that the
Evangelists and Apostles were not acquainted with this high point of religion,
or if they were acquainted with it, that none of them should have regard to
recommend it to the Church. Surely, if they had been of the Romish religion
that now is, they would never have done the Virgin Mary that exceeding great
wrong: but because they were not so, because their care was, that God only
should be advanced according to his word, therefore M. Bishop thinks them
unnatural gross pates, in taking it to be a disgrace to the Son, to advance
his own good Mother. As for us, we honor the blessed Virgin so far as God
has given us warrant so to do. We acknowledge her a most excellent instrument
of the grace of God, and most highly blessed above all other, in that God by
her would bring him into the world, that should be a blessing to all other. But
yet we say, that this was a blessing only according to the flesh, it was no
spiritual and heavenly blessing, and because spiritual blessings are greater
then carnal, we hold the Virgin Mary to have been greater by that that she had
according to the spirit, then by the honor that was done her according to the
flesh. Therefore S. Austin says, that August. de sa^ct. Virg. cap. 3. (...)
Mari^ (...) fi^^ Christi, qu^^ c^ (...) etc. (...).
Mary was more blessed by receiving the faith of Christ, then by conceiving the
flesh of Christ. Her neernesse to Christ in being his mother had nothing booted
her, had she not more happily borne him in her heart then in her womb. This
our Savior himself confirms in the Gospel, when being told as he was
preaching, that his mother and brethren were desirous to speak with him,
answered as with indignation, ^.
Who is my mother, and who are my brethren? He that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven. he is my brother and sister and mother. ^
My mother and brethren are these which hear the word of God and keep it:
Tertul^ (...)
He makes these other of the greater worth, says Tertullian, and shows
that the hearing of Gods word is a thing to be preferred above being the mother
and brethren of Christ. J^ (...), etc. Non vt v^^^^res su^stituit. sed vt
dig^^^^res.
He transferreth the names of kindred to them, whom he rather judges to be
most near unto him, because of faith, whom he puts in place of the other,
not as more truly his mother and his brethren, but as being of greater worth.
So again, when a woman amidst the company cried out: L^k 1^.28.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that gave thee suck, to
withdraw the minds of men from carnal fancies, he answers, Yea rather,
blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it; Tertul. de car^^
Christi. Non ma^^^^ v^^rum and v^ (...)
Not denying the womb and pappes of his mother (says Tertullian again) but
signifying them to be more happy, that do hear the word of God. This
happiness and heavenly bounty Mary was also partaker of, but he considers
her respectively only under the title of the mother of Christ. Therefore more
plainly S. Austin delivers Christ's answer: Aug ^ (...)
My mother whom ye call blessed is therefore blessed, because she keeps the
word of God. not because the word became flesh in her. Epiphanius further
observes, that when Christ another time says unto his mother: Woman what have
I to do with thee, mine hour is not yet come? He therefore E^ (...) Virgi^^^
(...) appella^^^, ve^u^ propheta^^ quae futura ess^ (...) sectarum ac haeres^^^
gratia, vt ne aliqud (...) sancta^^, in hanc haeres^ (...).
called her woman that none might think too highly of the holy Virgin; as
prophesying what should come to pass in the earth by Sects and heresies, that
none admiring her (says he) should fall into this heresy and the dotages
thereof: speaking there as touching the heresy of the Collyridians, who set up
the image of the Virgin Mary, and thereto offered (Collyridem) a cake in the
honor of her, and thereof they had their name. As touching all this blind
devotion which the Papists have renewed to the full, he tells us, that Ibid
Est ^^dibr^um tota r^s. and amcularum fabula
it is a toy, and an old wives fable: and asks as we do, Quae Scripturae ae
hoc na^^auit^
What Scripture has told us any thing hereof? And that we may understand how
leudly M. Bishop belyeth antiquity, in saying, that Antiquity termed the
Virgin Marie, Our Lady and Queen exalted above all quiers of Angels, he
reasons thus against that heresy: Quis Prophetarum praecep^^ hominem
adorari, nedum mult^^rem?
Which of the Prophets has taught, that any man is to be worshipped? much
less a woman. And again, St Angelos adorari non^uli^ quanto magis eam quae
genitae est ab Anna.
If God will not have the Angels to be worshipped, how much more will he not
have the daughter of Anna to be worshipped? And again, Mariam nem^ adoret, non
dico mulurem, imo neque vtrum. Deo debetur hoc mysterium, neque Angelicapiunt
talem glorificationem.
Let no man worship Mary; I say, not a woman, no not a man: this mystery
belongs unto God, the Angels receive not any such glory. And again, as
touching the name of the Queen of heaven, he adds, Ne turbent orbem
terrarum: ne dicant, honoramus reginam coeli.
Let not these women trouble the world: let them not say, We do honor to the
Queen of heaven. We see how far Epiphanius was from the conceit of those
supersticious fooleries, which M. Bishop here so solemnly discourses unto us.
We see how the Church of Rome walks just in the path and steps of these
heretics, which were of old condemned by the Church. They argued as M. Bishop
here full simply, does from the unright rule of crooked reason: she was his
best beloved mother, he took flesh of her, he sucked her breasts, surely he
would bestow upon her his special favors; he would without doubt do more for
her, then for strangers, to whom he was not at all beholding: he would
replenish her with such grace as should make her fit for that place which he
never gave her. These are fantastical presumptious of silly doting women, and
blind ignorant dottrels: they have no savor at all of the spirit of God. They
might upon these grounds argue for the brethren and cosins of Christ, and
conceive, as the mother of James and John did, that being his kinsmen, they
should be more respected then others, and as they were nearer him in blood, so
should be preferred in dignity and place, and therefore should Mat. 20.2^.
sit one on his right hand* and the other on his left hand in his kingdom. But
the kingdom of Christ is not administered by such fancies, neither do carnal
titles serve to give preferment there. And as touching the blessed Virgin,
Epiphanius further against such conceits observes, that Christ Ibid. Non pe^^
si^ ipsidare baptisma, non benedicere discipulis, (...) ^t terra ^mpera^^
^ussit, sed and sola^ ipsa^ sa^ctificationem esse dignam factam esse regn^
ipsius.
permitted her not to baptize* gave her not power to bless his disciples, did
not appoint her to reign or rule in the earth: but her only sanctification
was, to be made worthy of his kingdom. It was therefore an heretical device,
to make her Queen of heaven: and it has been since one of the forgeries of
Antichrist, to attribute unto her a power and authority to command the Son
of God. But M. Bishop tells us, that this is no doctrine of the Roman
Church, nor found in all her service, yet knows well enough, that this was
the doctrine of the Roman Church, and commonly found in all her service.
Harlots that have little shame, yet blush at some things: and the harlot of
Rome though of an iron forehead, yet saw some things to be so grossly
blasphemous and inexcusable, as that she could not for shame but remove them
out of the Church, when question began to be made of them. Such was that prayer
concerning Thomas Becket, which before I mentioned in the answer to the
Epistle: Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit,
Fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit.
That is: By the blood of Thomas which for thee he did spend,
Make us, O Christ, to clime whither Thomas did ascend.
Which prayer was found in all their Portesses, though now it be taken out. So
they were wont also very solemnly to sing throughout the whole Church of Rome:
Iube filio, foelix puerpera
Iure matris impera
Redemptori, etc.
Bid thy Son, O blessed Mother,
By mothers right command our Redeemer.
This Duraeus the Jesuit acknowledges Duraeus contr. Whitaker. lib. 9. Ad
libros Rituales confug^^, ex quibus obsoleta quaedam corradis.
ex libris Ritualibus, out of their books of rites and ceremonies, by which
their Church-seruice was directed. Yea M. Bishop himself very well knows,
that the words are not to be denied, and therefore as Duraeus does, so does he
also make a favorable construction thereof, that the Author of that prayer,
deemed the Virgins prayers to her Son, to be as forcible in kindness, as if
they were commandments, and in that sense called the^ commandments. Thus as
M. Harding under a color of Harding. Confut. of the Apolog^^ part. 2.
spiritual sporting and dalliance; so these men under opinion of kindness, do
labor to hide open blasphemy and spiritual idolatry. They stick not to
speak apparently to the derogation of the Son of God, and then turn it to
matter of jest, like him of whom Solomon speaks, who Pro. 26.18.19
faining himself mad, casts firebrands, arrows and deadly tools, and then
says, Am not I in sport? But how ill their sporting construction fitteth with
the humor of those times, let it appear by another hymn of theirs, which
will not be so answered: Histor. secundum chorum Augustens^de commemor.
Virginis Mariae.
Gaude matrona coelica; exultando magnifica
Deum tuum salutarem qui te fecit singularem.
Tu ancillam Jesus Christi te vocare voluisti:
Sed vt docet lex diuina, tu ipsius es Domina.
Nam ius habet and ratio, matrem prae esse filio.
Ergo ora suppliciter and praecipe sublimiter,
Vt nos in mundi vespera ad regna ducat suprema.
That is to say: Be glad O matron heavenly, and with rejoicing magnify
Thy God, thy Savior who thee has singled out in dignity.
The handmaiden of Jesus Christ, thy self to call thou wast content:
But thou his Lady mistress art, as teaches Gods commandment.
For right and reason does require, the mother be above the Son:
Pray therefore as a suppliant, and command as a higher one:
That in the end of this worlds days,
He bring us to his heavenly joys.


Here is then right and reason, and Gods Commandment to approve and justify,
that the Virgin Mary as the Mother should have power over her son, and
authority to command him. And to no other purpose sounds that which M.
Bishop acknowledges, as being yet in their use, In hymn. Ecclesiastic.
Monstrate esse matrem; Show thy self to be a mother. He says it is not
added, by commanding thy son, but he should have told us how otherwise it
should be meant; because we know not, nor can conceive in what meaning they
should request her to show her self to be his mother, but only upon opinion
of some motherly superiority, and authority to command him. For as for that
which he says follows in that place, Sumat per te preces qui pro nobis natus
tulit esse tuus; Let him by thee receive our prayers, who for us yielded to be
thy son; it gives us no light at all to the contrary, but that she should
show her motherly command, by causing him to accept the prayers that are made
unto him; which he seeing, translateth the words falsely, Present our prayers
unto him, etc. And thus the common people were persuaded by them, and specially
women, that they had better hope and readier access to God, and more assured
safety by our Lady, then they had by the Son of God. And no marvel, when
they lifted her up into the seat of Christ, and invested her in their public
service, with all the titles of mercy and grace that are proper unto him. Now
therefore, M. Bishop, there is cause sufficient for us to forbear to be
reconciled to the Church of Rome, which under pretense of magnifying Christ,
has put the Pope and the Virgin Marie, and the rest of the Saints in the place
of Christ, and colors her Antichristian presumptions, and usurpations under
the feigned title of the gifts of Christ. You devise what you lift, and fill
the Church with your abominations, and use the name of Christ as a cloak to
cover your filthiness and shame. If they came naked in their own likeness,
all men would detest them, and detest you for persuading them; therefore it is
the policy of the whore of Babylon to offer the Apoc. 17.4.
filthiness of her fornications in the golden cup of the name of Christ, that
the glory of the cup may bewitch them, not to suspect any poison to be
contained therein. As for us, we esteem of the power, merits and satisfaction
of Christ, as he himself has taught us to esteem; we assume no part or
parcel thereof to our selves, because by the letters patents of his Gospel we
have no warrant so to do. Because then we unfeignedly seek the true honor of
Jesus Christ, and cannot brook the dishonor that is done unto him in the
Church of Rome, under the counterfeit terms of his divine gifts, we make
choice to hearken to the voice of God, Apoc. ^8.4.
Come out of her, my people, and be not partakers of her sins, lest ye be
partakers of her plagues.

M. BISHOPS ANSWER TO M. PERKINS Preface to the Reader.
Upon your preface to the Reader I will not stand, because it touches no point
of controversy: let it be declared in your next, what you mean, when you
desire your reformed Catholic to hold the same necessary heads of Religion
with the Roman Church: for if the Roman Church does err in the matter of
faith, and justification; in the number and virtue of the Sacraments; in the
books and interpretation of the word of God; if she raze the foundation, and
make Christ a Pseudochrist, and an Idol; to omit twenty other errors in
substantial points of faith, as in this your small discourse you would
persuade: there will remain very few necessary heads of Religion for them to
agree in. And be you well assured, that you are so wide from winning Catholics
by this your work, to a better liking of your Religion, that you have taken
the high way, to lead them to a far greater dislike of it; by teaching, that
in so many material points it differs so far from theirs. For all
Catholics hold for most assured, that which the most ancient, learned and holy
Doctor Athanasius in his Creed delivers in the 2. verse: Which Catholic
faith unless every man observe wholly and inuiolably (not omitting, or sh
inking from any one article of it) without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.
If S. Basil that reverend and blessed Father of the Church, does hold it the
duty of every good Christian, rather to loose hi^ life, then to condescend to
the alteration of any one syllable in matter of faith: Theod. 4. his. cap. 17.
you may be sure that we Catholics cannot but carry a very base conceit of
your doctrine; who go about under the ouerworne and threedbare cloak of
reformation, to deface and corrupt the purer and greater part of Christian
Religion: specially when they shall perceiu^ the most points of your pretended
reformation, to be nothing else but ld ^otten condemned heresies, new scoured
up and furbushed, and so ^^shew made more saleable unto the unskillful, as in
this treatise shall be proved in every Chapter.

R. ABBOT
YOur demand, M. Bishop, is already satisfied before. M. Perkins by those
necessary heads of Religion, understands such general grounds as stand
unquestioned betwixt us and the Romish Church, which for the matters handled
he commonly sets down by the name of our consents in the entering of every
question. There are some maine points of doctrine to which the Church of Rome
subscribeth as well as we. The Reformed Catholic is still to hold those,
though he depart from the corruptions and abominations, to the maintenance
whereof the same Church of Rome does wickedly misapply them. As for his winning
of Catholics to the liking of our Religion, I assure my self that you M.
Bishop your self, and your friend of good intelligence and judgment, were
jealous and doubtful thereof. His plain debating of the points in question,
laying open the absurdity of Popery, and clearing the doctrine on our part,
from those lies and slanders wherewith in corners you labor to deprave it,
might seem very likely to draw many to the knowledge and approbation of the
truth. It should seem, there was some sore, for that both you and your friend
were so careful to apply a plaster; but your plaster by the grace of God will
make your sore a great deal worse, when men shall further see, how sincerely
he has dealt to deliver truth out of the word of God and doctrine of the
ancient Church, and what base geere you have brought as the marrow and pith of
many large volumes, for the contradicting and oppugning of it. The more and
greater the points are of difference betwixt the Church of Rome and us, the
more does it concern your Catholics, if they tender their own salvation to
look into them, which if they do, they will cease to think basely of our
religion, and will begin to honor it, and embrace it as the truth of God. They
will see, that there is in it a true reformation indeed, a just departure from
the horrible idolatries and superstitions of the Romish Sinagogue, and it shall
grieve them that they have so long dishonored God, by holding fellowship with
him who has no true fellowship with Jesus Christ. That you think basely
thereof, M. Bishop, we wonder not. He that doateth upon a harlot, is wont to
scorn and think basely of honest matrons. The Scribes and Pharisees thought
basely of our Savior Christ: no marvel if you do the like of the Gospel of
Christ, who live and thrive by traditions as they did. As for old rotten
condemned heresies, how silly a man you have showed your self in the obiecting
thereof, it has appeared partly already in the answer of your Epistle, and
shall appear further, God willing, in the answer of your book, and we will
expect hereafter, that you learn more wit, then to babble and prate of
heresies, you know not your self what.

THE THEME OF M. PERKINS Prologue.
And I heard another voice from heaven say, Go out of her my people, that you
be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues. Revel. 18.3. M.
BISHOPS ANSWER TO M. Perkins Prologue.
Sect. 1.
THe learned know it to be a fault, Exordium Common.
to make that the entry unto our discourse, which may as properly fit him,
that pleads against us: but to use that for our proeme, which in true sense
has nothing for us, nay rather bears strongly for our adversary, must needs
argue great want of judgment: Such is the sentence above cited out of S. John
by M. Perkins: for it being truly understood, is so far off from terrifying
any one from the Catholic Roman Church, as it does vehemently exhort all to
fly unto it, by forsaking their wicked company that are banded against it.
For by the purple Harlot in that place is signified (as shall be proved
presently,) the Roman Empire, as then it was, the slave of Idols, and with most
bloody slaughter persecuting Christ's Saints: Those of the Church of Rome being
as nearest unto it, so most subject to that sacrilegious butcherie. Wherefore
that voice which S. John heard say, Go out of her my people, that you be not
partakers of her sins, etc. can have none other meaning, then that all they
who desire to be Gods people, must separate themselves in faith and manners
from them, who hate and persecute the Roman Church, as did then, the Heathen
Emperors, and now do all Heretics: Unless they will be partakers of their
sins, and consequently of their plagues. This shall yet appear more plainly
in the examination of this Chapter. Where I will deal friendly with my
adversary, and advantage him all that I can; that all being given him, which
is any way probable; it may appear more evidently, how little he has to any
purpose out of this place of the Apocalipse, whereof all Protestants vaunt and
brag so much both in their books and pulpits. Well then, I will admit that
in the 17. and 18. Chapters of the Revelation by the whore of Babylon, is
understood the Roman state and regiment: which in lawful disputations, they
are not able to prove: the most iuditious Doctor S. Augustine, and diverse
others of the ancient fathers, with the learned troop of later interpreters,
expounding it of the whole corpse and society of the wicked. And as for the
seven hills on the which they lay their foundation, they are not to be taken
literally: the Angel of God in the very text it self interpreting the seven
heads of the beast, to be as well seven Kings, as seven hills. But this
notwithstanding to help you forward, I will grant it you, because some good
writers have so taken it: and therefore omit as impertinent that which you say
in proof of it. What can you infer hereunto? Marry that the Roman Church is
that whore of Babylon. Fair and soft good Sir, how prove you that? Thus. The
whore of Babylon is a state of the Roman regiment, ergo the Roman Church is
the whore of Babylon. What form of arguing call you me this? By the like
sophistication, you may prove that Romulus and Remus were the purple Harlot,
which to affirm were ridiculous, or (which is impious) that the most Christian
Emperors, Constantine and Theodosius, were the whore of Babylon, because
these held also the state of the Roman Empire and regiment. To make short, the
feeble force of this reason lies in this: that they who hold the state, and
govern in the same kingdom, must needs be of like affection in religion;
which if it were necessary, then did Queen Marie of blessed memory, and her
sister Elizabeth carry the same minds toward the true Catholic faith,
because they sat in the same chair of estate, and ruled in the same kingdom.
See I pray you what a shameful cavil this is, to raise such outcries upon. A
simple Logician would blush to argue in the par^^ies so loafty: and yet they
that take upon them to control the learned in the world, often fall into
such open fallacies. Well then, admitting the purple Harlot to signify the
Roman state, we do say, that the state of Rome must be taken as it was then,
when these words were spoken of it; that is, Pagan, Idolatrous, and a hot
persecutor of Christians. Such it had been a little before under that bloody
tyrant Nero, and then was under Domitian: which we confirm by the authority
of them who expound this passage of the Roman state. The commentary on the
Apocalipse, under S. Ambrose name says, The great whore sometime does
signify Rome, specially which at that time when the Apostle wrote this, did
persecute the Church of God: (...) Cap. 178.
but otherwise, does signify the whole city of the Devil. And S. Jerome who
applies the place to Rome, affirms, Libr. 2. cont. J^^^n.
that she had before his days blotted out that blasphemy written in her
forehead, because then the state was Christian, which before had been Heathen:
so that unto the party Pagan, and not unto the Church of God, he ascribes
these works of the wicked Harlot: which also the very text it self does
convince: for it has That she was drunk with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus. Verse 6.
Now the Church of Rome had not then by the confession of all men, drawn any
blood of Christ's Saints, but in testimony of his truth, had powered out
abundance of her best blood. Wherefore it is most manifest, that the harlot
could not signify the Church of Rome, so pure and free from slaughter: but the
Roman Empire, which was then full gorged, with that most innocent and holy
blood. Again, that whore is expounded, Verse 18.
To be a city which had kingdom, over the Kings of the earth. But the Church
of Rome had then no kingdom over the earth, or any temporal dominion at all;
but the Roman Emperors had such sovereign commandment over many Kings:
wherefore it must be understood of them, and not of the Church. Now to take
kingdom not properly for temporal sovereignty, but for spiritual
Jurisdiction, as some shifters do; is to fly without any warrant, from the
native signification of the word, unto the fantastical and voluntary
imagination. And whereas M. Perkins says, page 5. that Ecclesiastical Rome in
respect of state, princely dominion, and cruelty against the Saints, is all
one with the heathenish Empire; he both seeks to deceive, and is greatly
deceived: he would deceive, in that he does apply words spoken of Rome, above
1500. years ago, unto Rome as it is at this day: and yet if that were granted
him, he erreth foully in every one of his particles. For first, touching
princely dominion, the Roman Empire held then, all Italy, all France, all
Spain, all England, a great part of Germany, of Asia, and also of Afric:
having their Proconsuls, and other principal Officers in all those Countries,
drawing an hundred thousand millions in money, and many other commodities out
of them: Wherefore in princely dominion, and magnificall state, it surmounted
Ecclesiastical Rome (which has not temporal dominion over the one half of
that one kingdom of Italy) more then an hundred degrees. And as for
persecution, the Empire slew, and caused to be slain, more Saints of God in
one year, then the Church of Rome has done, of reprobates and obstinate
heretics, in 1600. years.

R. ABBOT.
WE see that M. Bishop has some skill in Oratory, but it seems he has
learned one precept above the rest of extenuation or diminution, to give
semblance of making light of his adversaries arguments, and not to be touched
therewith, when notwithstanding he is galled with them, and wounded at the
heart. Of this lesson he makes good use throughout his whole book; but here
in the beginning having his wits ye^ fresh, he goes somewhat beyond it, and
will make his Reader believe, that that text of the Apocalipse, which M.
Perkins propounded for the matter of his Prologue, Go out of her my people,
etc. is so far from making against them, as that it is an advertisement to
all men to forsake the society and fellowship of all them that show themselves
adversaries to the Church of Rome. The Apostle tells us, 1. Cor. 11.19.
There must be heresies, that they which are approved may be known. Because
there must be heresies, there must be heretics, men give up to reprobate
sense, obstinate and wilful in their wicked fancies, even then when they are
Tit. 3 11.
condemned in themselves. Otherwise such is the light and evidence of
Scripture, in directing that admonition as a caveat against the Church of Rome,
at least wise to every man's eyes and sight, there is that probability
thereof, as that a man would not believe, but that the handling of this point
should have made M. Bishop to tremble and fear, and to surcease from going any
further in the rest, specially seeing that for the safeguard of his minion of
Rome, he is feign to go so directly contrary to the evidence that stood
against him. Yet we see how gloriously he carries himself here in the
beginning, and makes show of great largess, and of giving his adversary all
the advantage he can. But let him remember what Solomon says, Prou. 25.14.
A man that boasts of false liberality, is like clouds and wind without
rain. His words show more courage then wisdom, and he gives his adversary
no advantage at all, but what he must have whether he will or not. The
question is, whether Babylon and the whore of Babylon mentioned in the
Revelation, be to be understood of Rome or not? He alleges out of Austin, and
some other ancient (though not indeed so ancient) writers, and out of a learned
troop of later interpreters, as it pleases him to term them, that by Babylon
is understood the whole corpse and society of the wicked. But his master
Bellarmine having mentioned that exposition for answer to our objection,
leaves, it, and says, Bellarm de A^tichrist. cap. 13 secun^o dici potest. and
me^ iudiciomelius per merc^^^em intell gi^^ mam.
It may be said, and in my judgment better, that by the harlot is understood
Rome. So had he before said, that S. John Ibid. cap. 5. Explicat mulierem esse
vrbem magnamquae sedet super septem c^lles, id est, Roman^.
declares, that the woman is the city that sits upon seven hills, that is,
says he, Rome. The very clear light of the truth made him to confess, that
in the description of the whore of Babylon Rome must necessarily be
understood; he must shift otherwise as he might, but he saw that to deny this
would be no shift. Yea and the exposition that M. Bishop brings, makes
nothing to the contrary. For although we understand that Babylon do import the
whole corpse and society of the wicked, yet we are also to understand, that
this corpse and society has a head, from whence the name is derived to the
whole body, and therefore the notification of the body, specially being a body
so confused, must needs be by the description of the head. The affirming I say
of Babylon to be the whole corpse and society of the wicked, does not exclude
Rome from being meant by the whore of Babylon, because the head is necessarily
implied in the whole body, and Rome is described and set forth unto us, as
being the head of that society. And that the head is here properly meant, is
inuincibly manifest, because the speech is here of Apoc. 14.8. and 17.2.
her that makes all nations drunk with her fornications, and is therefore to
be distinguished from the body of the wicked of all nations, which are made
drunk by her. But for declaring of this point S. Austin in sundry places
divides the whole body of mankind by August in Psalm 26. and 61.
two cities, Babylon and Jerusalem, comprehending under the name of Babylon
all that live according to the flesh, and under the name of Jerusalem, all
that live according to the spirit. Idem in Psalm. 64. Duas istas civitates duo
faciunt amores: Jerusalem facit am^r dei; Babyloniam facit amer secul^
The love of the world makes Babylon, and the citizens thereof, The love of
God makes Jerusalem and the citizens thereof. This earthly city being the
whole corpse and society of the wicked, takes the name of it from Babylon the
great City of Assyria, which was for the time the principal part thereof. De
ciuit dei. li. 16 cap. 17. In Assyria praeualucrat dominatus impiae ciuitatis:
huius caput erat Babylon illa, cuius terr^genae ciuitatis nomen ap^issimum est,
(...) est, confus^^.
In Assyria (says S. Austin) prevailed the dominion of the wicked city; the
head thereof was Babylon, whose name, that is, Confusion, fitteth the city of
earthly kind and disposition. That Babylon wholly sauoured of the flesh,
affecting altogether the state and kingdom of this world, full of abominable
idolatry, covetousness, pride, cruelty, unclean and filthy lust,
persecution and hatred toward the people of God, whom it held a long time in
subjection and bondage to it self. Now as that Babylon being the most ancient
state of earthly minded men, was the head of that company and society of the
wicked, not because all universally were outwardly subject unto it, but because
all were joined inwardly in conformity of affection with it; so Rome arose up
afterward to be another head of the same body, Ibid. Roma co^^^ velut altera
(...) Occide^te Babylonia.
as it were another Babylon in the West, as S. Austine speaks. Ibid lib. 18
cap. 2. Babylonia quasi pr^m^ Roma: Ip^^ Roma quasi secunda Babylonia est^^
cap. 22. velu^ priori^ filia Babyloni^.
Babylon, says he, was as it were a first Rome, and Rome is as it were a
second Babylon, and as the daughter of the former Babylon* It was Babylon then
even from the first original of it, though as did Babylon, so Rome also should
in the latter states thereof grow to be in higher degree of confusion then it
was in the beginning. All this the holy Ghost most plainly confirms in the
description delivered by Apoc 13.1. and 17.3. etc.
S. John. First, it is to be observed, that S. John according to the example of
the Prophet Daniel, does by the term of Dan 7.3. etc.
a beast import some earthly kingdom, state, and government, therefore named
a beast, to signify the same to be led wholly with beastly and carnal
affection, to those things that concern the flesh, and savor of the flesh.
Secondly, by Cap. 17.1.3.
a woman, a harlot, he notes a city, which is the place and palace of such a
state, given to fornications, both spiritual by idolatry, and corporal by
luxuriousness, wantonness and filthy lust, which sits and has
advancement by the pre-eminence of that kingdom, state, and government. Thus
the Angel plainly distinguishes the woman and the beast, when he says: Ver.
7.
I will show thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that bears her,
of which S. John had said before, Ver. 3.
I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast. Albeit, we are so to take
this distinction, as that withal we understand that the same is not always
precisely observed, but that the woman and the beast are used sometimes
indifferently for the same, and either of them to signify the whole. Now of
the woman the Angel says, Ver. 18.
The woman which thou saw, is the great city, which reigns over the kings
of the earth. Again, she is said Ve^. 1.
to sit upon many waters, which (says the Angel) Ver. 15.
are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. But there was no city
that reigned over the kings of the earth, and over those many nations and
peoples, but only the city of Rome. Rome therefore is the woman that is there
meant. This appears further by that he notes of the situation of this city
upon the seven heads of the beast, which (says the Angel) are Ver. 9.
seven mountains or hills, upon which the woman sits. M. Bishop tells us,
that those seven hills are not to be taken literally; but that is a very
witless shift. The Angel by way of exposition delivers, that by seven heads
are meant seven hills, and we must take it upon M. Bishops word, that by seven
heads are not meant seven hills, but somewhat else, but what, he cannot tell
himself. What an absurd toy is this, that the Angel so expounding it, we
should be sent to him again, to know what he means by seven hills? But this
touches them to the quick, because the city of Rome is famous for seven
hills, for which Tertullian calls the people of Rome Tertul. Apol. cap 35.
Ipsos Qu^rites, ipsam vernaculam septem collium plebem conuenio.
the native or home-borne people of seven hills; whereof they had their Idem de
idololat.
septimontium, which was Jbid. in Annot. Ren. Liur. Septimontium dies festus
appellatur mense Decembri, etc. quod in septem monubi^ fierent sacra.
a festival day in the month of December, upon which day they performed
sacrifices and devotions upon those seven hills: and was so named (as Varro
observes) Varro de ling. Latin. lib. 5. Dies septimontium nominatus est ab hu
septem montibus in quibus vrbs sita est.
of those seven hills upon which the city stood. Seeing then there is no city
in the world to which this mark of seven hills can be applied but only the
city of Rome, they have no way to excuse Rome from being the whore of Babylon
here described, but only by saying, that those hills are not properly to be
understood; thereby bewraying the misery of their cause to every man that does
not wilfully yield himself to be blinded by them. The Angel further
expounds those Ver. 9.
seven heads to signify seven kings, of which five are fallen, says he, one
is, and another is not yet come, that is, says the Rhemish Divines, though
they said it before they were aware, Rhem. Test. Ann. Apoc. 13.^
five were before Christ, one present, and one to come. Whereby they cross
that absurd shift of theirs used in the place which we have here in hand, that
Annot. Apoc. 17.9.
seven is a mystical number, signifying universally all of that sort whereof he
speaks, and that the seven heads, hills, or kingdoms, are all the kingdoms
of the world, persecuting the Christians, being heads and mountains, say they,
for their height in dignity above others. For if the seven heads be taken in
that generality of construction, then there is no place left for this division
of five before Christ, one present, and one to come, because the meaning must
be all that are past, all that are present, and all that are to come. The other
exposition which they bring is as vain and ridiculous as that. For as they
reckon Ibid.
five empires, kingdoms, or states, that were persecutors of Gods people before
the time of Christ, as of Egypt, Canaan, Babylon, the Persians, and Greeks: so
they may reckon many more as cruelly minded toward them as these were, the
Philistines, the Amalekites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Ismaelites, the
Edomites, the Assyrians: and because there are so many more then five,
therefore they cannot accord with the sum here, where there are but five. Yea
and the text plainly rejects this manner of account, because the seven heads
here spoken of, are heads of one beast, and therefore cannot be applied to
diverse states. But by one of these heads or kings, it shall appear what all
the rest are. Of the king that was in the time of Christ and of S. John, there
is no question but that it was the Emperor of Rome, who was in a manner the
king of the world, and therefore Luke 1.2.
gave forth commandment a little before the birth of Christ, that all the
world should be taxed. There is no other king to be spoken of at that time, but
only this king. Seeing then that the sixth king is head of the Roman state,
and all the seven kings are heads of one and the same state, it must needs be,
that those five kings, which were before Christ, were also heads of the Roman
state. Now in this sixth head, we see that the name of king is not understood of
them only who have the very title of kings, but of such as have the place and
authority of kings, that is, the highest and supreme government of the state.
And as the sixth head or king was not only one man, but the whole succession of
the Emperors, so we must understand, that the other five heads or kings, were
not five several men, but five several titles and states of the highest
governors of the state. And fully so many we find in the Roman government
before the Emperors and the time of Christ; which were kings so called,
Consuls, Decemuirs, Tribunes, Dictators; every of which for their times
successively, were the supreme Officers in the Empire and kingdom of the
Romans. Seeing then that this cannot be justified in any other state or city,
but only in the city of Rome, it is hereby manifest again, that Rome must be
the Babyl^^ here intended by S. John. Furthermore this beast is described also
to have Verse 3.
ten horns, and those ten horns are expounded to be Verse. 12.
ten kings, which shall grow out of the beast, that is, out of the same state
or kingdom. Now there was no other state, but only the state of the Roman
Empire, whence those kings might arise, yea and S. Jerome witnesses, that
Hieron in Da. 7. Dicamus quod omnes Scriptores ecclesiastic^ tradedirunt* etc.
december futuros reges qui ^^bem Roman^^ inter se diuidant.
all Ecclesiastical Writers have delivered, that those ten kings shall divide
amongst them the Roman Empire. Therefore Bellarmine also confesses, that
Bellarm de Antichrist. cap. 5. Orientur quidem ex Romano imperio, sed non erunt
Romani Imperatoris sicut ^ornua ipsa ortuntur ex bestia* sed bestia ipsa non
sunt.
the ten kings shall arise out of the Roman Empire, but shall be no Emperors
of Rome, even as the horns grow out of the beast, but yet are not the beast.
If then it be certain, as it is most certain, and cannot be denied, that the
state of Rome is it whence those ten kings must grow, how can we make doubt,
but that the State of Rome is it, which is here set forth unto us under the
name of Babylon? To say nothing, that there was no other state or government to
which it can so rightly be applied, that it was Verse. 6.
drunken with the blood of Saints, and of the martyrs of Jesus Christ. The
description fitteth so lively and apparently, as that the ancient Fathers
Tertullian and Hierom have made undoubted construction thereof concerning the
city of Rome. Tertul. contra Judaeos, and lib 3 contra Marcion. Babylon apud
Ioannem nostru^ Romanae vrbis figuraem portat.
Babylon with S. John (says Tertullian) carries the figure of the city of
Rome. Hieron. ad Algal. q. 11. Romanum imper ^l aeternum putant. Vnde infronte
purpuratae mere^^icis secundum Apocalyps^o Ioannis scriptum est nomen
blasphemiae, hoc est, Romae aeternae.
They think (says Hierome) that the Roman Empire shall be eternal, whereupon
according to the Revelation of S. John, in the forehead of the purple harlot is
written a name of blasphemy, that is, Rome everlasting. In another place
speaking of his dwelling in Rome, he says: Jdem praefat. in lib. Didymi de Sp.
sancto. Cum in Babylone versarer, and purpuratae merciricis essem ce^onus, and
iure Quiritum v^uerem.
When I remained in Babylon, and was an inhabitant of the purple harlot, and
lived after the law or fashion of the Romans. And again, writing to Marcella
in the name of Paula and Eustochium, to persuade her to come from Rome to
Bethlehem, uses argument thereof from that which in the Revelation is written
concerning Rome: Jaem ad Marcellam Lege Apocalypsin Ioannis, and quid de
muliere purpurata, and scripta in eius front blasphemia, septem mon^^bus,
aquis multu, and Babylonis cantetur exitu contuere.
Read (says he) the Revelation of S. John, and he hold what is there said of
the purple harlot, and the blasphemy written in her forehead, of the seven
hills and many waters, and of the end of Babylon: and thereupon applies to it
the sentence here prefixed, Go out of her my people, says the Lord, etc. Of
which place Ludouicus Viues gives this observation, that Ludo. Viues in
August. de ciui. Dei. lib. 18 ca. 22 Hieronymus ad Marcillam scribens non aliam
existimat describi a Ioanne in Apocalypsi Babylorem, quam vrbem P^nam.
Hierome writing to Marcella, thinks that there is no other Babylon described
by John in the Revelation, but only the city of Rome. In another place also
speaking namely to the city of Rome, he says: Hieron. adu. Iouin. li. 2.
Maledictionem tibi saluator in Apocalypsi comminatus est
Our Savior in the Revelation has threatened a curse unto thee. Thus they
conceived that all that is said of Babylon, of the purple harlot, of the name
of blasphemy, of the seven hills, of the many waters, of the curse threatened to
Babylon, and the final destruction of it, to be wholly understood of the city
of Rome. We will therefore take nothing here of M. Bishops courtesy and gift,
but by the very light of the text we will wrest it from him whether he will or
not. Now this M. Perkins sets down indefinitely, that the whore of Babylon
is the state or regiment of a people that are the inhabitants of Rome, and
appertain thereto: he concludes not, ergo, the Roman Church is the whore of
Babylon, but infer^eth, that by other consequence afterward, and M. Bishop
shall see, God willing, that there is sufficient to be said for proof thereof.
But whereas he says, that of that assertion it follows that Romulus and Remus
were the purple harlot, he is much deceived therein, because the state or
regiment of a people that are the inhabitants of Rome, cannot be strained to
import all people that are the inhabitants of Rome. Yet we must let him
understand, that Romulus was the first founder of Babylon, and in him was the
beginning of the first of those seven heads of the beast, because he was the
first king of Rome. For Rome was Babylon even from the first original of it,
as before I noted out of A^stin, and as appears in that it is described to
have seven heads, and therefore must be Babylon, not under one or two only,
but under all those heads, though we indeed most commonly speak thereof, only
in respect of Antichrist, which is the seventh head. So was she also from the
beginning a purple harlot, being founded in blood and parricide, as S. Austin
observes, by August de ciu. Dei lib. 15. cap 5
Romulus his slaughter of his brother Remus, that he might be king alone:
established by Tit Liu. Dec. 1. lib. 1.
rauishment of virgins and maids, allured thither under pretense of sports and
plays: increased by continualll slaughter and bloodshed, to that huge
greatness which it attained unto: though the name of purple harlot be more
specially given in respect of shedding the blood of the martyrs of Christ, and
of the filthiness of Antichrist, wherein he should go beyond all other that had
gone before him. As for Constantine, Theodosius, and some other such like godly
and Christian Emperors, though they were heads of her that is the whore of
Babylon, yet it follows not that they were the whore of Babylon, or the
purple harlot, because it is not necessary that simply all in that succession
should be of the same affection. For even amidst the rank and succcession of
idolatrous heathen Emperors, when M. Bishop denies not but that Rome was
Babylon, there was Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. cap. 33.
Philip the Emperor, a godly and Christian Prince, so devoted to religion, as
that he submitted himself to the censure of the Church. Yea and Valerian the
Emperor in the beginning of his reign was so well affected to Christian
religion, as that his Idem lib. 7. ca^ 9. Tota illius aula referta erat pu^s,
et ecclesia dei facta.
Court was full of godly and devout persons, and was become a Church of God.
Therefore though Constantine and Theodosius were godly princes, yet Rome might
still continue Babylon, both by the remainder of those impieties that were
before, and by the seeds of that defection that was to come, which soon began
to be sowed, and mightily to grow there. Whatsoever may be alleged of Rome for
that time, it is easily to be understood, that some small interregnum, as I may
term it, and intermission of beastly and Babylonish corruption and confusion,
could not take away the nature and name of that which it had been so long
before, and was soon after to be again. And indeed a small time it was, that
Rome continued in the hands of those religious and godly Princes. Necessary it
was in respect of those things that were afterward to be fulfilled, that
Christian religion should publicly be established and advanced there, which
could not be, but that the Emperors and Princes themselves must be professors
of Christian faith. But the chief seat of the Empire being by Constantine
translated to Constantinople in the East, Rome within a while fell into the
possession of other Lords. For about threescore and thirteen years after the
death of Constantine (in which time also for some part thereof it had been
holden by Constantius and Valentinian the second Arian heretics, by Julian the
Apostata, and Maximus the tyrant) it was wholly taken by the Goths out of the
Emperors hands, and so continued as Bellarm. de Antichristo cap. 5. Valens,
Arcadius, Theodosius ^unior, and alij eorum successores vsque ad Iustinianum
omnes Roma caruerunt.
Bellarmine also confesses, unto the time of Justinian the Emperor, which was
about the space of an hundred and fourteen years: yea and soon after, it
was distressed and taken again, and the Western Empire wholly overthrown, the
providence of God by this confusion giving way by little and little to the
Bishop of Rome to take upon him, as afterward he did, to be the seventh head
of the Roman State. Now then we hope M. Bishop can see, that we have no
meaning to argue in that sort, that they are of like affection in Religion who
govern the same kingdom, nay we are so far from arguing in that sort, as that
we rather confess, that they who both are properly heads of the whore of
Babylon, may yet be diverse in religion, as were the heathen Emperors that
were of old, from the Popes that are now. Yet upon his loose imagination he
censureth us, that with such fallacies we take upon us to control the
learned in the world, of which whosoever they are, we are sure that he is
none, nor do hold him a fit man to judge who they are. But M. Bishop, let us
not contend who are the best learned. You know what we are wont to say, that
the greatest Clerks be not always the wisest men. Solomon tells you, Prou.
26.12.
See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool then
of him. Think humbly of your learning, and it will happily serve you the better
to learn the truth. As for our learning, thanks be to God, it has done you
that sorrow, that ye have no cause to brag of yours, only loosers must have
their words, and he can do little, that cannot talk.

But now he tells us, that admitting the purple harlot to signify the Roman
state, yet the state of Rome must be taken as it was then when these words were
spoken of it, that is, pagan, idolatrous, and a hot persecutor of Christians.
Here is all that he has to say, and if this be nothing, there is no remedy
but Rome must be Babylon, the Pope Antichrist, and then what shall become of
him? Now we deny not but that Rome was the purple harlot under those heathen
Emperors, but we deny that in the falling of those Emperors, she should
thencefoorth cease to be the purple harlot. For the purple harlot described by
S. John, was so to be under seven heads, of which by S. John's account the
Emperor was but the sixth. Since then that Rome was the purple harlot under the
Emperor, which was the sixth head, it follows that there remained after the
Emperor a seventh head of the Roman state, under which Rome was to continue to
be the purple harlot. That Babylon spoken of by S. John, must be possessed by a
beast as head thereof, in the time of those ten kings to which the Empire shall
be divided, which Apoc. 17.13.
shall give their power and authority to the same beast. There was no such
division of the Empire, nor any such ten kings in the time of those heathen
Emperors. Therefore since Rome was Babylon under the heathen Emperors, it must
continue to be Babylon after them. Yea that Babylon must be destroyed, with
that destruction which S. John describes at large in the 18. Chapter. But Rome
was not so destroyed in the time of those heathen Emperors. Therefore it
abides still under the name of Babylon, expecting the time of that
destruction. To be short, it is without all controversy, and D. Sanders
confesses it, that Sander. visib. Eccles monarch. lib. 8. demonstr. de Antich.
38. Joannes in Apocalypsi dicit, Reges terraecum Babylone (quae seeds and
ciuitas Antichristi est) fornicasas esse.
Babylon mentioned by S. John, is the seat and city of Antichrist. Because
therefore that Rome is that Babylon whereof Saint John speaks, Rome must be
the seat and city of Antichrist. Rome was not the seat and city of
Antichrist in the time of the heathen Emperors. Therefore it remained
afterward so to be. It appears therefore how vainly these men please
themselves with a shadow of an answer, that Rome was the purple harlot in the
time of the heathen Emperors, inasmuch as thereof it follows, that she is
afterward also the purple harlot, because it is apparent, that the purple
harlot must be after the time of those Emperors, and there are not two purple
harlots but only one. That therefore which M. Bishop alleges under the name
of Ambrose, is so far from making any thing for him, as that it makes wholly
against him, because it proves, that Rome was that great whore at that time,
when the Apostle did write this. So does that also of Hierome, because it
shows, that it was Rome that had that blasphemy written in her forehead. As
for that that he says, that Hieron adu. Iou^n. lib. 2. Scriptam in front
blasphemiam Christi confessione delesti.
by the confession of Christ, she had blotted out that blasphemy, it helps
M. Bishop nothing. She had taken away the imputation thereof for the time, but
that eclypse of the light, or rather of the darkness of the beast hindered not,
as before was said, but that she might return to be the same that she was
before. Yea when presently after he says, that Christ in the Revelation had
threatened a curse unto her, and in his Epistle to Marcella has applied to
her, that which is said of the destruction of Babylon, as we have seen before,
he gives us plainly to understand, that his words yield no exception, but
that Rome might still be Babylon, because that curse and destruction but under
the name of Babylon, could not befall unto her. But M. Bishop has yet some
foolish reasons to persuade us, that these things cannot be meant of the Church
of Rome. First, the purple harlot was then drunk with the blood of the
Martyrs, but the Church of Rome had not then drawn blood of any. Absurd
shifter, that will thus go about to delude the vnheedie and ignorant Reader.
Who would think him in his wits to argue thus, that the Church of Rome now
cannot be the purple harlot, because the Church of Rome that then was, had shed
no blood of any Martyr? The Church of Rome then had not that headship, wherein
she should be the purple harlot. She was afterterwards to be the purple harlot,
when she should be fallen from that that she was then, and should usurp the
state and dignity of them, by whom the blood of Martyrs then was spilt, which
having sithence done by her head the Pope, she has played the butcher of Gods
Saints under him, as well as the city of Rome did before under the heathen
Emperor. Hereby his other exception falls in like sort, because we speak not
of the Church of Rome that then was, but of that that is grown since, by
degenerating from that Church. That Church reigned not over the kings of the
earth, neither was this latter Church of Rome to reign over kings in that sort
as the city of Rome then did: it is sufficient, that by reigning then over the
kings of the earth, the place is described where the purple harlot should
afterward sit, though her kingdom were to be of another kind. For that kind
of government which was the Empire, was wholly to be abolished, and those ten
kings before spoken of, were to arise out of the ruins thereof: but in the
place of the Empire another kind of kingdom was to be set up, in name whereof
those ten kings should submit themselves unto the beast, Some title the
beast, that is, Antichrist must have whereby to challenge superiority over
those ten kings, which, the title of Imperial jurisdiction being extinguished,
should in likelihood be the spiritual jurisdiction which has succeeded in the
same place. Which M. Bishop would gladly seem to fasten upon the first Church
of Rome, but alas, that Church knew no such matter; it is a mere usurpation
long after presumed by the Pope. Now by this spiritual jurisdiction, he would
not deny but that the Pope and Church of Rome has reigned over the kings of
the earth; only he will not have it to be called a kingdom, and thinks it
to be but shifting to take it so. Yet Thomas Aquinas, who we hope he will say
was no shifter, was put to such a shift, as that he was feign to call it not a
kingdom only but an Empire. Who perceiving it by constant agreement of all
antiquity, that in the dissolution of the Roman Empire should be the arising
of Antichrist, and seeing what the case of the Empire in his time was, asked
the question, Thom. Aquin. in 2 These. cap. 2. Lect 1. Quomodo est h^c, quia
iamdus gente^ a Romano imperio recesserunt, and tamen necdum veni^.
Antichrist^^ D^cendum est, qu^ I^ (...) cessauit, sed est comm^ta^^^ de
temporal^^^ spirituale; and ^deo d^cendam est quo^ discessio a Romano imperio
deb^^ intelligi non solum a tempor^li sed a spirituali.
How is it that the nations long since are fallen away from the Roman Empire,
and yet Antichrist is not come? Whereto he answers, that the Empire is not
ceased, but is changed from temporal to spiritual, and that the falling away
must not be only from the temporal Empire, but also from the spiritual.
Where if he had not been blinded with the doting love of his mistress, he
would have seen that Antichrist certainly had been come, because the certain
and infallible token of the coming of Antichrist, which was the ruin of the
Roman Empire, was apparently fulfilled. For it was the temporal Empire that
the ancient fathers spoke of, they never were so mad as to dream of a
spiritual empire to be divided to ten kings. Of the temporal and civil state
of the Empire, it was that Tertullian said; Tertul. de resur. carnis Romani
imperij abscessio in december reges d^uisa Antichristum superduce^.
The decay of the Roman empire divided to ten kings, shall be the bringing in
of Antichrist. Of the fulfilling whereof Eberhard Archbishop of Iuuauia, above
three hundred and fifty years ago, spoke thus in an assembly of the states of
B^uaria: Auenc^^. Annal. lib. ^ To any maiestas populi qua o^^m orbis
regabatur. subl^^^ est do terr^^, etc. Imperator vana appella^^s and fol^ vmbra
est Regen december par^^^r existu^^, qu^ orbem t^rrae, Romanum quonda^ imperium
non ad regendum, sed ad consumendum par^^ti sunt. December cornua, Turcae, Graeci,
Aegyptij, Afri, Hispani, Galle, Angli, Germani, Siculi, Itali, Romanas
prouincias possident, Romanosque in hi^ excidere colonos. Cornu paruulum sub
his sucereuit, etc.
The majesty of the people of Rome, by which the world in times past was
ruled, is taken out of the earth. The Emperor is a vain title, and only a
shadow. There are ten kings being together, who have divided the world, which
was sometimes the Roman empire, not to govern but to consume it. The ten
horns, the Turks, Greeks, Egyptians, Africans, Spaniards, French, English,
Germans, Sicilians, Italians do possess the Roman provinces, and have thence
worn out the colonies of the Romans. A little horn is grown up under these,
which has eyes, and a mouth speaking great things. Thereof Lyra also says;
Lyra. in 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2 A Romano imperio recesserunt quaso omnia regna;
negantia ei subijci and re^ditionem tributi. Iam a multis annis imperiu^ illud
caruit imperatore.
All kingdoms in a manner are gone from the empire of Rome, denying to it
subjection and payment of tribute; now for many years has that empire been
without an Emperor. The empire of Rome then is long ago abolished and come to
naught; all Bellarmines devices cannot set it up again. The Empire that now
is, is but a mere title; the name without the thing, and not to be accounted
so much as the shadow of the Roman empire. Yea what it is, it is the Germane,
not the Roman empire; for how should he be called Emperor of Rome, who has
nothing to do in Rome? For the Pope these many hundred years has usurped
Rome, and taken it for his own, wholly excluding the Emperor from thence.
Auent Annal. li 6. A^ulia nostra cum vrbe Romana est, non Imperatoris. Romae
nostra sede^ est, Imperatoris est. Aquis. etc.
The city of Rome is ours, says Adrian the fourth, not the Emperors: our
seat is at Rome, the Emperors seat is at Aquez in Arduenna, which is a wood
in France. Theodoric. a Number. li 3. ca. 43. Si ad Romam and Italiam respexeris.
fuit illa quidam veteris Impe^^j seeds, sed nunc Imperator nihil de ea habet
quam titulum.
If a man look to Rome and Italy, says Theodoricus, it was indeed the seat
of the ancient empire, but now the Emperor has nothing thereof but a title
only. So then it is but a mockery now to call him the Roman Emperor; he shall
under the name of an Emperor, be only one of those ten kings, to whom the
Empire should be divided. And hereby the Bishop of Rome is infallibly known to
be Antichrist, because in the fall of the Empire he is risen up, and instead of
the temporal majesty, he has set up a spiritual empire and jurisdiction of
his own. As for temporal dominion, he needs not to make him Antichrist, to
have any more but only the state and territory of Rome. The Emperor was the
sixth, and Antichrist (the Empire being dissolved) must be the seventh head of
that Roman state, which the Pope has long time been, and B^llar. de Romans
Pontif. l^b. 5. ca 9
Bellarmine defends him so to be. But to make him equal to the heathen
Emperors in state and princely dominion, his spiritual jurisdiction has been
fully sufficient; in respect whereof Blond instaur. Romae lib. 3. Omnes
principes orbis terrarum pontificem vt summum deum honoram and colun^, etc.
Maiora vel certe parta priscorum tem^^rum vect^g ^libus Eur papene omn^ tributa
Romam mittit.
all princes of the world, as says Bloudus the Popes secretary, did honor the
Pope as the highest God; and almost all Europe did send their tributes to Rome,
greater, or at least equal to the revenues of ancient times. Yea, even out of
this realm of England there went greater revenues to Rome, as Math. Paris^^^
Henr. 3.
Matthew of Paris, and others have noted, then were the revenues of the Crown.
Therefore a very simple evasion does M. Bishop use, in saying, that by
temporal dominion the Pope is a hundred degrees less then the Emperor was,
when as he knows, that by his spiritual empire and kingdom, he has been
as great, and indeed greater then ever the Emperor was. Now I would have him
to remember what his master Bellarmine says, that Bellarm. de Antichr. cap.
15. Exi^ Antichristus vltimus rex qui tene^ it Romanum imperium, tamen sine
nomine Romani Imperatoris.
Antichrist shall be the last that shall hold the Roman empire, and yet without
the name of the Roman Emperor. He would not see it, but indeed he does
thereby rightly describe the Pope, who without the name of the Emperor, has
under another name of spiritual jurisdiction, holden the Empire in subjection
to himself. This he should do, because the temporal dominion was to be
divided to ten kings. This he has done, and has holden those kings under his
obedience, and yet these men stop their eyes, and will not see him to be that
that indeed he is. As for that which M. Bishop says, that M. Perkins seeks
to deceive, in that he applies to Rome at this day, that which was spoken of
Rome 1500 years ago, he is therein much deceived himself, because those
things which were spoken of Rome 1500. years ago, were spoken by way of
prophecy, to discover Rome unto us as it is at this day. His last exception
is, that the Empire slew more saints of God in one year, then the Church of
Rome has done of obstinate heretics in 1600. years. Where after the manner
of the persecutors under the old empire, he calls them reprobate and
obstinate heretics, who were indeed the Saints of God. Of them the Church of
Rome slew none at all, until by usurpation of the Pope, she became the seat
and kingdom of Antichrist: but how she has played her part since, it may be
esteemed by that that Bellarmine himself reports, that by Bellar de notis
eccles. cap 18.
eight thousand, which as Matthew of Paris notes, were the Popes Math. Paris.
in Ioanne. anno 1213.
crosse-marked soldiers, there were slain at once in France a hundred
thousand of the Albigenses, in the time of Innocentius the third. Matthew Paris
again mentions, that not long after, in the time of Pope Gregory the ninth,
there were slain of the^ in Almaine Idem in Henr. 3. anno. 1234.
an infinite number, besides a great multitude of them destroyed in Spain. Now
these Albigenses, although they will not have it so taken, were professors of
the Gospel, even of the same faith and religion which we now profess, of whom
it were infinite to record, how many hundreds and thousands they have slain
under the names of Waldenses, Leonists, Lollards, Wicleuists, Hussites,
Hugonots, and such like. But of later times Paulus Vergerius, who himself had
bin one of the Inquisition, and spoke upon good knowledge of his own, declared
that by the same very Inquisition within the space of thirty years, there had
bin martyred Bale. de Act. Romans Pontif. lib. 7. in fine. ex Verge^o.
a hundred and fifty thousand men and women, only for the Gospels sake. The
French massacres and butcheries will not be forgotten, wherein M. Stow
mentions, that Stowes Annals. anno 1562. in marg.
the slaughters at Vassey, Paris, Sens, Toulouse, Blois, Tours, Angiers, and
other places, by credible estimation reported out of France in the year 1562.
were to the number of a hundred thousand persons, within the space of six
months. After which about the space of ten years, followed the slaughter of
Bart^emewtide, most barbarous and cruel, wherein some thirty or forty
thousand were destroyed in Paris, and other cities of France, within a very
short space, and thereupon great gratulations made at Rome, with processions,
and other tokens of public joy. Thus they have made no end of martyring the
Saints of Christ, and have equalled the cruelty of the heathen Empire to the
uttermost: and yet this hypocrite being instructed by his master Bellarmine,
and having sold himself to dub his lies, tells us, that his Roman Church,
or the Pope the head thereof, has not at all shed so much blood, as by the
heathen Empire was shed within the compass of one year. The blood that they
have shed cries for revenge, and they shall receive it in due time.

W. BISHOP.
Having thus proved, that the whore of Babylon, signifies the heathen state of
Rome, and not the Ecclesiastical: let us now hear what you say against it.
Marry, that the distinction of the Empire of Rome, and Church of Rome is
foolish, and coined of late to serve our turn: which to be far otherwise, I
prove out of those very Authors, who do interpret that harlot to signify Rome;
who are neither foolish, nor of late days: you have heard it before out of S.
Ambrose commentaries. And farther, we gather it out of S. Hierome, in the
Epistle which you cite: for he having resembled Rome unto Babylon, for the
multitude of the wicked, which yet remained in it: points out a more pure
part, saying; There is indeed the holy Church, there are the triumphant
monuments of the Apostles and Martyrs, there is the true confession of Christ,
there is the faith praised by the Apostle, etc. Be not there expressed two
distinct parts of Rome? Again, Tertullian who lived in the second hundredth
year, under those persecuting Emperors, says in one place, Lib. cont. Iud.
Depraescript. cap. 16.
that Babylon is a figure of Rome, in respect of her proud Empire, and
persecution of the Saints. And in another, that Rome was most happy for her
holy Church, unto which the Apostles with their blood had poured forth their
whole doctrine. See a plain distinction between the Heathen Empire and the
holy Church of Rome; ^. Pet. 5.
which finally may be gathered out of the express word of God. Where the
Church in Babylon coelect, is distinguished from the rest of that city, which
was Pagan. You say (but without any author) that Babylon there does not
signify Rome, but either a city in Egypt, or Assyria: But Eusebius lib. 2.
his. cap. 14. and S. Jerome de Eccles. script. verse. Marcus, with other Authors
more worthy of credit, do expound it of Rome. And you your selves take Babylon
for Rome, where you think that any hold may be taken against it, as in the 17.
of the Revelation, but in S. Peter's Epistle they will none of it, because it
would prove too plainly, that S. Peter had been at Rome,

R. ABBOT.
We have here a frivolous and idle discourse, only to give a mock to the
unlearned Reader. We doubt not but that there was a difference of old to be
made betwixt the profane state of the Empire, and the state of the Christian
Roman Church, and who would go about to make any question of that matter? Nay
we say further, that there is exceeding great difference betwixt the Church of
Rome that then was, and the Church of Rome that now is; because the church of
Rome that now is, is become in dominion and princely state like to the Empire
that then was. And in this respect is it that M. Perkins calls that a foolish
distinction, not because it puts difference betwixt the heathen Empire and
the church that was, but because it distinguishes to no purpose the Empire of
Rome that was from the church of Rome that now is, when as the Bishops sea is
now turned into the Emperors court, and by pretense of spiritual
jurisdiction, the beast that now is, is become the perfect Apoc. 13.12.14.
image of the former beast. Some difference there is in that the Empire was
wholly Pagan, and the church in some sort professes Christ, but in pomp and
pride, in filthiness, idolatry and cruelty, the church is now the same that
the Empire was. He brings a place of Peter needlessly to prove his
distinction, and in that place will needs have it, that by Babylon must be
meant Rome. We are well content at his offer to take it so; but so, as that he
must remember that being once Babylon, it should never finally surcease that
name until it carried Antichrist for the seventh head thereof, under whom the
abominations of it shall grow to their full measure, that that heavy
destruction may fall upon it, which God has threatened for full vengeance.

W. BISHOP
Well, M. Perkins is content in fine, to allow of that distinction, of
Heathenish and Ecclesiastical Rome, which before he esteemed so foolish: and
then will prove; that not the Heathenish, but Ecclesiastical Rome is resembled
to the purple Harlot. See what confidence this man has in his own shutle wit,
that now will prove this, and shortly after disprove it: but let us give him
the hearing in the 3. v. The holy Ghost says plainly, Cap. 1^.
that she has made all the world drunk with the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and yet adds: that she has committed fronication with the kings
of the earth: But this cannot be understood of heathen ish Rome, for that left
all the kingdoms of the earth unto their own religion and idolatry: and did
not labor to bring them to worship the Roman Gods. Ergo, it must be
understood of Papal Rome. I answer. The Roman Empire being the head and
principal promoter of all kind of Idolatry, and maintaining, and advancing
them, that most vehemently opposed themselves against the Christian religion;
who with any show of reason can deny, but they chiefly committed spiritual
fornication with the kings of the earth, if not by persuading them to forsake
their own false Gods, which the Pagan Romans worship as well as they: yet by
encouraging and commanding them to persevere in that filthy Idolatry, and to
resist, and oppress the Christians wheresoever. Neither is that true, that the
Roman Emperors did not labor to bring other nations to worship new Gods, when
Nero and Domitian would be worshipped as Gods, and for fear of Adrian, one
Antinous his servant, was worshipped as a God of all men: as Justinius Martyr
testifies in his Apology to Antonine. ^^eb. lib. 4. hist. ca^ 8.
These words of the text then, agree very well with the Emperors, who both
were Idolaters, and the chief patrons of Idolatry: but can in no sort be
applied to the Roman Church, which was then (as the Protestants cannot deny) a
pure Virgin, and most free from all spiritual fornication.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins admits the distinction, without impeachment of any thing that he
has before said. He grants them that, whereby he gives them to understand
that they gain nothing. The argument which he alleges to prove that Rome
ecclesiastical is here to be understood, and not the heathen Rome, is very
forcible and strong. For it is true that heathen Rome did not tie other
nations, when they had conquered them, to their gods and rites of religion, but
did rather entertain the religions and gods of other nations. Which was a
thing that S. Austin derided in them, that Aug. de e^ (...) cap. 3. V^ (...) ac
(...), etc. Mag^ (...) praesump^um non p^sse (...) defens^^^^ v^^^^s.
they worshipped those Gods as their maintainers and defendors whom they
themselves had overcome, and vainly presumed they could not be conquered,
having before conquered them by whom they should be defended. They made not
themselves any rule of religion; they thought it to be the way to gain both
gods and men, to have a Pantheon for a receptacle of all strange gods, and to
fashion themselves to the rites and ceremonies of other men. The instances that
M. Bishop brings against this, are not to the purpose, because they are
examples singular, and touch not the perpetual course of the Roman
government. Nero and Domitian commanded themselves to be worshipped as Gods,
but neither did any so before, nor did any afterward uphold that which they
commanded, neither grew any such worship universally or commonly to be
received. Adrian being grieved at the loss of his paramour Antinous, whom he
had abused to filthy unnatural lust, to do him some honor being dead whom he
could not keep alive, named a city in Egypt of his name Origin. contra Celsum
lib. 3.
Antinoupolis, and builded him there a temple, and commanded him there to be
worshipped, but much further the worship of Antinous prevailed not. These
examples are far from answering that which is said of the whore of Babylon,
with special reference to the last state thereof, for the corruptions whereof
she should finally be destroyed: Apoc. 17.2.
The kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the
inhabitants of the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication. Cap 18.3.
All nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornications: Cap. 19
2.
she did corrupt the earth with her fornication. But these things very
apparently agree to the Church of Rome, in which it is fully verified which S.
Hierome says of Antichrist, that H^^ron in Dan. 7. C^nct^^ religionem suae
sub^^cret po^^^^ati.
he shall bring all religion under his own power. The Pope has made himself
the master and commander of all religion; what he list to approve, must be
followed; what he disliketh, must be rejected: no man must presume to contrary
that which he says. Decretal de ^aer^^. cap. Ad al^o^ena^m. Vniuersos que de
sacramento cor^^^^ and sanguinis Domini, vel de baptismate. se^^ peccatorum
confessione, matrimonio, vel reliq^^ ecclesiasticis Sacramentu, aliter s^ntire
aut docere n^n me^^unt quam sacrosancta Romana Ecclesia praedicat and obseruat.
vinculo perpetu^ Anathematis ^nnodamus.
We bind them all universally with a bond of a perpetual curse, says he, who
dare to think or teach otherwise then the Church of Rome teaches and
observes of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, or of Baptism, or
of confession, matrimony, or other sacraments of the Church. 25. q. 1.
Generali. Constitu^mus vt execrandum anathema sit, quicunque regum seu
episcoporum, vel pote^tum de^^ceps Romanorum Pontificum decreterum censuram in
quoquam crediderit vel permiserit violandam.
We determine that he shall be highly accursed, whatsoever king, or bishop, or
potentate, shall think that the sentence of the decrees of the Bishops of Rome
may be violated in any thing, or shall suffer the same so to be. De mayor. and
obed. cap Vnam sanctam. Subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae creaturae
declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and pronunciamus, ^^mno esse de necessitate
salu^^,
We denounce, that it is necessary to salvation, for every humane creature to
be subject to the Bishop of Rome. Under this authority he has sent abroad
through the world his Jubilees, his Pardons, his dispensations, his Masses, his
Monkeries, his Relickes, his Agnus Deis, his hallowed beads, his holy water,
his holy oil, and a thousand such other witchcrafts and sorceries, and has
enchanted and besotted the nations to make them doat upon the opinion of these
abominations. I need not amplify this point, the matter is plain enough, and
they themselves require this obedience to be performed to that filthy beast.
As for that M. Bishop says of heathen Rome, encouraging and commanding the
nations to persevere in their filthy idolatry, neither does that satisfy the
matter, because she could not be properly called Apoc. ^8.5.
the mother of those fornications and abominations which she found among the
nations, and only encouraged them to persevere therein. But the Church of Rome
has either been the deviser of her abominations, or if they have in any part
been devised by others, yet she has licked all those monstrous and ill-favored
bastards to their form. The Church of Rome, I say, that now is, we apply
nothing to the Church of Rome that then was, which he fondly inculcateth
without cause. The mother we confess was a chaste matron, but the daughter is
grown to be a filthy harlot.

W. BISHOP.
But that it is now become idolatrous, M. Perkins does prove by his second
reason, gathered also (I warrant you, right learnedly) out of the text it
self, where it is said: that the ten horns which signify ten kings, Cap.
17. ver 16.
shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked: which (as he says)
must be understood of Popish Rome. For whereas in former times, all the kings
of the earth did submit themselves to the whore: now they have begun to
withdraw themselves, and to make her desolate: as the kings of Bohemia,
Denmark, Germany, England, Scotland, and other parts. In these his words is
committed a most foul fault, by gross oversight and ignorance in the very
text. What, be England, Scotland, Denmark, (as for Bohemia ruled by a
Catholic Emperor, it must be omitted, as also many States of Germany,) be
these Kingdoms your principal pillars of the new Gospel, comprehended within
the number of the ten, mentioned there in S. John, which hate the harlot? Yes
marry. Why then they are enemies of Christ, and Satan's soldiers; for in the
13. verse it is said of these, that they shall deliver their power unto the
beast, (which signifies either the devil or Antichrist) and shall fight with
the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, because he is Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings. Is not this doting in an high degree, to infame so notoriously
them, of whom he would speak most honor? and to make the special Patrons of
their new Gospel, the devils captains, and fiercely to wage battle against
Christ Jesus. See, how heat of wrangling blinds men's judgments.

R. ABBOT.
The direct conclusion intended by M. Perkins is, that S. John's prophecy was
not accomplished in heathenish Rome, whereupon it remains to be understood of
the Church of Rome. The argument which he uses to that purpose is invincible,
and M. Bishop cunningly ouerslippeth it without saying any thing directly to
it. He charge M. Perkins with most foul fault, and gross oversight and
ignorance in the text, and with being blinded with heat of wrangling, when he
himself, poor soul, knows not what he says, or if he do know, then
carries himself most impudently therein. The case is plain, if we do but
consider that the beast and the harlot belong both to one, as S. John gives us
to understand, by describing Apoc 17.3.7.
the woman to be sitting upon the beast, in respect whereof the Rhemish Divines
do name Rhem. Testa^. Annotat. Apoc. 131.
the whore, and the beast, and Antichrist all as one. So Ferus their Preacher
of Mentz says: Ferus in Mat. 24. Abhominationem disolationis quae est regnu^
Antichristi Ioannes in Apocalypsi nunc qu^de^ per Bestiam cui draco potestatem
suam dedit, nunc per mulierem best^^ insidentem intelliga. etc.
The abomination of desolation which is the kingdom of Antichrist, John in the
Apocalypse understands sometimes by the beast to which the Dragon gave power,
sometimes by the woman sitting upon the beast, and making all to drink of the
wine of her fornication. S. John then gives us to understand, that ten kings
should arise out of the dissolution of the Empire, as has been said. Of these
ten kings he says, Ver. 13.
These have one mind, and shall give their power and authority to the beast.
Hereupon it shall follow, that together with the beast Ver. 14.
they shall fight against the Lamb, that is, against Jesus Christ. Afterward
it shall come to pass, that those ten kings* Ver. 16.
shall hate the whore that sits upon the beast, and shall make her desolate
and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For, that it may
appear how they shall give their power to the beast, and yet hate the whore,
that is, submit themselves to Antichrists state and government, and yet hate
the Babylon wherein he has reigned, he adds: Ver. ^7.
For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to do with one
consent, for to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God be
fulfilled. So then until the words of God be fulfilled, and he have performed
what in his secret judgment he has thereof decreed, those ten kings shall
submit themselves to the whore, to the beast, that is, to Antichrist reigning
in his Babylon. But when God has finished his work otherwise, then the
kingdom of Antichrist shall be overthrown: the kings that before were
subject, shall withdraw their obedience from him; they shall hate the whore of
Babylon, the city of the beast, of Antichrist, and having stripped her of the
state and dominion whereby she was advanced and reigned over them, they shall
furiously bend themselves against her, until they have utterly destroyed her.
These things we see cannot belong to the days of the heathen Emperors, as
before is said, because the division of the Empire, and these ten kings were
not in those times. It remains therefore, that the prophecy belongs to
times afterward succeeding. Now being so understood, as necessarily it must
be, we see the same in part already fulfilled in the Church of Rome, and God
in his good time will fulfill the rest. The Empire has been divided into many
kingdoms: those kings have all submitted their scepters to the power and
authority of the Bishop of Rome. He has played the Lord and tyrant over them,
and they have patiently suffered him so to do. Yet God at length has opened
some of their eyes already, and they have learned to see the deceits of
Antichrist, and to hate the same. The like mercy he will show to the rest in
his good time, and they shall jointly apply themselves to work the confusion
of that wicked strumpet. So then they whom God has already called, are not
now as M. Bishop cauilleth, the enemies of Christ, and Satan's soldiers; they
were so, so long as they gave their power and kingdom to the beast: but now
they are Gods army, and the captains of the Lords host, to fight his battles
against the beast and the whore, until they have wrought his judgment upon
them. Weigh the text (gentle Reader) and consider well how readily it yields
thee that that we say thereof: and hereby conceive, in what a pitiful case M.
Bishop was, when he was feign to pass it over as he has done. Yet his
fellows are beholding to him, that he lays lustily about him with words, and
seems to have a good courage, howsoever if he weighed the place at all, it
could not be, but that in his own bosom he was well privy, that his cause
was quite undone.

W. BISHOP.
But you proceed and say, page 7. that we further hold, that the blood of the
Saints and Martyrs was not shed in Rome, but in Jerusalem. Here is a confusion
of men, and matters; for we say that the blood of many Saints rehearsed in the
Apoc. was shed in Rome by the tyrannical Emperors, but the martyring of those
two principal witnesses, Cap. 17.
Enoch and Elias, (recorded in the eleventh of the same) shall be at
Jerusalem, as well, because the text is very plain for it; Ver. 8.
specifying that their bodies shall lie in the streets of that great city,
where the Lord was crucified; as for that the ordinary interpreters of that
place do so take it. But M. Perkins holds, that the place where Christ was
crucified, signifies here not Jerusalem, but Rome; because Christ was
crucified there in his members: so it might as well signify any other place of
persecution as Rome: the reason therefore being naught worth, he fortifieth it
with the name of S. Hierome, but cites in the margent a letter of two virtuous
matrons, Paula and Eustochium. Good sir, if S. Hierome had meant, that that
Epistle should have had his authority, Epist. 17. Epist. 17.
he would have set it out in his own name, which seeing he thought not
expedient, set the authority of it aside, and urge his reasons, if you think
it worth your labor, and you shall be answered. In the mean season (I hope)
all sober Christians, will take the place where our Savior Christ was nailed
on the cross, to signify rather Jerusalem, then Rome. And consequently, all
that you have alleged out of Scripture, to prove the whore of Babylon to
figure the ecclesiastical state of Rome, not to be worth a rush.

R. ABBOT.
That which M. Perkins alleges, is according to their common fancy, that
Antichrist shall have his seat and kingdom at Jerusalem, and therefore shall
there shed the blood of the Martyrs of Christ. For some of the^ perceiving, as
M. Bishop might do, if his eyes were matches, that the Prophecy of S. John
cannot be determined under the heathen Empire of Rome, do post us off to
Jerusalem. there to find the whore of Babylon drunk with the blood of Gods
Saints, and so understand that which is said of the slaughter of Apoc. 11.3.8.
the two witnesses, whose bodies are said to lie in the streets of the great
city, where our Lord also was crucified. Thus because Rome is most evidently
described by S. John, they tell us one while that these things are indeed to be
referred to Rome, but under the heathen Emperors: and because there are some
things that cannot possibly be applied to the time of the heathen Emperors,
they another while put all over to Jerusalem, and will by no means admit of
Rome, albeit it be most manifestly pointed out for the place thereof. But as
touching the place of the death of those two witnesses, M. Perkins rightly
says, that it is not meant of Jerusalem, but of Rome. It is called the great
city, and what the great city imports we understand by the mention of it
afterward, Cap. 17.18.
the great city that reigns over the kings of the earth. That was Rome, and
not Jerusalem, as has been before declared. Jerusalem was destroyed 20.
years or more before S. John saw this Revelation, and Hieron. in Ier. lib. 4.
cap. 19. Ciuitas eorum in aeter^os caneres collapsa est: usque ad
consummationem seculi ruinae Jerusalem permansurae sunt
was fallen into dust for ever, as Hierome speaks, the ruins or destructions
thereof shall continue until the worlds end. Theodoret in Diu. cap. 9. Vsque
ad finem seculi consummatio desolationis absque vlla mutatione permanebit
Even to the end of the world, says Theodoret, the consummation of her
desolation shall continue without any change. The words of the Prophets are
fully verified in her, Ierem. 19 11.
I will break this city as a man breaks a potters vessel, that cannot be
made whole again. Mich 3 12.
Sion shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall be an heap, and the
mountain of the house shall be as the high places of the forest. Save only
for three turrets, and a part of the walls on the west side, left to show what a
city the Romans had overcome, it was so destroyed Joseph. le bello Iudai^.
cap. 18. and 2^.
to the very foundations, as Josephus records, and laid so flat, as that men
would hardly have thought that there had been any habitation there. Arias
Montan. in Mich. cap. 3. Ille quae nunc Hierosolyma dicitur (...) Ael^o Adriano
Athae nomin^ construct^, ^^que antiquam faciem ne qu^ situm etiam retinet. Quod
and obscura quaedam ill^^ quae extant vestigia and de scriptio ipsa manifest
arguunt, etc.
Only Aelius Adrianus the Emperor built near unto it another city, which of
his own name he called Aelia, which since has gone with Christians under the
name of Jerusalem, but has indeed neither the fashion nor situation of
Jerusalem, as Arias Montanus notes for the justifying of that prophecy, and
therefore is but wrongly and corruptly called by that name. Therefore there
neither is, nor shall be any Jerusalem for Antichrist to reign in, nor
streets of Jerusalem, wherein the corpses of those two witnesses should lie.
To prove that Jerusalem is not there understood, M. Perkins brings the
testimony of Hieromes epistle, written in the name of Paula and Eustochium, to
Marcella. M. Bishop answers, that if Hierome had meant that that epistle
should have had his authority, he would have set it out in his own name. He
could not deny but that Hierome was the author of it, and if Hierome would not
have had it to carry his authority, he would not surely have given it place
amongst the rest of his epistles. But that he should keep it still under their
names for whom he wrote it, there was a necessary cause, because there are
some circumstances in it that are appliable to them only, and not to him. Now
Hierome though he there deny that great city to be Jerusalem, yet does not
expound it to be Rome; but that is very manifest of it self, because it is
Verse 7^
the beast that shall fight against those two witnesses and kill them, and the
beast, as we have before seen, is the Roman state and government, and Rome
the city of seven hills, the place and seat thereof. But to the contrary M.
Bishop urges, that it is said to be the city where our Lord also was
crucified; and that he says, all sober Christians will take rather to signify
Jerusalem then Rome. Thus no man must be taken to be sober that will not serve
the Popes turn. Yet we take our selves to be sober, and because we are so, we
know that the words are not to be understood of that that is not, but of that
that is, and therefore not of Jerusalem, which neither is nor shall be, as
has been said, but of Rome, which is and shall be, until God bring upon it
the destruction which he has pronounced. For that we are not properly there to
understand the place where Christ was crucified, beside that we conceive it by
the course of the whole book, Hieron. de 5. quaest. Marcellae. Omnis ille
liber spiritualiter intelligendus est.
which as Hierome says, is spiritually to be understood, the place it self
plainly directs us thereto. The great city, says S. John, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified. It
is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, and it is spiritually the place where
our Lord was crucified. Now the city where our Lord was corporally crucified
being utterly perished, there is no other great city to which we have any
reason in special manner to refer it spiritually, but only the city of Rome.
Rhem. Testam. Annot. Apoc. 17. 18.
By authority of the Roman Empire, as the Rhemists rightly acknowledge,
Christ himself was put to death, and by the same Romish authority the members
of Christ were put to death, both in Rome it self, and throughout the whole
world. The members of Christ are spiritually Christ; he reckons and
accounts them as himself. Of the members of his mystical body, he says;
Math. 25.40.
In as much as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me. Acts 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Origin. in Ierem hom. 11. Per singulis
martyrs Jesus co^demnatur. Si co^emnatur Christianus (...): tanti^^ quod
Christianus est, Christus est qu. condemnatur.
In every of the martyrs Jesus is condemned. If a Christian be condemned only
for that he is a Christian, it is Christ that is condemned. Therefore those
things that are done to the faithful for the name and faith of Christ, are
termed Phil. 3.10.
Christ's sufferings, 2. Cor. ^.10.
the death of the Lord Jesus, Heb. 13.13.
the reproach of Christ, Gal. 6.17.
the marks of the Lord Jesus, and therein they are said Ibid. 2.19.
to be crucified with Christ. Seeing then the blood of the martyrs has been
shed so abundantly in the streets of Rome it self, and by authority from
Rome, the like blood has been shed and spilt in the streets of all other
cities and places throughout the world, which because they were under the
dominion of the city of Rome, may well be called the streets of Rome,
therefore Rome above all other is the place whereof it may be truly said, that
it is the great city where spiritually our Lord was crucified, and in the
streets whereof the Lords witnesses were slain. And that Christ was crucified
at Rome, M. Bishop must not deny, because he must not deny that which Ambrose
reports concerning Peter's being crucified at Rome. He tells, that Ambros
lib. 5. epist. 32. in Orat. cont. Auxent.
when the Pagan infidels sought for Peter to put him to death, the faithful
requested him that for a while he should go aside, and should reserve himself
to instruct and strengthen the people of Christ. Whereupon at night he was
going out, and seeing Christ to meet him in the gate, and to be entering into
the city, he says unto him, Lord, whither go thou? Respondit Christ^;
venio Romam uerum crucifiga. Intellexit ergo Petrus quod iterum Christus erat
crucifegendus in seruulo, etc.
Christ answered, I come to Rome to be crucified again. Peter then understood,
that Christ was in his servant to be crucified again. Therefore he went back
of his own accord, and when the Christians demanded the matter, he gave them
this answer, and being straight ways taken he glorified the Lord Jesus. Since
then that in the crucifying of Peter Christ was crucified, and Peter was
crucified at Rome, it cannot be denied but that Christ also was crucified at
Rome, and therefore that Rome is rightly called the city where our Lord was
crucified. As for that that he says, that the two witnesses there spoken of,
are Enoch and Elias, it is a mere fable, and has no probability or
likelihood of truth. Some curious heads finding mention of two witnesses, must
needs use their wits to devise to what two particular men they might apply that
name. Arethas says, Areth. in Apo 11. Extraditione prae^^^ Christi
inuariabiliter in ecclesia receptum est Enoch venturum esse cum ^lia Thesbite.
that it was constantly received that they should be Enoch and Elias. But
Victorinus, who was far more ancient then Arethas, tells us otherwise.
Victorin. in Apoc. 11 apud sixth. senens B blioth. lib. 6. annot. 34^.
Multiputant vnum ex hic testibus esse Elia^, alterum aut Elizeum aut Mose^; sed
vtrique mortui sunt. Jeremiae autem mors non inuenitur, quia omnes veteres
nostri tradiderunt illu^ esse Ieremiam.
Many think (they did but think) that one of these witnesses is Elias, the
other either Elizeus or Moses, but they are both dead. Marry, the death of
Jeremy is not found; for all our ancients have delivered that that other is
Jeremy. Yet Hilar. in Mat. can. 20 Mosen and Eliam duos prophetas intelligimus
praeuementes aduentum Antichristi, etc.
Hilary thinks, that he that shall come with Elias shall be Moses and no
other. Such uncertainty is there in men's presumptions, when they will
determine of that which God has said, only by their conceits. Very probable
it is, that it is an allusion to that John. 8.17.
that is written in the law, as our Savior says, that the witness of two is
true, God thereby giving to understand, that notwithstanding the fury of the
beast, and the cruelty of persecutors and tyrants, yet he will never want two
witnesses, that is, sufficient for the justifying of his truth. We may
otherwise though to the same effect refer it to the Zach. 4.3.12.
two olive branches spoken of by the prophet Zachary, which did drop oil into
the lamp that was to burn and give light before the Lord, as to signify that
God would provide always to have some by whom he would preserve the light of
the Church, and no less uphold it, then by the two olive branches, that is,
the kingdom and the priesthood, he did amongst the people of the Jews. S.
Austin in his Homilies upon the Apocalypse, if at least he were the author of
them, expounds August, in Apoc. hom. 8. Beda in Apo. 11.
the two witnesses to be the two testaments, whom Beda also follows therein,
and that we may know the vanity of that tale of Enoch and Elias, he says,
that August. ibid. Excluditur omnis suspicio quorundam qui putant hos duos
testes, duos un o^ esse, and ante aduentum Christi coelum in nubibus
ascendisse. Quomodo autem potuerunt habitantes terram de duorum nece gaudere,
^um in vna ciuitate marerentur and munera inuice^ mittere, si tres dies sunt
quo antequa^ gaudeant de nece contristentur de resurrectione.
their conceit is wholly excluded, who think that those two witnesses shall be
two certain men, and that they be ascended to heaven in the clouds before the
coming of Christ. For how, says he should the inhabitants of the earth
rejoice of the death of two, when as they should dye in one city; and how
should they send gifts one to another, if there be but three days that before
they can rejoice of their death, they shall have sorrow again of their
resurrection. He gathers out of the very text it self, that the place cannot
be meant of two particular men, because the inhabitants through the world can
have no such rejoicing of two men put to death in one place, who within three
days must rise again, and therefore necessarily we must admit another
construction thereof. That is briefly this, as more at large might be showed,
if occasion so required, that the servants of God for the word of their
testimony, the doctrine of Jesus Christ, witnessed by the old and new
testament, should be murdered and slain in the streets and cities of the
Roman Empire, and their bodies dishonorably cast forth and left to the fowls
and beasts, whom yet notwithstanding God after a time certainly determined,
would challenge from that despite and reproach, and make their name glorious, so
that they should seem even to rise from death to life, and as it were from
hell to be raised up to heaven; which came afterward to pass, when God by
Constantine freed his Church from the persecution of that time.

W. BISHOP.
Now let us come to the ancient and learned men, whom you cite in favor of
your exposition. The first is S. Bernard, who says, that they are the
ministers of Christ, but they serve Antichrist. Of whom speaks that good
religious Father? forsooth of some officers of the court of Rome. Good, who
were (as he says) the ministers of Christ, because they were lawfully called
by the Pope to their places, but served Antichrist; for that they behaved
themselves corruptly in their callings. And so this makes more against you,
then for you, approving the lawful officers of Rome, to be Christ's ministers.
The second place is alleged out of him yet more impertinently, your self
confessing presently, that those words were not spoken of the Pope, but of his
enemy: The reason yet there set down, pleases you exceedingly: which you
vouch so clearly that it seems to bear flat against you; for you infer
that that Pope, and all others since that time, be usurpers, out of this reason
of S. Bernard. Because forsooth, that the Antipope called Innocentius, was
chosen by the King of Almaine, France, England, etc. and their whole clergy,
and people. For if Innocentius were an Antichrist and usurper, because he was
elected by so many Kings and people: then belike he that had no such election,
but is chosen by the Cardinals of Rome only is true Pope. This, your words
declare, but your meaning (as I take it) is quite contrary. But of this matter
and manner of election shall be treated hereafter, if need require; It
suffices for this present, that you find no relief at all in S. Bernard,
touching the maine point, that either the Pope, or Church of Rome is
Antichrist. And all the world might marvel, if out of so sweet a Doctor, and
so obedient unto the Pope, any such poison might be sucked: specially weighing
well, what he has written unto one of them, Lib. 2. de Cons. ad Eugen.
to whom he speaks thus, Go to, let us yet enquire more diligently, who thou
art, and what person thou bear in the Church of God, during the time. Who
art thou? A great Priest, the highest Bishop: thou art the Prince of Bishops,
the heir of the Apostles, and in dignity Aaron, in authority, Moses, in
Power, Peter, thou art he to whom the Keys were delivered, to whom the sheep
were committed: There are indeed also other Porters of Heaven, and Pastors of
flocks; but thou art so much the more glorious, as thou have inherited a more
excellent name above them: they have their flocks allotted to them, to each
man one: but to thee all were committed, as one flock to one man: thou art not
only Pastor of the sheep, but of all other Pastors, thou alone art the
Pastor. And much more to this purpose, which being his clear opinion of the
Pope, how absurd is it, out of certain blind places, and broken sentences of
his to gather, that he thought the Pope of Rome to be neither sheep, nor
Pastor of Christ's Church, but very Antichrist himself.

There is a gross fault, also in the Canon of Pope Nicholas as he cites it:
that the Pope was to be created by the Cardinals, Bishops of Rome. As though
there were some thirty or forty Bishops of Rome at once, but of the matter of
election else where.

R. ABBOT.
I confess the places of S. Bernard do not serve directly to that purpose to
which they are brought. In naming Antichrist, he did not intend thereby, that
we should understand the Pope; yet M. Bishop without cause takes advantage of
his first words, because the Pope being Antichrist indeed, nothing hinders,
but that they who by office, and calling, and duty, are the ministers and
servants of Christ, may in action and practice perfidiously and trecherously
yield their service to the Pope. Antichrist shall 2. These. 2.4.
sit in the temple of God, and therefore the officers of the temple of God
shall be subject unto him. That which by institution is the house of God, shall
by his occupation become a den of thieves: they who by duty are subjects,
shall in following him be rebels and traitors; pastors shall become beasts;
watchmen shall be blind men, and they who have places for one use, shall turn
them to another. Thus S. Bernard says of the Clergy of Rome: Bernard. in
Cant. ser. 32. Ministri Christi sunt and seruiunt Antichristo.
They are the ministers of Christ, and they serve Antichrist: the true use of
their places is the service of Christ, but they abuse the same to the helping
forward of the kingdom of Antichrist. He describes at large in that place the
horrible corruption of the Church of Rome. Ibid serpit hodie putidatabes per
omne corpus ecclesiae, et quo la t^u^ eo desperatit^; coque perititiosius, quo
inter^tis.
A filthy contagion, says he, is creeping through the whole body of the
Church, by how much the more generally, so much the more desperately; and so
much the more dangerously, by how much the more inwardly. He shows how the
Pastors of Churches, Deanes, Archdeacons, Bishops, Archbishops, got their
places by Simonie, and abused them to luxury and all excess. He complains
that Iut^sti^a and insinabilu est plaga ecclesia, etc. A turpi vita, a turpi
questu, a turpi commercio, a negatio denique, perambulante in tenebris.
the plague of the Church was inward and incurable, and that by filthy life,
by filthy lucre, by filthy company, and by the matter that walks in the
dark, that is, by Simonie. He concludes thus, Superest vt tam de medio siat
daemonium meridianum, ad seducendos siqui in Christo residus sunt adhuc
permanentes in simplicitate sua. Ipse est Antichristus qui se non solum diem
sed etiam meridiem menti^tur.
It remains, that the noone-walking devil be brought forth to seduce, if
there be any in Christ, yet continuing in their simplicity. The same is
Antichrist, who shall counterfeit himself to benot only day, but noone day,
and shall be exalted above all that is called God, etc. Again, having upon
another occasion afterward entered into the like discourse of the strange
declination of the state of the Church, he ends in like sort; In Psalm. Qui
habitat ser. 6. superest vt reueletur homo peccati etc.
It remains, that the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, etc. He
saw not that the Pope was Antichrist, yet he saw that the Church was then by
the government of the Pope as a horse sadled and bridled, and fully furnished
for Antichrist to get up and ride upon. Yea and it appears by that that M.
Perkins secondly cites, that he did not think S. Peter's chair to be
incapable of Antichrist, in that he says: Idem epist. 125. Bestia illa de
Apocalypsi cui datum est os loquutus blasphemias and bellum gererecum sinctu
Petri sedem occupat tanquam leo paratus ad praedam.
The beast spoken of in the Revelation, to which is given a mouth speaking
blasphemies, and to make war with the Saints, possesses the chair of Peter,
as a Lion ready to the prey. He spoke this indeed of the Antipope, but yet it
appears that he saw the time then fitting for the kingdom of Antichrist, and
that Antichrist might be likely to sit in Peter's chair, and therefore was not
far from seeing and deeming that the Pope was Antichrist. But what he saw
not, others had seen before that time, when Auent. Annal. lib 5. Plerique tum
Hildebrandum pro contione Antichristum esse praedicant titulo Christi,
inquibat, Antichristi negotium agitat. In Babylonia in templo dei sede^. Super
omne id quod col tur extollitur quasi deus sit, se errare no^ posse gloriatur,
etc. Quicquid dixerit, legem Dei putat, etc.
many in their Sermons, as Auentinus says, did publicly deliver, that
Hildebrand was Antichrist; that under the title of Christ, he did the business
of Antichrist. He sits in Babylon, said they, in the temple of God; he is
exalted above all that is worshipped, as if he were very God: he boasts that
he cannot err: whatsoever he says, he takes it to be the law of God. The
same Auentinus mentions, that Ibid. Plerique omnes boni, aperti, iusti,
ingenui, simplices tum imperium Antichristi coepisse quod ea quae Christus
seruator noster tot annos ante nobis cantauit euenisse eo tempore cernebant,
memoriae literarum prodidere.
almost all good and plain men, that dealt justly, ingenuously, and simply,
did then deliver in writing, that the kingdom of Antichrist was then begun,
for that they saw that those things were then come to pass, which Christ our
Savior had spoken of so many years before. Long after that he brings in
Eberhard the Archbishop of Iunauia, of whom I spoke before, saying, Idem. lib.
7. Sub Pont. maximi titulo, pastoris pelle, lupum saeuissimum nisi caeci sumus
sentimus. Hildebra^dus ante annos centum et septuaginta primus specie
religionis Antichristi imperij jundamenta iecit. etc. Flamines illi Babyloniae
soli regnare cupiunt: ferreparem non possunt. etc. Qui seruus seruorum est,
dominus dominoru^ perinde acsi deus foret esse cupit. etc. Ingentia loquitur
quasi vera Deus esset. etc.
Under the title of the highest bishop, the garment of a shepherd, we
perceive, if we be not blind, a most cruel wolf. Hildebrand, says he, a
hundred and seventy years ago, did first under show of religion lay the
foundation of the Empire of Antichrist, etc. Those Priests of Babylon desire to
reign alone; they can endure no equal. He that is the servant of servants
coueteth to be Lord of Lords, even as though he were God. He speaks great
words as though he were God, even that wicked man, whom they are wont to call
Antichrist, in whose forehead a name of blasphemy is written, I am God, I
cannot err. Thus l Matthew of Paris shows, how Robert Grosthead bishop of
Lincoln in the time of king Henry the third, being extremely afflicted and
grieved, to see the desolation and confusion of the Church, by the practices of
the Bishop of Rome, a little before his death called some of his Clergy to
him, and by argument and reason informed them, that the Pope was Antichrist,
for that he wasm a destroyer of souls, for that he by his n Non obstante
violated and ouerturned all the constitutions of the holy Fathers; for that he
multiplied o mischiefs and inconveniences in the Church, etc. I omit many
other that might be brought particularly acknowledging and testifying this
point: but by these it may appear, that both before the time of S. Bernard,
and after, it was a thing amongst good men commonly believed and spoken, that
the Pope was Antichrist. Yea M. Perkins well observes, that the reason whereby
S. Bernard proved Anacletus the Antipope to be Antichrist, proves all the
Popes since to have been Antichrists, because they have not been elected
according to that form whereby he then justified Innocentius to be the true
bishop of Rome, that is, with consent of the Emperor, the Princes of
Christendom, and the whole Clergy, being since chosen by the Cardinals
only. And this he further confirms by a decree of Pope Nicholas the second,
for the election of the Pope, that it shall be with the liking of the Did. 33.
In nomine saluo se^per honor and reuerentia Imperae toris ista siant.
Emperor, and performed by Electio Romani Pontificis in potestate Cardinalium
Episcoporum sit: ita vt siquis Apostolicae sedi sinc praemissae concordi and
canonica electione eorum, ac deinde sequentium ordinum religioseru^. Clericorum
and Laicorum consensu inthroni. zatur. non Papa vel Apostolicus, sed
Apostataeus habeatur.
the Cardinal Bishops, but with the consent of the rest of the Clergy and
Laity, and if any man, says he, be set in the Apostolic seat without the
foresaid concording and canonical election of the Cardinals, and the consent
of the religious states following, the Clergy and Laity, he shall not be
accounted Pope or Apostolical, but Apostatical, which is as much to say, as
Antichristian. The Popes then being not now, nor having been of long time
chosen by this rule, but only by the College of Cardinals, are found to be
Apostataes and Antichrists, by the sentence and decree of the Pope himself.
Hereto M. Bishop says not a word, though he confess that he knew M. Perkins
meaning well enough, which indeed was somewhat amiss set down, by putting the
Antipope called Innocentius for the Pope called Innocentius. He had nothing
whereby to excuse the Pope from being Antichrist even by his own decrees, and
therefore puts the matter over to another place, where he never meant to say
any thing of it. Only in the end he charge M. Perkins with a gross fault in
citing the Canon of Pope Nicholas, for saying that the Pope was to be created
by the Cardinals, bishops of Rome; as though, says he, there were some thirty
or forty Bishops of Rome. Belike it was dark, and his eyes did not well serve
him, or else he might have seen, that M. Perkins did not say, by the
Cardinals, Bishops of Rome, as he has set down, and pointed amiss, but by
the Cardinal Bishops of Rome, that is, by the Cardinals of Rome which are
Bishops. For they are all Cardinals of Rome, but some are Cardinal bishops,
some Cardinal priests, some Cardinal Deacons, and according to this
distinction M. Perkins named the Cardinal Bishops of Rome, the Popes Canon
requiring the Cardinal Bishops to be the Electors of the Pope. As touching
that which M. Bishop cites out of S. Bernard for his opinion of the Pope, I
answer him, that we doubt not, but that S. Bernard had a very high opinion of
the Popes place, but I answer him withal, that S. Bernard had a higher opinion
of the Popes place, then he had of the Pope himself. He knew well, that though
the Popes place were such in the Church of Christ as he describes it to be,
yet the Pope by the abusing of his place, might be very Antichrist himself. He
wishes Pope Eugenius to remember and consider, what person, what place and
office, according to his conceit, he did bear in the Church, thereby to move
him upon conscience thereof to the redressing of those intolerable enormities
and corruptions, that were then grown in the Church and Court of Rome. For in
those books De consideratione, he does purposely bend himself to lay forth
the deformities and abuses then prevailing: to show how the Bishop of Rome by
temporal dominion and princely pomp, did degenerate from Peter and the rest
of the Apostles, and did rather succeed Constantine then him; to note the
defaults and corruptions of government, of judicial proceedings, of appeals
to Rome, of the Popes dispensations, of the neglect of the punishment of
offenders; to show the neglect of the Clergy in teaching the people, making
themselves fitter for any other use, then for that. Yea such was the horrible
apostasy and iniquity reigning at that time, as that by way of complaint unto
Jesus Christ, he says thereof with exceeding grief in another place, Bernard
in conuers. S. Pauli Ser. 1. Coniurasse contra te videtur vniuersitas
Christiani populi a minimo vsque ad maximum: a planta pedis, vsque ad verticem,
non est sanitas vlla. Egressa est iniquitas a senioribus, Iudicibus, Vi carijs
tuis qui videntur regere populum tuum, etc. Heu! heu! Domine Deus, quia ipsi
sunt in persecutione tua primi qui videntur in Ecclesia tua diligere primatum,
gerere principatum. Aus cem Sion occupauerunt, apprehenderunt munitiones, and
vniuersam deinceps libere and potestatiue tradunt incendio ciuitatem. Misera
eortem conuersatio plebis tuae miserabilis subuersio est, etc. Dati sunt sacri
gradus in occasionem turpis luer^ etc. De animarum salute nouissima cogitatio
est, etc. Inique agit^r and caeteri eo ^ra Christum, multique nostris
temporibus sunt Antichristi.
The whole company of Christian people seems to have conspired against thee,
from the least even to the greatest; from the sole of the foot to the top of
the head there is nothing sound: iniquity is gone forth from the ancients,
the Judges, thy Vicars which seem to govern thy people. Alas, alas, O Lord
God, for they are foremost in persecuting thee, who seem to love supremacy,
and to bear principality in thy Church. They have taken possession of the
tower of Sion, they have seized upon the munitions thereof, and thencefoorth
freely and by authority they betray the whole city to the fire. Their
wretched conversation is the miserable subversion of thy people, etc. The
sacred degrees and orders are yielded to opportunity of filthy lucre: the
saving of souls is the thing last thought of. The rest also deal wickedly
against Christ, and there are many Antichrists in our times. Now the due
consideration of these words we suppose may somewhat qualify M. Bishops
opinion of the words by himself alleged, because hereby we plainly
understand, not by broken, but by perfect sentences, that whatsoever S. Bernard
conceived of the dignity and duty of the Popes place, yet that he very well
saw, that by evil usage thereof the Popes in his time were become the very
enemies and persecutors of Christ, even they who (as he says) were Christ's
Vicars, and had the supremacy and principality in the Church of Christ. And
so we find that the high Priest of the Jews, who by Gods own ordinance and
institution was a figure of Christ, and sat in the place of Christ, yet by
Apostasy and iniquity became an Antichrist, a persecutor of Christ, and
solemnly gave sentence against Christ. In like sort therefore nothing lets,
but that the Pope may now be Antichrist, albeit his place had been at the first
appointed by Christ: but much more now, in that his place is no divine
institution but only humane presumption; affected by ambition, attempted by
rebellion, yielded unto by superstition, established and possessed by tyranny
and cruelty, by villainy and treachery: vpholden by the devices of Sycophants
and Parasites, who have used all manner falsehood and deceit to iniect into the
minds of men an opinion of it. S. Bernard therefore by error attributed to the
Pope that which indeed is none of his, and although for the credit of the Popes
authority, he allege some words out of the Gospel used to S. Peter, yet he
brings no Scripture to prove, either that that which he gives to the Pope in
that description, did ever belong to Peter, or that that which in the Gospel
is spoken to Peter, belongs to the Pope. He attributes to the Pope to be
Tues princeps Episcoporum, summus Pontifex
prince of Bishops, and highest Bishop, directly against the decree of the
African Council, one Canon whereof is, that Council. ^p^ric. cap. 6. Vt primae
sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princeps sacerdotum, aut summus sacerdos, aut
aliquid huiusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus
the Bishop of the first sea (which was Rome) should not be called prince of
Bishops, or highest Bishop, or such like, but only the Bishop of the first
sea. His error therefore is apparent in this point, by the sentence of the
Council, but it is more absurd in some other words that he uses, howsoever we
presume that his meaning was more tolerable then his words. For to say as he
does, that the Pope is Ordine Melchisedec, vnctio. de Christus.
by order Melchisedec, and by anointing Christ, what construction he would
make of his own words we know not, and M. Bishop by omitting those words,
shows that he was ashamed of them, but we know that it sounds little less
then blasphemy against Christ.

W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins having lightly skirmished with a broken sentence or two out of one
Catholic Author, flies to a late Heretic called Ioachim, and quoteth Jewel
for relator of it. A worshipful testimony of one Heretic, and that upon the
report of another: and he the most lying Author of these days. As for the late
Poet Petrarke his words might easily be answered, but because he quoteth no
place, I will not stand to answer it. But to close up this first combat, a
sentence is set down out of the famous Martyr Irenaeus, that Antichrist should
be Lateinos, a Roman. Here be as many faults as words. That learned ancient
Doctor discoursing of Antichrist his proper name, out of these words of the
Revelation, Cap. 13.
the number of the beast is 666. and observing the letters of the Greek
Alphabet, (by which they do number, as we do by ciphers) says: that among
others the word Lateinos does contain those letters, which amount just to the
number of 666. and consequently that Antichrists proper name perhaps might be
Lateinos, but more likely it is to be Teitan, as he says there, and lastly
that it is most uncertain what his name shall be. See the place (gentle
reader) and learn to beware of such deceitful merchants, as make no
conscience, to corrupt the best Authors: and being often warned of it, will
never learn to amend. Irenaeus leaves it most doubtful what shall be
Antichrists name: And among diverse words esteems Lateinos, to be the
unlikeliest. And yet M. Perkins reports him to say resolutely that his name
shall be Lateinos: and then to make up the matter, turns Lateinos, a proper
name with S. Irenaeus into Roman, an appellatiue, which notes only his
country. Fie upon that cause, which cannot be vpholden and maintained, but by
a number of such paltry shifts.

R. ABBOT.
It follows not that every man who in a point of doctrine conceiueth amiss,
is presently an heretic, for so many should be heretics both of ancienter and
later writers, who notwithstanding by M. Bishop himself are reckoned for good
Catholics. Ioachim indeed delivered against Peter Lombard, a pernicious
opinion concerning the godhead. The council of Laterane condemned his opinion,
but because he was not wilful in his error, it made no heretic of him.
Therefore in that council it is noted in the margent, Council. Lateran cap. 2.
in marg. Non ipse Joachim, sed eius liber damnatur.
Not Ioachim himself, but his book is condemned. M. Bishop therefore is too
presumptuous, to pronounce him an heretic, whom the council did not so
pronounce. M. Perkins cites the words of Ioachim out of Bishop Jewels sermons,
but he is also rejected as another heretic, yea and the most lying Author of
these days. But we would gladly have M. Bishop to learn that point of honest
civility and good manners, not to speak so rudely of them whom he knows not.
I dare say he never read Bishop Jewel, nor does know whether he tell truth or
not; only the Magistri nostri have told him that so he must say. And indeed it
concerns them that Bishop Jewel be taken for a lying author, for if he have
reported truth, then in miserable case are they. But his true and faithful
dealing will sufficiently justify it self to them that are careful to learn
the truth, even to the shame and confusion of these Sycophants, who labor by
impeaching the truth of others, to gain opinion and credit to their own lies.
But for this matter, if he will not take it to be true upon Bishop Jewels
report, I will do him the favor to refer him to another author, who is
liable to no exception. That is Roger Houeden, who writes that Ioachim the
Abbot in a discourse before king Richard the first of our land, Rog. Houed.
Annal. lib. 2. anno. 1190. De isto Antichristo dicit idem Ioachim quod ia^
natus est in ciuitate Roman, and in sede Apostolica sublimaintur.
did say concerning Antichrist, that he was then borne in Rome, and should be
set up aloft in the Apostolic sea. Then was indeed the Bishop of Rome grown
to that height of insolency and pride, as that he openly practiced rebellion
against the Emperor his Lord and master. Yea such was the incredible
arrogancy and impudency of this Antichristian beast, as that soon after that
speech of Ioachim, Idem anno. 1191.
Celestinus the third being to crown the Emperor Henry the sixth, took the
Crown betwixt his two feet, and made the Emperor to bow down, that with his
feet he might set it upon his head, which having done, with one of his feet he
struck it off again, to give him to understand, that it was in his power
again to bereave him of the Crown. As for Petrarch, I let him pass, because
though freely uttering what he thought, he called Rome Babylon, and spoke many
things to touch the triple crown, yet it seems that for fear of displeasure
he was afterward content to make the best of that he had said. There
remains only Irenaeus, who setting down diverse conjectures as touching the
name of the beast, which S. John says shall contain the number 666. brings
this for one, that l. 30. a. 1. t. 300. ^. 5. i. 10. ^. 50. o. 70.. 200. 666.


(...) is the name imported by that number, and that Antichrist happily shall
be known by that name. Against this M. Bishop has sundry exceptions, and all
to little purpose. First he says, that Irenaeus amongst diverse words
esteems Lateinos to be the unlikeliest. But whether that be true let the
Reader esteem by Irenaeus his own words. Jerenaeus li. 5. Sed and (...) nomen
sexcentoru^ sexaginta sex numerum habens valde verisimile est quomam ve^^ssimum
regnum hoc habet vocabulum; Latini enim sunt qui nunc regnant, sed non in hoc
nos glo^^a^imur.
The name Lateinos, says he, containing the number of six hundred, sixty
six is very likely, because the truest kingdom has that name. For they are
the Latins that now reign, but neither will we presume of this. Irenaeus
himself says, It is very likely: M. Bishop tells us that Irenaeus says,
It is the most unlikely of all other: hereby let it appear who best deserves
the name of a lying author. Again, he says that Irenaeus means it to be a
proper name, whereas we make it an appellatiue. But this appears to be false,
by the reason that is given by Irenaeus of the likelihood of the name. For if
he should have that name of the kingdom and country where he should reign,
as the words of Irenaeus import, then it is manifest that it should not be his
proper name. Thirdly, he alleges that Irenaeus makes t. 300.. 5. ^. 10. t.
300. a. 1. u. 50. 666.


(...) a more likely word. I mention not these things in the same order as he
has set them down, but as they yield themselves most conveniently to be
spoken of. Now it is true that Irenaeus says, that that name is Omnium nominum
quae apud nos inueniuntur magis side dignum est.
most worthy to be believed, but that helps M. Bishop nothing, because that
name by the Popes own decrees lights fully upon himself. For Titan, as
Irenaeus notes, is the name of the sun, and the Pope makes himself
Decretal. Gregor. de maiorit. and obed. ca. solitae. Quanta est inter solemn and
Lunam, tanta inter Pontifices and reges differentia.
the Sun, and the Emperor the Moon, and will have us to think, that so
much as the Moon is lesser then the Sun, so much is the Emperor inferior
to him. Titan is a name applied to Idols, says Irenaeus, and what is the Pope
but an Idol, carried up and down upon men's shoulders like an Idol, bedecked
like an Idol, publikly adored and worshipped like an Idol. Titan, says he,
is a name containing ostentation of revenge, and who has ever more proudly
vaunted revenge then the Pope has done, whose style against such as offend him
usually is this, 25. q. 1. Generali.
We decree that he shall be utterly accursed: Decretal de haeret. cap. Ad
aebolendam.
we bind him with a bond of perpetual curse: Extrauag de offic. delegati cap.
Seeds Apostolica, and passim.
let him know that he shall incur the indignation of Almighty God, and of
the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul: yea and not only by words, but by deeds
has made even the earth to groan, and the Princes thereof to stagger and fall
under the burden of his revenge. But of this name also Irenaeus will affirm
nothing, and therefore fourthly M. Bishop says, that Irenaeus leaves it
uncertain and doubtful what his name shall be. And so he does indeed, but
with this direction, that Certius and sine periculo est sustinere adimpletionem
prophatiae.
the surest way and without danger, is to wait for the fulfilling of the
prophecy. Now the fulfilling of the prophecy has made that clear and
certain to us, which some did conjecture then, and could but conjecture,
being so many hundred years before the fulfilling of it. The number of the
name of Apoc. 13.18.
the beast, that is, of Antichrist, is set down in the thirteenth chapter.
Afterward in the seue^teenth chapter, many things are further added for the
better understanding of all that went before. Now there we understand, that
Antichrist shall be Apoc. 17.9.10.
a king, that is, as before has been said, the highest governor of a state.
We know also by experience, that a king takes his name of the country, or
place, or state whereof he is king. Thus are we wont to name kings, the king of
England, the king of Denmark, the French king, the Spanish king. We must
therefore conceive likewise, that Antichrist being a king, must take his name of
his kingdom, of the city or country over which he reigns. The place where
Antichrist shall reign, is set forth to be Ver. 9.18.
the city upon seven hills reigning then over the kings of the earth, which is
undoubtedly the city of Rome. Antichrist therefore must have his name from the
inhabitants and people of Rome over whom he is to reign, and the name that
he takes from them, which is (...), Latin or Roman, fully expresses the
number six hundred, sixty, six. But to give us yet further light, it is
noted that he shall be Ver. 9.10.
the seventh king of the Latins, and he shall be together with Verse. 18.
the ten kings, to which the Empire of Rome shall be divided. The sixth king of
the Latins we have before seen was the Emperor. So then after the fall of
the Emperor, and dissolution of the Empire, the Latin king shall be the
certain and undoubted name of Antichrist, neither are we to make any question,
but that he is Antichrist whosoever is Lord and king of the Roman state. But
that the Pope has ever since been, and therefore does Turrian the Jesuit call
the Popedom, Turrian. de eccles and ordinat. minist. lib. 1. cap. 2. Regnum
Romanerum.
the kingdom of the Romans, and Navarre the Canonist terms the Pope Nauar.
Manual. Confessar. in epist. dedicat. ad Gregor. 13.
regem Latinorum, the king of the Latins or Romans, and it has been before
showed, that he wholly chalengeth to himself the right and title thereof. The
Pope therefore without all doubt is Antichrist, and we know him so to be,
because after the Emperor he is become the Latin or Roman king, under the
name of the Latin or Roman Bishop, by which he is renowned through the whole
world. And because we see that the seventh king of the Latins is not one only
man, but a succession of many, as in the other governments before, therefore
we know that it was not meant that Antichrist should be one only man, but a
succession of many in one government of the Roman state. Which is the thing
wherein Irenaeus erred, being deceived as it seems by the traditions of
Papias, by means whereof, both he himself, and others after him by his
example more readily entertained sundry fables concerning Antichrist, the
pretense whereof the Papists now abuse to make men look for another
Antichrist, and not to know him whom the Scripture has described so to be.

W. BISHOP.
Thus come we at length to the end of M. Perkins proofs, and reproves in his
prologue, where we finding little fidelity in his allegations of the fathers,
bad construction and foul oversight in the text of holy Scripture, briefly
great malice, but slender force against the Church of Rome, we are to return
the words of his theme to all good Christians. Go out of her my people.
Forsake the enemies of the Roman Church. And as our Ancestors did the Pagan
Emperors, who drew out her most pure blood, so let us fly in matters of faith
and religion, from all heretics that of late also spared not to shed abundance
of the same most innocent blood, unless to your greater condemnation, you had
leifer be partakers of her sins, and receive of her plagues. And because I
purpose (God willing) not only to confute what M. Perkins brings against the
Catholic doctrine, but somewhat also in every Chapter to fortify and confirm
it: I will here deliver what some of the most ancient, most learned, and most
holy Fathers do teach, concerning joining with the Church, and Pope of Rome,
from whose society Protestants labor tooth and nail to withdraw us. And
because of this we must treat more amply in the question of supremacy, I will
use here their authority, only whom M. Perkins cites against us. S, Bernard
is cited already, S. Irenaeus Scholar of S. Policarpe, and he of S. John the
Evangelist, of the Church of Rome writes thus. To this Church, Lib. 3. cap. 3^
by reason of her more mighty principality, it is necessary that every
Church, that is, the faithful on all sides, do condescend and agree; in and by
which, always the tradition of the Apostles has been preserved by them that
be round about her.

Saint Jerome writing to Damasus Pope of Rome, says: I following none as
chiefest but Christ, do in participation join with thy blessedness, that is,
with the chair of Peter, I know the Church to be builded upon that Rock.
Whosoever does eat the Paschall Lamb out of this house, is a profane fellow,
he that is not found within the Ark of Noah, shall when the floods arise
perish: And a little after, I know not Vitalie, I refuse Meletius, I take no
notice of Paulinus: he that gathers not with thee, scatters; that is, he
that is not with Christ, is with Antichrist.

Mark and embrace this most learned Doctors judgment, of joining with the Sea
of Rome, in all doubtful questions: he would not trust to his own wit and
skill, which were singular; nor thought it safe to rely upon his learned and
wise neighbors: he durst not set up his rest with his own Bishop Paulinus,
who was a man of no mean mark but the Patriarch of Antioch: but made his
assured stay upon the Sea of Rome, as upon an immovable Rock, with which
(says he) if we do not communicate in faith and Sacraments, we are but profane
men, void of all Religion: In a word, we belong to Christ, but be of
Antichrists train. See, how flat contrary this most holy ancient Father is to
M. Perkins. M. Perkins would make us of Antichrists band, because we cleave
unto the Bishop of Rome. Whereas S. Hierome holds all to appertain to
Antichrist, who be not fast lincked in matters of Religion, with the Pope and
See of Rome. And so to conclude with this point, every true Catholic must say
with S. Ambrose: Lib 3 de Sacra. cap. 1.
I desire in all things to follow the Church of Rome. And thus much of his
prologue. Afterward he takes upon him to prescribe and show us how far
forth we may join with the Church of Rome, by proposing many points in
controversy between us and them, and in each showing in what points we
consent together, and in what we differ. I mean by Gods grace to follow him
step by step, although he has made many a disorderly one, as well to discover
his deceits, and to disprove their errors, as also to establish the Catholic
doctrine, the which I will endeavor to perform (by the help of God) with all
simplicity of language, and with as much brevity as such a weighty matter
will permit. Yet (I hope) with that perspicuity, as the meaner learned may
understand it, and with such substance of proof, both out of the holy
Scriptures and ancient Fathers, as the more judicious (to whose profit it is
principally dedicated) may not contemn it.

R. ABBOT.
What the dealing of M. Perkins and M. Bishop on each part has been, I leave
it to the Reader to judge by examining of both, who I doubt not will
acknowledge M. Perkins fidelity of allegations, true construction of holy
Scriptures, and sufficient argument to make all men jealous of the Church of
Rome. And seeing Hierom of old has given light (as before has been showed)
that of Rome it is said, Go out of her my people, and there can be thencefoorth
no other Rome, to which we may apply it, but only the corrupted state of the
Church of Rome: therefore he will take it (I presume) as a warning from God, to
take heed of, and to eschew the filthy fornications, idolatries, and
abominations of that unclean strumpet, and will deride the silliness of those
collections, whereby M. Bishop labors to persuade the contrary. As for that
which he says of us under the name of heretics, that of late we spared not to
shed abundance of their most innocent blood, it sets forth the singular
impudency, and remorselesse malice of these notorious hypocrites. For whereas
he talks of abundance of blood, he well knows, that in five and forty
years of Queen Elizabeth, there was not so much blood of theirs shed by us,
as was of ours by them in five years of the reign of Queen Mary. And whereas
he calls it innocent blood, they themselves, M. Bishop I mean, and his
fellow Seculars, by their Proctor Watsons Quodlibet^.
Watson, have cleared the State, as having just cause to proceed against the^
that were put to death; against the Jesuits as immediate actors of treason,
against the Priests as being employed by them for the effecting thereof. It
pleased God by that quarrel of theirs against the Jesuits, to make them
witnesses of the innocence of the State in the shedding of their blood: and by
their own mouth to make it known, that the Jesuits were still devising and
practicing for the death of the Queen, and for the ruin and overthrow of the
Realm, and that the Priests were used by them as instruments for the
compassing and atchieuing of their traitorous designs, so that the nature of
their fact could be no less then treason: and therefore what conscience may we
think there is in this lewd hireling, contrary to their own confession, to
renew a complaint against the State, of shedding innocent blood, as if there
had been no cause but merely Religion toward God, why they were put to death.
But if that had been the quarrel, many more would have been in like sort to be
touched, being openly known to be professors of that Religion, who
notwithstanding as we know, save only for a pecuniarie mulct for trespassing
the law, lived at their own liberty, and fully with us enjoyed the benefit
of the State. To let this pass, M. Bishop will now tell us somewhat out of the
Fathers, to warrant our joining with the Church and Pope of Rome. He has
alleged S. Bernard before, and he is answered before. Further, he brings
Irenaeus, saying: Iren. lib. 3. ca. 3 Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter pote^ti^^em
principalitatem necesse est omnem conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt
vndique fideles; ^n qui semper ab (...) qui su^t vnd que conseruata est, ea
quae est ab Apostolis traditio.
To this Church by reason of the more mighty principality, it is necessary
that every Church, that is, the faithful on all sides do agree, in which the
tradition which is from the Apostles, has been always preserved of the^ that
are about her. Which words he alleges, but draws no direct conclusion from
them, nor indeed can do, but by begging that which is in question betwixt us.
It was necessary in the time of Irenaeus, that every Church should accord to
the Church of Rome, because therein the tradition and true doctrine of the
Apostles had been faithfully preserved: but will M. Bishop hereof simply
conclude, that it is now also necessary for every Church to accord with the
Church of Rome? It is a question now, whether she retain the doctrine and
tradition of the Apostles: nay it is out of question that she does not so, and
therefore her former commendation, is no argument, that we should approve her
now. Jerusalem was 2. Chron. 6.6.
the city which the Lord did choose to place his name there. She was a faithful
city, and so long necessary it was, that all other cities should conform
themselves to her. But Esa. 1.21.
of a faithful city, she became a harlot, and departed so far from her
former steps, as that she crucified the Son of God, and killed his Saints,
and in the end it was said of her by a voice from God, as Josephus records,
Joseph. de bello Iudaico^^. 7. c. 12
Migremus hinc: Let us depart from hence. So the Church of Rome was a Virgin,
the chaste and faithful spouse of Christ, continuing steadfastly in the doctrine
by which she first became the Church of Rome, and so long as she so continued,
it was necessary for all Churches to accord with her, as for her to accord with
all other Churches that had done the like. But she is since become an unclean
filth prostituted to all manner of fornications, embrued and drunken with the
blood that she has sprit, so that now the voice of God calls to us in like
sort concerning her, Go out of her my people. Neither has M. Bishop any better
help by that that he will further allege, that Irenaeus mentions a potent
principality of that Church. For that potent principality was not intended by
Irenaeus for any supremacy of the Church of Rome, but imported only an honor
yielded unto it in respect of the imperial state of the city of Rome; which
we know men of inferior towns are wont to yield to them that are of high and
honorable cities, only for the pre-eminence of the place. But if the Church of
Rome had had any such potent principality as M. Bishop intends, in respect
whereof all other Churches should yield subjection and obedience unto her, then
would not Jren. apud Eusebius. hist. eccles. lib. 5. cap 23.
Polycarpus the Bishop of Smyrna have refused to yield to Anicetus the Bishop
of Rome in matters of difference betwixt them, as Irenaeus shows he did
before his time: neither would Ibid. cap. 22. and Hieron. in Catal. Script.
Eccles. in Polycrate.
Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus and Metropolitan of the Asian Churches have
resisted Victor in the time of Irenaeus; neither would Cypr ad Pompeium contra
Epist. Stephane.
Cyprian have contradicted Stephanus, neither would Aurelius and Austin and the
rest of the Fathers in the Council of Carthage, have Council. Carth. 6 and
Aphrican. cap 101. etc.
withstood the claim of the Bishop of Rome for authority to receive appeals
made from them to him: neither would those six hundred and thirty Bishops in
the Chalcedon Council, have yielded to the Patriarch of Constantinople,
according to a former decree of a council of Conc Constantinop. 1. cap. 2.
Constantinople, an equality of privilege and prerogative with the Bishop of
Rome. The matter is very plain. Conc l. Cha^cedon Act. 15. ca. 28. Antiquae
Romae throno quod vrbi il^a imperaret, iure Patres priu^legiae tribuere. Et
eade^ consideratione moti 150 Dei amantissimi Episcopi sanctissimo nouae Romae
throno aequalia priuilegia tribuere, recte iudicantes vrbem quae and imperio
and Senatu honerata sit, and aequalibus cum antiquissimo Roma priuilegijs
fruatur, etiam in rebus ecclesiasticis, non secus ac illa^ extolli and
magnificari secunda^ post illam existentem.
The Fathers, say they, have yielded privileges to the sea of old Rome,
because that was the Imperial city. And the hundred and fifty Bishops (of
the Council of Constantinople) being moved with the same consideration have
yielded equal privileges to the sacred sea of new Rome, (that is,
Constantinople) rightly judging, that the city which is honored with the
Empire and Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with old Rome, should also
in ecclesiastical matters be no less extolled and magnified then it is, being
the next unto it. Thus they acknowledge the principality of the Church of Rome
to be nothing else, but in respect that that city was the seat of the Empire,
and therefore Constantinople being become the seat of the Empire, and in
respect thereof being called New Rome, they gave to the Church of
Constantinople equal dignity and principality with the Church of Rome,
leaving to the Bishop of Rome only precedence of name and place. The Legates
of the Bishop of Rome would feign have had it otherwise, but the whole Council
approved the decree. Now by that that has been said to Irenaeus, the answer is
plain to that that M. Bishop further cites out of Hierome. The true faith and
doctrine of the Godhead of Christ, was then maintained by the Church of Rome
against the remainder of the infection and poison of the Arian heresy.
Hereupon Hierome writes to Damasus Bishop of Rome, to be advertised of the use
of some words that concerned that point. He commends the Church of Rome,
Hieron. ad Damasum. Apud vos solos incorrupta Patrum seruatur haereditae.
for that the inheritance of the Fathers (that is, the true faith) was
preserved vncorrupt with them only. For this cause does he bind himself to
the communion and fellowship of Damasus. Upon the rock of that faith which the
Church of Rome still held, he knew the Church to be built. In respect of this
faith, he that went out of that house, that is, left the communion of that
Church, because thereby he renounced the truth, he became profane. In the same
respect, he that gathered not with Damasus, being a maintainer of the true
faith, be must needs be a scatterer. He could not be of Christ, that refused
them that took part with Christ, and therefore must be of Antichrist. In this
respect he renounced Vitalis, Milesius, and Paulinus, because Erasm. schol.
ibid.
they were all either known or suspected to be partakers of the heresy of
Arius, and therefore very deceitfully does M. Bishop allege, that he would not
set up his rest with his own Bishop Paulinus, who was no mean man, but the
Patriarch of Antioch: as hereby to add a superiority to the Bishop of Rome,
when as there was otherwise so apparent cause, why he should refuse so to do.
In all this therefore Hierome says no more of the Bishop and Church of Rome,
then he might have said of any other Bishop and Church, professing true faith
and doctrine, as the Church of Rome then did: but very far was he from
teaching or intending any perpetual necessity, that all Churches for ever
should conform themselves to the Church of Rome. And that he never had any
such meaning, let it appear by himself, when being urged with the example of
the Church of Rome, he answers: Hieron. Epist. ad Euagr. Quid mihi profers
vntus vrbis consuetudinem? quid paucitatem de qua ortum est supercilium in
leges Ecclesiae vindicas?
What do thou bring to me the custom of one city? why do thou maintain a
paucitie (or fewness) whence has grown proud usurping upon the laws of the
Church? He had said a little before, Ibid. Si autoritas quaeritur, orbis mayor
est vrbe. Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, sieve Romae, sieve Eugubij, sieve
Co^stantinopoli, sieve Rhegij, sieve Alexandriae, sieve Tanis, eiusdem meriti est,
eiusde^ sacerdotij. Potentia diuitiaru^, and pauperiatis humilitas s^l linuorem
vel inferiorem Episcopu^ non facit, caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt.
If we demand authority, the world is greater then the city. Wheresoever a
Bishop be, whether of Rome, or of Eugubium; whether at Constantinople, or at
Rhegium; whether at Alexandria, or at Tanes, he is of the same worth, and of
the same office of Bishopric. Power of wealth, or baseness of poverty,
makes a Bishop neither higher nor lower, but they are all successors of the
Apostles. Thus he spoke purposely in derogation of the Church of Rome, charging
the same with proud domineering over the laws of the Church: affirming the
authority of the Churches through the world, to be greater then the authority
of the Church of Rome: attributing to every Bishop of whatsoever place,
equality in office with the Bishop of Rome, because all are alike successors
of the Apostles. Yea and to show that the Church of Rome received no more by
Peter, then other Churches did by the rest of the Apostles, he says in another
place: that Idem adu. Iouin lib. 1. At dicis. super Petru^ fit datur Ecclesia;
liceta idipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostolos fiat, and cuncti claues regni
coelerum accipiant, and ex aequo super eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur.
the Church is built upon all the Apostles, and they all receive the keys of
the kingdom of heaven; and the strength of the Church is equally grounded upon
them. Whereby it plainly appears, that Hierome never meant to make the
Church of Rome any such perpetual Mistress and ruler of other Churches, as M.
Bishop dreameth her to be. Yea but S. Ambrose further says: I desire in all
things to follow the Church of Rome. But why did M. Bishop give over there, and
not add also that that follows: Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 3. cap. ^ In omnibus
cupio sequi Roman^m Ecclesiam, sed tamen and nos homines sensum habentus: ideo
quod alibi rectius seruatur, and nos recte custodimus.
I desire (says he) in all things to follow the Church of Rome: but yet we are
also men that have understanding: and therefore what is more rightly observed
otherwhere, we also justly observe the same. S. Ambrose being Bishop of
Millaine not far from Rome shows, that he yielded a reverend respect unto
the Church of Rome, but yet professes, that things might be better in other
places then they were at Rome, and that his Church of Millaine had
understanding to judge what was fit as well as the Church of Rome, and therefore
that they held not themselves tied by any necessary duty to the example
thereof, but would do what they thought more rightly performed in any other
Church. Now then what shall we think of M. Bishop, who thus shamefully seeks
to blind his reader, by alleging one part of a sentence for his purpose, when
the other part thereof expressly crosses that for which he alleges it. And
thus much concerning M. Bishops answer to M. Perkins Prologue. For the rest I
will (God willing) follow him in like sort step by step, according to his
own words, in more honest and faithful manner then he has dealt with M.
Perkins, and that in such sort I hope, as that the meaner learned shall
understand, that the learning which he would teach them is naught, and the more
judicious shall be able to judge, that it is a very bad cause, to which the
marrow and pith of many large volumes can yield no better defense then he has
brought.

CHAPTER. 1. OF FREE WILL.
1. W. BISHOP.
THat I be not thought captious, but willing to admit any thing that M. Perkins
has said agreeable to the truth, I will let his whole text in places
indifferent, pass, paring off only superfluous words, with adding some
annotations where it shall be needful, and rest only upon the points in
controversy. First then concerning Free will, wherewith he begins, thus he
says: Free will both by them and us, is taken for a mixed power in the mind and
will of man, whereby discerning what is good, and what is evil, he does
accordingly choose or refuse the same.

Annot. If we would speak formally, it is not a mixed power in the mind and
will, but is a free faculty of the mind and will only, whereby we choose or
refuse, supposing in the understanding, a knowledge of the same before. But let
this definition pass as more popular.

M. Perkins. 1. Conclusion. Man must be considered in a fourefold estate, as he
was created, as he was corrupted, as he is renewed, as he shall be glorified. In
the first state we ascribe unto man's will liberty of nature, in which he could
will or will either good or evil; note that this liberty proceeded not from
his own nature, but of original Justice, in which he was created. In the
third liberty of grace, in the last liberty of glory.

Annot. Carry this in mind, that here he grants man in the state of grace to
have Free will.

R. ABBOT.
Master Bishop here deals as iuglers are wont to do, who make show of fair
play, when they use nothing but legerdemaine. He will not be thought captious,
and yet for two whole pages here in the beginning, is nothing but captious. His
^^^ing the text of M. Perkins his book to pass whole in places indifferent,
is nothing but a dismembring and mangling of the text. His paring off only of
superfluous words, is the paring off of such arguments and authorities as he
knew not how to answer. His adding of annotations, the sophisticating of his
reader with idle and frivolous corrections. His resting only upon points of
controversy, the wresting of those things to controversy whereof there is no
controversy at all. M. Perkins defines Freewill to be a mixed power of the
mind and will of man, whereby esteeming what is good and what is evil, he
does accordingly choose or refuse the same. A little to please himself he
gives a snatch at this definition of Free will, as not formal enough, only to
show himself more formal then wise, the definition being more fitly expressed
then that which he has put in place of it, and he honestly is content because
it is more popular, to let it pass. Whereas M. Perkins in his first
conclusion, affirms in the first estate of man as he was created, a liberty
of nature, M. Bishop gives thereof this learned note: that this liberty
preceeded not from man's own nature, but from original justice wherein he was
created, as if he should say, that the shining of the Sun proceeds not from
the nature of the Sun, but from the light of it; whereas the light is a part
of the nature of the Sun, as was original justice a part of the nature of
man, being the Ephesians. 4.24.
image and likeness of God, in which and according to which he was created.
And to say that Free will did proceed from original justice, is wholly against
himself, because it must thereof follow, that in the fall of original
justice, must needs be implied the loss of Free will, which cannot stand
without that from which it does proceed, so that man in his fall must
necessarily be said to have lost his Free will. But he should rather have said,
that God gave unto man Free will, as the steward and disposer of original
justice and righteousness, and as Tertul adu. Marcion lib. 2. Libertas and
potestas arbitrij quasi ubripens emancipatia deo boni.
the balance to turn either to or fro, the benefit that God had put into the
hands and power of man.

In the third estate of man, as he is renewed, M. Perkins affirms liberty of
grace. Carry this in mind, says M. Bishop, that here he grants man in the
state of grace to have Free will. As though either he, or any of us had made
question thereof, who all acknowledge by the Gospel that it is the work of
Christ John 8.36.
to make us free, Rom 6 18.
free from sin, Cap. 8.21.
free from the bondage of corruption, that in holiness we may be servants
unto God. Nay that the reader may the more clearly conceive the truth of this
whole matter, we deny not Free will in any estate of man. For it is true which
S. Austin says, August. de ciuit dei. lib 5. cap. 10. Necesse est esse vt cum
volumus libero velimus arbitrio.
that whatsoever we will, we will the same by Free will, because the will is
not subject to compulsion, but wills always freely, and of it own accord,
or else loses the nature and name of will. Which freedom of will, by
original institution stood indifferent either to good or evil; yet was not to
continue so, but upon election once made to be free only in that whereto of it
self it should betake it self: free only in evil, if it should apply it
self to evil: free only in good, if it should make choice to continue
therein. Therefore the Angels which kept their original habitation and estate,
have their Bernard. de great and li^ arb. Angeli sancti ita sunt boni vt non
possuit esse and ^^ali.
Free will by Gods election and grace stablished in goodness, so that it is not
inclineable to any thing that is evil. But the Angels which sinned and abode
not in the truth, have their Free will by it self, and of it self Ib^d
praeuaricatores angeli ita sunt mali vt (...) non valiant esse boni.
obdured and hardened in that that is evil, so that it is not at all appliable
to any thing that is good. Man therefore by sin has not lost Free will, for
by August. cont 2. epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap 2 Liberum arbitrium vsque a^^o in
peccatore non perij^ vt per illud peccant, maxim omnes qui cum delectatione
peccant and lib. 3. ca. 8 Non nisi ad peccatu^ v^let.
Free will it is that now he sins, yea and can nothing but sin. But this
Free will that is thus free in sin, has no freedom at all, as S. Austin in
sundry places expresses, to righteousness and to the service of God, until
it be rectified and made free by Jesus Christ; no freedom or power at all, but
what is newly and merely Idem. de peccat. mer. and rem. lib. 2. cap. 6. Ipsum
liberum arbitrium ad dei gratiam hoc est ad Dei dona pertinere non ambigens.
etc.
the grace and gift of God. Therefore having affirmed the freedom of the will
to sin, he adds that Cont 2. epist. Pelag. l. 3. cap. 8. Ad iustitiam nisi
diuinitus liberatum aduitumque non valet.
to righteousness, but as it is made free and helped of God, it avails
nothing. Ibid. lib. 4 ca. 8 Quid mihi obi^^d^s liberum arbitrium quod ad
faciendam iustitiam liberum non erit, nisi ouis fuerit? Qui facit igitur oues
homines ipse ad obedientiam pietatie humanas liberat voluntates.
What tellest thou me of Free will, says he, which to the doing of
righteousness shall not be free, except thou become a sheep of Gods? he then
who of men makes his sheep, even he makes the wills of men Free to the
obedience of godliness. Epist. 107. Liberum arbitrium ad diligendum Deum primi
peccati granditate perdidimus: and antea: Gratia nostrum ad de. linandum a malo
and faciendum bonum liberatur arbitrium.
We lost free will to love God by the greatness of the first sin, says he,
but by grace our will is made free to decline from evil and do good. So then
we do not deny Free will to be righteousness, but yet we have regard to that
caution which S. Austin gives against Pelagians and Papists, Ibid. si vere
volumus defenders liberum arbitrium non oppugnemus v^de ^ic liberum.
if we will defend Free will aright, not to oppugn that whence it is made
free. What Cont. 2. ep. Pelag. l. 4 cap. 9. Nunquid liberum arbitrium negat
hominibus quia Deo totum tribuit quod recte viuimus?
does a man deny Free will, says he, because he attributes it wholly to God
that we live well: Retract. lib. 1^ cap 9. Tale est. vt sine illo recte viuere
nequeamus.
without freedom of will we cannot live well; (for how should a man do well
without his will?) but yet this Free will to live well is Cont 2. epist. Pelag.
lib. 3 cap. 7. Hominis non libera sed Dei gratia liberata voluntas.
a will not free (merely and of it self) but made free by the grace of God.
For then is De ciuit. Dei. lib. 14. cap. 11. Arbitrium voluntatu tunc est vere
liberum, cum vetijs peccatisque non seruit. Tale datum est a Deo quod amissum
proprio vitio, nisi a quo dari potuit reddi non potest.
the will of man free indeed, when it is free from sin: and such a free will
God gave to man in the beginning, but he lost it by his own default, and being
lost it cannot be restored, but by him that was able first to give it. In
Christ therefore it is restored unto us, who by his Esai. 51.12.
free spirit gives Esa. ^1 1.
liberty to the captives, and opens the prison to them that are bound, and
Col. 1.13.
delivers us from the power of darkness, and makes us 1 Cor. 7.22.
freemen unto him. But yet so, as that having received but Romans 8.23.
the first fruits of the spirit, by whom this freedom is wrought, according to
the words of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3.17.
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, the same is yet but begun
in us, so that August. in Joan. tract. 41. Ex part libertas, ex part
seruitus; nondum tota, nondum pura, nondum plena liberias.
there is partly freedom, and partly bondage, not yet whole and pure and
perfect freedom. For no further is the will freed then it is renewed; and it
is renewed as yet but in part, continuing still De peccat. mer. and rem lib. 2.
cap. 7. Animus qui est homo interior nondum totus est renouatus, and in quantu^
nondum est renouatus, intantum adhuc in vetustate est.
in part in the old estate. Therefore it is so made free, as that in some part
we have cause still to complain with the Apostle, Romans 7.14.
I am carnal, sold under sin, and to pray with the Prophet David: Psalm.
142.7.
Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto thy name. Hence is
that heaviness and dullness, that waywardness and untowardness, that
retention and holding back, that still we find in us in the applying of our
selves to spiritual and heavenly things. And as touching that wherein we are
renewed and made free, it is not sufficient to uphold us and keep us in the
right way, but we have still need of the grace of God, to be assistant and
helpefull unto us. Hieron. ad Ctesiphont. Non sufficit mihi quod semel donauit,
nisi semper donauerit: Peto vt accipiam, and eum accepero rursus peto.
It is not enough that God has once given, says Hierome, except he still
give: I pray to receive, and when I have received, I pray again. Therefore the
ancient church required of Pelagius to confess, that August epist. 106.
Fateatur gratiam Dei and ad^utorium etiam ad singulos actus dari.
the grace of God is given us to every act that we do. Enchirid cap. 32.
Nolen^em praeuenit vt velit; volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit.
He preuenteth us to make us willing, and follows us when we are willing,
that we do not will in vain. And if his hand do not hold us and uphold us, it
comes to pass by the burden of corruptible flesh, that we are still
relapsing to our selves, and still ready with the Exodus 14.11.12.
Israelits to yield our selves to become bond again. Bernard. in Cant. ser.
84. Non est aliud anima nostra quam spirits valiens and non rediens^^, ita
fuerit derelicta.
Our soul, says Bernard, is no other but as a wind that passes and returns
not again, if it be left unto it self. Now M. Bishop do you carry this in
mind, thus expressed by the phrases and speeches of the ancient Church, and
leave to calumniate our doctrine, who affirm Free will as far as they
affirmed it, and deny it no otherwise but as they denied it against the
Pelagian heretics. But you will hardly leave your wont, because you see well
enough, that if you take our doctrine as we deliver it, you can devise nothing
plausibly or colourably to speak against it.

2. W. BISHOP.
M. Per. 2. Conclusion. The matters whereabout Free will is occupied, are
principally the actions of men, which be of three sorts, Natural, Humane,
Spiritual. Natural actions are such, as are common to men and beasts, as to
eat, sleep, etc. In all which we join with the Papists, and hold that man
has free will even since the fall of Adam.

M. Per. 3. Conclusion. Humane actions are such, as are common to all men, good
and bad, as to speak, to practice any kind of art, to perform any kind of
civil duty, to preach, to administer Sacraments, etc. And hither we may
refer the outward actions of civil virtues, as namely Justice, Temperance,
Gentleness, and Liberality, and in these also we join with the Church of
Rome, and say (as experience teaches) that men have a natural freedom of
will, to put them, or not to put them in execution. S. Paul says, The Gentiles
that have not the law, Romans 2.14.
do the things of the law by nature, that is, by natural strength: And he
says of himself, Phil 3 6. Mat 6 5. Ezech. 29.19.
that before his conversion touching the righteousness of the law, he was
unblameable. And for the external obedience, natural men receive reward in
temporal things. And yet here some caueats must be remembered.

First, that in humane actions (he should say moral) man's will is weak, and
his understanding dim, thereupon he often fails in them. This caveat is no
caveat of the Protestants, but taken out of S. Thomas of Aquines. Sum. 12 ^.
109. art. 4. and 8.
And in all such actions with S. Augustine (you might have quoted the place) I
understand the will of man, to be only wounded or half dead.

2. That the will of man, is under the will of God, and therefore to be ordered
by it: Who knows not this?

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop gives us some more of his learned notes, and tells us, that
M. Perkins for humane should have said moral, whereas the name of moral
actions does not so properly comprehend all those which he meant to import by
humane actions. As touching the first caveat given to the third conclusion,
that in humane actions man's will is weak, and his understanding dim, etc. he
notes that this caveat is no caveat of the Protestants, but taken out of S.
Thomas of Aquines. He was desirous it seems to have it thought, that he had
looked into Thomas Aquinas, but he was willing withal to show that he did not
well understand what he read there: for he that looks into Thomas Aqui. 1 2.
q. 109. art. 4. and 8.
the places which he quoteth, shall easily see, that there was little cause for
him to say, that that is a caveat taken out of Thomas Aquinas, there being
nothing directly tending to the matter of the caveat expressed by M. Perkins.
But the Protestants might well learn that caveat out of their own experience,
and if we had not observed it of our selves, we could have learned it of
Philosophers, and Poets, and Historians, to say nothing of eccelesiasticall
Writers, so that we need not to seek to Thomas Aquinas to borrow it from him.
But what is that to the purpose, seeing we profess our selves well content
legere Margaritas ea coeno, to gather Pearls even out the dirt, and from M.
Bishop himself to take knowledge of any thing worthy our learning, if any thing
worthy our learning had bin written by him. M. Perkins says, that in humane or
moral actions, with Austin he understands the will of man only wounded or half
dead. M. Bishop says, he should have quoted the place: the place to which M.
Perkins alludeth, I take it to be Hypognost. lib. 3. where Austine says that
man was wounded and half dead, August. Hypognost. lib. 3 Recte dictus est
sentiuiuus: habebat enim vitale^ motum, id est liberum arbitrium ^uburatum
(morum scilicet ornamentis and bono pos^i^litatis liberi arbitrij perdit^) quod
ei solum ad vitam aeternam quam perd derat red^. 8 non sufficiebat.
because his Free will had still vital motion, but he was wounded in the
ornaments of moral actions, and lost the benefit of the possibility of Free
will, to return unto everlasting life. To the other caveat, that the will of
man is under the will of God, and therefore to be ordered by it, M. Bishop
says, Who knows not this? As if men in delivering precepts and rules of any
kind of learning, did not set down even triuiall and common things, because
howsoever they be common yet they be necessary to make a perfect work, and
always necessary for learners, when the whole works are needless to them
that are already learned. And why might not M. Perkins bring in this caveat in
a writing against the Papists, as well as Hierome did against the Pelagians?
Hieron adu. Pelag. lib. 2. Vt scramus non ex nobis, sed ex Dei cunct^ pendere
iudicio, veniam, inquit, etc. Qui enim dicit, venia^ ad vos, ostendit se velle,
mostrat cupere, promittit aduentum: sed vt cautius haec lo qu^tur, infert; si
Dominus voluerit. Si quis enim putat si quid nosse necdum nouit sicut (...)
Jeoportet
That we may know, says he, that all things depend, not upon us, but upon the
discretion and will of God, the Apostle says, I will come unto you speedily,
if the Lord will. When he says, I will come unto you, he shows his good will,
he declares his desire, he promises his coming. But yet to speak with a
caveat, he says, If the Lord will. For if any man think he knows any thing,
he knows not yet as he ought to know. Yea and S. Austine also thought this
point worth the noting against the same Pelagians, that August de great. and lib
^bit. cap. 20. Scriptura intendit non solu^ bonus ^ominum voluntates, etc
virum^tiam quae conseruant seculiore ^turamita esse in Dei potestate, vt eas
quo voluerit, quando voluerit, facia^ inclinar^, etc.
the wills of men not only for spiritual and eternal life, but as they
concern the preserving of the creature of the world, are in the power of God,
so as that he causes them to incline whither he will, and when he will, either
for benefit to some, or for punishment to othersome. And he thought it not
unfit to exemplify this matter out of the Ibid. cap. 20, 21
books of Iosuah, of the Kings and Chronicles, how God orders the wills of
men, for the constituting of earthly kingdoms, and makes profitable use and
application thereof, that it should be absurd De Praedest. sanct. cap. 20.
Cogitate quale sit, vt credamus ad constituenda regna terrena hominum
voluntates operari Deum, and ad capessendum regnum c^elorum homines operari
voluntates suas.
to think that God frames the wills of men for the settling of earthly
kingdoms, and that men frame their own wills for the obtaining of the kingdom
of heaven. And will M. Bishop now turn off Austine and Hierome, as he does M.
Perkins, with Who knows not this? But his notes yet are but to whet his wit:
when he is well awaked out of his sleep, happily we shall have some wiser stuff.

W. BISHOP.
M. P. 4. Conclusion. The third kind of actions are spiritual more nearely,
and these be twofold: good, or bad. In sins we join with the Papist, and
teach that in sins man has freedom of will. Some perhaps will say, that we
sin necessarily, because he that sins, cannot but sin, and that Free will
and necessity, cannot stand together. Indeed the necessity of compulsion and
Free will, cannot stand together, but there is another kind of necessity (or
rather infallibility) which may stand with Free will: for some things may be
done necessarily, and also freely.

Annot. The example of a close prisoner is not to the purpose, for it puts
necessity in one thing, and liberty in another. The solution is, that
necessarily must be taken for certainly, not that a man is at any time
compelled to sin, but his weakness and the craft of the devil are such,
that he is very often ouerreached by the devil, and induced to sin, but with
free consent of his own will.

R. ABBOT.
The comparison of a prison used by M. Perkins, is most pregnant and fit. A man
walks up and down in close prison, and freely moves and stirs himself;
yet he has no power to get out of prison, but for ought he can do for himself
is necessarily there. Even so, man is free in sin, and freely wills
whatsoever he wills thereto: but sin is his prison, and he cannot free
himself therefrom; nay because the will it self is imprisoned, he has no
will to be free, and therefore of necessity remains still a prisoner to
sin, till God do change his will to make him free. But M. Bishop disliketh
the comparison, because it puts necessity in one thing, and liberty in
another, whereas to that purpose it was used, and to that purpose most fitly is
applied, and therein nothing contained, but what is agreeable to the truth. For
whereas he takes upon him to correct that term of necessity, and will have
it to be called infallibility and certainty, he malapertly takes upon him to
teach them that are more learned then himself. It is a word which S. Austin
often uses upon the like occasion, both against the Pelagians and Manichees.
August. de perfect. iustit. Rat. 9 Quia peccauit voluntas secula est peccantem
peccatu^ habendi dura necessitas.
Man sinned by his will, says he, and thereupon followed a cruel necessity
of having sin. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 1 Naturae nostrae dura necessitas merito
praecedentis iniquitatis exortae est.
A cruel necessity (of sin) grew upon our nature by the desert of the first
sin. De not. and gra. cap. 66 Ex vitijs naturae, non ex co^ditione naturae
est quaedam peccandi necessitas.
Not by creation, but by corruption of nature, there is a certain necessity
of committing sin. Cont Fortunat. disput. ^. Post qua^ libera ipse voluntate
peccauit nos in necessitatem praec^pitati sumus
After that Adam sinned by free will, we were thrown headlong into a
necessity (of sin) all that have descended of his race. And that this
necessity does well stand with liberty, S. Bernard shows, in calling it
Bernard. in Cantic. Ser. 81. Ipsa sua volu^tas necessitate^ facit, vt nec
necessitas cum voluntaria sit excludere valeat voluntatem, nec voluntas cum sit
illecta excludere necessitatem. Et post^ Anima sub voluntaria quadam and male
libera voluntate tenetur. Et iterum post. Voluntas inexcusabilem and
incorrigibile^ necessitas facis.
a voluntary and mis-free necessity, wherein neither can necessity excuse
the will, because it is voluntary, nor the will exclude necessity, because it
is entangled with delight therein; wherein will takes from him all matter of
defense, and necessity bereaueth him of possibility of amendment, and in a
word, the will it self in strange wise causes this necessity to it self.
Now then because the state of sin is such, as that there is one way
necessity by the habit of corruption, and another way liberty by the free
motion of the will, very rightly did M. Perkins to express the same, use the
example of a prison, that puts necessity in one thing, and liberty in
another. And thus in righteousness also necessity and liberty agree, and do
not one exclude the other. For the Angels being by the grace and power of God
confirmed in goodness, are thereby necessarily good, Jdem de great. and lib.
arist. sup.
so and in such sort good, as that they cannot become evil, and yet they are
freely and voluntarily good, because it is the will it self that is
established in goodness. The same shall be the state of eternal life to the
elect and faithful, August de perfect. iustitia.
Been viuendi and nunquam peccandi, voluntaria foelixque necessitas: A
voluntary and happy necessity of living well, and never sinning any more. Let
M. Bishop take knowledge now of this manner of speech, and learn not to find
fault when he has no cause. But he notes, that we must not understand, that a
man is at any time compelled to sin: where I may answer him with his own
words before, Who knows not this? And again, that this is none of M. Bishops
caveat, but taken out of M. Perkins. M. Perkins had told him so much before
hand, and therefore what needed this note? For this necessity grows not of
any outward force, but from inward nature, not by condition of the substance,
but by accidental corruption, which being supposed, there is a necessity of
sin, as in the palsy a necessity of shaking, in the hot fever a necessity
of burning, in the broken leg a necessity of halting, so continuing till the
malady and distemper be cured and done away. And whereas M. Bishop refers
this necessity of sin to the weakness of man, and to the craft of the
devil, he speaks too short in the one, and impertinently in the other. For
we are not to conceive weakness only, which may be only a privation, but a
positive evil habit and contagion of sin, whereby a man sins even
without any furtherance of the devils temptations, by the only evil
disposition of himself. Which evil disposition, because it is also in the
will it self, therefore in the midst of that necessity, a man sins no
otherwise, but as M. Bishop requires to have it said, with free consent of his
own will.

W. BISHOP.
M. P. 5. Conclusion. The second kind of spiritual actions be good, as
Repentance, Faith, Obedience, etc. In which we likewise in part join with the
Church of Rome, and say that in the first conversion of a sinner, man's Free
will concurreth with Gods grace, as a fellow or co-worker in some sort: for in
the conversion of a sinner, three things are required: the word, Gods spirit,
and Man's will: for Man's will is not passive in all and every respect, but has
an action in the first conversion and change of the soul: when any man is
converted, this work of God is not done by compulsion, but he is converted
willingly, and at the very time when he is converted by Gods grace, he wills
his conversion. To this end says S. Augustine, He which made thee without
thee, Se^. 15 de verb. Apost.
will not save thee without thee. Again, that it is certain that our will is
required in this, that we may do any thing well, (it is not only then required
in our first conversion, if it be required to all good things which we do,) but
we have it not from our own power, but God works to will in us. For look at
what time God gives grace, at the same time he gives a will to desire and will
the same: as for example, when God work faith, at the same time, he works
also upon the will, causing it to desire faith, and willingly to receive the
gift of believing: God makes of the unwilling will a willing will, because no
man can receive grace utterly against his will, considering will constrained,
is no will. But here we must remember, that howsoever in respect of time, the
working of grace by Gods spirit, and the willing of it in man go together: yet
in regard of order, grace is first wrought, and man's will must first of all be
acted and moved by grace; and then it also acts, wills, and moves it
self. And this is the last point of consent between us and the Roman Church,
touching Freewill, neither may we proceed farther with them. Hitherto M.
Perkins.

Now before I come to the supposed difference, I gather first, that he yields
unto the principal point in controversy, that is, freedom of will, in civil
and moral works in the state of corruption, and all good works in the state
of grace: for in his first conclusion distinguishing four estates of man, he
affirms, that in the third, of man renewed or (as we speak justified) there
is liberty of grace, that is, grace enableth man's will to do (if it please)
such spiritual works, as God requires at his hands. Yet lest he be taken to
yield in any thing, Page ^0.
he does in show of words contradict both these points in another place: For in
setting down the difference of our opinions, he says: that man's will in his
conversion is not active, but passive, which is flat opposite unto that which
himself said a little before in his first conclusion; that in the conversion
of a sinner, man's will concurreth not passiuely, but is co-worker with Gods
grace.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop understands not the principal point in controversy, and
therefore thinks that M. Perkins yields to the principal point in
controversy, when he does nothing less. It was never any point of
controversy, whether man in the state of corruption have freedom of will in
civil or moral works: for none of us ever has denied it. Neither was it
ever any point of controversy, whether man in the state of grace have freedom
of will to good works: for there is not one of us but always has affirmed
it, so that M. Bishop knows not indeed what he disputes of. As for that
liberty of grace, he expounds it also out of his own blind fancy, and not
out of our doctrine. For we do not mean thereby, that grace enableth man's will
to do, if it please, such spiritual works as God requires at his hands, but
that grace works in the will of man to please to do such spiritual works as
God requires at his hands. For he does not hang his work upon the suspended
if of our will, but Phil. 2.13.
works in us to will, and Ezech 36.27. August. de Praedest. sanct. cap. 10
Ipse facit vti illi faciant quae praecepit. Et cap. 11. Promissit facturum se
vt facia^^, quae ^ulci vt fiant.
causes us to do the things that he commands us to do. But M. Bishop here
imagines, that M. Perkins contradicts in one leaf that which he yields in
another. He says one where, that man's will in his conversion, is not active
but passive. But let M. Bishop learn of S. Austine, that August. quaest. ve^.
Test. 14. Qui verba suppronit quaestionis aut imperitu^ est aut tergiuersator,
qui calumniae magis studeat, quam doctrinae.
he that concealeth the words of the point in question, is either an unlearned
idiot, or a wrangling crauen, that studieth more to cavil, then either to
teach or learn. The words of M. Perkins are these: The Papists say, Will has
a natural cooperation; we deny it, and say, it has cooperation only by
grace, being in it self not active but passive, willing well only as it is
moved by grace, whereby it must first be acted and moved, before it can act or
will. Where he very plainly affirms the cooperation of man's will in his
conversion, but says truly, that it is of grace it self, that it does
cooperate with grace. He says, that in it self it is not active but passive,
but though in it self it be only passive, yet he acknowledges that it
becomes active also, by being acted or moved by grace. Now how is this
contrary to that which he says in the fifth conclusion, that man's Free will
concurres with Gods grace, as a fellow or co-worker in some sort, and is not
passive in all and every respect? In some sort, says he, it is a co-worker
with grace, and is not passive in all and every respect. How is that? Man's will
must first of all be acted and moved by grace, and then it also acts,
wills, and moves it self. How can M. Bishop devise to have a man speak
more agreably to himself? But he plays the lewd cousiner, and whereas the
whole point of the controversy lies in these words, by it self, or in it
self, he guilefully omitteth the same, and makes M. Perkins absolutely to
say, that man's will in his conversion is not active but passive, when he says,
that in it self it is not active but passive, declaring that by grace it is
made active. So in the other place where it is said, that man's will is a
co-worker in some sort, and is not passive in all and every respect, he leaves
out those terms of restraint, as if M. Perkins had made the will simply and of
it self a co worker with grace, and not passive in any respect. The
contradiction therefore was not in M. Perkins his words, but in M. Bishops
head, or rather in his malicious and wicked heart, which blind-foldeth him to
make him seem not to see that which he sees well enough.

5. W. BISHOP.
The like contradiction may be observed in the other part of liberty in moral
actions: for in his third conclusion he delivers plainly, man to have a
natural freedom, even since the fall of Adam, to do, or not to do the acts of
wisdom, Justice, Temperance, etc. and proves out of S. Paul, that the
Gentiles so did: yet in his first reason, Page 19.
he affirms as peremptorily out of the eight of Genesis, that the whole frame
of man's heart is corrupted, and all that he thinks, deuiseth, or imagines, is
wholly evil, leaving him no natural strength to perform any part of moral
duty. See how uncertain the steps be of men that walk in darkness, or that
would seem to communicate with the works of darkness. For if I mistake him
not, he agrees fully in this matter of Free will, with the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church: for he putting down the point of difference, says, that it
stands in the cause of the freedom of man's will in spiritual matters:
allowing then freedom of will with us in the state of grace, whereof he there
treats: for he seems to dissent from us only in the cause of that
freedom. And as he differs from Luther and Calvin, with other sectaries, in
granting this liberty of will: so in the very cause also he accords with
Catholics, as appears by his own words. For (says he) Papists say, man's
will concurreth with Gods grace by it self, and by it own natural power: we
say, that man's will works with grace; yet not of it self, but by grace:
either he understands not what Catholics say, or else accuses them
wrongfully: for we say, that man's will then only concurreth with Gods grace,
when it is stirred and helped first by Gods grace. So that man's will by his
own natural action, does concur in every good work, otherwise it were no
action of man: but we farther say, that this actio^ proceeds principally of
grace, whereby the will was made able to produce such actions: for of it self it
was utterly unable to bring forth such spiritual fruit. And this I take to
be that, which M. Perkins does mean by those his words: that the will must be
first moved and acted by grace, before it can act or will. He mistook us,
thinking that we required some outward help only to the will, to join with
it; or rather, that grace did but as it were untie the chains of sin wherein
our will was fettered: and then Will could of it self turn to God. Not
understanding how Catholics take that Parable of the man wounded in the way,
Luke 10.
between Jerusalem and Ierico, who was (not as the Papists only say, but as
the holy Ghost says) left half, and not stark dead. Now the exposition of
Catholics is not, that this wounded man, (which signifies all mankind) had
half his spiritual strength left him; but was robbed of all supernatural
riches, spoiled of his original justice, and wounded in his natural powers of
both understanding and Will, and therein left half dead, not being able of his
own strength, either to know all natural truth, or to perform all moral
duty. Now touching supernatural works, because he left all power to perform
them; not being able so much as to prepare himself conveniently to them: he in
a good sense may be likened unto a dead man, not able to move one finger that
way of grace: and so in holy Scripture the father said of his prodigal Son,
Luke 15.
He was dead and is revived. Yet as the same son lived a natural life,
albeit in a deadly sin: so man's will after the fall of Adam, continued
somewhat free in actions conformable to the nature of man, though wounded also
in them, as not being able to act many of them, yet having still that natural
faculty of Free Will, capable of grace, and also able, being first both
outwardly moved, and fortified inwardly by the virtue of grace, to effect and
do any work appertaining to salvation: which is as much as M. Perkins
affirms. And this to be the very doctrine of the Church of Rome, is most
manifestly to be seen in the Council of Trent, where in the Session are first
these words in effect, concerning the unableness of man to arise from sin of
himself. Every man must acknowledge and confess, that by Adams fall we were
made so unclean and sinful, that neither the Gentiles by the force of nature,
nor the Jews by the letter of Moses law, could arise out of that sinful
state. After it shows, how our deliverance is wrought, and how freedom of
will is recovered in special, and wherein it consists, saying: The beginning
of justification, in persons using reason, is taken from the grace of God,
preventing us through Jesus Christ, that is, from his vocation, whereby without
any desert of ours we are called, that we who were by our sins turned away
from God, may be prepared by his grace, both raising us up, and helping us to
return to our own Justification, freely yielding our consent unto the said
grace, and working with it. So as God touching the heart of man by the light of
the holy Ghost, neither does man nothing at all, receiving that inspiration,
who might also refuse it: neither yet can he without the grace of God, by his
Free will, move himself to that, which is just in Gods sight. And that you may
be assured, that this doctrine of the Council, is no other then that which was
taught three hundred years before, in the very midst of darkness, as
Heretics deem: 12. q. 109. Art. 6.
see what S. Thomas of Aquine one of her principal pillars, has written of
this point in his most learned Sum. Where, upon these words of our Savior,
Ioh. 6.
No man can come to me, unless my Father draw him, he concludes it to be
manifest, that man cannot so much as prepare himself to receive the light of
grace, but by the free and undeserved help of God, moving him inwardly
thereunto. And this is all which M. Perkins in his pretended dissent auerreth
here, and goes about to prove in his five reasons following: the which I will
omit, as being all for us. And if any man desire to see more to that purpose,
let him read the most learned works of that famous Cardinal, and right
reverend Archbishop Bellarmine.

R. ABBOT.
Here is another contradiction framed upon the anuile of M. Bishops ignorance,
whilst he understands not, that works morally good may be spiritually
evil, and whilst they Luk 16.15.
are highly esteemed with men for the substance of the act, yet may be
abominable with God by the uncleanness of the heart. Which if he had duly
considered, he might well have seen, that both these assertions may stand
together, that man has freedom of will to do the outward acts of moral
virtues, and yet that all that man deuiseth, frames or imagines is wholly
evil, because his moral virtues without grace are in Gods sight but so many
corruptions of good works, being poisoned in the root of unbelief, and wholly
diuerted from their true and proper end, so that God has no respect to them,
because in them there is no respect at all to God. This follows afterward
more fully to be handled toward the end of this question, but in the mean
time we see how simply he collecteth of this latter point, that M. Perkins
leaves a man no natural strength to perform any part of moral duty, and as
if he had very wisely handled the matter, adds his epiphonema: So uncertain
are the steps of them that walk in darkness, very fitly agreeing to himself,
who neither understands what the adversary says, nor what he himself is to
say for his own part. Whereupon it is that he conceiueth that M. Perkins fully
agrees with the Romish Church in this matter of Free will, whereas they are as
far different one from the other, as heaven is from earth. The agreement
forsooth is in that M. Perkins grants Free will in the state of grace. But so
did Luther and Calvin, and so do we all, as far as M. Perkins does. The Papists
say, that man has in his own nature a power of Free will, which being only
stirred and helped, can, and does of it self adioyne it self to grace to
accept thereof, and to work with it. This is it that we deny: we say, that
freedom of the will to turn to God, and to work with him, is no power of
nature, but the work of grace; that it is in no sort of man himself, but
wholly and only the gift of God: that howsoever God do offer grace, yet that
man has no power in himself, or in his own will to assent and yield unto it,
but it is God himself that withal works in him to accept thereof: that to
the conversion of a sinner, there arises nothing from the motion of his own
will, howsoever assisted and helped of God, but what God by his Spirit does
work in it.

Upon this point only Luther and Calvin, and we all insist to challenge all
wholly unto God. In this respect was it that Luther said, that Free will is, Res
de solo titulo, a matter of name only, and a bare title, because of man
himself it is nothing, and by it, or in it there can nothing be attributed
unto him. For August. de bono perseu. cap. 13. and cont. 2. ep. Pelag lib. 4.
ca. 6.
we will indeed, it is true, but God works in us to will; we work, but it is
God that works in us to work; we walk, but he causes us to walk; we keep
his commandments, but he works in us to keep his commandments, so that
nothing is ours of our selves, but all is his only. And this M. Bishop in some
show of words here seems to affirm, but indeed he wholly overthrows it. He
says, that man's will then only concurreth with Gods grace, when it is first
stirred and helped by grace, and therefore that M. Perkins either does not
understand them, or else does wrongfully accuse them, in that he charge them
to say, that man's will concurreth with Gods grace by it self, and by it own
natural power. But M. Perkins understood them well enough, and does no whit
wrongfully accuse them. For Andradius the expounder of the riddles of the
council of Trent, does plainly tell us, Andrad. orthodoxar. explicat lib. 4.
Libere nostri arbitrij motto atque ad institiam ap^licatio non magis a gratia
Deipendet, quam a diuina virtute stipitis exultio, etc. Cum diuina gratia
iacentem libertatem erigat and confirmet viresque illi addat quibus oblata
iustitiae ornamentae complecti possit, non secus quidem sui ad iustitiam
applicationis causa efficiens dicenda est ac ea quae natura constant earum
omnium operationum ad quas naturae impulsione feruntur.
that the motion of Free will, and applying of it felfe to righteousness, does
no more depend upon the grace of God, then the fires burning of the wood does
depend upon the power of God; that grace lifts it up being fallen down, and
adds strength unto it, but that it is no less the efficient cause of
applying it self to grace, then other natural things are of all those
operations whereto by force of nature they are carried. Therefore he compares
Ibid. Non secus ac ligneis sole^ deuincti qui incedendiquidem facultatem
habent, etsi ingredi nullo modo possit ni vincula rumpantur prius quae motum
reprimunt ac retardam.
Free will to a man made fast in the stocks, who has a power and ableness in
himself to go, if he be let go out of the stocks, and the bonds be broken
that held him before that he could not stir. Whereby he gives us to
understand their mind, that as the fire and other natural things being by the
power of God vpholden in that which naturally they are, do of themselves work
their proper and natural effects, and as a man unbound and let go out of the
stocks walks and goes, not by any new work that is wrought in him, but by
his own former natural power; so Free will though entangled in the delights
of sin, and bound with the bonds thereof, yet has a natural power whereby
it can apply it self to righteousness, if grace by breaking the bonds, and
abating the strength of sin, do but make way for it to use and exercise it
self; so that grace having wrought what concerns it, they leave it to the
will by it self, and by it own natural power, to adioyne it self to work
therewith. And this Bellarmine plainly testifies, when he affirms, Bellarm
de great. and lib. arb. lib 6 cap 15. Sicut auxilium generale ita concurrit cum
omnibus rebus in actionibus naturalibus, vt tame^ non impediat libertatem and
conti^ge^tiam, ita speciale auxil um ad^^uans ita concurrit ad omnes actiones
supernaturales vt non impediat hominis libertatem: quoniam eode^ prorsus modo
auxilia ista concurrunt.
that grace does no otherwise concur to supernatural actions, then
universal causes do to natural, so that it does no more in the work of
righteousness, then the Sun and heavenly powers do in the act of generation,
or the producing of other natural effects yielding an influence and
inclination, but leaving the very act to the will and work of man. All which
in effect M. Bishop himself afterward expresses, teaching that man after the
fall of Adam, has still a natural faculty of Free will, which being first
outwardly moved, and inwardly fortified by the virtue of grace, is able to
effect and do any work appertaining to salvation; thereby giving to understand,
that there is still an ability left in nature, howsoever for the present
overwhelmed and oppressed, which being excited and stirred up, though in it
self it be not sufficient to produce the effects of spiritual actions, yet
has a sufficiency to apply it self to grace for the producing thereof. Which
Costerus the Jesuit declares, by the similitude of Coster. Enchirid ca. 5.
Sit quispiam lapsus in foueam tenebricosam ex qua neque cogitete gredinec exire
solus possit; sed in ea securus obdormiat: accedat ad eum amicus qui hominis
miserius de somno exertatum ad egressum moneat multisque rationibus vt
assintiatur inducat: tum ei manum vel funem potrigat and simul co^antem educat
in lumen
a man fallen into a dark and deep pit, whence he cannot get out by himself,
nor has care to get out, but sleeps securely therein, till his friend come,
who awaketh him out of his sleep, and wishes him to get out, and by reasons
persuades him to be willing thereto, and so gives him his hand, or reaches
to him a cord, which he takes and lays fast hold on it, and yields his
own uttermost strength that he may be pulled out. To which purpose also he
uses another example, of a man Ibid. Homo languidus qui ab igne vel a lumine
solis facie auersus se ipse solus non potest co^uertere; sed si accedat amicus
qui iuuet and languidus ipse conatum aliquens adhibeat sit tandem vt conuersus
calore solis aut ignis fruatur.
extremely faint and weak, lying with his face turned away from the fire or
the Sun, who is not able to turn himself to the fire or the Sun, but if
he have one to help him, uses his own strength also for the turning of
himself about to enjoy the warmth thereof. Which comparisons do plainly show,
that they attribute unto Free will a proper and several work beside that that
is done by the grace of God. Whereby we see how guilefully M. Bishop speaks,
when he says, that the will is made able by grace to bring forth spiritual
fruit, being of it self utterly unable thereto, because he means not hereby,
that grace does work in the will that whole ability that it has, but that to
the ability which the will naturally has grace offers, and being accepted,
yields only an assistance and help for the accomplishment of the work. Which
he implies in that he says, that the work proceeds principally of grace:
not wholly but principally; only because grace first occasioneth and begins
the same, whereas otherwise they make Free will parallel-wise, and as it were
side by side concur with grace to the effecting of that whereto it tends.
Yet he will not have us think, that they require some outward help only to
the will, to join with grace, or that grace does but as it were untie the
chains of sin, wherein our will is fettered, and then will can of it self
turn to God, when indeed he cannot well tell what he would have us think. We
hear him and his fellows talk of inward moving, and inward fortifying, but
in truth they make all this inward but only outward, because they still deny,
that grace works that intrinsecall act of the will, whereby it first applies
it self to God, and do leave Andrad vt supra. Homini semper liberum
relinquitur diuinae operationi praebere impedimentum, eamque vel amplecti vel
repudiare.
the will of man to make up the work of grace, by that that merely and
naturally is his own. In respect whereof Costerus compares grace Coster. vt
supra. Est haec gratia in arbitrio voluntatis vt ea vti possit, and non vti
retinere and abijcere: quemadmodum baculus in manu conualescentis, cuius
auxilio si velit vtetur, sin minus poterit eum remouere.
to a staff in a man's hand, which at his own will he either uses for his
help, or throws away, still excluding that work of God, whereby it is
wrought in the will, to will and receive the grace of God, and not to reject
the same. The necessity of which work herein plainly appears, for that man
as touching spiritual life, Ephesians. 4.18.
the life of God is wholly dead, and therefore as the dead man has no faculty
or power left, whereby to do any thing for himself for recovery of life
again, but his life and the life of all his parts must wholly and newly be put
into him, so man has nothing left in nature, whereof with any help whatsoever
he can make any use to return to God again, but this life must wholly and
newly be wrought in him by the grace and power of God. Now in this point M.
Bishop stutteth and stammereth, and knows not how or what to say. Man, he
says, is but half dead, not stark dead, and by and by after, he is half
dead in his natural powers of understanding and will, but touching
supernatural works, he may in a good sense be likened to a dead man, and yet
presently says again, that in this state there is a natural faculty of Free
will, which is able being outwardly moved and inwardly fortified, to effect and
do any work appertaining to salvation. Whereby he wholly overthrows the
comparison of a dead man, because where there is remaining an active power that
needs only to be stirred up and strengthened, there cannot be affirmed the
state of death. But the Scripture pronounces man absolutely dead: The John. 5
25.
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it, shall
live: Epes. 2, 1.5. Col. 2.13.
Ye were dead in trespasses and sins; not Luke 10.30.
half dead, like the man that descended from Jerusalem to Jericho (to whom S.
Ambrose more fitly resembles man falling after Baptism, Ambros. de poe^tit.
lib. 1. cap. 10.
and in the state of grace) but plainly Mat. 8.22.
dead, like John 11.39.
Lazarus, four days dead, and now stinking in his grave, in whose raising up
was Aug in Joan. trail. 49 Surrexes, protessit. Jn v^roqu^ potentia Domin.
erat, non vires mortut.
the power of Christ, not any strength of the dead man, so as that the
recovering of a man to faith and spiritual life, is by E^nes. 1.19
the same working of the mighty power of God, which he wrought in Christ when
he raised him from the dead. Which if M. Bishop did acknowledge, according to
the plain evidence of holy Scripture, he would not thus halt betwixt grace and
Free will, but would confess, that whatsoever the will does in the work of
salvation, the same is fully and wholly wrought therein by grace. But now he
does but dally with the name of Grace, as Pelagius the heretic did, only to
hide the venime and poison of his false doctrine, August. cont. Pelag. and
Celest. lib. 1. cap. 37. Gratiae vocabulo frangens inuidiam effensionemque
decli^ians.
to abate the hatred, and avoid the offense that should otherwise arise against
him. And no otherwise does the council of Trent which he alleges for his
warrant, the doctrine whereof is the very same with the Pelagian heresy, being
taken with those corrections and limitations wherewith Pelagius and his
followers did abridge and explain themselves. For they denied not a necessity
of the grace of God, Pelagius himself plainly saying, Pelag. apud Aug. ibid
lib. 1. cap. 31. Liberum arbitrium habere nos dicimus quod in omnibus bonu
operibus diuino semper adiuuarur auxilio.
We say that we have a Free will which in all good works is always assisted
with the help of God; Cap. 33. L^berum sic confitemur arbitrium vt dicamus nos
indigere Dei semper auxilio.
We so confess Free will, as that we say that we always stand in need of the
help of God: Cap. 35 Epistota nostra consitetur nos omnino nihil boni facere
^asse sine Deo.
We can do no good at all without God: Cap. 37. Inuemeni nos ita hominis
laudare naturam vt Dei semper gratiae addamus auxilium.
We so praise nature, as that we always add the help of the grace of God.
And that we may see that he first trod the path for the council of Trent to
follow, he sticks not to pronounce Cap. 1. A thema qui sentit vel docet
gratiam Dei qua Christus vinit in hunc mun^um peccatores silu^s facere, non
solum per singulas horas aut per singula momenta, sed etiam per singulos actus
nostros non esse necessariam, and qui hanc conantur aufer^e, paenas sortiuntur
aeternas.
Anathema to every one that thinks or says, that the grace of God whereby
Christ came into this world to save sinners is not necessary, not only every
hour and every moment, but to every act of ours, and they that go about to
deny it shall be punished for ever. So does the Pelagian heretic affirm to
Hierome; Hieron. adis. Pelag. lib. 3. Su^t plerique nostrorum qui omina quae
agimus dicant fieri praesilio Dei.
There be very many of ours who say, that all things that we do, are done by
the help of God. By this acknowledgement of grace Pelagius deluded the Bishops
of the Eastern Churches, before whom he was conuented, and by that means was
acquitted and dismissed, as having taught nothing against the truth. For as
Augustine notes, August. epist. 95. His audius ver^is thommem Dei gratia
adiunari, and.) Catholici antistit^^ nullam aliam Dei gratiam intelligere
potuerunt, nisi quam in libris Dei legere and populis Dei praedicare
consueuerunt.
When they heard him confess the grace of God, they could imagine no other
grace, but what they were wont to read in the book of God, and preach to the
people of God. Which grace by this occasion the same S. Austin in diverse and
sundry places, defines to be that Ibid. Gratiae qua Christiani and filij Dei
sumus. Et postea: Qua praedesiinati vocamur, iustificamur, glorificamur.
whereby we are Christians and the children of God; and being predestinate are
called, justified and glorified: Epist. 105. Qua iustificati sumus vt homines
iusti essemus,
whereby we are justified to be just men: Epi. 107. Agnoscamus gratiam quae
facit proasse doctrinam.
which makes the doctrine of God profitable unto us: Cont. Pelag. lib. 1. cap.
13. Vt non ^stendat tantummodo veritatem, verumetiam impertiae charitatem.
whereby he does not only show us the truth, but also inspireth love: Ibid.
cap. 30. Qua iustificamur, id est, qua charitas Dei diffunditur in cordibus
nostris, etc.
whereby we are justified, that is, whereby the love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given unto us; Cont. 2. Epist. Pelag lib.
4. cap. 6. Haec est gratia Dei bonos faciens nos.
whereby we are made good; Cont Pelag, etc. vt supra. cap. 10. Istam aliquando
fateatur qua futurae gloriae magnitudo non solum promittitur, verumetiam
creditur and speratur; nec reuelatur solum sapientia, verumetiam and amatur,
nec suadetur solum omne quod bonum est, verumetiam pers^^ad tur.
whereby the excellency of heavenly glory, is not only promised, but also
believed and hoped for; nor wisdom only revealed, but loved, and every
thing that is good is not only advised, but (fruitfully and effectually)
persuaded. This only grace and no other did they understand to be the grace of
Christ, whereby as touching the work of our salvation, God is all in all
whilst of him and by him, merely by his gift we are whatsoever we are toward
him, so that although De great. and lib. arb^t cap. 16. Certum est nos velle cum
volumus sed ille facit vt velimus, etc. Certum est nos facere cum facimus,
sedille facit vt faciamus, etc,
we will, and we work, and we walk, and we run, yet it is God that works
in us, to will, and to work, and to walk, and to run, and in all these
things we have nothing but what we have of him, that there may be no exception
to the Apostles question, 1. Cor. 4.7.
What have thou that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why
do thou boast as if thou had not received it? But this grace Pelagius
could by no means endure: he thought it absurd, that all should be ascribed to
God, and therefore would needs devise a course of grace that might give way to
the Free will of man. The contriuing of which course, if we duly consider from
point to point, we shall see, that it most fully correspondeth and accords to
that doctrine of grace and Free will, which is now taught in the Church of
Rome; only the specialties thereof their school divines have directed them to
express somewhat more distinctly then he has done. And first they tell us of
grace preventing, exciting and stirring up, whereby says the council, without
any desert of ours we are called, that by his grace raising us up, and helping
us, we may be prepared to return to our justification. Where we are to note M.
Bishops error in his own principles, who sundry times calls the grace of
first justification Of Justification. sect. 32. Of Merits. sect. 1 etc.
the first grace, forgetting that there is a former grace, to which he himself
refers their works of preparation, and here brings the council
describing it as precedent to justification. But of this preventing grace
Costerus the Jesuit says, that Coster. de lib. arbit Haec gratia praeuenitas
non est illa quae in anima nomina inhabitans usstu^ ^onstitu^t and filium Dei
efficit, sed impulsus tantum and motio sp. sancti adhuc foris degentis, qui
stat ad ostrum eordis pulsans nondum admissus ad eius domicilium.
it is not that that dwells in the soul to make a man just, but it is only
the impulsion and motion of the holy Ghost, being yet without, and standing
knocking at the door of the heart, not being as yet let in. This he expresses
by the comparison of a friend finding a man in a deep pit, as before was said,
and persuading him by diverse reasons to be willing to be pulled out. Therefore
Bellarmine says, that Bellarm. de great and li arbit. lib 6. cap. 15. Nihil est
aeliud n^si su^sio quae non deter^t not voluntatem sed in^linat per modu^
proponentis obiecti.
it is but only a persuading which does not determine the will, but inclines
it in manner of a propounding object. This grace Pelagius describes in this
sort: Pelag apud a August cont. Pelag. and Celest. lib. 1. cap. 10. Operatur in
nobis velle quod bonum est, velle quod sanctum est dum nos serrenis cupidit
itibus deditor, mutorum more animalium taentummede presentia dilige^tes futurae
gloriae magnitudine and prae^^orum pollicitatione succendit, dum reuelatione
sapientiae in desiderium dei stupentem suscitat voluntatem: dum nobis suadet
omne quod bonum est.
He works in us to will that that is good, to will that that is holy, whilst
finding us given to earthly lusts, and like bruit beasts loving only present
things (note that he excludes all former merits as the council does) he
enkindleth our minds with the greatness of the glory to come, and with
promise of reward: whilst by revealing his wisdom, he raises up our
astonished will to the desire and longing after God; whilst he persuades and
exhorts us to all good things. And again to the same purpose he says: Ibid
ca 7 Adiuuat nos Deus per doctrinam and reuelationem suam dum cordis nostri
oculos aperit, dum nobis ne praesentibus occupemur futura demonstrat, dum
diaboli pandit insidiat, dum nos multiformi and ineffabili dono gratiae
caelestis illuminat.
God helps us by his doctrine and revelation, whilst he opens the eyes of
our hearts, whilst he shows us things to come, that we may not be holden
with things present; whilst he lays open unto us the snares of the devil;
whilst he enlighteneth us with the manifold and unspeakable gift of his
heavenly grace. Thus hitherto they agree as touching this preventing grace,
both calling that by the name of grace, which the ancient Church disclaimed
under that name, because they understood grace to be meant of that only,
whereby God himself makes us to be that that he calls us to be, and here
is nothing but propounding, persuading, exhorting, stirring, enkindling,
enlightening, moving, knocking, but leaving it to us either to accept or
reject that that is propounded and persuaded, and Jbid. cap. 4. Nostrum est,
quia haec omnia vertere etiam in malum possumus Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 5.
Neque homo ip. c nihil omnino agit, inspirationem ill^ recipiens qu^ pe qui
illam and abijcere potest.
both resting the act and effect of all upon man himself, yielding to his
motion when it is at his own discretion to do otherwise. For M. Bishop here
tells us out of their learning, that there is in us a natural faculty of
Free will, to which this propounding and persuading is used, Coster. vt supr.
Relicta voluntati liberate, quae fieri potest, vt vel suscipiantur influxus
diuini vel repulsam patiantur.
to which it is left to give to these motions either admission or repulse. B
llar de great. and lib arbit. lib. 5. cap. 29. In potestate voluntatis
relinquitur consentire vo^a^ti and sua senti vel non consentire.
It is left in the power of the will, says Bellarmine, either to consent to
God calling and persuading, or not to consent unto him. Now says Costerus,
Coster. ib. Qui hanc gratiam admittit, cadem aduitus progreditur vlterius, vt
credendo. sperando, poenitendo, ad iustificationis gratiam se paret. ^ Of
Justification. Sect. 21.
He that by Free will admits of this grace, by the help of it (not being
yet any spiritual renewing grace, but only as the friend (as before was said)
reaching his hand, or giving a coard to the man in the pit) he prepares
himself by believing, hoping, repenting, and performing works of piety, to
receive the grace of justification. So that before justification, and without
any inward or inhabitant grace of regeneration, even by Free will receiving
only a help which is without it, a man has faith, hope, repentance, love, by
which, and for which (as M. Bishop afterward disputes) God is induced and
moved to bestow upon us his justifying grace. All this matter M. Bishop in the
thirteenth Section of this question sets down thus: God by his grace
knockes at the door of our hearts: he does not break it open, or in any sort
force it, but attends, that by our assenting to his call, we open him the
gates, and then lo he with his heavenly gifts will enter in. Whereby it
appears, that with the^ the first intrinse call act of man's conversion is of
himself, and an act of his own Free will, occasioned by God, but acted by man
himself, because the act of grace on Gods part being complete, there remains
a distinct and several act of the will of man for admitting of that grace of
God, upon admitting whereof follows the endowment of the gifts of God, by
which thence forth Free will works according to the will of God. All this
Pelagius also taught as they do, affirming a power of nature consisting in Free
will, Pelag apud August. contrae Pelag and Ce est. lib 1 cap. 4. Jpsa^
possi^ilitatem gratiae suae ad. ^liat semper auxilio.
which power (being not sufficient of it self) God always assisteth with the
help of the foresaid grace. August. Epist. 107. Per legem, per Scripturas suas
Deus operatur vt velimus, sed eu consentire vel no consentire, ita nostrum est
vt si velimus fiat: si autem nolimus, nihil in nobis operationem Dei valere
faciamus.
By his law, by his Scriptures, which we read or hear, he works that we may
be willing; but to consent or not consent, is so ours, as that if we will, we
do so; if not, we cause that the work of God avails nothing. Now then Contr.
Pelag. vt supra cap. 32.33. Qui currit ad Deum, and ab eo seregi cupit, ad est,
voluntatem suam ex eius voluntate suspendit, qui ei adherendo nigiter vnus eum
illo fit spiritus, non hoc nisi de arbitrij efficit liberate. Qua qui been
vtitur, ita se totum trauit Deo omnemque suam mort ficat voluntatem, vt cum
Apostolo possit dicere, Viuo autem, etc. pontique cor suum in manis Dei vt
illud quo voluerit Deus ipse declinet.
he that uses his Free will aright, says he, he runs unto God, and
desires to be guided and directed by him, and hangs his will upon the will
of God, to whom being joined by cleaning still unto him, he becomes or is made
one spirit with him: he so commits himself wholly to God, and mortifieth all
his own will, that with the Apostle he may be able to say, Now I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me: he puts his heart into Gods hand, that God may
incline it whither it shall please him. Here is Free will yielding assent to
God, and from thence (by assistance of grace which he also, as we have heard,
acknowledges in his meaning, which is the same with the Papists, to be
necessary always, and in all things,) there follow the works of preparation,
which he expresses by terms of running unto God, desiring to be guided by
him, mortifying our own will, putting our heart into Gods hand, hanging our
will upon Gods will. Now hereupon will he have to ensue the justifying grace and
gift of God, which he signifies by becoming one spirit with God, by having
Christ to live in us, by having God to incline our hearts whither it pleases
him. August ibid. Magnum profecto diuinae gratiae adiutorium, vt cor nostrum,
quo voluerit Deus, ipse declinei: sed hoc tam magnu^ adiutorium, sicut ipse
desipit, tunc mere mur, cum sine vllo adiutorio nonnesi de arbitrij liberate
ad Dominum currimus, etc. us his praecudentibus meritis sic eius consequamur
gratiam, vt cor nostrum quo voluerit, ipse declinet.
A great help of grace indeed, says Austine, that God incline our heart
neither he will, but this so great help as he (Pelagius) doteth, we then merit
(or obtain) when without any help only by Free will, we run to God, desire
to be guided by him, etc. That these merits going before, we may so obtain
grace, that God may incline our heart whither he will. And this is also the
very self same dotage, that now possesses the Church of Rome. For if M.
Bishop will except, that they do not affirm their works of preparations to be
without any help of grace, only of Free will, I answer him, that no more did
Pelagius, who accursed them (as has been said) who held not the grace of God
to be necessary to every act. But yet in that meaning, wherein S. Austine
speaks of See after in Sect 15.
the help of God, as whereby the thing it self is wrought in us, wherein we
are said to be helped, they say, as S. Austine charge Pelagius to have said,
that their preparations are without any help of grace, and only of Free will,
because there is for the time of this preparation no inhabitant or renewing
grace, no habitual quality or gift of grace that should be the worker thereof.
They only teach, as Pelagius did, a grace though internal in respect of the
man, yet to the will only externally assistant, moving and directing it for
the doing of these things, but merely the will it self is the doer of them.
Which hereby also is apparent, for that if they were properly the effects of
they should by their doctrine be meritorio us ex condigno, whereas now they are
denied so to be, and thereby are denied to be the proper effects of grace. And
hence M. Bishop thinks to have another difference betwixt the Pelagians and
them, because Pelagius affirmed merits before the grace of justification, and
they do not so. But this will not serve his turn, because Bellarmine
confesses, as the truth is, that the Fathers in condemning Pelagius for
affirming grace to be given in respect of merits, did understand merit Bellar.
de grati and lib. arbit lib. 6. cap. 5 Gratia^ Dei secundum merita nostra dari
intolligunt Patres, cum aliquid fit propri^s viribus ratione cuius datur
gratia, etiamsi non sit illud meritum de condigno.
when any thing is done by our own power, in respect whereof grace is given,
though the same be not merit ex condigno. Such are their works of preparation,
which are done by our own power in that meaning as the Fathers spoke, as has
been said, because they are no proper effects of renewing grace, and are
defended by the^ to be the cause for which God bestows his grace upon us.
They defend therefore that which was condemned in the Pelagians, that the grace
of God is given according to our merits, August. contr. 2. Epist Pelag. lib 4.
cap. 6. Priores vtique door quod libet ex libero arbitrio vt sit gratia
retribuenda pro proemio.
that we first give somewhat by Free will, for which grace is to be rendered for
reward. They say as the Pelagians did, Ibid. Nos facimus vt mereamur, cum
quibus faciat Deus.
We work to merit that God may work with us. Yea they professedly teach, that
their preparations are merits, though not ex condigno, yet ex congruo, because
by the rule of their schools Thom. Aquin. 1. 2. q 114. art 6. in Corp
Congrutem est, vt dum homo been vtitur virtute sua, Deus secundum
superexcellentem virtutem excellentius operetur,
it is meet or standing with reason, that whilst a man well uses his own
power, God according to his more excellent power do work more excellently.
They think themselves well discharged, for that they put no merits before the
first grace, as they call it, whereas therein they say no more then Pelagius
did. He made the first grace Aug. Epist. 106. Haec intelligitur doctore ipso
gratia Dei, quae Paganis atque Christianis, napus and pijs, fidelibus atque
infidelibus communis est.
a thing common both to the wicked and to the godly, to Pagans and Christians,
to believers and infidels, consisting in motions and illuminations, offered to
all, and left to every man's Free will, to accept or reject them, even Bellar.
de great. and lib. arbit, lib. 2 cap. 3. Lumine gratiae nemo omnine priuatur.
so do they. They say, that before that first grace there are no merits at al
precedent; even so said he, affirming the calling of God, whilst he finds us
given to earthly lusts, and like brute beasts loving only present things, as
his own words have told us. But the first grace or preventing grace, before
which the Fathers say there are no merits is justifying grace, Aug contr. 2.
Epist. Pelag. lib. 4 cap. 6. Ille facis vt ambulemus, vt obseruemus, vt
faciamus. Haec est gratia bonos faciens nos: haec miscricerdia praeueniens nos.
the grace whereby he makes us to walk, to observe, to do what he
commands; whereby he himself works the effect of that which either by
outward instruction, or inward motion and illumination he does commend unto us.
Before this grace they place their merits or works of preparation, thereby to
obtain it, contrary to the words of the Apostle, as S. Austin witnesses:
Contr. Pelag. and Celest lib. 1. cap. 23.
Not of works, lest any man should boast: and again, If it be of grace, it is
not of works. And herein their iniquity is the greater, in that they borrow
the terms of a distinction of Enchir. cap. 32
grace preuenient and subsequent from S. Austin, and apply it otherwise then he
meant it, to the maintenance of an heresy, which he oppugned by it. Thus M.
Bishop for his life cannot imagine a better accord, then there is betwixt
Pelagius the Heretic and their Council of Trent, both auouching, and by
fraudulent devices maintaining the power of nature and Free will against the
truth of the grace of God. And to assure us that they attribute thereto as much
as Pelagius did, August dena. and grit. cap. 39 Po^^ ^at item humo^ae naturae
ita ^^st^dis, vt homo per Liberum ar^^erium etiam sine Christi nomine salu a
esse posse credatur.
who so defended the power of nature, as that a man without the name of Christ
might be saved by Free will, Andradius tells us, out of the secrets of that
Council, that they also hold, Andrad. Ortho. expli aedi 3. Sine lege Mos^ and
Euangelit vnobis per Christura data sola lige naturae perm^iltos puisse Dei
gratia iustificatos and saluatos: and prius vmeum Deum religio^e venerati sunt;
in ipso spes suas omnes collocarum; illi perpetuo placere studuerunt ab illo
virtutum remunerationem sperarunt.
that heathen Philosophers, having no knowledge of the law or of the Gospel of
Christ, were justified and saved only by the law of nature; that they
religiously worshipped one God, put all their trust in him, hoped for reward of
their virtues from him, yet all this by the grace of God he says, which
Pelagius also would say, but both teaching no other grace but what the heathens
themselves confessed, that Arist. de mundo. Cic. de Not. Deer. Nemo vir magnus
sine aliquo afflatud uino vnquam suit. Neminem nisi inuante Deo, talem fuisse
creuo^ dum est.
never any man proved great and excellent without some divine instinct: so that
Aristotle, and Tully, and such other acknowledging the same, must now be taken
for Preachers of the grace of God. Wherein we may wonder at their impudency,
that doubt not to affirm a thing so plainly absurd, and so resolved against
by S. Austin in his defenses against the Pelagians, concluding by imitation of
the Apostles words, that Aug de not. and great. cap. 2. Se^er uniturum iull^^a
sutilla f^d^ assi^^s Christi and resurrectious inst^tans) cego C^^ss^^ gratis
^^^^us est.
if by the law of nature there be righteousness without the faith of the
passion and resurrection of Christ, then Christ died in vain. And again; that
Ibid. cap. 9. Fece quod est crutem Chr sti eu^cuare sine illa quenquam per
naturalem legem and voluntatis arbitrium iustificari posse contendere.
to affirm, that a man may be justified by the law of nature and Free will, is
to make the cross of Christ of no effect. But by all this we see, that their
speech of grace for converting of man to God, is but collusion and mere
Pelagian hypocrisy, as whereby indeed they attribute no greater a work to God
in bringing man to righteousness, then to the devil in bringing man to sin.
Which being condemned in the Frosp. de lib. arbit. Ostendere volun inter boni
and mali contrarius suasiones, ita omnem h^minem proprie discretiom esse
commissum ^t c^^mplus a Deo praesidij quam a Diabolo fis periculi.
Pelagians as a horrible impiety and blasphemy, yet by Costerus the Jesuit
in his Enchiridion, is manifestly acknowledged to be their meaning, Coster.
Enchirid. cap 5. Sicut demon tentatione mentem nostram praua cog^tatione and
concupiscentiae motu tangit ac pulsat afficereque conatur voluntatem vti^
peccatum consentiat, quae sua liberate motiones has omnes and admittere potest
and reijcere: tia sunt in nobis d^umi quidam insiuxus aliquddo quidem,
aliquando constantiores qui cor nostrum pulsant relicta interim voluntati sua
liberate qua fieri potest vt vel susciptan tur vel repulsam patiantur.
that as the devil by temptation and suggestion touches our minds, and
knocks at the door of the heart, and seeks to move the will to consent to
sin, which notwithstanding is at it own liberty to admit or reject the
same, so are the influences of Gods preventing grace, whether sudden or more
constant, which do beat and knock at the heart, but so, as it is left in the
liberty of the will to accept or refuse, even in as plain terms as Pelagius
said, August. Epist. 107. Consentire hominis libero arbitrio constitutum est.
etc. Liberate: naturali si vult facit; si non vult, non facit.
that to consent to God consists in man's Free will, and that by liberty of
nature he does so if he will. This pains I have taken to vnhood M. Bishop and
his Council of Trent, and to make good that that I have before affirmed, that
the Church of Rome now maintains the heresy of Pelagius which anciently was
condemned by the Church of Rome. That which he alleges out of Thomas Aquinas
is of the same stamp, neither can his antiquity of three hundred years add
any grace to that which eight hundred years before him was universally
condemned by the whole Church. Whether M. Perkins his reasons do destroy their
assertion of Free will, upon determining the state of the question in the next
section it shall appear.

6. W. BISHOP.
Now the very point controuersed, concerning Free will, M. Perkins has quite
omitted, which consists in these two points, expressed in the Council:
First, whether we do freely assent unto the said grace, when it is offered us,
that is, whether it lie in our power to refuse it; And secondly, when we
concur and work with it, whether we could if we listed refuse to work with
it. In both which points we hold the affirmative part, and most sectaries of
this time the negative. Of which our Author is silent: only by the way in his
fourth reason, touches two texts out of Saint Paul, which are commonly
alleged against Free will.

R. ABBOT.
This true point of the controversy is contained in the proposition of the
Pelagians, that Aug. ep. 107. Vt Euangelio consentiamus non est donum Dei sed
hoc nobis est a nobis, id est, expropria voluntate, quam nobis in nostro cord
non operatus est ipso.
to consent to the Gospel is not the gift of God, but that this we have of our
selves, that is to say, of our own will, which he has not wrought for us in
our hearts. For thus you have, M. Bishop, all this while affirmed, that grace
having performed and done what appertained to it for the conversion of man,
there is behind a distinct and proper act of the will, which either by
consenting and yielding makes good, or by dissenting and refusing makes
frustrate all that grace has done. This you all inculcate and beat upon that,
that when God has wholly done his part, it is in man's will either to make or
mar, and so do plainly teach with Pelagius, that God does help Idem de great.
Certisti to it. Pelag. and Celest. lib. 1. cap. 25.
possibilitatem naturae, our natural power, that we may be able to consent and
will, but actually to consent and will, is left still free to our own will and
choice. And thus, M. Bishop, you your self inform us, when propounding the
first part of the question, Whether we do freely assent unto grace when it is
offered us, that is whether it lie in our power to refuse it, you hold
affirmatively, that by Free will we assent unto grace, having it in our power
and choice to refuse the same. Whether this be so or not is the point, and we
resolve with S. Austin, Idem. ibid. Non solum Deus posse nostrum donauit atque
adiuuat, sid etiam velle and operatioperatur in nobis.
that God does not only give us and help us to be able to will and to work,
but also works in us to will and to work: he does not so offer us grace, as
to leave us to assent unto it if we will, but himself works also in us to be
willing and to give our assent unto it, who De praedest. sanct cap. 20. Cum
Deus vult aliquid fieri quod non nisi volentibus hominibus oportet fieri,
incitnantur eorum cordae vt hoc vt let eo scid^cet incli^ante, qui in nobis
^urabilt modo and Ineffabili operatur and velli: and de bono pers^uer. cap. 23.
sic in potestate habet cor nostru^, etc.
so has our hearts in his power, as that in wonderful and unspeakable manner
he works in us to will that good that we cannot have but with our will. And
whereas you say that it lies in our power to refuse the grace of God, you
thereby subject De Praedest. sanct cap. 10 per ho^ vt promissi sua Deus possit
implere non est in Dei sed in hominis potestate.
the accomplishment of the promise of the grace of God, to the power and will
of man; so that if man list, it shall take place: if man list not, it shall not
take place. Jbid. Filios, promisit Deus Abrahae quo ^idei c^us vestig^a sect
^rentur.
God promised children to Abraham that should follow the steps of his faith.
Prosp. de ^ocat. gene. l b 1. cap. 3 Creditucos promisit, etc recr^cidi^dos
promisit, obilituros, persiuerat^^os. etc.
He promised them forgiveness of sins, obedience, perseverance, the fear of
him. He offers grace to that purpose, where if it lie in man's power to refuse
the same, then it must be in man's power whether the promise of God shall be
fulfilled or not. But God did August. ibid. Non di nostrae voluntetis
potestate, sed de sua praedestinatione promisit. Promisit enim quod ipse
facturus fuerat, non quod homines; quia etsi faciunt h^mines bona quae
pertinent ad cele^dum Deum ipse facit vt illi facia^t quae praecepit, non illi
faciunt vt ipse faciat quod promisit.
not make that promise upon the power of our will, as foreseeing what we would
do, but upon his own purpose, determining what he himself would do, causing
men to do what he has commanded, not having from men to perform what he has
promised, because he intended such Jdem. de corrept and great. ca. 11. Secunda
plus potest, qua fit etiam vt velit.
a grace, not as whereby man may attain to righteousness if he will, but
whereby it is wrought in him to will and love the same; Ibid cap. 14. Magis
habet in potestate voluntates homi^um quam ipsi sua^.
he having in his power the wills of men more then they themselves have. In a
word, man by nature has in him to resist and refuse the grace of God: to this
his power serves, and does not serve to do otherwise. But God ouerruleth this
power, and works in him not to refuse his grace, and when God works in man
not to refuse, it cannot be said, that to refuse is in the power of man; not
that God makes man just against his will, but De praedest, sanct. cap. 8. A
nullo duro cord respitutur. edeo quippe triburtur vt cordis duritia primitus
auferatur.
he takes away from him hardness of heart, whereby he did refuse, and is De
great. and lib. arbit. cap 14. Cor lapideum aduersus Deum omnino inflexibile est.
altogether inflexible toward God, and gives him a new heart, a heart of
flesh willing to obey, whereby a man grows to be as adverse to sin, as he
was before to righteousness, and enters to that state which S. John
describes, 1. John 3.9.
Every one that is borne of God sins not, neither can he sin, that is,
serve sin, give himself altogether over to sin, because he is borne of
God, which is here the happy beginning of the everlasting blessed state of
Gods elect, August. de corrept and great: cap. 11. Prima libertas voluntatis
erat posse non peccare: nouissima multo mayor erit non posse peccare, etc.
Non posse peccare, non posse bonum deserere, to be freed from all possibility
of sin, or forsaking that good that God has yielded unto us by Jesus Christ.
Now hereby we see how absurdly M. Bishop propounds the second part of this
question, when we concur to work with grace, whether we could, if we listed,
refuse to work with it. For who doubts but if we list, we do refuse? but
therefore the work of grace is that we shall not list to refuse the work of
grace, but that our list shall be to submit our selves unto it. August de
corrept. and great. cap 8, An audebis dicere etiam rogante Christone deficeret
fides Petri, defecturam fuisse si Petrus eam deficere voluisset, hoc est, si
came vsque in sinem perseuerare noluisset. Quasi aliud Petrus vllo modo vellet
quam pro illo Christus rogasset vt vellet. Nam quit ignorant tunc suisse
perituram fidem Petri, si ea quae fidelis erat voluntas ipsa deficeret, and
permansuram si cadem voluntas maneret? sed quia praeparatur voluntas a Domino
ideo pro illo non posset esse inanis oration. Quando rogauit ergo nefides cius
deficeret, quid aliud rogauit, nisi vt haberet in fide liberrimam, fortissimam,
inuictissimam, perseuerantissimam voluntatem?
Where Christ prays for Peter that his faith might not fail, will any man
dare to say that it might fail if Peter list to have it fail, that is, would
not have it to persevere unto the end? As if Peter could list or will in any
sort otherwise then Christ had prayed for him that he might will. For who
knows not, that Peter's faith should fail if the will of faith should fail
in him, and continue, if that should continue. But because the will is prepared
by the Lord, therefore the prayer of Christ for Peter could not be in vain,
whereby he prayed that he might have in the faith a most free, most strong,
invincible and perseuering will. This is the work of grace to all the
faithful: it stands not upon their list to refuse the grace of God, for then
they certainly give it ouuer, but Ierem. 32.40.
he puts his fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from him.
Now the question being truly and rightly propounded, whether God having fully
done his part for the conversion of a sinner, it remain free to his own will,
either to accept or refuse this grace: the reasons used by M. Perkins are very
effectual and strong to prove the contrary, and it was M. Bishops cunning to
pass by them, because he knew not any probable answer to give unto them. His
first reason shows the universal corruption of man's heart, Genesis 6.5.
the whole imagination whereof God testifies to be only evil continually; so
that Romans 8.7.
flesh sauoureth of nothing but enmity against God, and is not subject to the
law of God, nor indeed can be. If man's heart be only evil and enmity against
God, then can it not be truly said, that there is in it any natural faculty
of Free will, to assent and yield it self to the grace of God. If it be not
subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be, shall we say by plain
contradiction, that it has in it whereby to assent and give it self in
submission unto God? Free will requires integrity in judgment of
understanding, in election of will, in obedience of affection; but here man is
utterly disabled in all these. What faculty of judgment has he to conceive
and approve the things of God, who in all his thoughts is only evil, and in
his very wisdom is enemy unto God? Ierem. 10.14.
Every man is a beast by his own understanding, his mind altogether Ephesians.
4.18.
darkness and ignorance; and as he avails nothing that offers light to the
blind, or brings him into the cleerest Sunshine, unless he can make him
see; so it booteth not that God does set his light before man, and causes it
most clearly to shine unto him, unless he Psalm. 119.18.27.
open the inward eye of the soul, and make him to understand; not leave him to
understand if he will, but make him to understand. To this purpose is the
second reason of M. Perkins, that 1. Cor. 2 14.
the natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God; that they are
foolishness unto him; that he cannot know them because they are only
spiritually, that is, Verse. 10.12.
by the spirit, to be discerned. If there be no free will in spiritual things,
without judging and discerning, and understanding thereof, and there be no
discerning or understanding thereof, but only by the Verse 16.
spirit and mind of Christ, surely in nature there can be no Free will that can
be helpefull unto us, to the attainment of spiritual life, and the power
thereof serves but to condemn for folly the counsels and instructions thereto
tending, the wisdom whereof it is not able to apprehend. Let grace do what may
be done, yet nature perceives nothing of the spirit, if the same spirit of
grace work not therein to perceive. Now where the understanding is capable,
yet what perverseness and crosnesse still remains in the will? It
hood-winketh the mind, and makes it seem to it self not to see when it does
see; it shuts the gates, and intercepteth the passages of the understanding,
shunning to admit any thing whereby it should be checked and interrupted in it
course; August. de verb. Apost ser. 13. Im^^a men's odit etiam ipsum
intellectum, and homo aliquando nimium mente peruersa timet intelligere, ne
cogatur quod intellexerit facere.
it hates and is afraid to understand, that it may not he urged to do when it
does understand. Yea where the conscience is convicted by knowledge and
understanding, yet the will being entangled with it own respects, how mightily
does it struggle and fight against God? and never cease fighting, till God do
Ose. 14.5.
heal the rebellions of it, not by putting it in case to yield if it will, but
working in it to will and to yield unto him. And when will has now begun to
yield, what unto wardlinesse does it find in the affections, which as a swift
and mighty stream, do every while ouerbeare both the judgment of the
understanding, and the resolution of the will, so that Gal. 5.17.
we cannot do the things that we would. The perverseness whereof, if it
prevail so much with men justified and in the state of grace, as that it
causes many bitter lamentations for ouersights thereby committed contrary to
the intendment of the will, how much more do they like flattering Dalilaes,
bind all our strength, and overcome all the power of nature, when the will as
yet has received no fortification of inward grace to resist and fight against
them? Seeing therefore the heart is on the one side so blind that it cannot
see, and on the other side so perverse, as that one while it will not see,
another while crosses whatsoever it does see, we may well say as S. Austin
does: August coneduas epist. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 6. Quid potestis boni sacere
de cord non bono? vt autem habeatis cor bonum; Daboinquit, etc.
What good may a man do out of a heart that is not good? but to have our heart
good, we must look to him that says, I will give you a new heart, and will
put into you a new spirit, so that till the heart be renewed and made good,
there is no doing good, and therefore no assenting to the grace of God. The
third argument of M. Perkins he omitteth with the rest, and yet lighting upon
some idle device afterward, he thought good to set it down in steed of an
objection, which shall be examined in the place which he has given it. The
fourth reason is taken from that that the Scripture in the conversion of a
sinner ascribes all to God, and nothing at all to man's Free will, as appears
from the terms of John. 3.3.
new birth, Gal. 6.15.
new creature, Tit. 3.5.
regeneration, etc. Whereby is argued, that as man conferreth nothing to his
generation and birth; so neither does he to his regeneration and new birth. As
man does nothing for himself in his creation, so has he nothing whereby to
steed himself to become a new creature. Whereto agrees the definition of the
ancient Church: Fulge a ad Monimum lib. 1. Null itenus sinimus, immo
salisbriter prohibemus tam in nostra fide quam in nostro opere tanquam nostrum
nobis aliquid vin licare.
We in no wise suffer, nay according to wholesome doctrine we forbid, whether in
our faith or in our works, to challenge to our selves any thing as our own. We
have to challenge nothing as our own; and therefore it is not our act of Free
will, but Gods work in us to assent to the grace of God. How then does M.
Bishop say, that this is nothing against him, who says in effect the same that
Pelagius did, Aug. cont Pelaeg and Celest. lib. 1. cap. 25. Quod possumus omne
bonum facere, dicere, cogitare illius est qui hoc posse donauit; quod vero been
vel ag^mus vel loquimur vel cogitamus nostrum est.
It is of God that we are able to do or speak or to think any thing that is
good, but to do, or to speak, or to think it is our own, because, if we
believe him, the grace of God leaves it to our own Free will, either to
accept or refuse, to do or not to do, to work with it, or not to work. M.
Perkins fifth reason is taken from the judgment of the ancient Church; which
how far it avails we shall see anon: but he that well weighs these
reasons, and the circumstances of them, as M. Perkins has set them down, will
surely think, that either M. Bishop was not well awake, or his wits here in
the beginning of his book were not yet well come to him, when he passed them
over with this opinion, that they were all for them. But he thought he had a
long way to go, and was loath in the beginning to put himself out of breath.

7. W. BISHOP.
1. Cor. 25.
The first. I have (says he) labored more abundantly then all they, yet not
I, but the grace of God, which is in me, attributing the whole work to grace.
To which I briefly answer, that they do corrupt the text, to make it seem more
current for them: the Greek has only, He son emoi, which is, with me, not,
which is in me, so that the words in true construction, make much more for us
then against us? S. Paul affirming the grace of God, which was working with
him, to have done these things: And so S. Augustine whom they pretend to follow
most in this matter, expounds it. Yet not I, De great. and lib. arb. cap. 15.
but the grace of God with me; that is, not I alone, but the grace of God with
me. And by this, neither the grace of God alone: neither he alone, but the
grace of God with him, thus S. Augustine. The like sentence is in the book of
Wisdom. Send that (wisdom) from thy Holy heaven, Cap. 9.
that it may be with me, and labor with me.

R. ABBOT.
Corruption of texts is not wont to be but for advantage. It is no advantage
more to us to read Cor. 15.10.
the grace of God which is in me, then to read the grace of God which is with
me. The ancient father Hierome reads it both ways: one where, Hieron. adu.
Iouinian. lib. 2.
the grace of God which is in me: another where, Idem ad Princip. explanat.
Psalm. 44. and adu. Pelag lib. 2.
the grace of God which is with me, as betwixt which in effect there is no
difference. To read, the grace of God which is in me, though it do not here
literally answer the Greek, yet has no other meaning but what the Apostle
elsewhere justifies by the same phrase of speech; Gal. 2.20.
Now I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, yea and in the same place
immediately before, we have literal example of it; 1. Cor. 15.10. (...).
His grace which is in me. The words in true construction, says M. Bishop,
make much more for us then against us. And why so? Forsooth because S. Paul
affirms the grace of God which was working with him, to have done these
things. But how is that for them? For if his meaning be, that because it is
said, that grace did work with him, therefore it must be also understood, that
he did work with grace, he must remember that he has said before, Ibid.
By the grace of God I am that I am, and therefore that it was of grace it
self, that he did work with grace. As if he should have said, I have labored
more abundantly then they all, yet I can attribute nothing to my self herein,
but all to grace, because it is the work of grace in me whatsoever I have
done, in working with grace. Oecumen in 1: Cor. cap. 13. Veritus ne rectum opus
sibi attribueretur, gratiae Dei ipsum fere acceptum.
Fearing least the work should be ascribed to himself, says the Scholiast,
he refers it to the grace of God. To which purpose the same Apostle
elsewhere says: Romans 15.17.
I have whereof to rejoice in Christ Jesus, in the things that pertain to God:
for I dare not speak of any thing which Christ has not wrought by me, etc.
Where Photius thus observes; Photius apud Oecumen. in To. cap. 15. Ostendit
quod nihil erat ipsius sed totum Christi.
He shows that nothing is his, but all wholly is Christ's. If all wholly be of
Christ, then is no part to be ascribed to the Free will of man. The Pelagians
urged this place to the Corinthians with the same pretense that M. Bishop does.
Let him take the answer of Orosius as spoken to him: Oros. Apologet. de arbit.
libert. Quid incaute praesumptor aspicis, quia dixerit, mecum Attend quia
praemiserit, Non ego. Qua propter tu haec a^o verba, Non ego, and mecum, gratia
Dei media est; cuius est vere and velle and perfi^cre pro bona voluntate et
tame^ volu^tate hominis. Vnde and ille confisus est vt diceret, mecum, quia
dixerat, Non ego. Jn voluntate ergo hominis gratia diuinae virtutis operatur,
quae and hoc ipsum velle donauit. Ita conscientia hominis profitetur vt dicat,
Non ego: gratia Dei largitur vt mecum.
Thou heedlesse presumptuous man, what do thou look at that he says, with
me? Mark well that he has first said, Not I. Betwixt, not I, and, with me,
comes in the midst, the grace of God, whose indeed it is both to will and
to work for the making of a good will, albeit the will be the will of man.
Wherefore he was bold to say, with me, because he had said, not I. So then the
grace of Gods power works in the will of man, which has given to it to will
the same. Whereupon the conscience of man professes and says, not I, but the
grace of God gives him that he may say, with me. Paul then says and may say,
with me, but it is not by any proper act of his own Free will, but by the
only gift and work of grace, whereby he attaineth to say, with me. And no
otherwise would S. Austin have spoken, if he had not fallen into hucksters
hands, who use him only for advantage, and not for truth. For having in hand
to show, that God calling us, and justifying us only by his grace, uses
thenceforth our will and work to accompany his grace, in going forward with
the work of our salvation, gives for example hereof the Apostle S. Paul, who
professing that by Gods mere grace he was all that he was toward God, shows
that having received this grace, it was not idle in him, but he labored more
abundantly then all the rest, but adding, yet not I, but the grace of God with
me; August. de great. and li. arbit. cap. 5. Id est, non solus, sed gratia Dei
mecum; ac per hoc nec gratia Dei sola, nec ipse solus sed gratia Dei cum illo.
Vt autem de coelo vecaretur and tam magna and efficacissima vocatione
conuerteretur, gratia Dei erat sola, etc.
that is, says Austin, not I alone, but the grace of God with me; and
therefore neither the grace of God alone, nor he himself alone, but the grace
of God with him. Now the next words are; But that he was called from heaven,
and by that mighty and most effectual calling was converted, Gratia Dei erat
sola, it was only the grace of God. Which words M. Bishop has fraudulently
concealed, as being expressly against him, and clearing this whole point most
manifestly on our part. Our conversion is only by the grace of God, as Austin
says S. Paul's was; Free will has no part therein. We say as he says, that
the will of man being converted and renewed by grace, does afterward apply it
self to work with grace, and so there is not only the grace of God, nor
only the will of man, but the grace of God accompanied with the will of man,
not as by any proper work of the will it self, but by the work of grace, by
which it was first converted. Therefore the same S. Austin elsewhere mentioning
those words, By the grace of God I am that I am, says thereupon: De praedest.
and great. cap. 11. Haec est prima misericordia quam liberae voluntatis opera
consequuntur. Sed vt Pauli vocationem bona opera sequerentur, quid ait; Et
gratia eius, etc.
This is the first mercy, after which do follow the works of Free will. But
that good works might follow after the calling of the Apostle, what does he
say himself; And his grace was not in me in vain. There is no Free will
then to righteousness, before a man can say, By the grace of God I am that I
am. Thereby the will is made free, and thereby it works with grace to bring
forth the fruits of all good works. So that Saint Austin leaves us this place
very strong to prove that both our conversion, and our working with grace,
when we are converted, is altogether and wholly to be attributed unto grace.
Hereby the other place is cleared, if it were ought worth.

8. W. BISHOP.
The second text is. It is God that works in us, Phil. 2. v. 13.
both to will and to accomplish. We grant that it is God, but not he alone
without us, for in the next words before, Saint Paul, says: Work your
salvation with fear and trembling. So that God works principally by stirring
us up by his grace, and also helping forward our will, to accomplish the work;
but so sweetly and conformably to our nature, that his vvorking takes not
away, but helps forward our will to concur with him. Again, the whole
may be attributed unto God, considering that the habits of grace infused, be
from him as sole efficient cause of them, our actions endued also with grace,
being only dispositions and no efficient cause of those habits: but this is an
high point of school Divinity, very true, but not easily to be conceived of
the unlearned.

R. ABBOT.
S. Austin in express terms contradicts M. Bishop saying, August. de great.
and li. arbit. cap 17.
vt velimus sine nobis operatur: without us he works in us to will. And so S.
Bernard also says, that Bernard. de great. and lib arbit. Creatio (in
libertatem volu^tatis) facta est and sine nobis.
the creating of us to freedom of will, is wrought without us. Our will is the
subject wherein it is wrought, but the efficient cause thereof is only the
grace of God. This M. Bishop denies, because the Apostle in the words
immediately before says, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. But
the Apostle when he bids them to work, bids them to do it with fear and
trembling. And why is that? Aug. in Psalm. 65. Subiecit causam, Deus est enim,
etc. Si ergo Deus operatur in te, gratia Dei been operaris non viribus tuis.
The Apostle adds the cause, says S. Austine: for it is God that works in
you to will and to work, of his own good will. If then God work in thee, it
is by the grace of God that thou workest well, not by thine own power. How
peruersly then does M. Bishop deal, that when the Apostle uses the latter
words to expound the former, he will take the former words to cross the
latter. Men are to be called upon by exhortation to do good works, but yet
they are to know, that the effect of exhortation, is the work of grace. True
says M. Bishop, it is of grace, but not of grace only: for Free will also
has a part. But S. Austin tells, that De bono perseueran. cap. 6 Tutiores
viuimus, si totu^ Deo damus, and non nos illi ex part and nob^^ ex part
commuttimus.
it is more safety for us to attribute all wholly to God, and not commit our
selves partly to God, and partly to our selves: and Tertul. aduers. Hermog.
Veritas sic vnum Deum exigit defendendo, vt solius sit quicquid ipsins est. ita
enim ipsius erit si fuerit solius.
true faith requires this in the defending of one God, that whatsoever is his,
we make it only his: for so shall it be accounted his, if it be accounted
only his. If God do work in us to will, let us acknowledge it to be his
only, and none of ours. God works principally, says M. Bishop, by stirring
us up by his grace, and also helping forward our will to accomplish the work,
but so sweetly and conformably to our nature, that his working takes not away,
but helps forward our will to concur with him. Here is stirring up the will,
and helping forward the will, and no more but what the Pelagians confessed, as
I have showed before; but why does he make it so dainty, to say as the Apostle
says, that God works in us to will? He names grace, which is but a grace if
we will, but we require the grace which the Apostle teaches, whereby God
works in us to will. He says, that God does not take away our will. So did
Pelagius say: August. contr. Pelag. and Celest. lib 1. cap 7. Dicimus eam sine
voluntate nostra nequaquam in nobis perficere sanctitatem.
that God does not work holiness in us without our will. We answer, that our
will is the subject wherein God works, as before was said, but it is no part
of the efficient cause, whereby it is wrought in us to will. The Arausicane
Council determines, Council Arausican 2. cap 4 Si quis vt a peccato purgemur
voluntatem nostram, Deum expectare contendit. Non autem vt etiam purgari
velimus per sancti Spiritus infu sionem and operationem in nobis fieri
confitetur, resistit Apostolo, etc.
that if any man do maintain, that God expects our will that we may be
purged from sin, and does not confess, that by the infusion and operation of
the holy Ghost it is also wrought in us to be willing to be purged, he
resists the Apostle, in that he preaches according to wholesome doctrine,
that it is God which works in us, both to will and to work, of his good
will. This M. Bishop maintains: he says that God offers grace to that
purpose, but expects our will to make good that grace to our selves: he
confesses that God stirs and helps forward our will, but cannot endure to
say, that it is God that works in us to will. He answers yet further, that
the whole may be attributed to God, because the habits of grace infused, be
from him as sole efficient of the^, our actions endued also with grace, being
only dispositions, and no efficient cause of those habits. But herein he
absurdly trifleth, by altering the state of the question, For the controversy
is not of the efficient cause of infused grace, but of the efficient cause of
our receiving that grace. We say, that the holy Ghost works the same
immediately in our will; they say, that the grace of God and the Free will of
man make Andrad Orth. explicat. li. 4 Ex gratia and libero arbitrio vnica causa
conflatur nostrae ad iustiua^ applicationis.
one efficient cause of the receiving thereof. They say, that God offers his
grace with condition if we will; but we say, that God without putting us to
condition of our will, works in us to will, and where he expresses a
condition does himself perform the same, Aug. Confess. lib. 10. ca. 29. Da
quod ^ubes.
giving what he commands, and De Praedest. sanct. cap. 11. Deus facit, vt
illa faciamus.
himself making us to do what he requires to be done. The words of the
Apostle are plain for us, and as plain against the^. But I take it to be but a
point of M. Bishops cunning thus to speak, yet his learning will gain but
small credit thereby.

9. W. BISHOP.
One other objection may be collected out of M. Perkins third reason against
Free will, which is touched, as he says, by the holy Ghost, in these words:
When we were dead in sins. Ad Ephesians. 2.2,
If a man by sin become like a dead man, he cannot concur with God, in his
rising from sin.

Answ. Sure it is, that he cannot, before God by his grace has quickened, and
as it were, revived him, to which grace of God, man gives his free consent. How
can that be, if he were then dead? Marry you must remember what has been said
before: that albeit man in sin be dead in the way of grace, yet he lives
naturally, and has Free will in natural and civil actions: which will of his
being by grace fortified, and as it were lifted up unto a higher degree of
perfection, can then concur and work with grace to faith, and all good works
necessary to life everlasting. (As for example) a Crab-tree stock has no
ability of it self, to bring forth apples, and therefore may be termed dead
in that kind of good fruit: yet let a siance of apples be grafted into it, and
it will bear apples: even so albeit our sour corrupt nature of it self be
unable to fructify to life everlasting, yet having received into it the
heavenly graft of Gods grace, it is enabled to produce the sweet fruit of
good works: to which alludeth S. James: Cap. 1.
Receive the ingraffed word, which can save our souls. Again, what more dead
then the earth? and yet it being tilled and sowed, does bring forth, and bear
goodly corn: now the word and grace of God is compared by our Savior himself
unto seed, Mat. 13.
and our hearts unto the earth that received it: what marvel then if we
otherwise dead, yet revived by this lively feed, do yield plenty of pleasing
fruit?

R. ABBOT.
This objection M. Bishop says, he collecteth out of M. Perkins third reason
against Free will, whereas it is indeed the whole matter of that third reason.
He would have kept due order, and have answered the rest as well as this, but
that he doubted he should have answered the rest as badly as he has done this.
He propounds the objection at his own liking, and cutteth off what he list.
If man by sin become like a dead man, he cannot concur with God in his
rising from sin. For this the words of the Apostle are alleged by M.
Perkins, Ephesians. 2.1.
When we were dead in sins. M. Bishop answers, sure it is that he cannot,
before God by his grace has quickened and as it were revived him, to which
grace of God man gives his free consent. Which answer, who is so blind as that
he cannot see how absurdly it crosses it self. Man must give his free consent
to grace, that he may be quickened thereby; and yet man cannot consent or
concur with God, before he be quickened by grace. If man cannot consent or
concur with God before he be quickened, then the consent of of his own Free
will cannot be the efficient cause of his quickening, because that that comes
after, cannot be the cause of that that necessarily goes before, and the
effect is never the cause of it own cause. And this is indeed the very truth,
justified by M. Bishops own words, against his will. But his whole discourse
drives the other way, that a man not yet quickened, must by Free will give
consent to grace, and concur with God, that he may be quickened; because
though grace be offered, yet it takes no effect until our Free will do make
way for it, and do add it own endeavor and help to the work thereof. Which
is all one as to require of a dead body to give consent, and to put to it own
help for the restoring of it self to life again. Yet he thinks to clear
the matter of all impossibility: for asking the question again, How can that
be, (namely, that man should give his free consent to grace) if he were then
dead? he answers, Marry you must remember what has been said before, that
albeit man in sin be dead in the way of grace, yet he lives naturally, and
has Free will in natural and civil actions. But what is this to the purpose,
seeing that spiritually he still continues a dead man? Yea but this will of
his being fortified and lifted up to a higher degree of perfection, can then
concur and work with grace to faith and all good works necessary to life
everlasting. Where he does but run in a ring, and in other words repeateth
the same answer, still sticking fast in the briars, wherein he was tangled
before. For how is this will to be fortified and lifted up to a higher degree
of perfection? He has told us before, by grace, and that to grace man must
give his free consent. So then he tells us that Free will cannot concur and
work with grace, except by grace it be first fortified and lifted up to a
higher degree of perfection: and yet it cannot be fortified by grace, and
lifted up to a higher degree of perfection, except it first concur with
grace. I may here again justly return upon him his own words, See how
uncertain the steps are of men that walk in darkness, etc. Now the Reader
will observe that the objection is of man dead as touching Free will to
righteousness, and he answers of natural Free will only fortified and
lifted up to a higher degree of perfection. What fortifying is there of a dead
man, and how should he be lifted up to a higher degree of perfection, except he
first recover life? Why does he by babbling and trifling bobbe his Reader, and
make show to say something, when indeed to the purpose he says nothing at all?
The argument still stands impregnable. Man is not only weak and imperfect,
but dead, not half dead, but wholly dead in sin, and therefore by S. Austine
likened to the Aug. contra duas Epist. Pela. lib. 4 cap. 5. and de verbis
Apost. Ser. 11.
Shunamites son being dead, whom the Prophet Elizeus raised from the dead. He
must be made Romans 6.13.
alive from the dead, before he can concur with grace. Which if M. Bishop
confess, or because he cannot deny, therefore he must confess also, that as
the dead man has nothing whereby to help himself to receive life again, so
man spiritually dead, August. de verb. Dom. Ser. 18. Mortuos eos vocat. Vbi
nisi intus in anima?
inwardly in soul dead, has nothing in him, no faculty or power of the
soul, whereby he can any way further the recovery of his own life. But to
fill up the measure of his folly, he will set forth this matter unto us by a
comparison. A Crab-tree flock (forsooth) has no ability of it self to bring
forth apples, and therefore may be termed dead in that kind of good fruit:
yet let a siance of apples be grafted into it, and it will bear apples: even
so (says he) albeit our sour corrupt nature of it self be unable to fructify
to life everlasting, yet having received into it the heavenly graft of Gods
grace, it is enabled to bring forth the sweet fruit of good works: Similes
habent labra lactucas: as his doctrine is, so must his similitudes needs be,
crabbed and cross. Is the Crab-tree stock dead to the bringing forth of
apples, which by it own natural life without alteration, continues life, and
gives nouriture and increase to the siances and graffes of apples, that are
engraffed and implanted upon it? which receives nothing at all of the graffes
or siances, but ministers unto them that, whereby they bring forth fruit? Is
this the condition of the grace of God in us, that we give it sap and
strength in us to bring forth good fruit unto God? And yet the Crab-tree
stock in the receiving of the new graffes is merely and wholly passive, and
not active in any sort. The engraffing thereof is altogether the work of the
gardener or husbandman. Yea and that they bring forth such or such fruit,
they have it not of the stock, but altogether and only of their own kind.
Therefore we must likewise say, that the nature of man in the receiving of the
graft of grace, is altogether passive and does nothing thereto, and when Iam.
1.21.
the superfluity of maliciousness being cast away and cut off, the same grace
uses our natural powers to the bringing forth of the fruit of good works,
the commendation of the fruit arises only from the graffe, from grace it
self and the power thereof, not by the stock, but by it self, digesting and
turning all to the nature and quality of it self. So that his own comparison
does most effectually serve to strengthen our part, and to overthrow his own.
But as he uses it, it sauoureth very rankly of the Pelagian heresy. For
Pelagius made of the power of nature, August. contrae Pelag. and Celest. lib. 1
ca. 18. Habemus possibilitatem vtriusque partis a Deo insitam velut quandam, vt
ita dicam, radicem fructifera^ atque foecundam quae ex voluntate hominis
diuersa gignat and paeriat, and quae possit ad proprij cultoris arbitrium vel
nitere flore virtutum, vel sentibus horrere vieiorum. Vbi non intuens quid
loquatur vnam eandemque radice^ constituit bonoru^ and malorum concrae
Euangelicam veritaetem, etc.
a fertile and fruitful root, which out of the will of man did bring forth
diversely, and might as the dresser thereof list, either be garnished with the
flowers of virtue, or else grow wild with the thorns of vice. Whereby as S.
Austine notes, he made one and the same root, both of good and evil works,
even as M. Bishop does by his Crab-tree stock, contrary to the truth of the
Gospel, and the doctrine of the Apostle. For in the Gospel we read of Mat
7.17.18.
a good tree and an evil tree, and that the good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit, nor the evil tree good fruit. Quid est bonus homo nisi
voluntaus bonae, hoc est, arber raedicis bonae? Et quid est homo malus, nisi
volu^tatis malae, hoc est, arbor radicis ^ale?
The good tree is a tree of a good root, and the evil tree a tree of an evil
root, not both of the same root. The tree of a good root is the man of a good
will; the tree of an evil root is the man of evil will, not growing both upon
the Crab-tree stock of M. Bishops Free will. Whereby we are given to
understand, that for the bringing forth of good fruit, it suffices not to
have any thing ingraffed in us, but we our selves must become graffes, to be
implanted into a new stock, and to grow upon a new root. We must be engraffed
into the Ioh. 15.1.
true vine Jesus Christ, by him to be purged from the corruption that we have
drawn from our old root, and to live wholly by his spirit, that we may bring
forth fruit, not according to our own nature and kind, as other graffes do,
but according to a new life and nature, that we receive by being joined unto
him. M. Bishop is of another mind, he will have Christ to be ingraffed upon the
Crab-tree stock of our Free will, he sees no necessity to leave his old
root to be engraffed into Christ. As for the place of S. James, Iam. 1 21.
Receive the engraffed word, etc. it avails him nothing at al: for it does
not import in any wise, that the word of God ingraffed in our natural Free
will, does bring forth fruit unto God, but only tells us in what sort the
word of God is to be received of us, that it may save our souls: namely, that
it must be inwardly wrought in our hearts, that it may become to us 1. Pet.
1.23.
the immortal seed, whereby through says we are Iam. 1.18.
begotten and borne again, and Ephesians. 2 10,
created anew in Jesus Christ, which is not done Ioh. 1.13.
by the will of man, that is, by Free will, but God Iam. 1.18.
of his own will has begotten us, and that so, as that though 1. Cor. 3.^.
Paul plant, and Apollo water, yet God only gives the increase, and neither
he that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters (which is in vain spoken
if he that is planted or watered be any thing by his own Free will) but God
only that gives the increase. Another comparison he uses of the earth. What
more dead, says he, then the earth? and yet it being tilled and sown, does
bring forth and bear goodly corn. Whereof he makes application thus: Now
the word and grace of God is compared by our Savior to seed, and our hearts to
the earth that receive it. What marvel then if we otherwise dead, yet revived
by this lively seed, do yield plenty of pleasing fruit? Where we see how loath
he is that the Pelagians in any absurdity should go beyond him. As before he
made one root, so here he makes one ground of Free will, common and
indifferent to good and evil, and which is strange, makes it as natural to
this ground or earth to bring forth fruit of the seed of Gods word, as it is
to the tilled ground to yield corn of the seed that is sown upon it. Moreover
of grace he makes no other matter but the seed, which is, the word of God,
August. contr. Pelag. and Celest. lib 1. cap. 7. and Epist 107. Gratiam Dei
po^^^ in lege atque doctrina.
the law and doctrine, and exhortation, even as Pelagius did; and that by this
seed of Gods word Free will is, revived, to bring forth plenty of pleasing
fruit. But our Savior Christ in the Gospel makes four sorts of ground, and
thereof one only good ground, which is not good of it self, but made good,
having nothing in it whereof to bring forth fruit of the seed or Gods word,
Esa 32.15.
until the spirit be powered upon it from above, that of a wilderness it may
become a fruitful field. So that the grace of God consists not in the seed
of the word, but imports a spiritual and heavenly influence of the blessing
of God, altering and changing the nature of the soil of man's heart, that it
may be fit to receive the seed, and to fructify thereby. For otherwise the
Scripture teaches us, that man's heart is a Prech 36 26.
stony heart, that his Esa. 48.4.
forehead is brass, and his neck an iron sinew, and that to bestow labor
upon him by the word of God, is but as to wash Ierem. 13.23.
an Ethiopian or a Leopard, to take away the blacknes and spots of them, or to
Amos 6.12.
plow upon the rock, where there is no entrance neither for plow nor seed.
Therefore howsoever the seed be sown, it avails nothing, neither can the
will of man fructify thereby, until it do Ioh. 6.45.
hear and learn of the Father to come to Christ, August. de Praedest. sanct.
cap. 8 Nihil est aliud quam donum accipere a Patre quo credat in Christum.
that is, until it receive a gift of the Father whereby to believe in Christ,
Idem de peccat. nun and remis. li. 2. cap. 17. Sciat quam vere non de terra
ista, sed spiritualiter dictum sit, Dominus Dabit, etc.
it being meant not of the very earth, says Austin, but spiritually which is
said: The Lord will yield his sweetness, and our land or earth shall give
increase, as to note, that not by any power of our Free will, but only by his
sweet and heavenly dew, Ose 10.12.
the rain of righteousness, Ezech. 34.26.
the rain of blessing, which he raineth upon us, we bring forth the seed of
the word of God.

10. W. BISHOP.
Having hitherto explicated the state of the question, and solued such
obiectio^s as may be gathered out of M. Perkins against it, before I come to
his solution of our arguments, I will set down some principal places, both
out of the Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, in defense of our doctrine,
because he proposes but few for us, and misapplyeth them too.

Genes. 4.
First then, God says to Caine: If thou do well, shall thou not receive a
reward? But if thou do evil, thy sin will presently be at the gates, but the
appetite of it, shall be under thee, and thou shall bear dominion over it.
Here is plain mention made of the power, which that evil disposed man Cain,
had not to sin, if he had listed; which was (no doubt) by the assistance of
Gods grace, and on the other side, that grace did not infallibly draw him to
good, but left it to his free choice, whether he would follow it or no. And
because they, who secke out all manner of starting holes, wrest these words, of
ruling and bearing sway, as spoken of his brother Abel, and not of sin:
first, to see their iniquity, mark the text, where is no mention of Abel,
neither in that verse, nor in the next before; but express mention is made of
sin in the next words before: therefore those Pronounes, (that are to be
referred to the words next before) must needs in true construction be referred
to sin, and not to his brother. Besides this plain construction of the text,
S. Augustine follows, saying as it were to Cain: Lib. 15. de ciuit. Dei cap.
7.
Hold thy self content, for the conversion of it shall be to thee, and thou
shall rule over it. What (says he) over his brother? God forbid, that so
wicked a man should rule over so good: Over what then? but he shall rule over
sin. See how manifestly that worthy Doctor has prevented their cavil. And
if it were need, I might join with him that most skillful Father in the Hebrew
text, S. Hierome, In quaest. Hebraice.
who in the person of God expounds it thus: Because thou have Free will, I
admonish and warn thee, that thou suffer not sin to overcome thee, but do
thou overcome sin.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins he says, proposed but few places for them, and misapplied them to;
and therefore he will himself set down some principal places, both out of
the Scriptures and fathers, in defense of their doctrine. But what ill hap had
he at first to light upon an example, whereby as Austin notes, it is so
manifest, August de ciuit. Dei. lib. 15. ca. 16 Spiritus sanctus operatur
intrinsecus vt valeat aliquid medicina quc adhibetur extri^fecus. A^equm
etiamsi Deus ipse vtens creatura sibi sub ect vinae^qua specie human^ sensus
alloquatur humanos, etc. nec interiore gratia mentem regat atque agat, nihil
prodest homini omn^s praedicatio veritatis. Facit hoc Deus, a vasis
misericordiae irae vasa discernens, etc. Et cap. 7. Hoc ipsum cum Deus locutus
esset ad Cain quid ei prosuit, etc.
that howsoever God himself do speak to the sense of man, either to his
outward or inward senses, yet if he do not by inward grace rule and work the
mind, all the preaching of truth avails nothing, and that it is the holy
Ghost that must work inwardly, that the medicine may avail that is outwardly
applied. Which is a work whereby God puts difference betwixt the vessels of
mercy and the vessels of wrath; so that the question why one receives the
grace of God, and another does not, Prosper. de vocat gent lib. 1. cap 9 Pr^sun
litas illius quaestionis per liberi arbitrij velle and nolle non soluitur quia
licet ^^sit (...) bonum nelle, tamen nisi ^^na^um non habet bonu^ velle.
is not answered by the vvilling or nilling of Free will, as to say, one by
Free will would when God offered grace, the other would not, but by Gods
working that in the one which he works not in the other, who both have by
nature to nill and refuse, but neither have to will but by the gift of God;
whereas with M. Bishop, the work of God is the same to both, neither does God
make the difference betwixt man and man, offering himself alike to all, but
man by Free will either receiving or refusing, makes difference betwixt
himself and other men. God himself spoke to Cain, yet was he not the better
for it. M. Bishop tells us, that the reason was in his own Free will,
whereby he had it in his own power, at his own list to convert and turn to
God, and that God did signify so much by saying unto him, that the desire of
sin should be under him, and he should bear dominion over it. Where he
should have had regard for proof of his doctrine, Aug. de va^t. eccles cap. 5
Hoc prae^ico atque propono, vt qu^que aeperta and manifesta deligamus. and ca.
16. Nec itae vt ea colligant and commemorent quae obscure vel ambigue vel
figurate dicta sunt quae quisque sicut voluerit interpretur ad sensum suum.
Talia enim recte intellige non possunt, nisi prius ea quae aperissime dicta
sunt firma fide teneantur.
to make choice of plain and manifest places, as S. Austins rule is, not of
such as being figurative or obscure, may be expounded and taken diversely. There
are sundry expositions of this place delivered by the ancient fathers, and
therefore there is no necessity to urge us to take that exposition which he
alleges. First Chrysostom expounds the place according to the true meaning
thereof, that God having by Genes. 3.16.
the same phrase of speech constituted before the superioriuie of the husband
oner his wife, does here yield to the first borne a superiority and kind of
Lordship over the rest of his brethren, which here he signifies to Cain, he
would not infringe, to give him occasion that way of offense toward his
brother, howsoever he accepted his brothers sacrifice better then his, albeit
ready to accept his sacrifice also if he offered in the like sort as his
brother did. Chrysan Genesis hom. 18. Ne putes licet tuum aeduersatus sim
sacrificiu^ ob prauam mentem frat^sque oblationem accepta^ hab^aer. in ob s^na^
intentio ne^ quod ideo primatu te destitua^ et primageniturae dig^^t trem a te
an^erant. Nam licet honor ego illum proficatus fuerins, acceptaque fu^^nt
di^us do^^, veruma^^e^ ad te conuer^io illi ^ et in ipsi^ dominabet^, Atque,
post peccati^^^ per. ^^^to vt primo. (...) priuile. (...) gandeas, illunque sub
tua potestate and dominio esse ^ubeo.
Think not, that because I have refused thy sacrifice because of thy corrupt
mind, and have accepted thy brothers sacrifice because of his upright and sound
heart, therefore I will d^priue thee of thy superiority, and take away from
thee the honor of thy birthright. For albeit I have honored him, and have
accepted his gifts, yet his turning shall be to thee, and thou shall have
dominion over him. And albeit thou have sinned, yet I yield thee to enjoy the
privileges of thy birthright, and do appoint that he shall be under thy power
and rule. Against this exposition M. Bishop gives an exception, that there is
no mention of Abel, neither in that verse, nor in the verse next before; but
express mention is made of sin in the next words before: therefore those
pronounes (that are to be referred to the next words before) must needs be
referred to sin, and not to his brother. But if his skill had served him to
consider, that the Hebrew word there for (...) sin.
sin is in the feminine gender, and the pronoune relatiues in the (...) the
desire of him, or his desire, and (...): over him.
masculine gender, he would have learned thereby to except against this
exception, and rather say, that the pronoune relatiues must needs be referred
to his brother, and not to sin. And so the Greek translators did take it,
(...).
the turning of HIM shall be to thee, etc. So does Arias Montanus translate it,
being himself a Papist, yet that way incomparably more faithful then commonly
Papists are, The desire of HIM shall be to thee, that is, in thy power, and thou
shall have rule over HIM. Another exception he takes from S. Austins
exposition of those words, who not acquainted with the Greek and Hebrew text,
and finding in the Latin the pronounes eius and illius indifferent to the
masculine or feminine gender, not thinking it fit in such meaning as he
conceived thereof, to attribute to Cain a dominion over his brother Abel,
construeth the place as touching sin, and delivers two interpretations
thereof, but no way according to M. Bishops meaning, nor any way fit to serve
his turn: the more lewdly does he deal, to make S. Austin the patron of an
opinion, which as appears in all this discourse, he did so highly and
inwardly detest. One exposition of his is in the reading of the words thus;
August. de ciuit. Dei. lib 5. ca. 7. Potestitae intelligi ad hominem
conuersionem esse debere peccati, vt nulli alij sciat quam sibi tribuere debere
quod peccat, etc. Tunc enim dominabitur quisque peccato, si^d sibi non
defendendo praesumpserit sed poenitendo subiecerit, etc.
Ad te conuersio cius sit: let the converting or turning of it be to thee, and
thou shall rule over it; as willing him to turn his sin upon himself, to
accuse himself thereof, to know that he was not to attribute his sin to any
other but himself, and therefore not to defend it, but to repent and to ask
pardon of it, and that this was the way to subdue it, and to become master of
it. Thus God left him not, as he says, without a commandment just and holy
and good, but in him gives example, as was before said, how the commandment
avails nothing from the mouth of God himself, where he himself works not
within, that which he commands. To this agrees in effect the exposition of
Ambrose, though taking the words by way of accusation, which Austin construeth
by way of precept or exhortation. Am^r, de Cain and Abel li 2. ca. 7. In te
reuertitur crimen quod ae te c^pit. Non habes in quo necessit item magis quam
mente^ t^a^ arguas. In te ret^rque tur improbitas tut, ^u princeps ill^us es:
Ben? a^t, Tit princeps es illius. Et enim impretas matter quaeda^ est
delictoram, etc.
The sin, says God, returns upon thee which began of thee. Thou have not
wherein to blame necessity more then thine own mind, Thy wickedness is
turned back upon thee; thou art the beginner of it. Rightly does he say, thou
art the beginner of it; for impiety is a mother of sins, etc. Thus he makes
God in those words to accuse Cain of sin, not to attribute to Cain Free will
for converting unto God. The other exposition of Austin is in reading the
place, Aug. vt supra. Cum commota fuerit pars ipsa carnalis ad aliquid perperam
committendum, si acquiescatur, Apostolo dicenti, Ne exhibeatu membra, etc. ad
mentem domita and victa conuertitur vt subditae ratio dominetur.
Ad te conuersio eius erit, etc. The converting or turning thereof shall be to
thee, and thou shall rule over it, understanding sin to be meant of carnal
concupiscence or lust, and making the construction thus, that when carnal
concupiscence is moved or stirred to commit any wicked thing, if a man rest and
harken to the Apostle saying, Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies; give
not your members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, then it being tamed
and overcome, is converted and turned to be in subjection to the mind, that
reason may have the rule and dominion over it. Therefore he takes it, as if
God had willed Cain to give over that which by his own wicked desire and lust
he had intended, and if he did resist it, it should turn and yield to him, and
whilst it was not suffered to work without, it might be the better accustomed
not to stir within. Prosper brings these latter expositions all into one,
as if God had said to Cain, Prosper. de vocat. gent lib. 2. ca. 4. Tuus hic
error est, enumque peccatum; qui^sce and noli in insontem fratrem movert: ad te
potius tua culpa reuo^itur. Noli peccato regnum in te dare^sed tu potius in
ipsum sum dominatu^. Paenitendo enim nec in manus facinus progredieres, and ab
eo in quo te doles displicuisse mundaberis.
This is thy error and thy sin; be quiet, and be not moved against thy
harmless brother; rather let thy sin be charged upon thy self: yield not
to it that it should reign in thee, but do thou take on thee the dominion and
rule over it. By repenting thou shall not go to any further wickedness, and
thou shall be reformed in that wherein thou shall grieve that thou have
offended me. Thus here is counsel and commandment to Cain, but no assertion
of Free will, and by Cains going forward in his wicked course, we see that Free
will avails nothing to true obedience, and keeping of Gods commandment. Now
then that M. Bishop can find nothing in Austin, let us see what Hierome has to
justify Cains example to be the maintenance of Free will. Hierome has indeed
the words and exposition which he alleges: Hieron tradit. Hebrat. in Genes.
Quia liberi arbitrises, monto vt non tibi peccatum sed tu peccato domineris.
Because thou have Free will, I admonish and warn thee, that sin do not
overrule thee, but that thou overrule sin. But that this neither helps
him nor hurts us, it will easily and plainly appear, if we consider what was
accorded before betwixt him and us. For we deny not Free will in moral and
civil outward actions, as has been before acknowledged by him. For in vain
were education and laws, and exhortations, and all precepts and directions of
life, if there were not left in man a power to conform himself outwardly to
the prescriptions thereof. God has left in nature August. desp. and lit. cap.
28. Non vsqueadeo in anima humana imago Dei detrita est. vt nullae in ea velut
lineamenta extrema remanserint. Origin. cont: Celsum lib. 4. Impossible vt
eius imaginis lineamenta in totum delcantur. etc.
some outward most lineaments, some imperfect shadows and portraiture of his
image, for the preserving of public order and society amongst men, which
could not stand, if men for fear or shame, or other respects could not
contain and bridle themselves from those mischiefs and villainies, whereto
corruption of nature does incline them. To this the words of Hierome are to be
referred. For Cain was Chrysostom in Genesis hom. 18. Sciebat ab initio quod fratrem
hic adoriturus esset, and ideo antea verbu repr^mit.
now contriuing and plotting the murder of his brother. There was now no law to
terrify him from the accomplishing of that which he had intended, but God
himself takes upon him to set before him the horror of his fact, and to
reclaim him from proceeding any further. If therefore we do with Hierome
refer the words here questioned to sin, God speaks to Cain to this
effect: Why art thou so much offended that thy brother is better accepted then
thy self? why art thou thus moved with envy toward him, and intendest
mischief against him? If thou do well as he does, assure thy self thou
shall be accepted as well as he. But if thou do wickedly, if thou go forward
with that horrible villainy that thou have conceived, know for a surety, that
thy sin shall lie waiting for thee at the door, and shall never cease to
attend and follow thee till it have brought upon thee just revenge. Wherefore I
advise thee to give over, bridle thy passion, be master thus far of thine
own affections; let not envy carry thee forward to commit so monstrous and
unnatural a fact: it is yet in thine own power, and therefore stay thy self,
and give no further way to this bloody designement to be sorry when it is too
late. Thus much and no more, do Hieromes words express unto us, and we doubt
not but Cain had Free will as touching committing of this cruel act. For if
some man had stood in his way with a sword drawn to slay him if he should
attempt the killing of his brother, who doubts but that it would have made
him hold his hands; which he could not, if he had not had in him power and
liberty to forbear. And if M. Bishop meant no more when he speaks of Cains
power not to sin, if he had listed, we would acknowledge the same with him,
but he would hereby prove a Free will to good, whereto he says Cain had the
assistance of Gods grace, which yet did not infallibly draw him to good, but
left him to his free choice, whether he would follow it or not. For proof
whereof there is no show of any syllable, either in the text, or in the other
testimonies which he has alleged. For as touching grace, we find here none
but that which the Pelagians spoke of, to counsel and advise him, whereas the
true grace inwardly works whatsoever outwardly is counseled or advised. And
whereas he says, that grace does not infallibly draw to good, it is true
indeed of his Pelagian grace, which consists only in the commandment, but
the true grace of God does infallibly draw to good. John 6 44.
No man, says our Savior Christ, can come unto me, August. cont. duas epist.
Pelag. lib 1. cap. 19. Venire ad me intelligitur credere in me.
that is to say, believe in me, except my Father which has sent me draw him,
thereby importing that all that are drawn of the Father do come unto him, that
is, do believe in him, because De praedest. sanct. cap. 8. Nihil est aliud qua^
donum accipere a patre quo credat in Christum.
to be drawn of the Father unto Christ, is to receive a gift of the Father
whereby to believe in Christ; so that Prosper. de vocat. gent. lib. 2. cap 9.
Qui non credant nec trahuntur omni^o.
they which believe not are not drawn at all. Therefore our Savior adds in
the next words; Every one that hears and learneth of the Father, that is,
every one that the father draws, comes unto me. Now M. Bishops drawing
leaves a man at his free choice whether he will follow or not. He says as the
Pelagians did; August epist. 107. Liberate naturali si vult, facit; si nonuult
non facit. Verse. 45.
If he will, he does so, if he will not, he does not; or as the Donatists, Idem
de unit. eccles. cap. 9. Cum arbitrio libero homo creatus est and si vult
credit in Christum, si non vult, non credit.
if he will, he believes; if he list not, he believes not: if he will, he
perseuereth; if he will not, he perseuereth not. These were the progenitors and
predecessors of his faith. But the true drawing grace, finding a man Hieron. a.
li. Pelag. lib. 3 Qui trahitur non spote currit, sed a^t retrectans and tardus
aut inuitus adiucitur.
resisting, drawing back, unwilling, persecuting the faith as Paul did, August
cont. duas epist. Pelag lib. 1. ca. 19 Quis trahitur si tam volebat? Et tamen
ne^io venit nisi velit. Trabitur ergo mires modis vt velit ab illo qui nouit
t^tus in ipsis hominum cordibus operari, non vt homines quod fieri non petest
nolentes credant, sed vt volemes ex nolentibus fiant. Et lib. 4 cap. 9. Ex
repugnantibus consentientes, ex oppugnant^bus amantes.
conuerteth his will to the faith; of unwilling, it makes him willing; of
resisting, it makes him consenting; of an oppugner of the faith, it makes him
a lover thereof. Let M. Bishop acknowledge this grace, if he will speak of
grace as the Scripture speaks: this is the only true grace; and this grace
Cain was never partaker of, and therefore being left to his own will, he did
not what he might have done, in giving ear to the warning and advice that was
given him of God.

11. W. BISHOP.
The second is taken out of this text of Deuteronomy. Cap. 30.19.
I call this day (says Moses) heaven and earth to witness, that I have set
before you, life, and death, benediction, and malediction, therefore choose
life, that thou may live and thy seed. Which words were spoken in vain, if
it had not been in their power, by the grace of God, to have made choice of
life: or if that grace would have made them do it infallibly, without their
consent.

R. ABBOT.
Moses says, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
I have set before you life and death, etc. Therefore choose life that thou
may live. These words, says M. Bishop, were spoken in vain, if it had not
been in their power by the grace of God, to have made choice of life. Where he
still goes on with his Pelagian device, yielding no more to grace, but only
adiuuare possibilitatem, to help the power of man, that whereas the power of
man is not sufficient, it may by grace be made able to make choice of life, but
yet so, as that still it rests in the will, whether to make use of this power
or not. But by the true grace of God man not only has power to choose, but
indeed does choose the way of life. And although man have no power in himself
whereof he can make use to make this choice, yet the words of God are not
therefore spoken in vain, because the word and the preaching thereof is the
instrument whereby God works in man to choose life, whilst through the spirit
it takes effect 2. Tim. 1.9.
according to the purpose and grace of God. He says by the ministry of the
word, Choose life, and by his grace Act. 16.14.
opens the heart to attend to that which he says, and in the mean while 2.
Tim. 2.25.
gives repentance, Phil. 1 29.
gives faith, Ephe. 1.17.
gives the spirit of wisdom and revelation, Mat. 13.11.
gives to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, Ezech. 36.26.
gives a new heart, Ierem 32.40.
gives the fear of God, and all things wherein consists the choice of life.
He says, Choose life, but so, as that he tells us also, John. 15.16.
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, as if he should say, that it is
not by our Free will, but by his choosing of us that we make choice of him.
Prosper de voc^t. gent. lib. 1. ca. 9. Ex Deo est vt homo (...) Dei eligat and
surgat a laps^s etc. Et post. Contra omnem electionem de ^^ero arbitri^
vementens inuictissim^ illa renitum sententia dir^ (...) Apostoli; Quis te
discernit, etc.
It is of God, says Prosper, that man makes choice of the way of God, and
arises from his fall; and against all election or choice proceeding of Free
will inuincibly resists the sentence of the Apostle, saying, Who separateth
thee? what have thou that thou have not received? M. Bishop says, My Free
will, my choice has made difference betwixt me and another man; because when
God made offer of life to us both alike, I by Free will made choice thereof,
and he refused. But the Apostle tells him, no. If he have made choice of
life, it is no work of Free will, it is a thing received. Aug. de praedest.
sanct. cap. 5. A quo nisi ab illo qui te a^ ceruit ab alio cui non donauit quod
donauit tibi?
Of whom, says S. Austin, but of him who has not given to another that which
he has given unto thee? Who, as he also answers the Pelagian heretic
obiecting the same place, ^acu^. de perfect. instit. prepe fi^em. ^^^p rat
(...).
inspireth the love whereby we choose. He adds further, that vainly it should
be said, Choose life, if grace would have made them do it infallibly without
their consent. Where we may wonder at his absurd manner of speech. Who was ever
so mad, as to say that God makes a man to choose life without his consent,
which is the same as if he should say, that he should make him consent without
consent, for how should choosing be without consenting? We deny not consent, but
we say with S. Austin, Aug. ep^st. 107. V^catione illa alta atque secre^a si^
eius agit se sunt vt eidem lege atque doctrine accommodet assensum
It is God who by his secret calling works the mind of man to give consent.
We say with S. Bernard, Bernard de great. ex l b arbit Non quod vel ipse
consensus ab ip^so fit. etc fecit volentem, no^ est volunt vt: su^
consentiente^.
Consent is not of man himself, but God makes a man willing, that is,
consenting unto his will. In Cant ^er. 57. Illius disider^u^ tuum creat, and
quod tu eius properas sermone^ admittere inde est quod ipse festinit inirare.
It is his desire of thee, that causes thy desire of him, and that thou art
forward to receive his word, it comes of his forwardness and hasting to
enter into thee.

12. W. BISHOP.
Unto these two places of the old Testament (one under the law of Nature, and
the other under Moses law) let us couple two more out of the new Testament.

The first may be those kind words of our Savior unto the Jews: Jerusalem,
Math. 23.
Jerusalem, etc. how often would I have gathered together thy children, as the
hen does her chickens under her wings, and thou would not: Which do plainly
demonstrate, that there was no want, either of Gods help inwardly, or of
Christ's persuasion outwardly, for their conversion: and that the whole fault
lay in their own refusing, and withstanding Gods grace, as th^se words of
Christ do plainly witness, And thou would not.

R. ABBOT.
If M. Bishop were put to the framing of an argument from this place, and to
bring in this conclusion, that man has Free will to convert and turn to God,
I suppose it would trouble him very sore. The words do rather import, that
howsoever Christ himself be amongst us and speak unto us, yet our Free will
avails nothing to make us to hearken to him, but we still refuse and rebel,
until God do work it in us to obey and to hearken to his call. And thus Moses
to give a reason why the people of Israel profited not by the sight of so
manifold signs and wonders, which the Lord had done before them and for them,
says, Deuteronomy. 29.4.
The Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears
to hear unto this day. Christ speaks those words out of his humane
affection; he shows his love toward them as man, he signifies his pains
and labor bestowed amongst them, and what occasion he had to complain, as
Esaias had foretold, Esa. 49.4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain and for nothing.
The words do no more import Free will then all other places of Scripture, that
do declare and set forth the rebellion of man's nature against God. But yet M.
Bishop tells us, that hereby it is signified that God used all means that
concerned him for the saving of them, and they by their Free will crossed his
purpose herein. The words, says he, do plainly demonstrate that there was no
want either of Gods help inwardly, or of Christ's persuasion outwardly, for
their conversion. But they do not demonstrate so much, yea by diverse places of
the Gospel we see they are very far from that demonstration. For if there
wanted no inward help for their conversion, how was it said by our Savior
Christ, Mat. 11.25.
Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent of the world: Cap. 13.11.
To them it is not given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven: Mar.
4.11.12.
all things are to them in parables, that they seeing may see and not discern,
and they hearing may hear and not understand, least at any time they should
turn, and their sins should be forgiven them. How was it said by the
Evangelist S. John: John 12.39.
Therefore could they not believe, because Esaias says again: He has blinded
their eyes and hardened their heart, that they should not see with their eyes,
nor understand with their heart, and should be converted and I should heal
them? How does S. Paul say; Romans 11.7.
The election has obtained, but the rest have been hardened, according as it
is written, God has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should
not see, etc. These things being so apparent and plain, how does M. Bishop
tell us that there wanted no help of God inwardly for their conversion, but
the want was only in their own Free will? Surely Aug. de corrept. and great.
ca. 14. Cui vol^nti saluu^ f^cere nullum hominu^ resistit arbitriu^. sic enim
v^lle and nolle in volentis aut nolentis est potestate vt diuinam volumtatem
non impediat nec superet potestatem De his enim qui faciunt quae non vult facit
ipse quae vult, etc. De ipsis voluntatibus hominum quod vult facit.
where God is willing to save, as S. Austin says, there no will of man
resists. For to will or to nill, is so in the power of him that wills or
nilleth, as that it neither hinders the will of God, nor ouerruleth his
power, because even of the wills of men he makes what he will. Euchirid. ad
Laurent. ca. 103 Dum tamen credere non cogamur aliquid omnipotentem Deu^
voluisse fieri factumque non esse qui sine vllu am^iguitatibus si in coelo and
in terra quaecunque voluit fecit, profecto facere noluit quodcunque non fecit.
In no wise may we think, says he, that the Almighty God would have any
thing to come to pass, and that the same does not come to pass; who if he do
whatsoever he will both in heaven and earth, as the truth instructs us,
surely had no will to do whatsouer he has not done. If therefore God had willed
the conversion of the people of Jerusalem, and had inwardly yielded them grace
for their conversion, it had followed infallibly that they had been converted,
neither should the frowardness of their will have defeated the purpose of his
will. Esa 46.10.
My counsel shall stand, says he, and I will do whatsoever I will: therefore
of the children of Jerusalem, whomsoever God would gather, he certainly did
gather. His will was to gather Rom 11.5.
a remnant according to the election of grace. Jerusalem would not, but
resisted the will of God, and hindered so much as in it lay, the gathering of
this remnant of her children. August. Euchir^^ cap. 97. Vbi est illa
omn^potentia, etc. si colligere filios Jerusalem voluit and non f^cit? An
potius and illa quidem filios sis ^s ab ipso c^lligi neluit, sede: quoque
relente filios eius c^llegit ipse quos voluit, quia in coelo and in terra non
quaedam v^luit and fecit, quaedam vero veluit and non fecit, sedomnia
quaecunque vol^^t fecit
But though Jerusalem would not, yet God gathered whom he would, and to them he
yielded his infallible saving grace, whereby he works to will and to do, and
gives the gifts before mentioned of repentance, faith, knowledge and such
like, without which there is no conversion, and the giving whereof is our
conversion unto God. Which seeing God gave not to Jerusalem, save only to his
remnant, it is absurdly said by M. Bishop, that there was no want of Gods help
inwardly for their conversion. Their refusing and withstanding was the fruit of
Free will, which howsoever God do otherwise offer grace, has nothing in it
self, whereof to do otherwise.

13. W. BISHOP.
Cap. 3.
The last testimony is in the Revel. where it is said in the person of God: I
stand at the door and knock if any man shall hear my voice and open the
gates, I will enter in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Mark
well the words: God by his grace, knocks at the door of our hearts, he does
not break it open, or in any sort force it, but attends, that by our
assenting to his call, we open him the gates, and then, lo he with his heavenly
gifts will enter in: otherwise he leaves us. What can be more evident in
confirmation of the freedom of man's will, in working with Gods grace?

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop does somewhat plainly show himself, and assures us that it is
not without cause that we have hitherto accused him of the Pelagian heresy.
The grace which for fashion sake he speaks of, is no other but such as
whereby God knocks at the door of our hearts, but works nothing in our
hearts, till we first of our selves assent to let him in. He attends till we
open him the gates, and then he with his heavenly gifts will enter in, which
was the damnable error of the Pelagians, that Gods grace and gifts are
bestowed upon the precedence of our will and works. But we have heard before
out of the Arausicane council, that Arausican. Council. 2. cap 4. Supra. sect 8.
if any man say that God exspecteth or attends our will, and does not
confess that God works in us to will, he gainsayth the doctrine of the
Apostle. Which is the same as to say, If any man say that God attends for our
opening the gates unto him, and does not confess that God himself opens the
gates unto himself, he is contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle. August
cont. duas epist. Pelag. lib. 4. cap. 6 Aditus diuinae vocationis ipsa Dei
gratia procuratur.
The entrance of Gods calling is wrought or procured by the grace of God
himself; he knocks with one hand, and opens with another, Psalm. 107.16.
breaking the gates of brass, and smiting the bars of iron in sunder, and
howsoever mightily he knock, we never hear, we never open till he open and
make entrance for himself. It is he that Act. 16.14.
opens the heart, he Luke 24.45.
opens the understanding, he Psalm. 119.18.
opens the eyes, he opens Job. 33.16.
the ears, he opens Psalm. 50.15.
the lips, he opens Act. 14.27.
the door of faith, and why then does M. Bishop say, that he attends till we
open? He does not attend our assenting to his call, but August. de praedest
sanct. cap. 19 Deus operatur in cordibus hominum vocatione illa secundum
proposi^um, vt non inarater aud^^nt Euangelium sed eo aud^to cont^er ta^tur and
credant, exerpientes non vt verbu^a hominum, sed sicum est vero verbum Dei.
by his calling which is according to his purpose, he works in the hearts of
me^, that they hear not the Gospel in vain, but do convert, and turn, and
receive it not as the word of man, but as it is indeed, the word of God. And
whereas he says, that God does not break open the doors, it is not always
true. For God sometimes with great violence assaulteth the heart, and Jude, verse.
23.
by terror and fear pulls men out of the fire, and as with a mighty hammer
breaks the pride and rebellion of the will, fighting and stirring against him.
When men are in the height of their insolency madly raging against him, he
strikes them to the ground, as he did the Apostle Act. 9.4.
S. Paul, and by astonishment ouercometh and subdueth them unto himself,
thus, August contr. duas Epist. Pel^. lib. 1 cap. 19. Non ait duxerit, vt illic
ali quo modo intelligamus praecedere voluntatem. Quis trah^tur, etc vt supra
Sect 10
not leading them as upon their precedent will, but drawing them; not to
believe against their wills which is impossible, but of unwilling to become
willing. In a word, when God knocks, Idem de Praedest sanct ca. 20. Ostrum
ergo apertum est in ^is, quibus datu^ est, aduersarij autem multi ex eis quibus
non est datu^.
the door is opened in them only to whom it is given, but they to whom it is
not given are still adverse, and they never open: and therefore M. Bishop says
amiss, that God attends that we open him the gates, or otherwise leaves us.
Neither do the words alleged serve for confirmation of the freedom of man's
will, telling us only what must be done that God may enter, but not importing,
that we do it by any power of Free will.

14. W. BISHOP.
To these express places taken out of Gods word, let us join the testimony
of those most ancient Fathers, against whose works the Protestants can take
no exception. The first shall be that excellent learned Martyr Justinius in his
Apology, who unto the Emperor Antonine speaks thus: Unless man by Free
will could fly from foul dishonest deeds, and follow those that be fair and
good; he were without fault, as not being cause of such things as were done.
But we Christians teach, that mankind by free choice, and Free will, does both
do well and sin.

To him we will join that holy Bishop and valiant Martyr Irenaeus, who of Free
will writes thus: Lib. 4. cap. 72.
Not only in works, but in faith also, our Lord reserved liberty and
freedom of will unto man: saying, Be it done unto thee according to thy faith.

I will add to that worthy company S. Cyprian, who upon those words of our
Savior, Joan. 6. Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Will you also depart? discourses thus: Our Lord did not bitterly inueigh
against them, which forsook him, but rather used these gentle speeches to his
Apostles, will you also go your way: and why so? Marry observing and keeping
(as this holy Father declares) that decree, by which man left unto his
liberty and put unto his free choice, might deserve unto himself, either
damnation or salvation. These three most ancient, and most skillful in
Christian religion, and so zealous of Christian truth, that they spent their
blood in confirmation of it, may suffice to certify any indifferent reader,
what was the judgment of the ancient and most pure Church, concerning this
article of Free will: specially when the learned of our Adversaries confess
all Antiquity, (excepting only S. Augustine) to have believed and taught Free
will. Hear the words of one for all. Mathias Illiricus in his large, long
lying history, having rehearsed touching Free will, the testimonies of
Iustine, Irenaeus, and others, says, In like manner Clement Patriarch of Alex.
does every where teach Free will, Cont. 2. cap. 4. col. 59.
that it may appear (say these Lutherans) not only the Doctors of that age to
have been in such darkness but also that it did much increase in the ages
following. See the wilful blindness of heresy. Illyricus confessing the best
learned in the purest times of the Church, to have taught Free will: yet had
rather believe them to have been blindly led, by the Apostles and their best
Scholars who were their Masters, then to epsy and amend his own error. These
principal pillars of Christ's Church were in darkness belike as Protestants
must needs say: and that proud Persian, and most wicked Heretic Manes (of
whom the Manichees are named) who first denied Free will, began to broach the
true light of the new Gospel.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop held it to be the best course for him clanum clauo pellere, to drive
out one nail with another, not answering the places which M. Perkins alleged
out of the Fathers, but only crossing them with other places. Nay, he so
passed them over, as that fraudulently and falsely he would make his Reader
believe, that they made all for him. But mark I pray thee gentle Reader, when
M. Bishop drives all to this, that when God has done his work for man's
conversion, it is left to man's free choice, whether to will the same or not,
does it make for him, or is it not against him which M. Perkins cites out of
Austin, that Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 12. I^^o sic volunt, quia Deus
operatur vt veli^t.
man therefore wills, because God works in him to will? Surely if man
therefore will, because God works in him to will, then Gods work does not
leave man to the free choice of his own will. When M. Bishop says, that there
is in man a natural faculty of Free will, which being stirred up and
fortified is able to do any act appertaining to salvation, does the same S.
Austine agree with him when he affirms, Epist. 107. L^cerum arbitrium ad
diligendum Deum prin^s peccati gra^ ditate per^^emu^,
that man lost Free will to the love of God by the greatness of Adams sin?
When he attributed man's conversion but only principally to grace, and blames
us for that we attribute the whole work to grace, does S. Bernard agree with
him, when he says, Bernard. de great. and lib. arb. Totum ex gratia
that it is wholly of grace that we are new created, healed, saved? By these it
is easy to make application of the rest; but we may look for good answers at
his hands herafter, who in the beginning being so directly oppugned, would
seek thus in a cloud to steal away. But if M. Perkins were able to say
nothing against him, we must think he is able to say for himself exceeding
much. Yet his first authority out of Justinius Martyr, makes nothing at all
for him: for being written to an heathen Emperor, it touches only moral and
external actions, in which we deny not but that God has left some freedom
and liberty to man's will, as before has been declared. His very Justin. Martyr
Apol. 2. Ne quis nostra dicta sic acciptat, quasi Fati necessitate^ asseramus,
and quae fiunt ideo fieri, quiae praedicta sunt exp^ica bonus hoc quoque etc
drift there, is to condemn the wicked fancies of Astrologers and Stoicke
Philosophers, who did hang all upon Aug. contra duas Epist. Pela. lib. 2. ap.
6. and in Psalm. 1^0 and de ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 1.
destinies and constellations, and fatal necessity, and thence sought excuse
of their lewd and abominable actions. And if we will more largely extend the
words, yet are they nothing for M. Bishops turn. Hominem libero arbitrio,
liberaque voluntate and peccare and recte agere docemus.
We Christians, says he, do affirm, that by free choice, and Free will,
mankind does both do well and sin. And so much we affirm also, that man by
free choice and Free will does well, for there Prosper de voc^t. Gent lib 2.
cap. 9. Virius nolenuum nulla est
is no virtue where a man has no will to that he does, but we say still
against M. Bishop, that this is not that Free will that he requires: it is not
a power of nature, but wholly the effect of grace: Aug. Epi. 107. vt supra Sect.
1.
It is the grace of God whereby man's will is made free, both to eschew evil and
do good, and they that teach any other Free will, they are Idem de great. and
lib arbit. cap. 14. Non defensores, sed inflatores and praecipitatores liberi
arbit.
not the defenders, but the puffers up and break-neckes of Free will. And no
otherwise did Iustine Martyr conceive thereof, as appears by these words in
the same Apology: Justin. vt supr. (...).
In like sort as God created us when we were not, so do we think that he
vouchsafes them of immortality and being with him, who willingly make choice
to do those things that are pleasing unto him. But to have being at the first,
it was not of our selves. In like sort then to choose and follow what is
pleasing to him by those reasonable powers which he has given us, it is by his
persuading and moving of us to the faith. In which words he plainly
confesses, that Free will to righteousness is wholly the gift of grace, and no
more of our selves, then it was at first to create our selves. The place of
Irenaeus avails him as little, who disputing in like sort against them that
held, that men by an immutable necessity of created nature, are some good and
some evil, proves, that good and evil consist in election and will, and that
this appears, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 72. Si non in nobis esset facere haec aut
non facereq uam causam habebat Apostolus, and multo prius ipse Dominus
consilium dare?
by that the Apostle, and before him our Savior Christ, did give counsel to
do some things, and from some other things to abstain. Afterward he shows,
that not in works only, but also in faith our Savior reserved to man
liberty and freedom of will, meaning that it is Non de violentia cogens.
not by any compelling violence that a man either believes or works, but
August. de Praedest. sanct. cap. 5. Posse habere fidem sicut posse habere
charitatem naturae est hominum: hahere autem fidem sicut habere charitatem
gratiae est fidelium. Vid. Prospide vocat. Genesis lib. 2. cap. 2.
by condition of nature he is such, as may either believe or not believe; and
when he believes, it is by his will that believes, and by a power of the will
that he has to believe: yet so, as that we must say with S. Austine, August.
Retract. lib. 1. ca. 22
Sedea potestas nulla est nisi a Deo detur; but that power is none, except it
be given of God. We may not take Irenaeus to be so gross, as to think faith
to be of our own power, which the Scripture so plainly tells us, is Ephesians.
2.8.
the gift of God. And as the places that he alleges are far from any such
purpose, Mat. 8 13.
According to thy faith be it unto thee: Mar. 9.23.
All things are possible to the believer, so he himself elsewhere out of the
words of the Apostle, Romans 7.18.
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing; plainly
affirms, Iren. lib 3. cap. 22. Sign^ficans quoniam non a nobis sed a Deo est
bonum salutis nostrae. Et iteru^: Miser ego homo, etc. Deinde insert
liberatorem, Gratia Dei, etc.
that the good which belongs to our salvation, is not of our selves but of
God, and that the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is our deliverer, that is, the
thing whereby we are made free. Therefore he prays for the Heretics, against
whom he wrote, that Ibid. cap. 46. Nos precamur non perseuerare eos in fou^a
qua^ ipsi foderunt, sed segregari ab nutusmodi matre, etc. and legitime eos
generari, co^uerses ad Ecclesiam Dei, and formari Christum in eis, and
cognoscere eos fabricaetorem huius vniuersitatu, etc.
they might not continue in the pit which they had dug, but might be
converted to the Church, and that Christ might be formed in them, and that they
might know the only true God and Lord of all. Whereby it appears, that he did
not take repentance, and faith, and conversion to God, to be matters of our
Free will and power, but the merciful gifts of God, and therefore by prayer to
be begged at his hands. The place of Cyprian sounds very harshly, but yet
being taken in that sense wherein the Fathers commonly spoke before the
Pelagian heresy, namely to affirm against the Manichees an act of man's will
both in good and evil, so that by his will and election, it is that either he
is good or evil, it imports nothing against us, because we deny not the act
and election of man's will, but only teach, that this act and election of the
will is nothing at all of it self, as touching righteousness, but only what
it is by being corrected and rectified by the grace of God. Our Savior says
to his disciples, Will ye also go away? Lib. 1. Epist. 3 Seruans legem qua homo
libertati suae relictus, and in preprio arbitrio constitutus fi^^m^tipsi, vel
^^^rtem appetit, vel salutem.
He observes the law (says Cyprian) whereby man left to his liberty, and put
to his own will, not deserves, (as M. Bishop falsely translateth) but desires
to himself either death or salvation, importing hereby, that man freely and by
his own will makes choice to continue with Christ unto salvation, but not
affirming, that man's own will is herein free of it self, or has of it own,
whereby to make this choice. And that he was of far other mind then so to
think, appears by his own words Aug. contra 2. Epist. Pelag lib. 4 cap. 9.
and de Praedest. sanct. cap. 3. and de bono perse. cap 19. etc.
often cited by Austin against the Pelagians: Cypr. ad Quir. lib. 3. cap. 5. In
nulla gloriandum quando nostrum nihil sit.
We are to glory of nothing, (namely, as touching righteousness) because
therein nothing is our own. Lib. 2. Epist. 2. Dei est, Dei est omne quod
possumu^^ inde v^^^mus, inde pollemus.
It is of God, says he, all that we can do: of him it is that we live, of him
it is that we have any power. But most direct to this purpose is it which he
notes as touching the petition of the Lords prayer, Lead us not into
temptation, that we are thereby Cyprian. in Orat. Dominic. Admonemur
infirmitatu and imbecillitatis nostrae dum si^ rogam^s ne quis se insolenter
extollat, ne quis sibi superbe atque arroganter aliquid assumat^ ne quis aut
confessionis aut passionis gloriam suam dicat, etc. vt dum praecedit and
submissi confessio, and datur ^^^um Domino, qu^quid suppli^^ter petitur, i^st^s
pictate praest^tur
put in mind of our own frailty and weakness, and that for perseuering and
continuing with Christ to the glory of confessing him, and suffering for his
sake, it is wholly to be ascribed unto God, and we are not to assume any thing
proudly to our selves. Whereof S. Austin collecteth (as before) against the
Pelagian heresy, that Aug de bono persevere. cap. ^7 Nihil nobi^ reliqu^t, in
qu^ ta^quam in nostro gloriemu^. Siqu^dem and vt (...) disced^mus a D^o n^n
estend^t, da^dum esse nisi a Deo, cum pascendum estendat a Deo. Qui enivi non
in errur in tentationem, non disc^dit a Deo. Non est hoc omnino in viribus
Liberi arbi^r^ quales nunc sunt, fuera^us (...) antequam caderet, etc. Post
casum autem hominis nonnisi ad gratiam suam Deus voluit pertinere, vt hom^
accedat ad eti^^ neque nisi ad gratiam suam pertinere voluit, vt homo non
recedat ab eo.
Cyprian leaves us nothing wherein to glory as our own; that he shows,
that not to depart from God, is no otherwise but given of God, in that he
teaches, that it is to be begged of God: for he that is not led into
temptation, does not depart from God. This says he, is not in the strength of
Free will as now it is. It was in man before his fall, but after the fall of
man, God would not have it belong save only to his grace, that we come unto
him; neither would he have it belong save only to his grace, that we do not
depart from him. Thus he conceived and observed as touching Cyprians meaning
out of Cyprians own words, and bereaueth M. Bishop of Cyprians warrant for
that, which he would father upon him by some words obscurely uttered in another
place. Jbid cap. 6. T^^^res vi^^^us si totum Deo damus, non autem nos illi ex
part and nobu ex part commutimus. Quod vidit iste venerabil^ Martyr, etc.
Cyprian that worthy Martyr saw well enough, says he, that we live most in
safety, when we ascribe all to God, and do not commit our selves partly to
God, and partly to our selves. By these three therefore M. Bishop hitherto has
gained nothing, but by Cyprian whose words seem to make most for him, he
gains least of all. But now he urges the confession of some of our best
learned, that all Antiquity (excepting only S. Austin) believed and taught
Free will. To this purpose he alleges a place out of the Centuries, which he
calls a large long lying history, marry speaking but by roate as children
do, or as the clown did of Aristides, who giving his voice to the banishment
of the same Aristides, and being asked of him unknown, Plutarch. Apophiheg.
whether he knew him against whom he gave his voice, answered, that he knew him
not, but it was trouble unto him to hear him termed a just man. For so M.
Bishop knows not the Centuries, (alas poor man, what should he meddle with
such great books?) but he has heard that Protestants were the Authors
thereof, and that is enough to warrant him to give his voice against them. But
his fellows know, that they have good cause to speak well of the Authors of
those Centuries, because by them they have bin able to say more for themselves
then ever they were before: so faithfully did those men deal in the compiling
of that story. Now they say indeed, as he alleges from his Author, that
Clement Alexandrinus does every where teach Free will, and that not only the
Doctors of that age were in such darkness, but also that it did much increase
in the ages following. Where taking the matter to be simply, as they say, and
as M. Bishop does object, what does he gain more by that objection, then the
Pelagians did? Prosper. Epist. ad August. Obstinationem sua^ vetustate
defendunt. A nullo vnquam ecclesiasticorum ita esse intellecta ve nunc
sentiuntur, affirmant.
who defended their obstinacy by antiquity, and affirmed, that none of all
the ecclesiastical Writers that were before, did so expound the Scriptures, as
Austin did, namely, against the Free will and merits of man: and that examining
the opinions of the more ancient Fathers, they were found to be in a manner
all of one mind against him. But this he took to be no sufficient argument,
but freely professes of his doctrine, Aug. de bono persevere. cap 18. Hoc
sc^onemine^ contra istam Praedestinatione^, etc. nisi errando disputare
potuisse.
I know that no man without error could dispute against it. He excuses the
ancients that were before him: De Praedest. sanct. cap. 14. Priusquam ista
Haeresis oriretur, non habuerunt necessitatem in hac difficili ad soluendum
quaestione versari, etc. vnde factu^ est, vt de gratia Dei quid sentirent,
breuiter quibusdam scriptorum suorum locis and transeunter attingerent,
immorarentur vero in eis quae aduersus alios inimicos Ecclesiae disputabant,
etc. frequentationibus aut orationibus simpliciter apparebat Dei gratia quid
valeret. Non enim poscerentur a Deo quae praecepit fieri, nisi ab illo
donaretur, vt fierent.
that before the heresy of the Pelagians began, they had not any such need to
deal much in that question, and therefore what they thought of the grace of
God, they touched but briefly and by the way, in some places of their works,
but stood more upon those things which they handled against other enemies of
the Church. Yet he says, that by their supplications and prayers it plainly
appeared what grace does, because they would not have asked of God those things
which he has commanded to be done, but that they held that the doing thereof
is the gift of God: De bono persevere. cap. 23. No oraret Ecclesia, vt daritur
infidelibus fides, nisi Deum crederet and auersas and aduersas hominu^ ad se
conuertere voluntates; nec oraret Ecclesia vt perseueraret in fide Christi,
nisi crederet Dominum sic in potestate habere cor nostrum, vt b^^u^ quod non
tenemus nisi propria voluntate, non tamen teneamus, nisi ipsi in ^o^is operetur
and velle
that the Church would not have prayed to God, as it always did, to give men
repentance, faith, obedience, perseverance, but that it believed, that God so
has our heart in his power, as that he works in us to will the good that we
cannot have without our will. He further observes, that Ibid cap. 20.
Didicimus singulas quasque haereses intulisse Ecclesiae proprias quaestiones:
cotra quas di^igentius defenderetur S^riptura diuina quam si nulla talis
necessitas cogeret. Quid aute^ coegit loca Scripturarum, quibus Praedestinatio
commendata est copiosius and enucientius i^^o nostro libere defendi, nisi quod
Pelagiani dicunt, etc.
all heresies have brought their several questions into the Church, by
occasion whereof as touching those points, the truth of Scripture was the more
diligently defended, and that by occasion of the Pelagian heresy, the places
of Scripture concerning Predestination and grace of God, were by his labor
more plentifully and plainly defended then they were before. And to conclude,
out of all Antiquity before him, he brings only Ibid cap 19.
four or five testimonies out of Cyprian, Ambrose, and Gregory Nazianzene,
whereby to justify what he taught. Now by this answer of Austin to the
Pelagians, M. Bishop and his fellows must receive their answer. If it were no
prejudice to him, that the Fathers before him taught otherwise then he did, it
is no prejudice to us teaching the same that he taught. He professed himself
De not. and gra. cap. 61
to be free in the writings of any such men, and that it was the Scripture
only to which he was bound, without refusal to give consent: why then does M.
Bishop seek to bind us in a matter wherein S. Austin refused to be bound?
Prosper being urged by the Pelagians with a sentence out of the book of the
Pastor, rejected it Prosper. de lib. arbit Nullius authoritatis testimonium de
libello Pastoris.
as a testimony of no authority, albeit Antiquity had Ruffi^ ^n exposit.
Symb. apud Cyprian.
so accounted of that book, as that they had joined it to the books of the new
Testament, and did read it publicly in their Churches, and does M. Bishop
think it much, that we reject some few testimonies alleged by him of far
less authority then that was? But yet Austine found in these few testimonies
of the more ancient Fathers, sufficient to justify both for him and us, Aug.
de bono persevere. cap. 19. Istitales tantique doctores dicentes non esse
aliquid de qu^ tanquam de nostro, quod nobis De^^ (...) ^ed^rit gloriemur, nec
ipsum cor nostrum and cogitationes nostrari^ potestate nostra esse, and tetum
dant^s Deo atque ab ipso nos acc^pere confitentes, vt permansu^^ conuertamur ad
cum, vt id quod bonum est, nobis quoque videatur ^^^um, and quod velimus illud,
vt honoremus Deum, and recipiamus Christum: vt ex indenotis efficiamur deu^^i
and religiosi, vt in ipsam Trinitatem ^redamus, and confiteamur etiam voce quod
credimus, haec vtique gratiae Dei tribuunt, etc.
that we have nothing whereof to glory as ours, which God has not given unto
us; that our heart and thoughts are not in our own power but Gods: that all is
to be ascribed unto God, and that we must confess, that we receive all wholly
of him, as touching our conversion to God, and continuing with him: that it is
wholly the gift of grace, the gift of God, which of him we have, and not of our
selves to will that that is good: to receive Christ, to believe in God, and by
voice to confess that which we believe. And surely howsoever those more
ancient Fathers spoke obscurely of Free will, and some of them questionless
meant amiss, yet for the most part their speeches being applied, as I said
before, against heathen Astrologers, and wicked heretics, excluding man's will
wholly from being any cause either of good or evil, they spoke worse then they
meant, and if we will take their words with those qualifications and
constructions, wherewith S. Austin cleared some speeches of his against the
Manichees, as Sect. 6.
before was showed in the answer to M. Bishops Epistle, they shall easily be
reconciled to the truth. Therefore i^arhem also that speak most amiss, we find
sometimes a right and true acknowledgement of the grace of God. Who was a
greater Patron of Free will then Origin who yet notwithstanding confesses,
Origin. contra Ceisum lib 7. Nostrum propositum non est sufficiens ad hoc, vt
mundum cor habeamus, sed Deo est opus qui tale nobis creet: ide^rco, qui scit
precari dicit Cor mundum, etc.
that our will suffices not for the having of a clean heart, but that we have
need of God to create the same in us, and that therefore he that knows how to
pray, says, Create in me a clean heart, O God: Jbid. Bonitate ac humanitate
Dei, and diuina ipsius gratia conceditur cognitio Dei duntaxat his qui ad hoc
praedestinat^ sunt vt cognito Deo digne viua^t, etc
that the true knowledge of God by his mercy and grace is granted only unto
them who are praedestinate to live worthy of him whom they know: Jn Mat. cap.
13. Quod gloriatione dignum est, id nostrum non est, sed domo^ est Dei.
that whatsoever is in us worthy our rejoicing, is not our own, but the gift
of God. Yea where he affirms, that there is in every soul a strength of
power and freedom of will whereby it may do every thing that is good: yet
further to express his mind he adds, In Cantic. Homil. 4. Se^ quia hoc
naturae bonu^ praeuaricationis occasion deceiptum, vel ad ignomimam, vel ad
lasciuiam fuerat inflexum, vbi per gratiam reparatur, and per doctrinam verbi
Dei restituitur, odorem reddit sine dubio illum quem primus conditor Deus
indiderat, sed peccati culpa subtraxerat.
that this benefit of nature was cropped by means of sin, and was turned
aside to shame and lasciuiousnes; but that the same being repaired by grace,
and restored by the doctrine of the word of God, does give that sweet savor
which God the first Creator put into it but the trespass of sin had taken away.
Where it appears plainly, that in speaking of Free will, his purpose was to
show what man's will is by condition of creation, and to what it may be repaired
by the grace of God, not what power it has of it self in this state of
corruption, to open to God when he knocks, or to assent to God when he
calls. And thus Clemens Alexandrinus affirming Free will against the
heretics Valentinus and Basilides, who thought that men by an essential state
of nature were some good, some evil, some faithful and some vnfai^hfull, so
as that the will of man is nothing at all either way, yet reserueth due place
to the grace of God, saying: Clem. Alexan. Strom^t. lib 5. Oportet mentem
habere sanam, etc. ad quod maxim diuina opus habemus gratia rectaque doctrina
castaque and munda animi affectione, and Patris ad ipsum attractione.
We have special need of Gods grace, and true doctrine, and of chaste and pure
affection, and of the Fathers drawing us to himself. Where by affirming the
Fathers drawing us to himself, he plainly excludes the voluntary opening
and assenting, and yielding of Free will, because drawing (as before was showed
out of Austin) imports that there is no will in us, till God of unwilling do
make us willing. Let one speech of Austine serve to clear all this matter,
Augu. de corrept. and great. ca. 1 Liberum arbitrium and ad malum, and ad bonu^
faciendum confitendum est nos habere sed in ma lo faciendo liber est quisque
iustitiae, peccati aute^ seru^^m bono autem liber esse nullus potest, nisi
fuerit liberatus ab eo qui dixit: Si vos filius, etc.
We must confess (says he) that we have Free will both to do evil and to do
good. This is the common assertion of the Authors whom M. Bishop opposes
against us: but let us take the w^rds following withal, and by them expound
the same assertion. For euil-doing every man is free from righteousness, and
the servant of sin, (there he has already Free will) but in that that is
good no man can be free, except he be made free by him that says: If the Son
shall make you free, then are ye free indeed. If any of them thought otherwise,
they erred in that they thought: neither learned they so to think of the
Apostles, or their best scholars, as M. Bishop idly talks, but either
borrowed it of heathen Philosophers, or presumed it of themselves. And
whatsoever they thought or meant, their manner of speaking was not Apostolic,
neither learned they it by the word of God: and therefore those times were not
the purest times, which had thus in phrase and speech varied from that Rom 6.17.
character and form of doctrine, whereto the Church was first delivered. And
if M. Bishop will say, that they learned these things of the Apostles, then he
must condemn S. Austine, and the whole Catholic Church of that time in which
Austine lived, for teaching otherwise then they taught: which if he will not
do, he must perforce acquit us as well as him, and let the blame rest upon them
to whom it does appertain. Whom we account no further to be pillars of Christ's
Church, then they themselves continued built upon the Gospel, which Christ
has made Iren lib. 3. ca 1. Euangelium nobis in Scripturis tradiderunt
Apostoli columna^ and f^^d amentu^ f^aci nostrae futurum.
the pillar and fortress of our faith, neither doubt we to say of them that
they were in darkness, where the Esa. 8.10.
word of the law and testimony did not give them light. Now for conclusion, he
vpbraideth us again with the heresy of the Manichees, only to show himself
a perfect scholar of the Pelagian school. For so did the Aug. contra 2. Epist.
Pelag li 3 cap. 9. Excogitaverunt Ma^^chaeoru^ detestabili nomine imperitos
quos potuerint d^terrere ne aduersus eoru^ dogmata peruersissima aures
accommodent veritati.
Pelagians object to Austine and other teachers of the Catholic Church, that
they took part with the Manichees, and defended their heresy in the denying
of Free will. They called them Manichees, and of themselves said, Ibid. lib. 2.
ca. 1 Pro Catholica fide contra Manichaeorum sicut loquuntur profa nitatem
consensionem Orientalium Episcoporu^ videntur exposcere, etc.
that they dealt for the Catholic faith against the profane opinion of the
Manichees, only to color their own heresy and enmity against the grace of
God by falsely vpbraiding their adversaries with another. But S. Austin answered
them: Ibid. cap. 2. Manichaei negant homini bono ex libero arbitrio fuisse
initria mal^. Pelagiani dicunt etiam hominem malum sufficienter haebere liberum
arbitrium ad faciendum praeceptu^ bonum. Catholicae vtrosque redarguit, etc.
The Manichees deny, that to man being made good, Free will became the
beginning of evil: the Pelagians say, that man being become evil, has a will
sufficiently free for the doing of the commandment of good. The Catholic
Church condemns them both, saying to the Manichees, God made man just: and to
the Pelagians, If the Son shall make you free, then are you free indeed. Let
M. Bishop turn the name of the Pelagians into Papists, and take this answer to
himself. The Pelagians and Papists are not therefore to be approved, because
they condemn the heresy of the Manichees, but are therefore to be detested,
because they have set up another heresy of their own. Ibid. possunt duo
errores inter se esse contrarij, sed ambo sunt detestandi quia sunt ambo
contrarij veritati.
Two errors (says S. Austine) may be contrary one to the other, and both to
be detested, because they are both contrary to the truth. So is it with the
Manichees and Papists, and we take the course that the ancient Church did to
condemn them both. But of this matter I have spoken sufficiently before in
answering his Epistle, and therefore need not here to stand upon it.

15. W. BISHOP.
Here I would make an end of citing Authorities, 2. Inst. ca. 2. q 4.
were it not that Calvin says, that albeit all other ancient writers be
against him, yet S. Augustine as he vaunteth, is clearly for him in this
point: but the poor man is foully deceived, as well in this, as in most other
matters. I will briefly prove, and that out of those works which S. Augustine
wrote after the Pelagian heresy was a foot: for in his others, Calvin
acknowledges him to have taught Free will. De spi. and lit 34. De gra. Chr. 14
Ad Simpli. q. 2. Tract. 72. in Joan. Epi. 47.
Of our Freedom in consenting to Gods grace, he thus defines: To consent to
Gods calling, or not to consent, lies in a man's own will. Again: Who does
not see every man to come, or not to come by Free will? but this Free will may
be alone, if he do not come, but it cannot be helped, if he do come. In another
place, that we will (do well) God will have it to be his and ours; his, in
calling us; ours, in following him. Yea more: To Christ working in him, a man
does cooperate, that is, works with him, both his own justification, and
life everlasting: will you hear him speak yet more formally for us. We have
dealt with your brethren and ours, as much as we could: that they would hold
out and continue in the sound Catholic faith; the which neither denies Free
will, to evil or good life, nor does attribute so much to it, that it is
worth any thing without grace. So according to this most worthy Fathers
judgment, the sound Catholic faith does not deny Free will, as the old
Manichees, and our new Gospellers do; nor esteem it without grace able to do
any thing toward salvation, as the Pelagians did. Lib 4. contr. Iul. c. 8.
And to conclude, hear S. Augustines answer unto them, who say, that he, when
he commends grace, denies Free will. Much less would I say, that which thou
lyingly do affirm me to say, Free will to be denied, if grace be commended,
or grace to be denied, if Free will be commended.

R. ABBOT.
Calvin indeed confesses as the truth is, that the Institut lib. 2. cap. 2.
Sect. 4.
ancient Writers save only Austin, have written so diversely and intricately,
or obscurely of Free will, as that hardly a man can gather from them any
certainty as touching that point. But yet he says further, that Ibid. Sect. 9.
albeit they went too far sometimes in extolling Free will, yet he dares to
affirm, that they aimed at this mark, to turn man altogether away from the
confidence of his own strength, and to teach him to make the repose of his
strength in God only. But whereas Calvin thinks that Austin is clear for
him in this point, M. Bishop says, the poor man was foully deceived as well in
this, as in most other matters. Where I cannot but smile to see, how every
ignorant brabler will have a snatch at Calvin, when he in the mean time going
like a stately Lion, shakes them off like curres, and dasheth them against the
walls. If Calvin were so poor a man, alas what shall we think of M. Bishop?
what shall we make of him but a beggar outright? Yet he takes upon him to
prove, and that out of those works which S. Austin wrote after the Pelagian
heresy was a foot, that the same Austin taught Free will. And we deny not,
but that he did so, and in that meaning wherein he taught it, we are ready to
affirm it. Yea let him remember that Calvin professes, that Ibid. Sect. 8.
if any man will use the name of Free will without the corrupt meaning of it,
he will not gainesay him, only because it cannot be retained without danger of
evil understanding, he wishes it to be forborne, and in that respect we for
the most part do forbear it. But this Free will in true meaning, is no
faculty of nature, as M. Bishop will needs have it, but Aug de pecca. mei and
remiss. lib. 2 ca. 6 Ipsum liberum arbitriu^ ad gratiam Dei, hoc est, ad dona
Dei pertinere no^ amb^go, nec solu^ vt sit, sed etiam vt bonum sit, hoc est, ad
facienda Domini mandata conuertatur.
it belongs to the grace of God, to the gifts of God, not only the being of
it, but the converting of it unto God. And very truly does the same S. Austin
argue, that Ibid cap. 18. Si nobis libera quaedam voluntas ex Deo est, quae
adhuc potest esse vel bona vel mala, bona vero voluntas ex nobis est, melius
est id quod a nobis, quam quod ab illo est.
if we have of God (by nature) a Free will, which may be either good or evil,
and have of our selves a good will (by consenting or applying it when God
calls to that that is good) then better is that that we have of our selves,
then that that we have of God. Which because it is absurd, we must needs
acknowledge, that a good will, that is to say, Free will to faith and
righteousness, is not of our selves, but of God only. But M. Bishop alleges
Austin affirming, that De spirit. and lit. cap. 34.
to consent to Gods calling, or not to consent, propriae voluntatis est,
belongs to man's own will. But rather he should say, proprie voluntatis est,
that is, it concerns properly the will: the place by changing of a letter
being undoubtedly corrupted, S. Austins purpose there, being only to note the
will to be the subject not the cause of this consenting. To consent he means
is an act of the will, which howsoever God works in the will to do, yet the
will it is that does it, but that the will consents by a power of it own, he
means not: yea he himself plainly euicteth the contrary in the words
immediately going before. For what is it to consent, but velle credere, to be
willing to believe? And Ipsum velle credere Deus operatur in homine.
God it is (says he) that works in us to be willing to believe. Therefore it
must needs be, that God works in man to give consent. Man's will consents,
it is true: Contra duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 1 cap. 18 and lib. 2. cap 8. and de
Praedest. sanct. ca. 5.
sed praeparatur voluntas a Domino: but the will is framed or prepared of the
Lord. Faith is in the power of man: De spir and lit. cap. 31.
sed nulla est potestas nisi a Deo, but there is no power but of God. It is in
man's will, when God has given him to will: it is in man's power, when God has
given him power. And more then this, howsoever we read the words, S. Austin
intended not. For full and certain assurance whereof, M. Bishop should have
remembered, that S. Austin himself reports it as an error which he had
sometimes holden, De Praedest. sanct. cap. 3. Vt praedicato nobis Euangelio
consentiremus nostru^ esse, and nobis ex nobis esse arbitrabar. Quem meum
errorem nonnulla opuscula mea satis indicam ante Episcopatum meum scripta.
that to consent to the Gospel when it is preached is of our own will, and
that we have that of our selves. From which error he professes he was
reclaimed by those words of the Apostle: 1. Cor. 4.7.
What have thou that thou have not received? For if it be of our own will that
we consent, then somewhat we have of our selves which we have not received. He
should further have remembered, that S. Austin notes it as the error of the
Pelagia^s, that Epist. 107 Co^sentire, vel non consentire, ita nostrum est vt
si velimus.
to consent, or not to consent is in our selves, and of our selves, so that if
we will, we do so: or if we will not, we cause that the work of God naught
avails in us. M. Bishop therefore does amiss, to make Austin a patron of
that opinion which he reformed as an error in himself, and condemned as an
error in other men.

The second place that he alleges, in Austins true meaning is altogether
against him. Contra Pelag. and Celest. lib 1. cap. 14 Quis no^ videat and
venire quenquam and no^ venire arbitrio voluntatis? sed hoc arbitrium potest
esse solum si non venit, non potest autem nisi aediutum esse si venit.
Who does not see (says he) that every man comes or comes not arbitrio
voluntatis, by his will? (Let it be as M. Bishop says, by Free will:) But this
will may be alone (says he) if he come not; but it cannot be but helped if he
do come. Where showing that our coming or not coming to Christ is acted by our
will, he gives to understand, that our will is of it self free to refuse to
come: but that the Free will whereby we do come, is the gift of God, even as
our Savior Christ teaches us, saying: Ioh. 6.65.
No man can come unto me, except it be given him of my Father. And therefore the
same S. Austin elsewhere reasons with a man in this sort: August. Quomodo
venisti? etc Veni, ^^quis, libero arbitrio: voluntate propria ven^. Quid
turgescu? v^ nosse, quod and hoc praestitum est tibi? Ipsum audi vocantem. Nemo
venit ad me, etc.
Thou say unto me, I am come to Christ by my Free will, I am come by mine
own will. Why art thou proud of this? Will thou know that even this also was
given thee? Hear him that called thee: No man comes unto me except my Father
draw him. For De Praedest. sanct. cap. 20. supra Sect 6.
when God will have a man do that which is not to be done but by the will, he
in an unspeakable and wonderful sort works in him to will. But M. Bishop
perhaps groundeth upon that that S. Austin says, that the will of man is helped
if he do come, as importing that man does somewhat of himself, but yet is not
fully sufficient without help. Whereto I answer again, that man does somewhat,
but not of himself, and God helps man doing somewhat, but so, as that that
wherein he helps him is of God also, so that Gods help^ng of us does always
presuppose a work of his own in us, which he alone and wholly does without us.
De great. and li. arbit. cap. 17 Vt velimus sine nobis operaturicum autem
voluntus, nobiscum cooperatur.
Without us (says Austine) he works in us to will, and works with us, or
helps us when we do will: Jbid. cap. 20. Ex mala mutatur in bonam, and cum
bona fuerit adiu^atur.
the will is changed from evil to good, and helped when it is good. Enchir
cap. 32. Hominis voluntatem bonam and praeparat ad iuuandam. and adiuuit
praeparata^.
He prepares the good will that is to be helped, and helps it when it is
prepared. C^ntra duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 8. Ad iustitiam nisi diunitus
liberatum adiutumque non valet.
Free will to righteousness is first made free, and then helped. Herein then
stands M. Bishops error, that he joins man to God in the first framing of
the will to come to God so that for the performance hereof, as God is man's
helper, so man is also Gods helper, not by that that God has now wrought in
man, but by that that man has naturally of his own: and therefore God helps
man for his salvation, if man by his Free will help God for the saving of
himself: but if man withdraw his help, the help of God avails nothing. But
the true help of God which S. Austine teaches, is that whereby God himself
works in us, that whereby we are helpefull unto him, neither does he help
any thing in us, but what he himself has wrought and prepared in us to be
helped. And therefore he makes a distinction of two kinds of help. De
corrept, and great cap 12.
Aliud est adiutorium, sine quo aliquid non fit, and aliud est adiutorium, quo
aliquid fit. There is a kind of help, without which a thing is not done, and
there is another kind of help by which a thing is done. There is a help
without which a thing is not done, but though that help be had, it follows
not thereupon that the thing is done, because some other help is wanting,
without which that help avails not. Without food we cannot live, and yet
though food be had, he lives not thereby that will die, or makes away
himself. Such was the help of God to Adam in Paradise, Jbid. cap. 11.
Adiutorium per quod posset (si vellet) and sine quo non posset per seueranter
bonu^ tenere quod vellet.
without which he could not continue though he would, by which he might
continue if he would; but was left to his own will, either to continue by this
help, or by forgoing it to fall away. Such the Papists say the help of God is
to us, by which we come to Christ, and continue if we will: but both for coming
and for continuing it is left to our Free will, either to use it, or refuse it:
so that it is in us whether it shall be a help or not. But Ibid. Est in nobis
per hanc gratiam non solum posse quod volumus, verumetia^ velle quod possumus.
the help of the grace of Christ is such, as whereby the thing is certainly
effected, for which it is a help; not such as whereby we come to Christ, or
continue with him if we will, but which makes us to will: so that it is first
a mere gift of that, of which afterward it becomes a help. For example
hereof Saint Austine says, that Cap. 12. Beatitudo cum daia fuerit continuo
fit beatus: adiutorium est enim no^ solum sine quo non fit, verumetiam quo fit
propter quod datur.
blessedness is a help by which when it is given, a man is forthwith
blessed. Thereby giving to understand, that this help is the giving of the
thing wherein God is said to help us. So that Gods help for our coming to
Christ, is the gift of God whereby we do come: his help for our believing, is
his very gift whereby we do believe: his Ibid. Sanctis tale adiutotium
perseuerantiae datur, vt eis perseuerantia ipsa donetur, non solum vt sine isto
dono perseuerantes esse non possint, verumetiam vt per hoc donum nonnisi
persiuerantes sint.
help for our perseuering and continuing with Christ, is his gift, whereby we
do persevere, and no other but persevere and continue to the end. And this
help does Saint Austine mean in the place cited by M. Bishop. The will cannot
but be helped, if a man come to Christ, meaning, that man's will comes not to
Christ, except God give unto the will to will and to come, that is, to believe
in him. And therefore he adds, Et sic adiutum vt non solum quid facientum sit
sciat, sed quod scierit et^am faciat.
And so helped, as that he not only know what is to be done, but do also that
which he knows: which in the Chapter before he has thus expressed, that Cont
Pelag. and Cel^st lib. 1. cap. 13 Si docet eos Deus qui secundum propositum
vocati sunt simul donans and quod agant scire, and quod sciunt agere.
to them which are called of purpose, God at once gives both to know what they
should do, and to do what they know. Gods helping therefore is no other but his
giving, and by this second place M. Bishop gains as little as he gained by
the first.

As little advantage has he by the third place, nay, we see therein a notable
piece of fraud and falsehood in concealing the former part of the words, which
should clear the latter. Ad Simplic. q. 2. Aliter Dius praestat vt velimus,
aliter praestat quod voluerimus: vt velim^s and suum voluit esse and nostrum:
suum vocando, nostru^ seque^do. Quod autem voluerimus solus prae^^at, id est
posse been agere and semper beat vinere.
In one sort, says Austin, God yields to us to will; in another sort he
performs the thing that we will. That we will, he would have it to be his and
ours: his in calling; ours in following. But the thing that we will he alone
performs, that is, to be able to do well, and for ever to live in bliss.
Where plainly he affirms, that it is God that does or performs both the one
and the other; he makes us to will, and he makes good to us the thing that
our will desires. How then will he have it to be ours that we will or are
willing, but by his working it in us to be ours? It is the act of our will when
we do will, and so ours, but yet it is Gods, because he works in us to will.
It is his in calling, ours in following; but it is his also that we follow,
because he makes us to follow. For how do we follow when he calls, but
Prosper. de v^cat gent lib. 2. cap. 9. sequaces fide and voluntate
by willing and believing? And no man can believe, August cont. duas epist.
Pelag. lib 1. cap. 19.
except it be given to him to believe, and Ad simplic. q. 2. Vt sit nutus
voluntatis ille tribuit, ille largitur.
that there is a yielding or assenting of the will, it is he that gives it,
says Austin in that very treatise, it is he that grants it; so that although
we will, and we run, and this willing and running be ours, yet as the Apostle
says; Romans 9.16.
it is neither of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy. Concerning which words, it is worth the while to observe what
Saint Austin writes in the same discourse, whence M. Bishop takes this
objection, and within a very few lines after, and thought worthy to remember
in diverse places of his works. M. Bishop says as all his fellows, that all
is not of God, but somewhat belongs to man's Free will for his conversion unto
God, which yet suffices not unless it be helped by the grace of God. But S.
Austin says, Ad Simplic. q. 2 si propterea solum dictum est, Non volentis,
quia voluntas hominis so^a non suffi it vt just recteque viuamus nisi
adiuuentur misericordia Dei. potest and hoc modo dici. Igitur non miserentis
est Dei sed volentis est hominis, quia misericordia Dei sola non sufficit nisi
consensus nostrae voluntatis addatur At illud manifestum est frustra nos vell
nisi Deus misereatur. Illud. autem nesc^o quomodo dicatur frustra Deum misereri
nisi nos velimus.
If therefore only it be said, It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy, because the will of man alone is not
sufficient, except it be helped by the mercy of God, it may be also thus said,
that it is not of God that shows mercy, but of man that wills, because the
mercy of God alone suffices not, unless there be adjoined the consent of the
will of man. More effectually does he express it in another place. Enchirid
cap. 32. Si propterea dictum est. Non volentis. etc. quia ex vtroque fit, id
est, ex voluntate hominis and misericordia Dei, vt si^ dictu^ accipiamus, Non
volentis, etc tanquam diceretur non sufficit sola voluntas hominis si non s^t
etia^ misericordia Dei, non sufficit ergo sola misericordia Dei si non sit
etiam voluntas hominis: ac per hoc si recte dictum est, Non volentis hominis
sed miserentis est Dei quia id voluntas hominis solae non implet, cur non and e
contrario recte dicitur, Non miserentis est Dei sed volentis est hominis, quia
id miserecordia Dei sola non implet? Porro si nullus Christianus dicere
audebit, Non miserentis est Dei sed volentis est hominis ne Apostolo
apertissime contradicat, restat vt propterea recte dictum intelligatur, Non
volentis, etc. Vt totum Deo detur qui hominis voluntatem bonam and praeparat
adiuuandam and adiuuat praeparatam.
If therefore it be said, It is not of him that wills, or of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy, because it is done by both, that is, by
the will of man, and by the mercy of God, as if it were said, the will of man
alone suffices not, if there be not also the mercy of God, then also the mercy
of God suffices not, if there be not also the will of man: and by this means,
if it be rightly said, It is not of him that wills, but of God that shows
mercy, because the will of man alone avails not, why is it not on the
contrary rightly said, It is not of God that shows mercy, but of man that
wills, because the mercy of God alone avails not? Now if no Christian man
will dare to say so, it remains that we understand it therefore said, It is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy, Vt totum Deo detur, that all wholy may be attributed to God, who
prepares or makes the good will of man. What could be more notably spoken to
overthrow all Popish assertion of man's Free will, which seeing S. Austin gave
M. Bishop occasion to note in the very place whence he took his objection, we
must needs think him a man of a seared conscience, that would thus wilfully
bend himself against an apparent truth. In a word, I answer his objection out
of Austin by the words of Hierome, having reference to the same sentence of the
Apostle: Hieron epist. ad Demetriad. Velle and nolle nostrum est, ipsumque quod
nostrum est sine Dei miseratione nostrum non est.
To will, and to nill (according to godliness) is ours; but even that that is
ours, is not ours without the mercy of God.

His fourth place of Austin, is that August. in Joan. tract. 72. Operante in se
Christo cooperatur sa^utem aeternam ac iustificationem suam.
Christ vvorking in man, man himself does cooperate, that is, works
together with him his own justification and life everlasting. An idle
objection, because by that very place, if it were discussed, it should appear
which the same S. Austin for a full answer expressly says elsewhere, Jn Psalm.
77. Dei gratia non solum operatur remissionem peccatorum, sed etiam cooperante^
sibi facit spiritum hominis in opere bonoru^ factoru^,
that God makes the spirit of a man to cooperate, or work together with him
in doing of good works, so that this cooperating, or vvorking together with
God, attributes nothing to the will of man, but what is the proper effect of
the grace of God.

In the fifth testimony he says, that Austin speaks yet more formally for
them, but let him conceive of the form as he will, we are sure he is far
from the matter of S. Austins speech. Epist 47. Catholica ^ides ^^que liberum
arb triu^ negat sieve in ^itam malam, sieve in bonam, neque tantum eitribuit vt
sine gratia Dei valeat aliquid sieve vt ex malo co^uertatur in bonum, sieve vt in
bono perseueranter proficiat, sieve vt ad bonu^ sempiternum peruentat.
The sound Catholic faith, says he, neither denies Free will, whether to
evil life or to good, neither attributes so much to it, as that it avails
any thing without grace, either to be converted from evil to good, or by
perseverance to go forward in that that is good, or to attain to the
everlasting good. Now we whom M. Bishop terms new gospellers, but yet out of
the old Gospel do affirm, according to the true meaning of S. Austin, that
there must be a Free will either in evil or good life. For a man cannot be
either good or evil against his will, and if he be willingly that that he is,
it is by Free will, because the will is always Free, and cannot but be Free
in that that it wills. But the will of man is of it self Free in that that
is evil; to that that is good, Retract. lib. 1. cap 15. Intantu^ l^bera est 1
quatum liberata est.
it is so far only Free, as it is made Free; Cont. duas ep. Pelag. lib 1.
ca. 3. Et De corrept. and great. cap 1. Liberum in bono non erit quod liberator
non liberauerit. In bono liber esse nullus potest nisi fuerit liberatus.
neither can any man in this respect be free, whom the purchaser of freedom
has not made free. We say therefore, that the Free will of man avails
nothing without grace, that is in S. Austins construction, avails nothing
but by that that grace works in it, either for converting unto God, or
perseuering in that whereunto it is converted. And therefore as S. Austin in
the epistle cited speaks, Epist. 47. Boni ipsam bonam voluntate^ per Dei
gratiam consecuti sunt Et post; Gratia intelligitur voluntates hominum ipsus ex
mala bonas facere, ipsas etiam quas fecerit custodire: and ante, Omnia quae ad
mores nostros pertinent quibus recte viuimus a patre nostro qui in coe^i^ est
do^uit esse poscenda, ne de libero praesumentes arbitrio a diuina gratia
decidamus.
It is by grace that good men have obtained a good will, and grace must be
understood to make the wills of men of evil good, and to preserve the same when
it has so made them; and of our Father which is in heaven we are to beg
all things whereby we live well, least presuming of Free will, we fall away
from the grace of God. If all things, then are we to beg of him to open, to
yield, to assent, to receive his grace, and therefore these things cannot be
attributed to the power of our own Free will. Now M. Bishop merely abuses
Austin, as if he had meant, that Free will has a power and ability of it own
to righteousness, but that this power is not sufficient, is not strong enough
without grace adjoined to it, whereas S. Austins meaning is to challenge wholly
to grace, whatsoever the will of man does, so that it does nothing but what
grace works in it to do. De verb Apos. ser. 11 Nihil ex eo quod aliqu^d
sumus. si tame^ in eius side aliquid sumus quantum cunque sumus ^ih^l nobis
arrogemus, ne and quod accepimus perdamus; sed in eo quod accepimus, illi
gloriam demus.
Of that as touching which we are somewhat in the faith of Christ, how much
soever it be, we may take nothing to our selves, but we must give the glory of
all unto God. The new gospellers therefore according to the doctrine of the
ancient Gospel, detest the Manichees for denying Free will in sin and
evil; and detest also Pelagians and Papists, for attributing to Free will an
ability and power of it own, whereby to apply it self to righteousness,
which whereas M. Bishop says the Pelagians affirmed without grace, I have
before showed, that he says untruly, and that the Papists do now teach in that
behalf the very same that the Pelagians did. To the last place the answer is
ready by that that has been said. Free will and grace, are not the one
excluded by the other, neither is the one denied in the affirming of the other,
if we make the one the cause of the other, as Austin does, and teach it to be
the work of grace to make the will Free. But grace is denied in the preaching
of Free will, if as touching salvation it be affirmed to have any freedom
which it has not of grace, or any thing at all be attributed unto it which is
not the effect of grace. For De corrept. and great. ca. 8. Voluntas humana non
liberate co^sequitur gratiam sed gratia potius libertatem.
man does not by freedom of will attain to grace, but by grace obtains
freedom of will; and though it be in the will, and by the will, that we
receive grace, yet Prosper de vocat. gent lib. 1. cap. 5. Omnibus hominibus
percipiendae gratiae causa voluntas Dei est.
in all men the will of God himself is the cause of the receiving of the grace
of God.

16. W. BISHOP.
Now in fevv words I will pass over the objections which he frames in our
names. But misapplyeth them.

First objection. That man can do good by nature, as give alms, do justice,
speak the truth, etc. and therefore will them without the help of grace.
This argument we use to prove liberty of will in civil and moral matters,
even in the corrupted state of man, and it does demonstrate it: and M. Perkins
in his third conclusion does grant it. And his answer here is far from the
purpose, for albeit (says he) touching the substance of the work it be good,
yet it fails both in the beginning, because it proceeds not from a pure
heart, and a faith unfeigned: and also in the end, which is not the glory of
God.

Answer. It fails neither in the one nor other: for that alms may issue out
of a true natural compassion, which is a sufficient good fountain to make a
work morally good: faith and grace do purge the heart, and are necessary
only for good and meritorious works: Again, being done to relieve the poor
man's necessity, God his Creator and Master, is thereby glorified. And so
albeit the man thought not of God in particular: yet God being the final end
of all good, any good action of it self, is directed toward him, when the man
puts no other contrary end thereunto.

R. ABBOT.
It was a caution given by the Pelagians, Prosper de lib. arbit. Proclamat
cauendum esse ne ita ad Deum omnia sanctoru^ merita referamus, vt nihil n si
quod malum est humanae ascribaemu^ naturae.
that we may not so attribute to God all the merits or good works of holy
men, as that we ascribe to the nature of man nothing but that that is evil.
This caution the Papists, not willing in any thing to swerve from the Pelagian
heresy, do very religiously observe. For the proving of Free will they object
unto us that man can do good by nature, as give alms, do justice, etc. and
therefore can will these things without the help of grace. M. Bishop says
they use this argument to prove liberty of will in civil and moral matters.
But therefore very lewdly do they Coster. Enchirid. cap. 5.
use it against us, and exclaim that we by denial of Free will, make laws
and exhortations and instructions of no effect, when as we deny not liberty
and freedom of will in moral and civil actions. Yet of such works we say,
that although in moral and civil life they stand for good, yet spiritually
and with God they are not good works but evil, because howsoever there is the
outward matter and substance, yet there wants the inward form and life
whereby they should have the condition of good works. Hereof M. Perkins says,
that the good thing done by a natural man, is a sin in respect of the doer,
because it fails both for his right beginning, which is a pure heart, a good
conscience, and a faith unfeigned, as also for his end, which is the glory of
God. But says M. Bishop, it fails neither in the one nor in the other, for
that alms may issue out of a true natural compassion, which is a sufficient
good fountain to make a work morally good. Where I wonder whether he did well
advise of that he says. For if natural compassion be a sufficient good
fountain to make a work morally good, then because bruit beasts have true
natural compassion, and true natural affections, we must needs attribute to
them virtuous and moral actions. But S. Austin was not of M. Bishops mind when
he said, Aug in Psalm. 31. Creed in cum qui iustificat impium, vt possint opera
tua esse opera bona: nam nec bona illa appellauerim, qua^que non deradice bona
procedunt.
Believe in him that justifies the ungodly, that thy works may be good
works. For I will not call them good works, so long as they proceed not from
a good root. Faith then by S. Austins judgment, is the good root whence good
works must grow, and if they grow not from this root, they cannot be called
good. And this he learned of the Apostle, teaching us that Heb 11.6
without faith it is impossible to please God, and that Romans 14.23.
whatsoever is not of faith it is sin. And therefore of natural compassion,
he says, that Aug contra Julian li 4 ca 3. Etsi misericordia ipsa per seipsam
naturali compassione opus est bonam, etiam isto bono male v^^tur qui
infideliter v^^^m, and hoc bonum male facit qui infideliter facit. Qui aute^
in^s^ pacit aliquid prefecto pec cat. Ex quo colligitur etiam ipsa bona opera
quae^ faciunt infi^e^es, non ipserum esse, sedillius qui been v^^tur malis
ipsorum autem esse peccata, quibus and bona male faciunt, quia ea non fideli
sed ^^fideli, hoc, est, stul^a and noxta faciunt voluntate
although in it self it be a good work, yet he uses this good work amiss
that uses it vnbeleeuingly, and does it amiss that does it vnbeleeuingly. Now
he that does any thing amiss, says he, sins therein, and therefore the
good works which unbelievers do are Gods, who uses to good purpose them that
are evil: but to them that do them they are sins, in that they do good
things amiss, because they do them with an unbelieving, that is, with a
foolish and corrupt will. Wherein he accords with the Apostle saying, that
Tit. 1.15.
to unbelievers all things are unclean, because even their mind and conscience
is defiled. And thereto Prosper alluding says, that Prosp. de lib. arbit.
Patet in impiorum animis nullam habitare virtutem, sed omnia opera eorum
immunda esse atque polluta, etc. dum ea ipsa quae non haberent, nisi dante Deo
subduntur ei qui primus recessit a Deo. Et post. Multa laudabilia reperiuntur
etiam in ingenijs ^^^orum quae ex na^^a ^uidem prodeunt, sed quoniam ab eo qu^
^aturam condidit, recesserunt virtutes esse non possu^t.
in the minds of the ungodly albeit there be found many commendable things, yet
there dwells no virtue, but all their works are polluted and unclean,
whilst therein they are subject to him who did first fall by apostasy from
God. Therefore M. Bishops distinction of good works and meritorious work, is
an idle and vain presumption, there being no works meritorious at all, nor
any works good, but only such as are done in the faith of Christ. The other
circumstance required by M. Perkins in good works, is the end whereto they are
referred. For Austin rightly says, Aug. cont. Julian lib 4 cap. 3. Noueris non
officijs sed finib^s a vitijs d^s^e^nendas esse virtutes, etc. Cum itaque facit
homo aliquid vbi peccare non videtur, si non propter hoc facit, propter quod
facere debet, peccare conuincitur.
that works are not esteemed by the actions, but by the ends, so that when a
man does a thing wherein he seems not to sin, if he do it not for that end
for which he should do it, that which he does becomes thereby sin. Now the
true and proper end of all good works, and which makes them good, is the
glory of God, of which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God,
and of which Prosper tells us, that Prosp^r. de vocat. gent. lib. 1. cap. 2.
etiamsi in bonis moribus. agat, male adhuc viuit, si non in gloriam Dei viuit,
albeit a man live in good behavior, yet he lives still an evil life, if he
live not to the glory of God. But hereto belongs the knowledge of God, which
is Arnob. cont. gent. lib. 2. Cognitio Dei ferme^tum quoddam est vitae
as it were the leaven that seasoneth the whole life of man. And this knowledge
of God, must be by the word of God, so that Clem. Alexand. in Protrepi. Qui
absque verbo veritatis operantur aliquid vel loquuntur, sunt similes ijs qui
conantur in gredi absque pedibus.
they who without the word of truth do work or speak any thing, are as they
that strive to go without feet. And it must breed the love of God, because
Jdem Stromat. lib. 3. Nec castitas est bonu^ and ex virtute, nisi fiat propter
delectionem in Deum
chastity, and so the like, are not virtues except they be done or observed
for the love of God. And in the love of God consists the worship of God,
Prosper. de vocat. gent. lib. 1. cap 3. Sine cultis very Dei etiam quod virtui
videtur esse peccatum est, nec placere vllus Deo sine Deo potest.
without which worship of the true God, even that that seems to be virtue is
sin, and therefore it offended Austin, and he retracted it as a thing
mis-spoken, that he had said August. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 3 Displi^et mihi
quod philosophos non vera pietate praeditos dixi virtutis luce ful^^se.
that the Philosophers shined with the light of virtue, who were not endued
with true piety or religion toward God. A part of which piety it is in all
our good works, to have a respect unto him, to do them for his sake, thereby
intending to serve, and obey, and to please him, so that Origin. in Numer. hom.
25. Inanis est omnis actus, and omnis sermo in quo non est intrinsecus aliquid
pro Deo and pro mandato Dei.
vain is every action, and every speech that has not somewhat inwardly for
God, and for the commandment of God, and August. De ciuit Dei. lib. 19. cap.
21. Virtutes cum ad se ipsas referuntur, nec propter aliud expetuntur, etiam
tunc inflatae and superbae sunt.
when virtues are referred to themselves, and desired only for themselves, and
not for some other respect (to God) they are swelling and proud, and are not to
be accounted for virtues but vices. And this respect to God must acknowledge
him to be the giver of all our virtue and goodness, and that we do but serve
him with his own, so that Idem. cont. Julian. Pelag. lib. 4 cap. 3. Non quia
per seipsum factum quod est operire nudum peccatum est, sed de tali opere non
in Domino gloriari solus impius negat esse peccatum. Et ante: Cum non ad suum
authorem referu^tur donae Dei hoc ipso mali his vtentes afficiuntur iniusts
although to cloth a naked man, or any other such like work, by it self be
not a sin, yet of such a work not to glory in the Lord, and not to refer
it to him as the author of it, none but a wicked man will deny it to be a
sin. Now these conditions and circumstances being required to make a work
good, Arnob. in Psalm. 26. Fieri poterit vt obsequendi voto offendam si qualiter
debeant ante non discam.
it may be that a man minding to do a service may commit an offense, if he do
not first learn in what sort he should do it. Which a man cannot learn by
Free will, and by the law of nature, and therefore offends even in those
things wherein he seems outwardly to do well. But M. Bishop tells us, that
in such works God is glorified, because albeit the man thought not of God in
particular, yet God being the final end of all good, any good action of it
self is directed toward him, when the man puts no other contrary end
thereunto. Where we may justly wonder, that so absurd a fancy should prevail
with him, that God should be glorified there where he is neither thought of nor
known, and that actions should be directed to God, where there is nothing to
direct them; that men's actions are the directors of themselves, and that though
a man have no meaning to glorify God, yet he does glorify him so long, as he
propounds not to himself a contrary end. These are M. Bishops dreams, and
upon the credit hereof we must believe that the Gentiles not knowing none but
idol gods, yet did glorify God in those works wherein they did not put a
contrary end, nay, the bruit creatures do direct their works of natural
compassion to the glory of God, for their natural compassion is a sufficient
good fountain to make their works good, and they propound no end contrary to
the glory of God. But S. Austin tells us, that August. in Psalm 31. Bonum
opus intentio facit: imentionem fides dirigit.
it is the intent that makes the work good, and that it is faith that
directs the intent, and therefore where there is neither intent to glorify
God, nor faith to direct the intent thereto, there cannot be any glorifying of
God, neither can the work that is done be called a good work. M. Bishop
therefore does amiss to join with the Pelagians, Cont. Julian. Pelag. lib. 4.
cap. 3. Introducens (...) hominum genus quod Deo placere pessit sine fide
Christi lege naturae. Hoc est vnde vo^ maxim Christiana detestatur ecclesia.
to bring in a kind of men, which without the faith of Christ, by the law of
nature can please God. This is it, says S. Austin to them, for which the
Church of Christ most highly does detest you. I will end this point with the
resolution of Origin: Origin. in Job. lib 1. Omne opus bonum quod visi fuerint
homin^e facere, nisi in Dei cultura, nisi in Dei agnitione atque confessione
fecerint, sine causa faciunt and superuacue. Aude^ter dicam, omnia gratis
faciunt, si non in fide fecerint: sine causa agunt nisi in agnitione vnius Dei
patris, and in confessione filij eius Domini nostri Jesu Christi, and
illuminatione Sp. Sancti hoc fecerint. Omnem iustitiam qui foris a vera Dei
cultura atque vera fide fecerit, gratis facit, in perditione facit, non prodest
ei, non adiuuat eum in die trae, etc. Ad quod testis est Apostolus: Omne quod
ex fide, etc. Quare? Quia bona fecisse videntur non quaesita fide, non quaesita
agnitione eius propter quem hoc fecerint A quo enim accipiet mercedem? Ab eo
quem non requisiuit, quem non agnouit, cui non eredidit, quem non est
confessus, non accipiet ab eo remunerationem nisi iudicium and iram and
condemnationem, etc. Sicut enim nihil est delectabile hominibus sine luce, sic
nihil est delectabile neque acceptum Deo absque fidei lumine.
Every good work, says he, which men seem to do, except they do it in the
worship of God, in the acknowledgement and confession of God, it is but
bootlesse and vain. I will boldly say that they do all in vain, if they do it
not in faith: they do all to no purpose, except they do it in the
acknowledgement of one God the Father, and in the confession of his only
begotten son Jesus Christ, and by the enlightening of the holy Gbost. He that
does a work of righteousness being a stranger from the true worship of God,
and from true faith, he does it to no good, he does it in destruction, it
profits him not, it helps him not in the day of wrath. Whereof the Apostle
is witness, saying, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Why so? because he
has not the faith and knowledge of him for whose sake he should do it. For of
whom shall he receive reward? Of him whom he has not sought after, whom he
knows not, whom he believes not, nor confesses? He shall receive no reward
of him, but judgment, and wrath, and condemnation. For as nothing is
delightsome to us without light, so is nothing delightsome or pleasing to God
without the light of faith. Only this I will add, that God to such actions
amongst the Gentiles gave temporal rewards for temporal respects, not to show
any approbation thereof in respect of himself, to whom the doers thereof had
no respect, but only to entertain the liking thereof, for the common good of
mankind, and for the maintenance of civil order and society, which God would
use to such ends, and in such sort as pleased him for the benefit of his
Church. And therefore even them who most excelled in the renown and
commendation of these virtues, God sometimes gave over temporally also to such
ends as to the world seemed unworthy to their former life, to show that he
stood not in any sort bound to them for the virtues, if we so call them,
wherein they had not respected him, in that he would neither be the defender of
them in this world, nor the rewarder of them in the world to come.

17. W. BISHOP.
2 Objection. God has commanded all to believe and repent, therefore they have
natural Free will, by virtue whereof being helped by the spirit of God, they
can believe. The force of the argument consists in this, that God being a
good Lord, will not command any man to do that, which he is no way able to do.

Answer. M. Perkins answers in effect (for his words be obscure) that God
commands that, which we be not able to perform, but that which we should
do: Then I hope he will admit that he will enable us by his grace to do it,
or else how should we do it? God surely does not bind us by commandment to
any imposble thing, he is no tyrant, but tells us, that his yoke is sweet,
and his burden easy. M^th. 1^. John 5.
And Saint John witnesses, that his commandments are not heavy. He was
far off from thinking that God would tie any man by law, to do that which
he was altogether unable to perform. This in the end M. Perkins himself
approves.

R. ABBOT.
Where they object that God commands all to believe and repent, and
therefore that all have Free will to do that which he commands, M. Perkins
answers, that the argument is not good, because God by such commandments
does not show what men are able to do, but what they should do, though of
themselves they cannot do it. Which answer why M. Bishop calls obscure, I
know not, but that his head happily fell out to be somewhat cloudie when he came
to consider of it. Yet he replieth; then I hope that he will admit, that he
will enable us by his grace to do it, or else how should we do it? We will
admit, that God by his grace enableth whom he thinks good, to do his
commandments for the state of his life so far as he thinks good, and to
them only the yoke of Christ is sweet, and his burden easy, and his
commandments not grievous, because of him Aug. de perfect. iustitia. Cui
grauia sunt intelligat se nondum accepisse donum quo grauia non sint.
they receive a gift whereby they become not grievous unto them. And to these
the use of the law and commandments does properly belong, which God did not
deliver as exspecting that any man could fulfill the same, Ambr in Gaelat. cap.
3 Lex ad hoc data est, vt peccatores reos se scirent apud Deum. Manifestatu
enim peccatis suis conclusi sunt vt se excusare no^ posse^t, sed quaererent
misericordiam. etc.
but thereby to bring men to the knowledge of sin, and of condemnation
thereby due unto them, that by this means he might move them whom he would
call, to apprehend that means of salvation which he had promised in Jesus
Christ; who by his spirit given unto them Romans 7.22.
delight in the law of God as touching the inner man, but by the rebellion of
the law of sin, are holden back in this life from attaining to the perfect
righteousness of the law. To the rest the law is a conviction of sin, no
help of righteousness; whilst God August. de bono persevere. cap. 14.
by unsearchable, but just judgment, denies to them that grace, which to
others he vouchsafes, because Romans 9.18.
he shows mercy to whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. Albeit that
man is unable to fulfill the law, it is not any default of God, but of man
himself, and therefore there was no cause why August. de peccat. merit. and
remiss. lib. 2. cap. 16. Neque peccatum erit siquid erit si non diuinitus
iubeatur vt non sit. Et iteru^, Quomodo non vetatur pe^ iustitiam si peccatum
est?
the just God should diminish any thing of the rule of righteousness, though
unrighteous man had by sin disabled himself of the performance thereof; the
righteousness of God I say required, that God should justify himself from
seeming to approve any sin by the defect of the commandment, howsoever man
could not justify himself from sin by the keeping of it. But of the end of
Gods giving the law and the possibility of keeping it, there will be occasion
afterward to entreat more largely, and therefore with this brief answer I
refer that point to his due place.

18. W. BISHOP.
3. Object. If man have no Free will to sin, or not to sin, then no man is
to be punished for his sins, because he sins by a necessity, not to be
avoided.

He answers, that the reason is not good; for, though man cannot but sin,
yet is the fault in himself, and therefore is to be punished. Against which, I
say that this answer supposes that which is false, to wit, that a man in
sin, 3. Pet. 3.
cannot choose but sin: For by the help of God, who desires all sinners
conversion, and thereunto affoordeth grace sufficient; a sinner in a moment,
may call for grace and repent him: and so choose whether he will sin or no,
and consequently has Free will to sin, or not to sin: And that example of
a bankrupt is not to purpose; for he cannot when he will, satisfy his
creditors, who content not themselves with his repentance, without repay of
their money, as God does.

Now concerning the force of this argument, hear Saint Augustines opinion. De
duab. animab. cont. Manich. in these words. Neither are we here to search
obscure books to learn, that no man is worthy of dispraise or punishment,
which does not that, which he cannot do: for (says he) do not shepherds upon
the dounes, sing these things? Do not poets upon the stages act them? Do not
the unlearned in their assemblies, and the learned in their libraries
acknowledge them? Do not masters in their schools, and Prelates in their
pulpits, and finally all mankind throughout the whole world, confess and teach
this, to wit, that no man is to be punished, because he did that, which he
could not choose but do. Should he not then (according to S. Augustines censure)
be hissed out of all honest company of men, that denies this so manifest a
truth, confessed by all Mankind? How gross is this heresy, that so hoodeth a
man, and hardneth him, that be he learned, yet he blusheth not to deny roundly,
that which is so evident in reason, that even natural sense does teach it unto
shepherds. God of his infinite mercy, deliver us from this strange light of
the new Gospel.

R. ABBOT.
As touching civil and outward actions, we doubt not, as before is said, but
that God has left a liberty and power to the will of man, and therefore
justly are they punished, who run wilfully into enormous actions from which
it is in them to forbear. And this adds much to the just condemnation of
man, that even in those things wherein he has power to do otherwise, yet he
carries himself frowardly and rebelliously against God. And yet of outward
actions in some degree, Hierome rightly observes, Hieron. cont, Pelag. li. 3.
Dicimus posse hominem non peccare si ve lit pro tempore, pro loco, pro
imbecillitate corporea, quamdus intentus est animus, etc. Quod si se paululum
remiserit, etc. discit fragilitate^ suam and multa se non posse cognoscit.
that a man can forbear to sin if he will at a time or in some place, or by
some let of bodily weakness, or so long as the mind is intent and heedie, but
he soon finds, that wholly not to sin it is not possible. To speak then
indefinitely of sin, it is true that man left in the power of his own Free
will cannot choose but sin. For how can he choose but sin, who of himself is
nothing but sin? Yea we know, that the corruption of sin lies as a
punishment upon the whole nature of man, and therefore is said to have befallen
August. de not. and great. ca. 34.
by the just revenge of God, and is called Idem. de perfect. iustit. Rat. 9
Poenalis vitiositas, a poenall vitiousnesse, or subjection to sin. Now if it
be as it were a prison or punishment, it is not in our choice to be rid
thereof, because a man cannot rid himself of a prison or punishment, which he
has drawn upon himself. And therefore does Saint Austin affirm it to be De
not. and great. cap. 67. ex lib. 3. de lib. arbit. cap. 18. Approbare falsa pro
veris vt erret inuitus, and resistente atque torquente dolor carnalis vincula
non posse a libidinosis operibus te^perare, non est natura instituti hominis
sed poen^ damnati.
the punishment of man by condemnation, to approve falsehood for truth, so as to
err against his will, and being vexed with the grief of the bond of the
flesh, yet not to be able to temper himself from libidinous actions. Thus have
we heard him before to avouch Sect. 3.
a necessity of sinning, and this necessity he acknowledges in some part to
continue still in the state of grace, De not. and great. cap. 66.
alleging thereof the words of the Prophet David. Psalm. 24.18.
De necessitatibus meis educ me: deliver me from all my necessities. And
therefore vainly does M. Bishop except, that by the help of God a sinner may
call for grace and repent him, and choose whether he will sin or no. For in
men converted it is true that they cannot choose but sin; in repentant men it
is still true that they cannot choose but sin. For the forbearing of this or
that action does not put a man in case to choose to sin, but though he arise
one way, yet the law of sin holds him still under a necessity to fall
another way, until August de not and great. cap. 66. Opitulante gratia, etc.
and mala necessitas remouebitur, and libertas plena tribuetur.
this evil necessity be taken away, and full liberty granted, which shall
Idem. in Joan. tract. 41 Quando plena atque perfecta libertas trit? Quando
nullae inimicitiae, qua^do nouissimae inimica destructur mors.
then be, when we shall see him face to face. Or if M. Bishop will say
otherwise, let him bring us forth the man that can choose to sin; the man
that can do more then ever Patriarch, or Prophet, or Apostle, or Evangelist
could do. For if they could choose to sin, why did they sin? or if they did
not sin, why did they say, Forgive us our trespasses? If he will needs follow
the Pelagian device, that Hieron. epist. ad Cresiph: Licet alius non fuerit,
tamen potest esse qui esse voluerit.
though no man be indeed without sin, yet a man may be so if he will, I will
answer him with Hieromes words, Ibid. Quae est argumentatio ista, posse esse
quod nunquam fuerit, etc. and dare cui libet quod in Patriarchis and Prophetis
and Apostolis nequ^as approbare.
What a reason is this, that that may be that never was, and that he should
yield that to I know not whom, which in the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and
Apostles he cannot prove? Repentance therefore and conversion so alters the
course of a man's life in the maine, as that even in the way of righteousness
it still leaves in him a necessity of sin. Neither does this conversion
stand indifferent to all, as he dreameth, nor does God afford to all sinners
grace sufficient to bring them to repentance. He notes for his purpose the
place of Peter, that God would not have any to perish, etc. but let him take
the whole words, and they will clear themselves, 2. Pet. 3 9.
He is patient TOWARD US, not willing that any (namely of us) should perish,
but that all (of us) should come to repentance. He speaks of Gods elect, of
them whom he has chosen to make up the body of his Church, of whom our Savior
Christ says, John. 6.39.
This is the will of the Father that has sent me, that of all that he has
given me I should loose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. Of
these he will have none to perish, but does patiently bear till he have
accomplished the number that he has decreed for himself. So did God say by
the Prophet, Ezech. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that
he be converted and live; but he said it to the house of Israel; he said it not
to the Philistims; he said it not to the Babylonians, the Ammonits, the
Moabits, etc. It was not for their sakes that he swear, but Heb. 6.17.
willing to show to the heirs of promise the stablenesse of his counsel, he
bound himself by an oath. Therefore to those peoples he gave not the means of
conversion, Psalm. 147.19.
he gave his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel; he dealt
not so with any other nation. How then does M. Bishop say, that God affords
to all sinners grace sufficient for their conversion? Will he say that the
beholding of heaven and earth, and such other natural motives, were sufficient
to bring men to repentance? He may dally with us, that in themselves they were
such as might sufficiently avail to move men; but what is that to the purpose,
so long as to the state and condition of man they were not sufficient? The
light of the Sun is a sufficient light, and yet it is not sufficient to make
a blind man see. What were al those motives and occasions whatsoever they were,
but even as a good lesson to a dead man? And what, will he term those means
of conversion by the name of grace? Away, away with this Pelagian conceit, and
let us acknowledge the truth as S. Austin does; August. de verb. Apost. Ser. 11.
Communis est omnibus natura, non gratia: Nature is common to all, but grace is
not so. It is but Videre acume^ sed vitreum. Qu^si lucet vanitate sed frangitur
veritate.
a glassie trick of wit, as he says, to devise a grace that is common to all:
it makes a fair show, but it is soon cracked.

Now M. Perkins, alleging that because it is by man's own default that he
cannot choose but sin, therefore he is notwithstanding justly punished,
brings for declaration thereof the example of a bankrupt, who is not therefore
freed from his debts because he is not able to pay them, but the bills against
him stand in force, because the debt comes through his own default. But M.
Bishop says, that this example is not to the purpose, because the bankrupt
cannot, when he will, satisfy his creditors, who content not themselves with
his repentance, without repay of their money, as God does. How many miles to
London? a poke-full of plummes. What is this to the purpose, that God is
content to remit his debtors without satisfaction? for so creditors also deal
sometimes with bankrupts when they have naught to pay: but is this any thing
against that which M. Perkins says, that by the example of a bankrupt, it
appears that a man may justly be punished for that which now he cannot help,
because by his own default he is run into it? The creditor may remit all if
he will, but otherwise the bills of debt are justly liable against him who by
default and negligence is come to that pass that he has nothing to pay. And
yet in his exception there are two absurdities implied. For it is absurd that
he says that God does remit and pardon his debtors without satisfaction. There
is no man reconciled to God, but by tendering a full and perfect satisfaction,
which because he has not to do of his own, therefore by faith he pleads the
payment of his surety Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 2.24.
who bare our sins in his body upon the tree; that in Ephesians. 1.7.
him we might have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our
sins. Now 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
all men have not faith, and therefore all men cannot plead this satisfaction
for themselves, and yet without this faith there is no repentance that can
avail to bring us unto God. And seeing both Ephe. 2.8.
faith and Act. 5.31. and 11 18.
repentance are the gifts of God, which Aug. de praedest. sanct. cap. 6 and de
bono persevere. ca. 14. Alijs praeparatur, alijs non praeparatur voluntas a
Domino. Illis qui veritatis exhortationem obedienter audiunt, ipsum donum Dei
datum est, hoc est, obedienter audire: illis autem qui non sic audiunt non est
datum.
he gives to some, and to other some does not give, it is another point of
absurdity to subject the gift of God to the arbitrarie will and power of man,
as if man have in him to believe and repent whenever himself will. But
against this M. Bishop for conclusion brings a place of Austin against the
Manichees, that August. de duabus animab. cont. Manich. ca. 11. Nemo
vitu^^ratione suppliciove dignus est qui id non faciat quod facere non potest.
Nonne ista cantant and in montibus pastores and in theatris poetae, etc.
shepherds and poets, and learned, and unlearned, and schoolemaisters, and
prelates, and all mankind confess, that no man is worthy of dispraise or
punishment, which does not that which he cannot do. Nay, to help the man
somewhat, I will add more out of the next chapter to that which he cites;
Ibid. cap. 12. Peccati reum teneri quenquam quia non fecit quod facere non
potuit summae iniquitatis est and infantae.
That a man should be holden guilty for not doing that which he could not do,
it is a point of iniquity and madness to affirm. Now what a strange matter
is this, that shepherds and poets, and all sorts of men, should see reason to
affirm this, and yet M. Bishop perforce should be driven to deny it? For let
us ask him in his own profession and doctrine what he thinks of children
dying unbaptized? He will give us a peremptory answer, that questionless they
are damned. But what have poor infants done why they should be damned, or how
could they avoid that for which they are damned? Tell us M. Bishop, how could
they choose to be other then they be, and if they cannot choose but be that they
are, how can it stand with your rule, that they should be condemned for being
that which they cannot choose but be? Perforce he must take a fall in his own
trippe, neither can he give an answer as touching this point, which does not
yield us a full answer against himself. But S. Austin himself cleereth this
point for us, who, using the words cited by M. Bishop to justify a definition
of sin which he had set down against the Manichees, that Ibid. cap 11.
Peccatum est voluntas retine^ di vel conseque^di quod iustitiae vetat est and
vnde liberum est abstinere.
sin is a desire of retaining or obtaining that which justice forbids, and
whence it is in a man's liberty to abstain, tells his Reader in the perusing
of that place in his Retractations, that he spoke there of that Retract lib 1.
cap. 15. Id definitum est quod ta^tummodo pecca tum est, non quod est etiam
poena peccati. Nam quando tale est vt idem sit and poena peccati quantum est
quod valet voluntas sub dominante cupiditate, nisi forte si piae est vt oret
auxilium, etc.
which is only sin, and is not also the punishment of sin. For in that
sin which is also the punishment of sin, how little is it that the will can
do against concupiscence or lust having dominion over it, and therefore by
reason hereof a man cannot do that that he should do, neither can he but do
that that he should not do, which yet cease not to be a sin and subject to
punishment, because he has purchased this condition to himself, by the merit
of a former sin. For Adam had it in his power not to sin, and yet did sin
by doing that which he ought not to do, and was in his power and liberty not
to do, and for this cause was given over as a prisoner to sin, that
thenceforth he could not do what he ought to do, nor could choose but do what he
should not do. Therefore the same Austin asking, if that rule that he has set
down be true, how Ibid. Cur paruuli tenentur rei? Respondetur, quia ex eius
origin tenentur qui non fecit quod facere potuit, diuinum scilicet seruare
mandatum.
infants become guilty, and are so holden, answers that it is by being borne
of him who did not that that was in his power to do. In a word, man is not
worthy of punishment for not doing that which he cannot do, except he have
disabled himself for the doing of it; but if he have disabled himself, as
indeed he has by the first sin, then is he justly punished, both for not
doing that which he once could, but now cannot do, and for doing that which he
once could, but now cannot choose but do. Which being a case very evident, and
sundry times delivered by S. Austin, in retracting the like places against the
Manichees, may we not wonder at the absurd folly of this man, who for
conclusion braueth in his terms, as if he had carried the matter very clear,
when indeed like an ignorant cauiller, he himself understands not what he
says. We respect not what natural sense does teach to shepherds, but we
cannot but think him an ill shepherd over the flock of Christ, who taking
upon him to be a doctor of Divinity, is so ignorant in a principle of
religion, which by the word of God every shepherd should know. God make him
wise to see his own folly, and then he will submit himself in obedience to
that truth which now in his ignorance seems unto him a strange light of a new
Gospel.

CHAPTER. 2. OF ORIGINAL SIN.
1. W. BISHOP.
M. PERKINS FIRST CONCLUSION.
Page 28.
THey say, natural corruption after Baptism is abolished, and so say we: but
let us see, how far forth it is abolished. In Original sin are three
things. First, the punishment, which is the first and second death: second,
guiltiness, which is the binding up of the creature unto punishment: third,
the fault, or the offending of God: under which I comprehend our guiltiness in
Adams first offense, as also the corruption of the heart, which is a natural
inclination and pronenesse to any thing that is evil, or against the law of
God. For first we say, that after Baptism in the regenerate, the punishment of
Original sin is taken away: Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation (says the Apostle) to them that are in Christ
Jesus.

For the second, that is guiltiness, we further condescend and say, that it is
also taken away in them that are borne anew. For considering there is no
condemnation to them, there is nothing to bind them to punishment. Yet this
caveat must be remembered, namely, that the guiltiness is removed from the
person regenerate, but not from the sin in the person, But of this more
hereafter.

Thirdly, the guilt in Adams first offense is pardoned. And touching the
corruption of the heart, I avouch two things. First, that the very power and
strength, whereby it reigns in man, is taken away in the regenerate.
Secondly, that this corruption is abolished (as also the fault of every
actual sin past.) So far forth as it is the fault and sin of the man in whom
it is. Indeed it remains till death, and it is sin, considered in it self,
so long as it remains; but it is not imputed to the person. And in that
respect, is as though it were not, it being pardoned. Hitherto M. Perkins.

Annotations upon our Consents.
First, we say not, that the punishment of Original sin is in it, or any
part of it, but rather a due correction, and as it were an expulsion of it:
this is but a peccadilio: but there lurketh a serpent in that caveat; that the
guiltiness of Original sin is removed from the person regenerate, but not
from the sin in the person. The like he says afterward of the fault, that it
is a sin still in it self, remaining in the man till death, but it is not
imputed to him, as being pardoned. Here be quillets of very strange Doctrine:
the sin is pardoned, and yet the guiltiness of it is not taken away. Does
not a pardon take away from the fault pardoned, all bond of punishment due unto
it, and consequently all guiltiness belonging to it? Who can deny this,
unless he know not, or care not what he say? If then Original sin be
pardoned, the guiltiness of it is also removed from it self. Again, what
Philosophy, or reason allows us to say, that the offender being pardoned for
his offense, the offense in it self remains guilty? as though the offense
separated from the person, were a substance subject to law, and capable of
punishment: can Original sin in it self die the first and second death, or
be bound up to them? What senseless imaginations be these? Again, how can the
fault of Original sin remain in the man renewed by Gods grace, although not
imputed? Can there be two contraries in one part of the subject at once? Can
there be light and darkness in the understanding, virtue and vice in the will
at the same instant? Can the soul be both truly converted to God, and as truly
auerted from him at one time? Is Christ now agreed to dwell with Belial? and
the holy Ghost content to inhabit a body subject to sin? All which must be
granted contrary to both Scripture and natural sense, if we admit the fault
and deformity of sin to remain in a man renewed, and endued with Gods
grace: unless we would very absurdly imagine that the fault and guilt of sin
were not inherent and placed in their proper subjects, but were drawn thence,
and penned up in some other odd corner.

Remember also gentle Reader, that here M. Perkins affirms the power, whereby
the corruption of the heart reigns in man, is taken away in the regenerate:
which is clean contrary unto the first proposition of his first reason
following, as shall be there proved.

R. ABBOT.
It was not M. Perkins intent here to set down any exact or formal
description of Original sin, but only so to touch it, as might serve to
lead him to the point that was to be disputed of. But out of that which he
says it arises, that original sin is a common guilt of the first sin of
man, inferring as a just punishment, an universal distortion and corruption of
man's nature, and everlasting destruction both of body and soul. Concerning
the matter therefore he propounds three things in Original sin to be
considered, the sin, the guilt, and the punishment. Where M. Bishop being
like a man of glass, afraid of being cracked where he is not touched, would for
more assurance give us a note, and I warrant you it is a wise one. We say not,
says he, that the punishment of Original sin is in it or any part of it,
but rather a due correction, and as it were an expulsion of it. Where he
puts me in mind of a speech that I have heard concerning an outlandish
Mathematicke Reader, whose tongue having out-runne his wits, and making a
discourse of he knew not what, asks his hearers at length, Intelligitisne? Do
ye understand me? they answered him, No. Profecto nihil miror, says he, neque
enim ego intelligo meipsum: Marry I do not marvel, for neither do I understand
my self. Such a lecture does M. Bishop here read, which no man else
understands, nor he himself. If he had understood what Original sin is,
and that concupiscence being a part of Original sin, is also a punishment
thereof, (corruption of nature which is one part, arising from the guilt of the
first sin, which is the other part) he would not so unadvisedly have denied,
that the punishment of Original sin is also a part thereof, especially
finding S. Austin in so infinite places affirming, that concupiscence is in
such sort a sin, as that it is also a punishment of sin; and of what sin,
but that which Adam in person committed by action, and is ours originally by
propagation? But that either this punishment of Original sin which is the
corruption of nature, or the following punishment thereof, which is the first
and second death, should be called expulsion of Original sin, we lack some
Oedipus to resolve us: sure I am that M. Bishop understood not what he said,
nor can give us any answer to make it good. Such learned men have we to do
with, which are so deep in their points, that they know not what they say. Now
he that utters such riddles himself, might easily pardon another man in a
speech though distasting to him, yet in it self very easy to be understood.
What a stir does he make at that that M. Perkins says, that in the
regenerate the guiltiness is removed from the person, but not from the sin
in the person. The meaning is plain, that the sin is pardoned to the man
regenerate, and therefore cannot make him guilty, but yet in it self and in it
own nature, it continues such, as that setting aside the pardon, it were
sufficient still to make him guilty and to condemn him, as shall be
afterward avouched out of Austin, to everlasting death. The pardon acquitteth
the man, but yet it cannot alter the nature of the sin: it sets a bar
against the effect, but take away the bar, and the cause is as strong as it
was before. His idle and wast words, and fighting with a shadow, I let pass:
if he were not a senseless man, that, that M. Perkins says in the plain
meaning thereof, would never seem to him any senseless imagination. But he
goes further; How can the fault of Original sin remain in the man renewed
by Gods grace, although not imputed? Why M. Bishop? what hinders I pray you?
Can there be two contraries, says he, in one part of the subject at once? And
why not? What? has not his Philosophy taught him, that contraries are
incompatible only in their extremes? Did he never read, that contraries when
they strive to expel one another, do it not in a moment, but by degrees; and
though one be stronger then then the other, yet the weaker still has that
latitude which the stronger has not gained? Thus are there in the regenerate
man, Romans 7.23.
the law of sin and the law of the mind, the former rebelling against the
latter; Gal. 5.17.
the flesh and the spirit the one contrary to the other, as the Apostle
speaks, and that in one part of the subject, as shall appear. Can there be
light and darkness in the understanding, says he? Why, did M. Bishop never
read of Zephan. 1.15.
a dark day? or will he reason thereof, if it be day, it cannot be dark; or if
it be dark it cannot be day? And if he can see that light and darkness may
meet together in a day, can he not see that light and darkness may also be
together in the understanding? One where our Savior Christ comme^deth the
light of his Disciples; Matthew. 13.16.
Blessed are your eyes, for they see: another where he condemns their
darkness, Mark. 8 18.
Have ye eyes and see not? By light of understanding Peter says, Matthew. 16.16.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. Blessed art thou Simon, says
Christ, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father
which is in heaven. The same Peter by and by also bewrays darkness of
understanding, giving Christ occasion to say unto him, Ibid. verse. 23,
Get thee behind me Satan; for thou understand not the things that are of
God, but the things that are of men. Orig. in Mat. tract. 3. Contraria sibi
adhu. erant in Petro, veritas and mendaecium. De veritate dicebat, Tu es
Christus, etc. Ex mendacio dixit, Propitius tibi esto etc.
Contraria erant adhuc in Petro: There were contraries as yet in Peter, says
Origin, truth and falsehood: he spoke by truth one way; he spoke by falsehood
another way. In a word the Apostle tells us, that 1. Cor. 13.9.12
we know but in part, we prophecy but in part, we see through a glass darkly,
or as the masters of Rhemes translate it, in a dark sort. How can that be,
but that there is still some darkness in the understanding which yet in part
has received light? He goes further, Can there be virtue and vice in the will
at the same instant? Yes M. Bishop, for whatsoever is wanting of perfect
virtue, August. epist. 29. Id quod minus est quam debet, ex vitro est.
ex vitio est, says S. Austin; it is by reason of vice. So long therefore as
there is not perfect virtue, there is vice remaining together with virtue. The
inner man wherein is the will of man, is renewed as the Apostle tells us,
from day to day. S. Austin very rightly argues thereof, August. de peccat.
merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 7. Qui de die in die^ reneu^^ur, nondum totus
est renouatus, and inquantum nondu^ est renouatus, intantum adhu^ in vetustate
est.
that he that is renewed from day to day, is not yet all renewed, and therefore
in part he is old still. Now from what is he renewed but from vice, and whereto
is he renewed but to virtue? If then the will be not yet wholly renewed to
virtue, then vice as yet in part remains with virtue in the will, from whence
as yet in part the will remains to be renewed. Therefore our will carries us
still contrary ways; Idem in Joan. tract. 81. Al^ud volumus quia sumus in
C^risto, and aliud volumus quia sumus adhuc in hoc seculo.
One way we will because we are in Christ: another way we will because we are
still in the world. Therefore the Apostle calling the Corinthians Saints, yet
anon after tells them, that they are carnal and walk like men. Therefore
our Savior says to his Disciples one where, John. 15 3.
Ye are clean by the word that I have spoken unto you. Another where he says:
Math. 7 11.
You being evil do know to give good gifts to your children. Yet again, Can
the soul be truly converted to God, says he, and as truly auerted from him at
one time? No M. Bishop: but yet in the soul converted to God, remains a part
of that infection, whereby Genesis 19.26.
Lots wife being gone out of Sodom, looked back to the place from whence she
came; so that August. Enchirid. cap. 64. Sic spiritu Dei excitantur and tanqua^
filij Dei prof^tiu^^ ad Deu^ vt etiam Spiritu suo maxim aggrauante
corruptibili corpore ta^quam si^^ hominum quibusdam moribus ^umanis deficiant
ad seipso^, and ideb pecce^t
the children of God albeit they be moved by the spirit of God, and as the
children of God do go forward toward God, yet by their own spirit, as the
children of men, through some humane motions, they fall back to themselves,
and thereby commit sin. Therefore they of whom we cannot doubt but that they
were converted unto God, yet found somewhat in themselves, for which they saw
that they had cause still to pray Psalm. 85.4. Lament 5.21.
to be converted. Again, Is Christ, says he, agreed to dwell with Belial? We
answer him, No: 2. Cor. 6.15.
there is no agreement betwixt Christ and Belial, and therefore does Christ
come to dwell in us, that Belial may be dispossessed and driven out. And
therefore Bernard. in Cantic. Sermon. 6. Vbi peccatum remittitur, ibi proculdubio
diabolus de cord peccatoru expellitur. Et Aug. contra Julian. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Expulsio daemoniorum est remissio peccatorum, etc.
where there is (by Christ) forgiveness of sins, the devil without doubt is
expulsed out of the heart of the sinner. But yet there remain still the
venomous feeds of his planting, August. de not. and great. cap. 66. Certamen
est aduersus tentatorem de ipsa co^tra nos necessitate pugnantem.
a necessity of sin, by the advantage whereof this tempter fights against
us: Bernard. in Cantic. Ser. 58. Velu nolu, intra fines tuos habitat Ie^usaeus:
subiugari potest sed non exterminari^
will we, nill we, this Iebusite for the time dwells within our borders: he
may be subdued, but he cannot utterly be destroyed. Last of all, Is the holy
Ghost, says he, content to dwell in a body subject to sin? Again we answer
him, No: for Romans 6.12.
sin does not reign in the bodies of the faithful, that they should be
subjects unto it, in obeying the lusts thereof. August. in Joan. tract. 41.
Quamdus viuit necesse est esse peccatum in me^bris iuis.
For so long as they live, sin must needs have a being in them; it is
tempting, it is entising, it never ceasseth urging and provoking from day to
day: but yet Romans 8.2.
the kingdom thereof is abolished, because the law of the spirit of life has
freed them from the law (that is, the kingdom and power) of sin and of
death. But if he mean subject to sin, of the having of sin, then the
Apostle tells him, Romans 7.14.
I am carnal, sold under sin, Verse. 23.
a captive unto the law of sin that is in my members, so that 1. Ioh. 1.8.
if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us. So then some of his collections we deny, not being consequents of our
doctrine, but his own vain and idle amplifications: the rest that are direct
to the point we affirm, as I have declared, and whatsoever his natural sconce
conceiueth thereof, the Scripture justifies, that the fault and deformity of
sin (though not in former degree) remains in a man renewed and endued with
Gods grace. And what does he think of himself I marvel? is he a man renewed
and endued with Gods grace? What, and no fault? no deformity of sin
remaining in him? no spot? no wrinkle? We wonder that a troop of Angels comes
not from heaven to applaud him, and to convey him as a great jewel out of the
world. But had he grace to know himself, he would soon perceive, that this
fault of sin is not penned up in an odd corner of him, but possesses all
his corners, and spreads it self as an infection over the whole man. And
surely he that well considers this book of his, will be of opinion, that
doubtless there is some deformed matter in him, that could yield so much
absurdity and untruth as he has contained therein. As for his Remember, he
tells us that we shall meet with it again, and therefore I will refer it
to his due place.

3. W. BISHOP.
Let us now come unto the difference which is between us. The Catholics
teach, that Original sin is so far forth taken away by Baptism, that it
ceasseth to be a sin properly: the effects of it remaining, are an
imperfection and weakness, both in our understanding and will, and a want of
that perfect subordination of our inferior appetite unto reason, as was, and
would have been, in Original justice: which make the soul apt and ready to
fall into sin, like unto tinder, which although it be not fire of it self,
yet is fit to take fire: yet say they, that these relics of Original sin
be not sins properly, unless a man do yield his consent unto those evil
motions. Master Perkins teaches otherwise. That albeit Original sin be
taken away in the regenerate in sundry respects, yet does it remain in them
after Baptism, not only as a want and weakness, but as a sin, and that
properly, as may be proved by these reasons, 1. Romans 7.
S. Paul says directly: It is no more I that do this, but sin that dwells
in me, that is, Original sin; The Papists answer, That it is called there,
sin improperly, because it comes of sin, and is an occasion of sin. I
approve this interpretation of S. Paul, as taken out of that ancient and famous
Papist S. Augustine, who says expressly: Lib. 1 contr duas Epist. Pelag. c. 10
Concupiscence, (whereof the Apostle speaks) although it be called sin, yet
it is not so called because it is sin, but for that it is made by sin: as
writing is called the hand, because it is made by the hand. Lib. 1. de nuptijs
and Concup. c. 23.
And in another place repeating the same, adds: That it may also be called
sin, for that it is the cause of sin: as cold is called slouthful, because it
makes a man slothful: so that the most profound Doctor S. Augustine is styled
a formal Papist by M. Perkins, and shall be as well coursed for it by the
plain circumstances of the place: For, says he, that S. Paul there takes
sin properly, appears by the words following, That this sin dwelling in
him, made him to do the evil which he hated. How proves this, that sin there
must he taken properly? it rather proves, that it must be taken improperly: for
if it made him do the evil which he hated, then could it not be sin
properly: for sin is not committed, but by the consent and liking of the
will: But S. Paul did not like that evil, but hated it, and thereby was so
far off from sinning, that he did a most virtuous deed in resisting and
ouercoming that evil. As witnesses Saint Augustine, saying: Reason sometimes
resists manfully, and rules raging concupiscence; Lib. 2. de Go^^. cont.
Mani^^. cap. 14.
which being done, we sin not, but for that conflict are to be crowned.

The first circumstance then alleged by M. Perkins, does rather make against
him, then for him.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins alleging the words of S. Paul, Romans 7.17.
It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me, thereby to prove
that concupiscence in the regenerate still retains the nature of sin, says
that the Papists answer that it is called sin there improperly, because it
comes of sin, and is an occasion of sin. M Bishop says, that he approves
this interpretation, as taken out of that ancient and famous Papist S. Austin,
and adds, that the most profound Doctor S. Austin is by M. Perkins styled a
formal Papist. But he speaks this out of a weak head and shallow wit, that
cannot understand so profound a Doctor as S. Austin is. What S. Austins opinion
was as touching this point, we shall examine hereafter in the ninth section,
where occasion is more fully offered to speak thereof; in the mean time that
S. Austin was no Papist, is plainly showed in the Aphrican. Council. cap. 101.
105.
Affricane Council, where were assembled two hundred and seventeen Bishops of
those parts, and Austin one of them, to whom Boniface the first, then Bishop of
Rome, sent his Legates, desirous to have an oar in their boat, and chalenging
to himself a supremacy over their Churches. But they all with one consent
(let him remember that Austin was one of them) resisted this proud attempt, and
whereas the Bishop of Rome alleged and showed the Nicene Canons yielding him
that supremacy, they smelling his fraud, and perceiving that he had falsified
and corrupted the Canons, sent as to others, so namely to the Patriarchs of
Antioch, Alexandria, and Constantinople, for the certain and undoubted copies
thereof. Upon the sight whereof this piece of knavery being discovered, they
wrote back first to Boniface, and after to Celestinus, that they would not
admit any such jurisdiction; that they would end their causes within
themselves; that they would allow of no appeals to the bishop of Rome; and
wished him, that he would thencefoorth forbear to trouble them any more with
his Legates. Wherein they crossed a special point of Popery, which is the
maine prop of all the rest: and this act of theirs was held to be so
prejudicial to the Sea of Rome and authority of the Pope, as that Bonifac. 2.
Epi. ad Eulal. Council. tom. 2. Aurelius Carthaginensis Ecclesiae olim Episcopus
cum collegis suis instigante Diabolo superbire temporibus praedecessorum
nostrorum Bonifacij atque Celestini contra Romanam Ecclesiam coepit.
Boniface the second affirmed, that in pride they did that which they did
against the Church of Rome, by the instigation of the devil. It appears then
hereby, that S. Austin was no Papist, neither was he so, as shall appear in
that point which we have here in hand. In the mean time against the answer of
the Papists, that sin is improperly taken by the Apostle, when he calls
concupiscence by the name of sin, M. Perkins alleges the circumstance of
the place, as first that S. Paul says, that this sin dwelling in him, made
him do the evil which he hated. Where to proceed orderly, and to give light to
his whole disputation, it is first to be resolved what concupiscence is, and
what sin is, for very uncertainly shall we argue that concupiscence is
sin, unless by definition of both we make it appear how they accord in one.
By concupiscence therefore we understand the remainder of the original
corruption of nature, after baptism, in the state of regeneration and new
birth. For man by nature is wholly unclean and sinful, there is nothing in him
but that that is evil, nothing but Romans 8.7.
enmity against God. Whence it is that Chrysostom says, that Chrysostom. op.
imperfect. in Mat. hom. 3^. Omnis homo naturaliter non solum peccator est, sed
etiam totum peccatum. Idem habet ex varijs in Mat. locis homil. 23.
man naturally is not only a sinner, but also wholly sin, and Jbid. op
imperf. homil 24. Homo omnia mala haebet in se.
has in him all manner of evil. Now this corruption which naturally
ouerfloweth and drowneth the whole man, by the spirit of regeneration is
abated, and the strength thereof broken, but so, as that still there remains
a grievous infection of it, which continually crosses and resists the work
of the holy Ghost, and 1. Pet. 2.11.
fights against the soul, by soliciting and enticing it unto sin. In this
remnant of corruption which we call by the name of concupiscence or lust, we
are to consider both the habit, which is the confirmed evil quality, and
also the immediate actions, and affections, and motions thereof. For August.
contr. Julian. Pelag. lib 6. cap. 8. Praeter istum motum inest ^omi^i malum,
vnde surgit hic motus.
beside the evil motion, as S. Austin says, there is within an evil, from
whence this motion does arise. And this evil continues when there is no act
or motion thereof; as when a man is asleep, and the mind and thought no way
stirs, yet the inward corrupt quality sticks still, even as a man is
truly said to be Jbid. Sicut inest timiditas ho mini t^^ido etia^ quando ne
sumet
timorous and fearful, when yet for the present time he fears nothing. Now
the question here is of both these, both the sticking evil quality, and the
first and immediate motions and stirrings thereof, before they be apprehended
and consented unto by the will. For many times evil cogitations and thoughts
arise in the heart, which yet a man checketh, and for which he is grieved at
himself, and reproves himself, and by no means will yield way unto them. Of
these therefore together with the fountain whence they spring, the
controversy is, whether they do properly undergo the name of sin. Now what
sin is, the Apostle Saint John briefly instructs us, saying, that 1. Ioh.
3.4.
sin is the transgression of the law. His word is (...), which signifies all
privation or defect, whereby we come short of that that is commanded or
required by the law. To which purpose the Apostle Saint Paul tells us, that
Romans 3.20.
by the law is the knowledge of sin, and that Cap 7.7.
he had not known sin, but by the law. For how is sin known by the law,
but by that we understand it to be sin, whatsoever declineth or swarueth from
the law, even as the Apostle for example adds, that he had not known lust
to be sin, except the law had said, Thou shall not lust, presuming it as
granted, that it is sin whatsoever is forbidden by the law. And this the
Apostle Saint John further confirms, in that he says, that 1. Ioh 5.17.
all unrighteousness is sin. For what is unrighteousness, but the
transgressing of the law, which is the rule of righteousness? If then all
unrighteousness be sin, and all transgression of the law be unrighteousness,
then all transgression of the law is sin. The heathen Orator Tully could
say, that Tul. Paradox. 3. Est peccare tanquam transire lineas.
peccare, to sin, is as a man would say, to go without, or beyond the bounds
or lines. We are listed and bounded by the law of God: it draws us lines,
within the compass whereof we are to keep our selves. What is it then to
sin with us, but to break the bounds prescribed unto us, and to go beside
that which we are directed by the law? Therefore says Origin Origin. in To. cap
7. Peccati natura hac est, si fiat quod lex fieri vetat.
This is the nature of sin, if any thing be done, which the law forbids to
be done. Oecumenius out of the ancient Commentaries of the Fathers says to the
like purpose, that Oecum. in 1. Joan cap. 3. Conueniunt inter se, and circa
idem sunt. Recte discipulus Domini vtrunque in ide^ commutauit.
sin and transgression of the law do agree together, and that rightly S. John
did make them both one. So Grego. Moral. lib. 11. cap. 21. Inter peccatum and
iniquitatem nihil distare perhibet Ioannes, qui ait; peccatu^ est iniquitas.
Gregory Bishop of Rome calling transgression of the law by the name of
iniquity, as the vulgar Latin translateth it, says, that betwixt sin and
iniquity, that is, betwixt sin and the transgression of the law, S. John does
witness that there is no difference. In like sort Bid says, that Beda in 1.
Ioa^. 3. Omne quod ab aequitatis ratione discrepat in peccatis numeratur.
all that swarueth from the rule of righteousness is sin. Caesarius the
brother of Gregory Nazianzene tells us, that Caesar. dialog. 3. apud Nazianz.
Peccatum mihi esse videtur omnis aduersus virtuum resistende co^atus and
repugnantia.
he takes it, that sin is all assay of resistance, and all repugnancie
against virtue. Saint Austine says, that Aug. de not. and great cap. 14. Ideo
est peccatu^ quia non debet fieri.
therefore a thing is sin, because it ought not to be done, and that Contra
Julian. lib. 4. cap. 3. Qui male facit aliquid profecto peccat.
to do any thing amiss, is to sin. Again he defines August. cont. Faust.
Manich. lib. 22. cap. 27. Peccatum est factum, vel dictu^, vel concupitum,
aliquid contra legem aeternam.
sin to be every thing that is said, or done, or coueted against the
everlasting law of God. Yea Thomas Aquinas says, that Thom Aquin. 1. 2. q.
109. art. 4. in corp. Nihil est aliud peccare quam transgredi diuina mandata.
to sin is nothing else but to transgress the commandments of God. In a
word, the curse of God belongs to nothing save to sin only. But the curse
of God belongs to every swaruing from the law of God: for Gal. 3.10.
cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in the book
of the law to do them. Therefore every swaruing from the law of God is
properly and truly reckoned to be sin. And surely this is a truth so apparent
and evident, as that we may wonder, not at the blindness, (for undoubtedly
they see it well enough) but at the extreme perverseness and impudency of
the Papists, that so stiffely stand in the denial thereof. Now then the
question being whether concupiscence or lust in it self be sin in the
regenerate man, the resolution is very ready and plain, and the answer
manifestly apparent, that because every diuerting or swaruing from the law is
sin, therefore concupiscence must necessarily be sin, in as much as it is a
declining from the law, saying: Thou shall not lust. And therefore does the
Apostle say, that he knew lust to be sin, (as before was noted) because the
law said, Thou shall not lust. He calls and terms it sin again and
again, so as that we may wonder, that he should call it sin, sin, and yet
his meaning should be, that it is not sin. For as Tertullian says: Tertul.
aduers. Hermogen.
Acuius habitu quid diuertit, pariter and a vocatu eius recedit: Look from the
being and nature whereof a thing departs, it departs also from the name and
calling thereof. If therefore concupiscence had lost the nature of sin, it
should consequently also be deprived of the name. But now whereas M. Perkins
alleged the words of the Apostle, that sin dwelling in him, made him to do
the evil which he hates, M. Bishop tells us, that contrary to M. Perkins
purpose and intention, those words do prove, that sin must be there taken
improperly. And how so I pray you? For (says he) if it made him to do the
evil which he hated, then could it not be sin properly; for sin is not
committed but by the consent and liking of the will. Where by Aequiuocation of
terms, he merely abuses his Reader. For the committing of sin is properly
understood of the external act and accomplishment thereof, and this indeed
cannot be without the consent and liking of the will. But the doing evil of
which the Apostle speaks, is no external act, but only the internal
August. contr. duas Epist. Pela. lib. 1. cap. 10. Facere se dixit non affectu
consentiendi and implendi, sed ipso motis concupiscendi.
motion of concupiscence. For we may not understand the Apostles words of doing
the evil which he hated, and doing that which he would not, Idem de verb.
Apost. Ser. 5. Non sic intelligamus quod dixit, Non quod volo, etc tanqua^
velit esse castus, and esset adulter, aut velit esse misericers, and esset
crudelis, aut velit esse pius, and esset impius, sed volo non concupiscere and
concupisco. Vide Epiphan. haer. 64.
as if he had said, he would have been chaste, and yet was an Adulterer; or
would have been merciful and yet was cruel: or would have been godly, and yet
was ungodly, or such like: but his meaning is, Volo non concupiscere, and
concupisco: My will and desire is to have no act, no motion of concupiscence,
and yet I have so. I would not have so much as any cogitation, any affection,
any thought, any inclination or passion of desire tending to evil, and yet I
cannot prevail to be without them. Now therefore M. Bishop did amiss to
breed ambiguitie by changing of the terms, and to put upon the Apostle a
suspicion of other meaning then indeed he had. But if his meaning be as it
should be, that no evil can be done, which may truly be called a sin,
without the consent and liking of the will, he says untruly, and does therein
but walk in the steps of the Pelagian Heretics. Saint Austine answered
them, and we answer him, that De perfect. iustit. Rat. 15. Peccatum est, cum
non est chaeritas quae esse debet, vel minor est quam debet, sieve hoc voluntate
vitari possit, sieve non possit.
it is sin, when either there is not charity, which ought to be, or it is
less then it ought to be, whether it may be avoided by the will, or cannot be
avoided: that is to say, whether it be with the will or against the will. And
whereas he had defined sin against the Manichees to be De duab. anim. contr.
Manich. cap. 11. See of Free will sect 18
the desire of retaining or obtaining that which justice forbids, and whence
it is in a man's liberty to forbear, as if there were no sin but what the
will by it own liberty does approve and yield unto, he shows that he there
defined, Retract. lib. 1. cap. 15.
that which is only sin, and is not also the punishment of sin. So having
affirmed De vera reli. cap. 14. Vsqueadeo peccatum voluntarium ma lum est, vt
nullo modo sit peccatu^, si non sit voluntarium.
that in no sort it is sin which is not voluntary, he gives the same
restraint again, that Retract. lib. 1. cap. 13. Peccatu^ illud cogitandu^ est,
quod tantummodo peccatum est, non quod est etiam poena peccati.
that sin only must there be understood, which is only sin, and is not
also the punishment of sin: as thereby still giving to understand, that that
sin which is the punishment of sin, as is concupiscence or lust, is rightly
and truly so called, though it have not the consent and approbation of the
will. It was Jbid. Non absurd vocatur etiam voluntarium, quia ex primi hominis
mala voluntate contractum, factum est quodammodo haereditarium.
voluntary only by the will of him, by whom sin was first committed, and
from him it is become original and hereditarie unto us. M. Bishops exception
therefore is nothing worth, neither does it let, but that concupiscence being
a part of Original sin, is properly called sin in the regenerate, though it
be without the consent and liking of the will. He says, that because the
Apostle hated it, therefore it is no sin: but we say, that therefore the Apostle
hated it, because it is sin. For the Apostle hated it according to God, neither
would he hate any thing but what God hates. And God hates nothing in man but
sin: that therefore which the Apostle hated in himself was sin: yea what is it
to do evil, but to sin? The name of evil we know, is used of annoyances and
inconveniences, of crosses and grieuances, but the doing of evil is never
affirmed but of sin. Now to lust, the Apostle tells us, is to do evil. To
lust therefore is to sin. And because the act and motion of lusting is sin,
therefore the habit of concupiscence or lust is a habit of sin also, because
the action always has his nature and denomination from the habit and quality
from whence it does proceed. Yet M. Bishop says, that the Apostle therein was
so far from sinning, as that he did a most virtuous deed, in resisting and
ouercoming that evil. But the Scripture calls the resisting of that evil,
Heb. 12.4.
the fighting against sin, and will M. Bishop say, that because we fight
against it, therefore it is not sin? See what accord here is. The Scripture
says, that it is sin against which we fight: M. Bishop says, that we do a
virtuous deed in fighting against it, and therefore it is no sin. As for the
place of S. Austin, it helps him nothing at al. Reason sometimes manfully
bridleth and restrains concupiscence, being moved or stirred: which when it
does, non labimur in peccatum, we fall not into sin. Which is not a rule in
the regenerate only, but also in the unregenerate, so that heathen Moralists
for the avoiding of sins, have delivered it for a precept, Tul. Offic. l. 1.
Ratio praesit, appetitus obtemperet: Let reason rule, and let lust obey. Yea
that moralisme which S. Austin prosecuteth in the place alleged, comparing
pleasure or temptation to the tempting serpent, concupiscence to Eve the woman,
and reason to Adam the man, was borrowed from the allegories of Philo Iud.
Allegor. legis lib. 1. and. 2.
Philo the Jew, who would thereby show, that concupiscence should be kept in
from being tempted, and though by temptation it were seduced, yet that reason
should subdue it, that it might not run to any further evil, as it desires
to do. Now when this is done by (...) ^nregenerate man, and either a Jew or a
heathen man bridle his passions and affections, that thereby he fall not into
sin, will M. Bishop conclude hereof, that those passions and affections which
he bridleth are no sin? He will not deny the same to be sin in the
unregenerate man, and yet S. Austines words so farrefoorth do indifferently
concern both. He understands sin morally only, and as it is reputed with
men, who account no sin at all, but either in the performance of the act, or
in the resolution and purpose of the will. We fall not into sin, that is,
into any moral or actual sin, into any outward sin, even in the like sort
as S. James says, that Iam. 1.15.
concupiscence when it has conceived, brings forth sin, when yet he did not
mean, but that concupiscence also it self is sin, as shall afterward
appear.

3. W. BISHOP.
Now to the second. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? Here is no mention of sin: how this may be drawn to his
purpose, shall be examined in his argument where he repeateth it: so that there
is not one poor circumstance of the text which he can find, to prove S. Paul
to take sin there properly. Now I will prove by diverse, that he speaks of
sin improperly.

First, by the former part of the same sentence: It is not I that do it, all
sin is done and committed properly by the person in whom it is: but this was
not done by S. Paul. ergo.

Secondly out of those words: I know there is not in me, that is in my flesh,
any good: And after: I see another law in my members, resisting the law of my
mind. Thus: sin properly taken is seated in the soul: but that was seated in
the flesh, ergo it was no sin properly.

The third and last is taken out of the first words of the next Chapter: There
is now therefore no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk
not according to the flesh, etc. Whence I thus argue: there is no condemnation
to them, that have that sin dwelling in them, if they walk not according
unto the fleshly desires of it: therefore it is no sin properly: For the
wages of sin is death, that is, eternal damnation.

R. ABBOT.
Now to the second, says he, and when he has done, says nothing of it, but
puts it over to the handling of the argument, and therefore there will we
also examine his examination. But though he shift off the one circumstance with
ignorance, and the other with saying nothing, yet as if he had very effectually
done what he pretends, he infers, that not one poor circumstance of the
text could be found to prove, that S. Paul took sin there properly, marry
he will bring us diverse, to prove that he takes sin improperly. Well then, let
us see what these diverse proofs be: we doubt they are like his answers; the
one very bad, and the other stark naught. First he will prove it by the former
part of the sentence, It is not I that do it. All sin (says he) is committed
properly by the person in whom it is: but this was not done by S. Paul, ergo.
But we deny his minor proposition, and it is altogether absurd and senseless.
How should concupiscence do any thing in S. Paul, which is not done by S.
Paul? Can the accident of the person be an efficient cause of any thing by it
self without the person? The accident is but the instrument of the person, and
what the accident does, the person does it by the accident. And therefore
accordingly S. Paul says, Romans 7.14.23
I am carnal sold under sin: I do that I would not: the law of my members
leads me captive to the law of sin: I in my flesh serve the law of sin:
(...); even I my self in my mind serve the law of God, and in my flesh the law
of sin. This S. Austine well observed: August. de verb. Apost. Ser. 5. Adhuc
concupisco, and vtique etiam in ipsa part ego sum. Non enim ego alius in mente
and alius in carne. Sed quid igitur ipse ego? Quia ego in mente, ego in carne:
ex v troque vnus homo. Igitur ipse ego, ego ipse me^te seruio, etc.
Even in that part that lusts, it is I also: for here is not one I in the
mind, and another in the flesh. Why does he say, I my self, but because it is
I in the mind, and I in the flesh, even one man of both these. Therefore I my
self, even I my self in mind serve the law of God, but in my flesh the law of
sin. But yet though being but one and the same person, he divides himself
as it were into two parts, being in part renewed, and in part yet continuing
old. And hereupon he says, It is not I that do it, that is, not I according to
that that is renewed in me: and yet I according to that whereby I am still
carnal and sold under sin: not I according to the inner man, wherein I delight
in the law of God, and yet I according to the flesh whereby I am still captive
to the law of sin: of which flesh I say not I, because I account my self
that that I joy to be, and which I shall ever be, not that which though it be
my self, yet is that I would not be, and which I labor not to be, and
therefore strive to destroy and put off, as being without it to live for ever.
Ibid Men's regit, caro regitur, and magis sum ego in eo quo rego, quam in eo in
quoregor.
I may rather say, I, in that wherein I rule, then in that wherein I am
ouerruled; therefore I say, it is not I that do it, and yet it is I in both. M.
Bishop therefore by his first circumstance proves just nothing, and even as
little proves he by the second. Which he takes out of those words, Ver. 18.
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing: and after, I
see another law in my members resisting the law of my mind. Hereof he argues
thus: Sin properly taken is seated in the soul, but that was seated in the
flesh, ergo it was not sin properly. Which is the same as if a man would
argue thus, that the true Pope has his consistory chair in Rome, but the
Pope that now is has his consistory in the Laterane Church, therefore he that
now is, is not the true Pope. For what is flesh as the Apostle speaks
thereof, but a part of the soul; the soul it self, so far as yet in part
it is not regenerate? What, is M. Bishop so absurd, as to think concupiscence
to be seated in the flesh, as the flesh is divided against the soul? Nay, the
soul it self having cast off the yoke of obedience to God, and betrayed it
self to the temptations of the devil for the gratifying and pleasing of the
flesh, is become a servant to that that should have been a servant unto it, and
being abiected to sensual, and carnal, and earthly desires, is wholly called
by the name of flesh, to whose service it does addict it self. Thus says
Origin, that Origin. de princip. lib. 3. cap. 4. Anima cum crassioris sensus
fuerit effecta ex eo quod corporis passionibus se subdit, etc. caro dicitur
effecta, and inde nomen trahit, in quo plut studij vel propositi gerit.
the soul being become of more gross disposition, by yielding it self to the
passions of the body, is said to be become flesh, and takes the name of that
on which it bestows it most desire. And again: Jdem in Psalm. 38. hom. 2.
Animas nostras incarnauimus: We have turned our souls into flesh. So says
Austine, that August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 14. cap. 2. Saepe ipsum hominem, id
est, naturam hominis carnem nuncupat. Et post: In operibus carnis inuenimus
illa quibus animi vitia significantur a voluptate carnis aliena.
the Scripture calls man himself, that is, the nature of man, by the name of
flesh: and calls those the works of the flesh, which yet are the proper
vices of the mind, and belong not to that which we properly call the flesh. And
so does God himself say of man wholly, that Genes. 6.3.
he is flesh, and our Savior in the Gospel opposing flesh to the spirit, Ioh.
3.6.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and that that is borne of the
spirit, is spirit, gives to understand, that all goes under the name of
flesh, that is not borne again and renewed by the spirit. Now therefore as
touching concupiscence, Saint Austine tells us, that Aug. de perf. Iustit.
Rat. 17 and contr. Julian. lib. 5. cap. 5. Quia carnaliter anima concupiscit.
it is said that the flesh lusts, because that the soul lusts according to
the flesh. Yea Cyprian doubted not to say, Cyprian. in Prolog. de cardinal.
Christi operibus. Quod caro aduers. spiritum and spiritus aduersus carnem
contendere dicitur, and repugnare improprie dictum arbitror, quia solius animae
lis ista est qua secum rixatur, etc Et paulo prius: Corpore sic vtitur anima,
sicut Faber malleo vel incude in qua format omnium turpitudinum idola, and
fabricatur quaelibet quarumcunque voluptatum simulachra. Non est caro dictatrix
peccati, nec inuentrix malitiae, nec cogitatus format, nec disponit agenda, sed
officina est spiritus, qui mea and per eam quaecunque affectauerit, peragit,
and consummat.
that he held it to be improperly said, that the flesh lusts against the
spirit, because it is the soul only that is at strife with it self. For the
flesh is no directer of sin, no deviser of wickedness: it frames not the
thought, nor disposes what shall be done, but is as the shop or workhouse of
the soul, which in it and by it performs whatsoever it desires: using the
body as the Smith does his hammer or anuile, framing thereupon the idols of
uncleanness and pleasure. Seeing therefore, as here it is plain, concupiscence
is seated in the soul, which for the corruption thereof is called by the name
of flesh, so that the Apostle by flesh in himself means nothing but the soul
according to the remainder of original infection, which still did stick fast
unto him, M. Bishop by his second circumstance proves nothing, but that
concupiscence is truly and properly affirmed to be sin. Which had been very
readily to have been perceived by any man, if he had framed his argument as he
should have done: Sin properly taken is seated in the soul; but concupiscence
is not seated in the soul: for this every man would have presently seen to be
absurd. But he to blind his Reader chose rather to say, Concupiscence is seated
in the flesh, whereas notwithstanding the flesh as it is the seat of
concupiscence cannot have any reasonable understanding but of the soul. But
now the third circumstance I trow will do the deed. That he takes out of the
first verse of the eight Chapter. Now there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the flesh. Whence, says he, I argue
thus: There is no comdemnation to them that have sin dwelling in them, if
they walk not according to the fleshly desires of it, therefore it is no sin
properly: for the wages of sin is death, that is eternal damnation. As if he
should say, God for Christ's sake does not impute this sin, therefore it is no
sin. God to them that are in Christ does pardon this sin, ergo, it is not
properly sin. And so he might likewise argue of David's adultery, Peter's
denying and abiuring of his master, Paul's persecuting of the Church, that none
of these were properly sins, because to the^ being in Christ, there is no
condematio^ for any of these things. Such drunken sophistry are we troubled
with, and drawn by the importunity of ignorant buzzards to spend time in the
refuting of such arguments as rather deserve to be chastened with a whip, then
to be graced with an answer. The matter is plain to the^ that are willing to
understand. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; it is
true: and yet who is there of them that are in Christ Jesus, but confesses
unto God, that there is that in him for which he might justly be condemned? To
them that are in Christ, for Christ's sake it is forgiven and pardoned: it is
not imputed unto them; but it is still such, as if it were imputed, it should
be sufficient to condemn them to everlasting death. Therefore the Apostle says
of concupiscence, not for his consenting to it, which he disclaimeth, but for
the having of it dwelling in him, that Rom 7.11.
it slew him, that Verse. 13.
by the commandment it wrought death in him, that by it he had Verse 24.
a body of death. How so, but that knowing that the wages of sin is death, he
knew himself thereby in case of death, if God should deal with him for it as
in extremity, and yet in justice he might do. Therefore does S. Austin say,
that even in the regenerate August. cont. Julian. lib 6 cap. 5 Tale ac tam
magnum malum tantum quia inest quomodo non teneret in morte and pertraheret in
vltimam morte^, nisi and vinculum eius in ea quae est in Baptismo peccatorum
omnium remissione solu^retur.
concupiscence is such and so great an evil as that only because it is in
them, it should hold them in death, and draw them to everlasting death, but
that the bond of the guilt thereof is loosed in Baptism by the forgiveness of
all our sins. It is therefore such in it self to which death is due, but yet
to them that are in Christ it proves not unto death, because it is forgiven
unto them for Christ's sake. Thus we have seen an end of M. Bishops
circumstances, and nothing yet to prove, but that concupiscence by the Apostle
is properly called sin. And to prove that it is so, because he says there is
not one poor circumstance to that purpose, I would have him to examine these.
First that by the law the Apostle says, he knew concupiscence to be sin. For
it is sin properly whatsoever by the law is convicted to be sin. Secondly,
that it wrought death unto him; and nothing but sin could make him to find
himself thereby in case of death. Thirdly that he says, sin that it might
appear sin, wrought death in me, thereby affirming, that by working death it
did appear to be that indeed which in name it is called, as Oecumenius
expresses those words, Oecumen. in Romans cap 7. vt quod est totum in toto fiat
manifestum.
that all in all it might be made manifest to be that that it is. Fourthly he
says, that (...).
this sin was exceedingly a sinner by the commandment: for so the words are
according to the original, and so says Irenaeus, by allusion to that place,
that Iren. lib. 3. cap. 20. Lex testificans de peccato quoniam peccator est.
the law did testify of sin that it was a sinner. Now sin is not a person
in it self, that it should be said to be a sinner, but hereby is signified
what man is by this sin, namely of concupiscence; and that is, exceedingly a
sinner. But a man cannot be a sinner, but by that that is properly sin:
therefore concupiscence making a man a sinner by the first motions thereof,
even without consent, is properly a sin. And thus much for circumstances of
the place.

4. W. BISHOP.
Now to M. Perkins Argument in form as he proposes it. That which was once
sin properly, and still remaining in man, makes him to sin, and intangleth
him in the punishment of sin, and makes him miserable, that is sin
properly: But Original sin does all these. Ergo.

The Mayor, which (as the learned know) should consist of three words,
contains four several points, and which is worst of all, not one of them
true.

To the first, that which remains in man after Baptism, commonly called
Concupiscence, was never a sin properly: but only the material part of
sin, the formal and principal part of it, consisting in the deprivation of
Original justice, and a voluntary auersion from the law of God, the which is
cured by the Grace of God, given to the baptized, and so that which was
principal in Original sin, does not remain in the regenerate: neither does
that which remains, make the person to sin, (which was the second point,)
unless he willingly consent unto it, as has been proved heretofore: it
allureth and intiseth him to sin, but has not power to constrain him to it,
as M. Perkins also himself before confessed. Now to the third, and intangleth
him in the punishment of sin: how does Original sin entangle the
regenerate in the punishment of sin, if all the guiltiness of it be removed
from his person, as you taught before in our Consent? Mendacem memorem esse
oportet: Either confess that the guilt of Original sin is not taken away
from the regenerate, or else you must unsay this, that it intangleth him in the
punishment of sin. Now to the last clause, that the relics of Original
sin make a man miserable, a man may be called wretched and miserable, in that
he is in disgrace with God, and so subject to his heavy displeasure: and that
which makes him miserable in this sense, is sin: but S. Paul takes not the
word so here, but for an unhappy man exposed to the danger of sin, and to
all the miseries of this world, from which we should have been exempted, had it
not been for Original sin, after which sort he uses the same word. ^. Cor.
15.
If in this life only we were hoping in Christ, we were more miserable then
all men: not that the good Christians were farthest out of Gods favor, and
more sinful then other men: but that they had fewest wordly comforts, and the
greatest crosses, and thus much in confutation of that formal argument.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins his proposition consists of four points. M. Bishop says, that
of those four points there is not one true. Which if it be so, it was M.
Perkins good hap to light upon such an adversary, as of four several points,
all as he says untrue, is not able to disprove one. The first point is, that
Concupiscence was once properly sin, which M. Perkins presumed as agreed and
granted, because the question betwixt us and them, is of Concupiscence after
baptism, as if in the unbaptized there were no question but that concupiscence
is sin. But M. Bishop here alters the state of the question, telling us
that Concupiscence was never properly sin, and thereby showing that he does
but colorably allege and merely abuse S. Austin, who before Baptism in no
sense denies but that Concupiscence is truly sin, and continually affirms
it to be so. And thus he makes the Apostle wholly to dally in naming sin,
sin, where there is no sin indeed, neither after Baptism, nor before. But
that which has been said both of the nature of sin, and of the circumstances
of the Apostles text, to prove that Concupiscence after Baptism is sin, does
much more prove, that the same is sin before Baptism, and it shall yet
further appear, if God will, in that that follows. In the mean time here we
are to observe, how M. Bishop falsely charging M. Perkins with four untruths in
his argument, in declaring the first of those four, does himself deliver
four untruths indeed. Concupiscence, says he, was never properly sin, but
only the material part of sin: the formal and principal part of it
consisting in the deprivation of Original justice, and a voluntary auersion
from the law of God. Where first he erreth, in that he makes Original justice
to consist only in the integrity of the will, and the form of sin to stand
only in the auersion of the will from God, by the loss of the same Original
justice, whereas Original justice was in truth the integrity of all the parts
of man, not subiecting the flesh to the mind, and the mind to God, but the
whole man to God, the image whereof is set forth unto us in the commandment,
Mat. 12.30. Luke 10 27.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy soul, with all thy thought and strength. The form of sin therefore
is not only in the auersion of the will, but in the auersion of any part, or
power, or faculty of the soul: if in any of these there be a declining from
the law of God, it is the sin of man. Now because August. de perfect justice.
Rat. 17. Cum est aliquid concupiscentiae carnalis quod velco^tinendo fraen^tur
non omnimodo ex tota anima diligitur Deus.
so long as there is any matter of concupiscence to be yet bridled and
restrained, God cannot be loved with all the soul (for how can God have all
the soul, so long as concupiscence has any part?) therefore in the remainder
of any matter of concupiscence, there is sin; because Ibid. Rat. 15.
it is sin when either there is not love at all, or it is less then it
should be, and it is less then it should be, when it is not with all the
soul. Therefore does S. Austin define sin to be Ad Simpl^^. quaest. 2. Est
piccatu^a hominis mordinatio atque peru^rsita ^^d est, a prae ^amiore conditore
auersio and ad cond i^ ^ife. ^^ra conuersio.
hominis inordinatio atque peruersitas: a disordered and perverted condition of
man. Of man he says, not only of the will of man, and therefore if in man
there be any disordered, or mis-conditioned affection, the same is sin. But
concupiscence which is a rebellion of the law that is in the members, against
the law of the mind, is a disorder in man, and therefore necessarily must be
holden to be truly sin. A second error he commits, in that making
concupiscence only the material part of sin, he appropriateth it to the
inferior, sensual and brutish parts and faculties of the nature of man, and
to the resistance thereof against the superior and more excellent powers of
the will, and reason, and understanding, whereas concupiscence truly understood
imports the universal habit of auersion from God, and a corruption spread
over the whole man, and defiling him in all parts and powers both of body and
soul. And therefore does the Apostle expound the conversation in or according
to the lusts or concupiscences of the flesh, to be Ephesians 2.3.
the fulfilling of the will of the flesh and of the mind, which he could not
do, but that concupiscence signifies also the prauitie and corruption of the
mind, even as the Apostle S. Peter also makes it the fountain of all 2. Pet.
1.4.
the corruption that reigns in the world. And thus amongst the works of the
flesh, which are the fruits and effects, and as it were the stream of that
fountain of corruption, are reckoned those things which have their proper
seat and being in the highest parts of the soul, as are Gal 5 20.21.
idolatry, heresy, witchcraft, envy, hatred, pride, which being acts of
concupiscence and sinful lust, yet are so far August. de cui Dei lib. 14.
cap. 2, and 3.
from being tied to the inferior parts of the soul which have their occupation
properly in the flesh, as that some of them, and that specially pride and envy
are noted to be the sins of the devil, who has no communion or society
with the flesh, and therefore in the name and nature of concupiscences, are
merely the vices and corruptions of the mind. Yea S. Austin acknowledges,
that Idem. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. Ipsae cupiditas nihil aliud est quam
voluntas sed vitiosa peccatoque seruiens
concupiscence is nothing else but the will of man corrupted and serving sin,
and that the temptation of concupiscence is nothing else but De bono persevere
ca. 6. Qui in tentationem suae mala voluntatis non insertur, in nullam prorsus
infertur. Vnusquisque enim tentatur a concupiscentia sua, etc.
the temptation of a man's own evil will. So says S. Bernard, Bernard. in
Can^. ser. 81. Voluntate persisto agere contra legem. Nam mea voluntas ipsa est
lex in membris meis, legi diuinae recal^itrans. Mihi ipsi mea ipsius voluntas
contraria inuenitur.
It is in my will that I continue to do against the law of God, for mine own
will is the law in my members rebelling against the law of God; mine own will
is found contrary to my self. Whereby it appears, that concupiscence which
is that rebelling law of sin, is a deprauation of the will also, and not to
be restrained to the brutish and sensual affections of the inferior part. Nay
Hierome notes, that it signifies Hieron. ad Alagas. quaest. 8. Nos per
concupiscentiam omnes perturbationes animae significatas putamus, quibus
maeremus, and gaudemus, timemus and concupiscimus.
all the passions or perturbations of the soul, whereby we joy or sorrow, fear
or desire, which are holden to be August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 14. cap. 3.
Origines, omnium peccatorum atque vitiorum.
the originals and beginnings of all sins and vices, which although Poets and
Philosophers have taken to arise of the flesh, yet Ibid. Non omnia vitae
iniquae vitia tribuenda sunt carni, ne ab his omnibus purgemus diabolum qui no^
habet carnem.
Christian faith, says Austin, teaches otherwise, that we are not to
attribute these vices of evil life altogether to the flesh, that is, to the
sensual part, least that of all the sins thereof we acquit the devil,
because he is without flesh. Another error of his is, that he makes the
privation of Original justice, and auersion of the will to be the principal
matter of Original sin. For the principal matter in Original sin, is the
1. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. Peccatum eos dicimus ex Adam originaliter trahere,
id est, eius reatu implicatos and ob hoc poenae obnoxios deteneri.
guilt of Adams sin, Bernard. in aduent. dom. ser. 1. Jn Adam omnes
peccauimus, and in illo sententiam damnationis accepimus omnes.
in whom we all have sinned, and in him have all received the sentence of
damnation. For that must be accounted the principal which is the cause of all
the rest; and it is the guilt of the first sin that is the cause of
whatsoever further sin originally cleaves to us, which together with death
it self is the punishment of that first sin. His fourth error is as touching
the cure of Original sin, which he makes to be such, as if Original
justice were wholly restored, and all auersion of the will from God wholly taken
away. Which is so palpably false, as that we may wonder that he had so little
feeling of conscience, as that for shame he would write it to the world. For if
there be that cure that he speaks of in the Baptized, how is it that there is
so little effect or token thereof? How is it that after Baptism there
remains so great crookedness and perverseness of nature, which we find
commonly to be no less then from the beginning men have complained of? How is
it that it is Cyprian de Cardinal. Christi operib. in Prologo Ommno rarum est
and difficile fieri bonum: facile and pronum est esse malum, and haec sine magi
stro, sine exemplo doctrina statim a pubescent^bus annu imbuimur and docemur.
so rare and hard a matter to be trained to goodness; so easy and ready a
matter to become naught? that to the one we attain with much difficulty,
albeit we use all the good helps thereto that may be used; the other is so
familiar to us, as that without any teacher, without any example to instruct
us, we can learn it of our selves? Why does he utter these absurd paradoxes so
contrary to the common sense and experience of all men? It is true that in
Baptism there is a medicine applied for the curing of this Original malady,
which medicine takes effect according to the purpose of the grace of God. It
does not by and by work in all; it works in some sooner, in some later, as
he thinks good to give it effect, by whom it was first applied. Sometimes
after many years he makes the same workefull by his effectual calling, which
from infancy has lien as it were fruitless, as if it never had been done.
But when it does work, it works not all at once; it works but by degrees;
it has still somewhat 2. Cor. 4.16.
to renew from day to day, and never effects a full and perfect cure so long
as we live here. This follows afterward to be proved at large, and therefore
I will but briefly propound it in this place. Now all these fancies has M.
Bishop uttered in answering the first point of M. Perkins his argument. Let us
now come to the second point. M. Perkins says, that concupiscence makes a man
to sin. M. Bishop says, it does not make a man to sin unless he consent
unto it. But the Apostle tells us, that concupiscence does make a man to do
evil, and it has been showed that that evil is sin, even before there be
given any consent unto it. This evil consists in evil motions and thoughts,
Ephiphan. haer. 64 Origin. Obrepunt circa cor nostrum etia^ non volentibus
nobis, etc.
which arise in us whether we will or not, neither Ambr. de fuga seculi lib. 1
ca. 1. Non in potestate nostra est cor nostru^ and ^ostrae cogitationes quae
improuito offusae mentem animu^que confundunt atque alio trahunt quam it is
proposueris, etc. Ipso in tempore quo cleuare mentem paramus, insertis inanibus
cogitationibus ad terrena plerunque deijcimur. Et paulo prius; vt quod studeas
vi tare, hoc cogites animoque volu^s.
are our hearts and thoughts in our own power for the avoiding thereof, but that
even unawares they ouercast the mind, and throw it down to the earth whilst
it is tending toward heaven, and that runs in the fancy which we make
special labor to put out. Yea oftentimes they grow to that absurdity and
wickedness, as that we could not believe but upon our own experience, that
there were in us so corrupt a spring, as to yield so loathsome and filthy
streams; which make the true faithful man ashamed of himself, and to
condemn himself in the sight of God, howsoever nothing thereof appear to the
eyes of men. But with M. Bishop these things are nothing; he will never cry
God mercy for any such, because he has therein done him no trespass; yea the
Trent Council tells us, that herein is Council. Trident Sess. 5. In renatis
nihil odit Deus; nihil eos ab ingressu coeli ramoratur.
nothing that God hates, nothing that hinders us from entering into heaven.
Which seeing God requires all the thought to be bestowed in his love, and
thereby denounces it to be a sin to have any of our thoughts wandering away
from him, these men would never thus affirm and teach, but that Romans 11.8.
a spirit of slumber has closed their eyes, that they see not that truth,
against which they have resolved to bend themselves. The third point of M.
Perkins argument is, that concupiscence intangleth a man in the punishment of
sin. This M. Bishop says, is contrary to that that he had said before, that
the guilt of Original sin is taken away in the regenerate. But here is no
contrariety, because in the continual rebellion of concupiscence, a man's
conscience sees punishment, thereby due unto him if God should require the
same, but yet by faith comfort himself, that it is remitted unto him for
Christ's sake. And that which M. Perkins spoke, he spoke it out of the Apostles
words, who of concupiscence says, that Romans 7.13.
it wrought death in him, that is, made him in himself guilty of death, and
thus entangled him in the punishment of sin, although in Christ he saw
deliverance, because Cap. 8.1.
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Let M. Bishop
therefore discharge M. Perkins of the lie, and take the whetstone to himself,
as being far more justly due unto him. The last point of the argument is,
that concupiscence makes a man miserable,, taken out of the words of the
Apostle, Romans 7.24.
Wretched man, or miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death, or from this body of death? M. Bishop hereto answers, that
miserable is understood two manner of ways, either by being in disgrace with
God, or by reason of the danger of sin, and the miseries of this world. But
of the danger of sin the Apostle acquitteth himself, 2. Tim. 4.18.
The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto
his heavenly kingdom, and Romans 8.39.
neither things present, nor things to come shall separate us from the love of
God. As for the miseries of this world, they are here drawn in by head and
shoulders, there being here no show of any matter that should move the Apostle
thus to complain in respect thereof. But the thing is plain, that he calls
himself miserable, as S. Austin plainly teaches, by reason of Agust. con.
Julian. lib 6. cap. 7. No^ne^ ^onced^s hominem miseru^ quicunque ille fuerit
aduersus talem clamasse qu theatem, velle adiacet mihi, etc. (qua voluntas bona
aut non ibi sit aut valere nihil possit.)
an inward evil quality whereby the will being good could not avail to do
the good that he would. He calls himself miserable, by reason of that from
which he desired to be delivered, which is the body of death. Now the body of
death is that which before he has called Romans 6.6.
the body of sin, and elsewhere Col. 2.11.
the body of the sins of the flesh. By the body of sin is understood
concupiscence, which is as a body consisting of many members and parts, which
are the diverse lusts of diverse sins, and thereby is a body of sins, even
consisting of all manner of sins. For we may not here understand the body
properly as of the body which dies, as if the Apostle had desired a
dissolution and end of life, because August. de perfect. iustit. Rat. 17. De
corpere mortis huius non omnis liberatur qui finit hanc vitam.
every one that dies is not thereby delivered from the body of death. For De
not. et great. ca. 55. De corpore mors corporis separat, sed contracta exillo
vitia cohae^ent quibus iusta poena debetur.
the death of the body separateth (the wicked) from the body, when yet the
vices and sins thereby gathered do stick fast, to which just punishment
remains due. Therefore when he prays to be delivered from this body of
death, Ibid.
De vitijs corporis dicit, he means it of the vicious affections of the body.
De Temp. ser. 45. Per concupiscentiam dictu^ est hoc nostrum mortis corpus.
By concupiscence is it that this our body of death is so called. So Oecumenius
says, that the Apostle desires to be delivered from Oecumen in To. ca. 7. Ex
corporalibus actio nibus spiritualem mortem inducentibus: a concupiscentijs
quae in corpore sunt quaeque mors nobis sunt.
the concupiscences which are in the body, and which are death unto us, and do
cause a spiritual death. Origin ibid. Corpus mortis appellatur in quo habitat
peccatu^ quod mortis est causa.
It is a body of death, says Origin, wherein sin dwells which is the cause
of death. Ambrose says, that the Apostle calls his body a body of death,
Ambros. apud Aug. cont. Iulia^. lib. 2. Omnes homines sub peccato nascimur
quorum ipse ortus in vitio est, etc. Ideo Pauli caero corpus mortis erat. etc.
because we all are borne under sin and our very beginning is in trespass,
acknowledging as touching the corruption of sin, that what it was in the
beginning, the same in part it continues still. Epiphanius or rather Methodius
says, that the Apostle here means Method. apud Epiphan. haer. 64. Non corpus
hoc mortem sed peccatum inhabitans per concupiscentiam in corpore dicit etc.
sin dwelling by concupiscence in the body from the bad imaginations and
thoughts whereof he wished to be delivered, accounting the same death and
destruction it self. Bernard says, that it was Bernard. in Cant. ser. 56.
Jpsa est carnis concupiscentia, etc. Hoc sane vnointeriecto pariete non long
peregrinabatur a Domino. Vnde and optabas, clamans, Quis me liberabit, etc.
the law of sin, even concupiscence standing as a wall betwixt God and him,
that made him cry out, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? In
concupiscence then stands this body of death, and because by this body of
death it is that the Apostle calls himself miserable, it is concupiscence
that makes him miserable, which therefore S. Austin calls August. de Tempore
ser. 45.
miseram legem, the miserable law of sin, not as being it self capable of
misery, but per metonymiam, because it makes us miserable, or because we are
miserable by it. Thus therefore the Apostle acknowledges himself miserable in
himself, not as holding himself to be in disgrace with God, but as finding in
himself that for which he deserves so to be, and should be, but that God in
Christ is merciful unto him, not to impute the same. And what is it but a
misery, to have as it were a filthy carrion tied fast to him, still breathing
out noisome stink? to be continually troubled with an importunat enemy, giving
him no rest, and wearying his soul from day to day? nay, to carry about with
him Idem. cont. Julian Pelag. lib. 2. Exercitum que^dam variarum cupiditatum
intra semetipsum debellabat.
even an army of diverse and sundry lusts, drawing one this way, and another
that way, fighting against him on the right hand and on the left, bereauing him
of his joy, whilst in most earnest meditations they carry him away whether he
will or not from that wherein his delight is. If outward crosses do make a man
miserable, much more this inward destraction and affliction, which galleth the
strings of the heart, and vexes the very spirit and soul, more then the
bitterness of death it self. If M. Bishop knew this affliction, he would
think there were cause enough therein to make him cry out, Miserable man that
I am, etc. But his benumbed heart feels it not, and therefore he speaks of
these matters but as a Philosopher in the schools, without any conscience or
sense of that he says, and to a formal argument, as he calls it, gives
these misshapen and deformed answers.

5. W. BISHOP.
Now to the second. Infants Baptized, die the bodily death before they come to
the years of discretion: but there is not in them any other cause of death,
besides Original sin, for they have no actual sin: and death is the wages
of sin, as the Apostle says, Rom 5. and Romans 5.
death entered into the world by sin.

Ans. The cause of the death of such Innocents, is either the distemperature of
their bodies, or external violence: and God who freely bestowed their lives
upon them, may when it pleases him as freely take their lives from them,
especially when he means to recompense them with the happy exchange of life
everlasting. True it is, that if our first parents had not sinned, no man
should have died, but have been both long preserved in Paradise, by the fruit
of the wood of life, and finally translated without death into the Kingdom of
heaven: and therefore is it said most truly of S. Paul, Romans 5. Romans 6.
Death entered into the world by sin. But the other place, The wages of sin
is death, is foully abused, for the Apostle there by death understands
eternal damnation, as appears by the opposition of it to life everlasting:
and by sin there means not Original, but actual sin, such as the Romans
committed in their infidely, the wages whereof, if they had not repented them,
had been hell fire: now to infer that Innocents are punished with corporal
death for Original sin remaining in them, because that eternal death is the
due hire of actual sin, is either to show great want of judgment, or else
very strangely to pervert the words of holy Scripture. Let this also not be
forgotten, that he himself acknowledged in our Consent: that the punishment of
Original sin was taken away in Baptism from the regenerate: how then does
he here say, that he does die the death for it?

R. ABBOT.
The example of infants dying after Baptism before they come to years of
discretion, is rightly alleged to prove that sin remains after Baptism,
because where there is no sin there can be no death. To this M. Bishop sends
us a most pitiful and miserable answer, that the cause of the death of infants
is not sin, but either the distemperature of their bodies or external
violence. Thus he would maintain a privilege to infants against the words of
S. John, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves; that they may say, we say
we have no sin, and we do not therein deceive our selves: and though we die,
yet it is not by reason of sin that we die, but either by the diste^perature of
our bodies, or external violence. But if M. Perkins had said as he might have
said, Infants after Baptism are subject to distemperature of body, and
external violence, and death following, all which are the proper effects of
sin; therefore they are not without sin, in what a woeful case had M.
Bishop been, and how had he been put to his shifts to devise an answer. Surely
S. Austin says, that Au^ust. in Psalm. 37. Non aliquid patimur in ista vita n
si ex illa morte qua^ m^ruimus primo peccato.
we suffer not any thing in this life, but by reason of that death which we
deserved by the first sin. And so says Origin very rightly, that Origin. in
Leuit hom. 3. Nobis homini^us vel mors velreliqua omnis fragilitas in carne ex
piccati condition superducta est.
death and all other frailty in the flesh, was brought upon us by the
condition or state of sin. Therefore distemperature, and weakness, and sickness,
and suffering of external violence, are no less arguments of sin then death
it self, and how then does he make these the causes of death without sin,
when they are no otherwise the causes of death but by reason of sin? But he
adds further, that God who freely bestowed their lives on them, may when it
pleases him as freely take their lives from them. But yet if there be no sin,
and if it be as the Trent Council says, that there is nothing in them that
God hates, nothing that hinders them from entering into heaven, why then does
God without cause take away their life, and not rather without death receive
them unto himself? why does he not immediately 2. Cor. 5 4.
cloth them upon that mortality may be swallowed up of life? This is a mystery
to M. Bishop, and he cannot tell what to say thereof. But the dying of baptized
infants, shows that there is still in the^ a corruption of flesh and blood,
by which the sentence of the Apostle takes hold of them, 1. Cor. 15.50.
flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither shall corruption
inherit incorruption. The cause of their death is the putting off of this
corruption, the dissolution and full mortification of the body of sin, that
this slough being cast off, and mortality changed into immortality, and
corruption into incorruption, they may be fit for the inheritance of the
kingdom of God. Thus Epiphanius brings in Methodius disputing against
Proclus the Origenist, that Epiphan. haer. 64. ex Methodi^. In auxiliaris
medicamenti modu^ ab auxiliatore nostro and vere medico Deo ad eradicationem
peccati ac deletionem assumptae est mors, etc. Instar medicamentariae
purgationis mortem Deus been inuenit quo sic omnino inculpabiles and innoxij
inueniamur, etc. videtur velut siquis summus opifex statuam pulchram ex auro
aut alia materia a se constructam rursus conflet mutilatam repent conspicatus
a pessimo quodam homine, etc.
God as the true Physician has appointed death for a medicinable purgation for
the utter rooting out and putting away of sin, that we may be made faultlesse
and innocent; and that as a goodly golden image sightly and seemly in all
parts, if it be broken and defaced by any means, must be new cast and framed
again for the taking away of the blemishes and disgraces of it, even so man,
the image of God, being maimed and disgraced by sin, for the putting away of
those disgraces, and the repairing of his ruins and decays, must by death be
dissolved into the earth, thence to be raised up again perfect and without
default. Now if M. Bishop will not learn it of us, yet let him learn it of
these ancient Fathers, that sin is the cause of death, even in them to whom
notwithstanding it is forgiven and pardoned for Christ's sake. But he goes
further, True it is that if our first parents had not sinned, no man should
have died, but both have been long preserved in Paradise by the fruit of the
wood of life: and finally translated without death into the kingdom of heaven.
But since they have sinned, what? Marry it is most truly said by S. Paul, Death
entered into the world by sin. Well then, if it entered by sin into the world,
does it continue in the world by any other thing then by which it first entered?
Nay, as it entered by sin, so sin is the only cause of the continuing of
it, and without sin there is no death: in the failing of the cause must needs
be a surceasing of the effect. Now to show that death is the proper effect of
sin, M. Perkins alleges the words of the Apostle, The wages of sin is
death. But M. Bishop says, that this place is foully abused by him. And why
so? Forsooth the Apostle here by death means eternal damnation. And what
then? Does he therefore not mean bodily death also? Surely the Apostle alludeth
to that that God said to our father Adam in the beginning: Genesis 2.17.
In the day that thou shall eat of that forbidden tree, thou shall die the
death, thereby threatening unto him both the first and second death. And in that
meaning has the Apostle spoken of death in the chapter going before, that by
sin came death, etc. Therefore M. Bishops great master Thomas Aquinas
tells him, that when the Apostle immediately before says, the end of those
things is death, he means by death Tho Aquin. in Romans cap 6. Peccata ^e se
nata sunt in^iucere m^^tem te^poralem and eterna^^. Et ^o ^arg. finis peccati
mori tam temporalis quam aeterna.
both temporal and eternal death. Another exception is, that sin is here
taken only for Actual sin; which is a fiction merely absurd and vain. For
it is a proposition universal concerning all sin, and so used universally by
all writers; and if it be true of Actual sin, that the wages of sin is
death, much more is it true of Original sin, which is the filthy and
corrupt fountain whence all actual sins do spring. And that we may know that
M. Bishop himself is of no other mind, he himself has used it in the section
next save one before this, concerning Original sin, arguing that if
Original sin were properly sin in the regenerate, then it should cause
death unto them, because the wages of sin is death. Whereby it appears,
that he speaks but at all adventure, and to serve the present turn, without
any conscience or regard of that he speaks, whether it be true or false. He
has been brought up in Bellarmines school, and of him has learned to care no
further, but only to say somewhat, though it be stark naught. Now for
conclusion of this point he says, Let not this be forgotten, that he himself
aknowledged in our Consent, that the punishment of Original sin is taken
away in Baptism from the regenerate. True, and what then? How then, says he,
does he say here, that he does die the death for it? But he says not so,
neither is it so: for if he should die the death for Original sin, he should
die also the eternal death, which notwithstanding by Christ is taken away.
This death therefore to the regenerate is not in the nature of a punishment,
but rather of a medicine, as has been already said, for the utter dissoluing,
and mortifying, and destroying of the body of sin, that only righteousness
may live in them. It follows as a wages of sin according to the words of
the Apostle in it own nature due unto it, though now paid for other end then
it was before.

6. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins third reason: That which lusts against the spirit, and by lusting
tempts, and in tempting intiseth and draws the heart to sin, is for
nature sin it self: but concupiscence in the regenerate is such: Ergo

Answ. The first proposition is not true: for not every thing that intiseth us
to sin, is sin: or else the Apple that allured Eve to sin, had been by
nature sin: and every thing in this world one way or another tempts us to
sin: according unto that of S. John: 1. Epi. 2.
All that is in the world, is the Concupiscence of the flesh, and the
Concupiscence of the eyes, and Pride of life: So that it is very gross to say,
that every thing which allureth to sin, is sin it self, and as wide is it
from all moral wisdom to affirm, that the first motions of our passions be
sins. For even the very heathen Philosophers could distinguish between sudden
passions of the mind and vices: teaching that passions may be bridled by the
understanding, and brought by due ordering of them into the ring of reason, and
so made virtues rather then vices. And that same text which M. Perkins brings
to persuade these temptations to be sins, proves the quite contrary. God
tempts no man; Jacob. 1.
but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence,
and is allured: after when concupiscence has conceived, it brings forth
sin: Mark the words well. First, Concupiscence tempts, and allureth by
some evil motion, but that is no sin, until afterward it do conceive, that
is, obtain some liking of our will, in giving ear to it, and not expelling it
so speedily as we ought to do the suggestion of such an enemy: the which that
most deep Doctor. S. Augustine, sifteth out very profoundly in these words:
When the Apostle S. James says, Lib. 6. in Jul. cap. 5.
every man is tempted, being drawn away and allured by his Concupiscence, and
afterward Concupiscence when it has conceived, brings forth sin: Truly in
these words, the thing brought forth is distinguished, from that which brings
it forth. The dam is concupiscence, the fool is sin. But concupiscence does
not bring sin forth, unless it conceive, (so then it is not sin of it self)
and it conceiueth not, unless it draw us, that is, unless it obtain the
consent of our will, to commit evil. The like exposition of the same place,
and the difference between the pleasure tempting, that runs before, and the
sin which follows after, Lib. 4. in Johan. cap. 15.
unless we resist manfully, may be seen in S. Ciril, so that by the judgment
of the most learned ancient Fathers, that text of S. James cited by M. Perkins,
to prove concupiscence to be sin, disputes it very soundly: to that reason of
his, Such as the fruit is, such is the Tree: I answer, that not concupiscence,
but the will of man is the Tree: which brings forth, either good or bad
fruit, according unto the disposition of it: concupiscence is only an intiser
unto bad.

R. ABBOT.
Against M. Perkins first proposition, M. Bishop says, that not every thing
that entiseth us to sin is sin. But therein he says untruly, if he mean
as he should do, of that that is in man himself. It is generally true that
there is nothing that tempts or entiseth to sin, which has not it self
the nature of sin, either as the subject or as the thing it self, so that
concupiscence because it cannot be said to be the subject, must necessarily be
holden to be sin it self. His exceptions to the contrary are very fond.
First, that then the apple that allured Eve to sin had been by nature sin:
and secondly, that every thing in the world one way or another tempts us to
sin. But where has he ever read, that the apple, if it were an apple,
tempted or intised Eve? Did the apple any thing more then it did before, or was
it any other then it was before? Surely there was no change in the apple, but
the change was in her self, and therefore as it did not tempt her before, so
neither could it be said to tempt her in that temptation. And what is this, but
to make God the tempter, who was the maker of the apple, contrary to the words
of S. James, that Iam. 1.13.
God tempts no man to evil? Which we must likewise say of all other things
in the world, if it be true that M. Bishop says, that they tempt us to sin.
For though God himself immediately do not tempt us, yet if the creatures of the
world do tempt us, the accusation redoundeth to him, because in the creatures
there is nothing but his work. They are fair and beautiful, they are
pleasant to sight and use, but do they therefore tempt to sin? Did the Sun
tempt the heathen idolaters to worship it? Did 2. Sam. 13.2.
Thamar tempt Ammon to filthiness, or Dan. 13.8.
Susanna the wicked elders? Nay, as S. James tells us, it is our own sinful
lust that tempts us to abuse the good creatures of God, which themselves
te^pt us not, but rather as S. Paul teaches us, Romans 8.22.
they groan and travail in pain, because Verse. 20.
they are subject to our vanity, and therefore Verse. 19.21.
wait when the sons of God shall be revealed, that they may be delivered from the
bondage of our corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. But
he alleges to his purpose the words of S. John: All that is in the world is
the concupiscence of the flesh, and the concupiscence of the eyes and pride of
life. Where if we consider the Apostles words as they lie, we shall see how
justly it may be returned to himself, which a little before he said of M.
Perkins, that either he shows great want of judgment, or else very strangely
peruerteth the words of holy Scripture. The thing that he has to prove, is
that every thing in this world tempts us to sin, The words of S. John are,
John. 2.16.
All that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the world. He speaks of the
things of the world which are of the Father, because they are his creatures: S.
John speaks of the things of the world, which are not of the Father. He
speaks of the world, which is the creature and frame of heaven and earth, and
all things therein: S. John speaks August. cont. Julian. lib. 4. cap. 13.
Nouimus Ioannem non mundum istum, id est, coelum and terram and omnia quae in
eo substa^tialiter sunt, reprehendisse cum diceret. Omnia, quae in mundo sunt,
etc.
not of the world in that meaning, but of the world of mankind corrupted and
defiled with sin, according to which the unregenerate are called Luke 16.8.
the children of this world, and as our Savior Christ says, that John. 7.7.
the world hated him because he testified of it, that the works thereof are
evil. And does he not then, think you, bring us a good proof, that every
thing in the world tempts us to sin? The meaning of S. John is plain, that
in the world, that is to say, in the men of this world, there is nothing but
corruption, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life, and
the following of all these, all which are not of the Father, nor have accord
with him, but are of men themselves, and perish together with themselves. What
is this then but profanely and lewdly to abuse the word of God, thus to cite it
to prove a falsehood, when it has not so much as any show of that for which it
is cited? If it be gross to say, that whatsoever allureth to sin is sin, I
am sure it is much more gross, that he has said for the disprouing of it. He
adds further, that it is as wide from all moral wisdom to affirm that the
first motions of our passions be sins. But we judge not of these things by
moral wisdom, which is the wisdom of this world, because 1. Cor. 1.21.
the world by it own wisdom knows not God in the wisdom of God; we esteem
hereof, as God by the foolishness of the Apostles preaching has taught us to
believe. And out of their preaching we have learned to say as S. Austin did,
that August. cont. Julian. lib. 4. cap. 2 Ipsa per se ipsa^ libido rectissime
omnino suis ipsis motibus accusatur quibus ne excedat obsistitur.
lust it self by it self is very justly accused or blamed in the very motions
of it, wherein it is resisted that it exceed not, and that Ibid. li 5. ca. 5.
Quantumlibet in isto conflictu superiores simus, etc. tamen ipsis certe nostrae
cogitationis motibus and affectibus si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus, etc.
howsoever in this conflict of the spirit against the flesh we get the better,
yet if in the very motions and affections of our thought we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. But says he,
heathen Philosophers could distinguish between sudden passions of the mind and
vices. But what is it to us what heathen Philosophers have distinguished,
seeing Christian Philosophers have taught us to call these passions, See after
Sect. 9.
vices, inward vices, vitiousnesse, vicious affections, vicious concupiscences,
or lusts? Let M. Bishop follow Philosophers if he please; as for us we say in
these questions of Divinity, as Tertullian said, that Tertul de praescript.
adu haeret. philosophia temeraria interpret diuinae naturae and dispositionis.
philosophy is but a saucy interpreter of Gods nature and disposition, and
that Philosophers are Idem. cont. Hermogen. Haereticorum patriarchae philosophi.
the patriarchs of heretics. We take our instructions out of Solomon's porch,
not out of the porch of Zeno; from Jerusalem, not from Athens; and there we
have learned to call it sin whatsoever swarueth from the law of God, as
before has been declared. Yea but M. Bishop will prove out of that very text
which M. Perkins alleges, that concupiscence is not sin. Iam. 1.14.
Every man, says S. James, is tempted when he is drawn away by his own
concupiscence, and is allured: afterward concupiscence when it has conceived,
brings forth sin. Mark well the words, says he. First concupiscence
tempts and allureth by some evil motion, but that is no sin, until
afterward it do conceive. But how does he prove that by any argument out of S.
James his words? What, is it not sin because S. James does not expressly call it
sin? Why then neither shall the consent be sin, because S. James expresses the
consent first, and afterward infers the bringing forth of sin. But though
S. James do not call it expressly sin, yet S. Paul does. For what S. James
speaks of concupiscence, stirring up evil motions, and thereby tempting and
entising, the very same S. Paul expresses in these words, Romans 7.8.
Sin wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. Which is the same as if he
should have said, that concupiscence which is the habit of sin, did stir up in
him all manner of evil motions and affections to tempt him thereby. The same
Apostle says, Cap. 6.12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof, calling it by the name of sin, where it reigns not, nor is
obeyed in the lusts of it. He distinctly notes sin, and the lusts of it, and
the obeying, that is, consenting to those lusts, and so plainly shows, that
in the root, and from the beginning it is sin. Thus the faithful elsewhere
are warned to take heed not to be hardened Heb. 2.13.
by the seducing (or deceitfulness) of sin, where it is also plain, that it
is sin which seduceth and enticeth, even as the Apostle says, Rom 7.11.
Sin seduced me (or deceived me) and thereby slew me, giving to understand,
that these seducings and enticings, that is, the first motions of
concupiscence, are so far sin, as that thereby he felt himself in himself
to be but a dead man. Thus the Apostle S. Paul thwarteth all that M. Bishop
gathers out of S. James his words, but yet the most deep Doctor S. Austin
sifteth out the matter very profoundly for him. And indeed he sifteth well, but
leaves to M. Bishop nothing but the very branne. Aug. contra Julian. lib. 6.
cap. 5. Profecto in his verbis, partus a pariente distinguitur. Pariens est
co^cupiscentia, partus peccatum. Sed concupiscentia non parit nisi conceperit.
Nec concipit nisi illexerit, hoc est, ad malum perpetra^dum obtinuerit vole^tis
assensum.
In these words (says he) the birth is distinguished from that that brings
forth. That that brings forth is concupiscence, the birth is sin. But
concupiscence brings not forth except it conceive. So then, says M. Bishop)
it is not sin of it self. But we deny his argument: for a mother brings
forth a woman, and yet she her self is a woman also. A woman brings not
forth a woman, except she first conceive, and yet she is a woman before she do
conceive, and sin brings not forth sin, except by consent it first
conceive, and yet it is sin before conception. There is nothing in Saint
Austins words, but stands well with that that before has been said, that
concupiscence being the habit of sin, does by gaining the consent of the
will, bring forth actual and outward sins, which is the true meaning of
that place of James. And that he did not otherwise conceive, but that
concupiscence is sin, M. Bishop might very well have seen, if he had but
read the words a few lines before the place which he cites, where speaking of
the same being in us, he says, Jbid. Non tan tum inesset, verum and graniter
obesset; nisi reaetus qui nos obstrinxerat per remissionem peccatorum solutus
esset.
It should not only be in us, but also greatly hurt us, but that the guilt
thereof is acquitted by the forgiveness of our sins. We would have M. Bishop
tell us, how it should hurt us if it be not sin: for we suppose that there is
nothing in man that can hurt him, but only sin, especially the hurt being
such, as S. Austine anon after speaks of, Tantum quis inest, pertraheret ad
vltiman^ mortem.
to draw us, only by being in us, to everlasting death. The place of Cyril
affirms the being of lust. Cyril^^ Joan. lib. 4. cap. 51. Feruens cupiditas
ante peccandi actum insidet.
ante peccandi actum, before the actual sin, but has nothing for M. Bishops
turn to prove, that lust also is not sin, nay in the words immediately
following, he proves that it is sin, affirming, that Vt hoc anigmate
perdiscamus nullo nos pacto mundos vnquam futuros nisi omnem turpe^ ex animo
cupiditaetem cijciamus.
by circumcision we should learn, that we shall not be clean, unless we cast
out of our mind all filthy lust. For if lust it self do make us unclean, it
must needs be sin, because nothing can make a man unclean but only sin.
That which M. Perkins adds to illustrate this point, Such as the fruit is,
such is the tree, was very fitly spoken to the matter in hand. For the fruit
has it whole nature and quality from the tree, neither is it any thing, but
what it is by that that it receives from thence. If therefore the actions of
concupiscence be sin, concupiscence which is the tree, must needs have the
nature and condition of sin. But M. Bishop answers, that not concupiscence,
but the will of man is the tree. Which is all one as if he should have said,
that not the will of man, but the will of man is the tree. For it has been
before showed, that concupiscence is nothing else, but the corrupted will of
man, which does not bring forth either evil or good indifferently, but is of
it self an enticer only unto bad, until God do create it anew, and by his own
hand do work in it to will that that is good. In a word, the holy Scripture as
on the one side it calls the motions of concupiscence, 1. Pet. 2.11.
the lusts of the flesh, so it calls also the effects and deeds of those
lusts, the works of the flesh; thereby showing, that concupiscence signified
by the name of Gal. 5.9.
flesh, and importing the corruption of the whole mind and will of man, is
rightly said to be the tree or evil root whence all evil works, and all
wickedness do spring.

7. W. BISHOP.
Lib. 5. contr. Julian. cap. 3.
But S. Augustine says, That concupiscence is sin, because in it there is
disobedience against the rule of the mind, etc. I answer, that S. Augustine in
more then twenty places of his works teaches expressly, that concupiscence is
no sin, if sin be taken properly: wherefore when he once calls it sin,
he takes sin largely as it comprehends, not only all sin, but also all
motions and enticements to sin: in which sense concupiscence may be termed
sin: but it is so called very seldom of S. Augustine, Lib. 6. cap. 5.
but more commonly an evil, as in the same work is to be seen evidently,
where he says: That grace in Baptism does renew a man perfectly, so
farrefoorth as it appertains to the deliverance of him from all manner of
sin; but not so, as it freeth him from all evil: so that concupiscence
remaining after baptism, is no manner of sin, in S. Augustines judgment: but
may be called evil, because it provoke us to evil. To this place of S.
Augustine, Tract. 41. in Joan.
I will join that other like, which M. Perkins quoteth in his fourth reason:
where he says, that sin dwells always in our members. The same
answerserueth, that sin there is taken improperly: as appears by that he
seats it in our members: for according unto S. Augustine and all the learned,
the subject of sin being properly taken, is not in any part of the body, but
in the will and soul, and in the same passage he signifies plainly, that in
baptism all sins and iniquity is taken away, and that there is left in the
regenerate, only an infirmity or weakness.

R. ABBOT.
That place of Austin does very pregnantly show, that concupiscence is truly
and properly called sin, and gives a reason thereof out of the true nature
of sin, which before has been declared. August. contr. Julian. lib. 5. ca.
3. Sicut coecitas cordis and peccatum est quo in Deum non creditur, and poena
peccati qua cor superbum digna animaduersione punitur, and causa peccati, cum
mali aliquid coeci cordis errore committitur: itae concupiscentia carnis
aduersus quam bonus concupiscit spiritus, and peccatum est quia inest illi
inobedientia contra dominatum mentis, and poena peccati est, quia reddita est
meritis inobedientis: and causa peccati est defectione co^sentientis vel
contagione nascentis.
As blindness of heart (says he) is both a sin whereby man believes not,
and the punishment of sin, wherewith the pride of the heart is justly
revenged; and the cause of sin whilst any evil is committed by the error of
the heart so blinded: so the concupiscence of the flesh, against which the good
spirit desires, is both sin, because there is in it a disobedience against
the rule of the mind, and the punishment of sin, because it was rendered to
the desert of him that obeyed not, and the cause of sin either by the default
of him that consents unto it, or by infecting of him that is borne of it.
Concupiscence then is sin, as blindness of heart is sin. But blindness of
heart is properly sin, therefore concupiscence is so also. Rebellion against
the law of the mind, whereby is meant the law of God, is properly sin, as
before is showed. But concupiscence is a habit of rebellion against the law of
God: it is therefore properly to be accounted sin. And whereas Austin when he
denies concupiscence to be sin, says it is therefore called sin, because
it is the punishment of sin, and the cause of sin, here he affirms that
it is not only the punishment of sin, and the cause of sin, but otherwise
also sin, and therefore properly and truly sin. But M. Bishop tells us,
that Austin in more then twenty places of his works teaches expressly, that
concupiscence is no sin, if sin be taken properly. Yet S. Austine in those
twenty places says nothing of sin properly or improperly taken, and indeed
takes sin improperly, when he denies concupiscence to be sin, as anon
shall appear. He says further, that when Austin calls concupiscence sin,
he takes sin largely, as it comprehends not only all sin, but also all
motions and enticements to sin, and so it may be termed sin And this large
taking of sin, we say is the proper taking of it, and thereby concupiscence
is properly called sin. But the motions and enticements to sin, being the
same with concupiscence, we see what a proper secret he has here delivered,
that concupiscence may be termed sin, as sin is taken largely, so as to
comprehend concupiscence. A learned note. But because the reason that he has
before delivered is stark naught, he should have given us here a better
reason, why the name of sin is not properly to be understood, when
concupiscence is called sin. He tells us, that with Austin it is more
commonly called an evil, and indeed it is true, that very often he so calls
it, but yet such an evil, as makes a man evil, so that by reason thereof,
Hieron. aduer. Pelag. lib. 3. Quamuis Patriarcha sit aliquis, quamuis Propheta,
quamuis Apostolus, dicitur eis a Domino Saluatore, Si vos cum sitis mali, etc.
though a man be a Prophet, a Patriarch, an Apostle, yet (says Hierome) it is
said unto them by our Savior, If we being evil do know to give good gifts to
your children, etc. Now there is nothing that makes a man evil, but that
which is properly sin. Concupiscence therefore is properly a sin. But of this
shall be spoken more at large anon. Only here it is to be observed, how M.
Bishop understands it to be an evil, because it provoke us to evil. So he
will have it no otherwise called an evil, then it is called sin. It is
sin, because it provoke to sin; and so evil, because it provoke to
evil, and so indeed properly shall be neither sin nor evil, whereas S.
Austin acquitting it in some meaning from the name of sin, leaves it simply
and absolutely in the name and nature of evil, as shall appear. To this place
he brings another testimony of Austin, which M. Perkins alleges in the
fourth reason, and gives to it a very improper answer. August. in Joan. Tract
41. Quamdiu viuis necesse est esse peccatum in me^bris tu^s.
So long as thou live (says Austin) of necessity sin must be in thy
members, sin is there also taken improperly, says M. Bishop. And yet S.
Austin deduceth that assertion from the words of S. John: 1. Job. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us,
alleging the one, and concluding the other by occasion of the words of our
Savior Christ, Ioh. 8.34.
He that commits sin is the servant of sin, and the servant abides not in
the house for ever. For hereupon he asks the question, What hope then have
we, who are not without sin? and answers at large, that sin, though
according to the words of S. John we cannot be without it so long as we live
here, yet shall not hurt us if we do not by suffering it to reign, make our
selves servants unto it, because he only that commits sin by course and
practice of evil conversation, is the servant of sin, that is to say, of
inward corruption. Now therefore if we will follow M. Bishops construction, we
must understand S. John also of sin improperly taken, and affirm contrary
to the ancient received Maxim of Christian faith, that if sin be properly
taken, it may be truly said of some men, that they are without sin, because
he says it is not true of sin properly taken, that so long as a man lives,
it must needs be in him, as S. Austin speaks. Now he will prove, that sin
is there improperly taken, because S. Austin places it in the members: For
according to S. Austin and all the learned, the subject of sin properly
taken, is not in any part of the body, but in the will and soul. Where we may
justly smile at his ridiculous and childish ignorance, Why, M. Bishop, is
concupiscence any otherwise in the members of the body, but only by the
soul? Julian the Pelagian was not so gross, but that he knew, that Aug.
contra Julian. lib. 6. ca. 5 Quia carnaliter anima concupiscit.
the flesh is said to lust, because the soul lusts according to the flesh,
which S. Austine confirms and says, that Ibid Motibus suis anima quos habet
secundum spiritum aduersatur alijs motibus suis quos habet secundum carnem, and
rursu^ motibus suis quos habet secundum carnem, aduersatur alijs motibus suis
quos habet secundum spiritum, and ideo dicitur ^are concupiscere aduersus
spiritum, etc.
it is the soul it self, which by it own motions which it has according to
the spirit, is contrary to other motions of it own, which it has according
to to the flesh: and by it own motions which it has according to the flesh,
is contrary to other motions of it own, which it has according to the
spirit, and that therefore the flesh is said to lust contrary to the spirit,
and the spirit contrary to the flesh. Who knows not this, says he to
Julian, which thou like a great Doctor so often tellest us? And what, does not
M. Bishop know it, that will be taken for so great a Doctor in the Church of
Rome? Let me tell him once again, that the soul is the proper and immediate
subject of concupiscence; that to lust is an act of a nature endued with life
and sense, which the body is not of it self, but only by the soul: and
therefore that that exception of his makes nothing to the contrary, but that
S. Austin by sin in the members, does understand that that is properly and
truly called sin, to say nothing of that I have before declared, that by
concupiscence is also understood the will it self, thrall and subject unto
sin. For conclusion of this point he adds, that S. Austin in the same passage
signifies plainly, that in baptism all sin and iniquity is taken away,
and that there is left in the regenerate only an infirmity and weakness. But
it is his singular impudency to allege S. Austin so directly contrary to his
whole drift and purpose in that place, which is as before was said, to show,
that sin is in us whilst we live, only that it may not hurt us we must have
care that we make not our selves the servants of it. Whereas he says, that
iniquity is taken away, he means it of the guilt thereof, which ceasseth in
the regenerate by the forgiveness of their sins, but otherwise he himself
affirms and approves Ambrose affirming the same, that Contra Julian. lib. 2
and lib. 9. cap. 8. Neque enim nulla est tui quitas cum (...) vno homine vel
inferiora superioribus contumacites reluctantur, etiamsi vincere non sinantur.
it is an iniquity in us, that the flesh lusts against the spirit, albeit it
be not suffered to overcome. He says, that the iniquity being taken away,
there remains an infirmity, but not taking infirmity in that sense as M.
Bishop does, for a mere weakness: but for that that he himself elsewhere
expounds it, when he says, that De peccat^^eris. and remis. li. 2. cap. 17.
Ignorantia and infirmitas vitia sunt, quae impediunt voluntatem, nemoueatur ad
faciendum opus bonum vel abopere malo abstinendum.
ignorance and infirmity are the vices which do hinder the will, that it
moves not to do good, or to abstain from evil; which he calls elsewhere De
not. and grae. cap. 67. Omni peccati animae duo ista poenaliae, ignorantia and
difficu^tas.
the penalties of every soul of man. Whereby it appears, that by infirmity
he means that vitiousnesse and corruption of man's nature, which ensued of the
first sin, whereby it is disabled to the doing of good and forbearing of
evil, which in part is cured in regeneration, but yet in part he says is
remaining still. Thus M. Bishop, we see, makes the best shift he can with
words, because in matter he can light upon nothing to serve his turn.

8. W. BISHOP.
Aug. Epist. 29.
M. Perkins 4. reason is taken from the record of the ancient Church: Charity
in some is more, in some less, in some none, the highest degree of all which
cannot be increased, is in none, as long as a man lives upon earth: and as long
as it may be increased, that which is less then it should be, is in fault: by
which fault it is, that there is no just man upon earth, that does good and
sins not, etc. For which also though we profit never so much, it is
necessary for us to say, Forgive us our debts, though all our worst deeds and
thoughts be already forgiven in Baptism. Answer. That here is never a word
touching concupiscence, or to prove Original sin to remain after Baptism,
which is in question: but only that the best men for want of perfect Charity,
do often sin venially, which we grant.

R. ABBOT.
S. Austin says, that August Epist. 29. Plenissima charitas quae iam non
possit augeri, quamdiu hic homo vtt^^, est in nem^ne^ quamdiu autem augeri
potest quod minus est quam debet, ex vitio est
perfect charity which can now no further be increased, is in no man so long
as he lives here. And so long as it may be increased, says he, surely that
that it is less then it should be, EX VITIO EST, is by reason of some vice,
corruption, default. M. Bishop answers, that here is never a word of
concupiscence, or to prove Original sin to remain after Baptism. But if he
had meant honestly, he should have told us what is meant by that vitium, call
it vice or blemish, or stain, or corruption, or default, or all these. If it
be not understood of concupiscence and the continuing blot and stain of
Original sin, he should have told us what we are otherwise to understand by
it. But he could devise nothing else whereof to understand it, and therefore is
content with a very homely and beggarly shift to pass it over, that forsooth
there is nothing said of concupiscence, when yet that that is said, cannot be
meant of any thing else. And that it is so meant, S. Austin himself plainly
confirms unto us by the like sentence in another place. De na. and gra. cap.
38. Si in Abeltusio charitas Dei adhuc erat, quo posset and deberet augeri,
quicquid minus erat, ex vitioerat
If in Abel (says he) there were wherein the love of God might and ought to be
increased, that that was too little, ex vitio erat, was by reason of some vice
or corruption. And this he shows to be the same that the Apostle speaks of
when he says, Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, etc. This sin he
terms vitium, and says: Ex hoc vitio mittitur and oculus quonon oportet.
By this vice or corruption the eye is cast whither it ought not to be, and if
it go forward and prevail, adultery is committed. Again he adds, Hoc
peccatum, id est, hunc vitiosae affectionis appetitum, qui magna ex part
frenarunt, etc. This sin, that is to say, this lust of vicious affection,
they who have for the most part bridled, have deserved to be called just. And
thus very often he calls concupiscence a vice, and the motions thereof vices,
as before was said. Now in the place cited, S. Austin adds, as touching the
effect of this vice: Epist. 29. Ex quo vitio non est nisius super terram, etc.
Ex quo vitio non iustificabitur. etc.
By reason of which vice there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and
sins not. By reason of which vice no man living shall be justified, or found
just in the sight of God. By reason of which vice, if we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, etc. Which two latter clauses M. Bishop very
trecherously and falsely has left out, because he saw them wholly contrary to
all that he says. For if by reason of this vice of concupiscence, we cannot
say that we have no sin, then it must needs follow, that concupiscence is
truly sin. If by reason of this vice, no man living shall be found just in the
sight of God, then this vice, that is to say, concupiscence, is sin, because
nothing hinders a man from being just in the sight of God but only sin. And
this takes away the other part of his answer, that S. Austine only says,
that the best men for want of perfect charity do often sin venially. For by
their doctrine, venial sins hinder not a man from being just in the sight of
God, whereas the vice of which S. Austin speaks, is such as hinders
justice, so that by reason thereof no man living shall be found just in the
sight of God. M. Perkins therefore rightly alleged this place, to prove that
concupiscence is sin, and M. Bishop in answering it, shows himself a man
of wretched and evil conscience, who being so shut in with the truth, as that
he knew not which way to resist, yet would rather by falsehood and collusion
shift it off, then renounce the errors, to the maintenance whereof he has
wickedly sold himself.

9. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins having thus strongly (as you see) fortified his position with that
one sentence of S. Augustine (which has also nothing for his purpose) in
steed of all antiquity: confesses ingenuously, that S. Augustine in sundry
places denies concupiscence to be sin: but expounds him to mean, that it is
not sin in that person, but in it self: which is already confuted: for
sin that is an accident, and so properly inherent in his subject, cannot be
at all, if it be not in some person, and the sin of the same person. But if
the Protestant Reader desire to be well assured of S. Augustines opinion in
this point: let him see what their Patriarch John Calvin says of it: Lib. 3.
Instit. cap. 3. number. 10.
where thus he writes: Neither is it needful to labor much in searching out
what the old Writers thought of this point, when one Augustine may serve the
turn: who with great diligence has faithfully collected together all their
sentences. Let the readers therefore take out of him, if they desire to have
any certainty of the judgment of antiquity. Hitherto somewhat honestly: What
follows? Moreover between him and us, there is this difference: that he
truly dares not call the disease of concupiscence a sin, but to express it,
is content to use the word of infirmity, then lo does he say, that it is made
sin, when the act of our consent does join with it. But we hold that very
thing to be sin, wherewith a man is in any sort tickled, Observe first good
Reader, that S. Augustines opinion with him carries the credit of all
antiquity: Which is the cause that I cite him more often against them.
Secondly, that he is flatly on our side: teaching concupiscence not to be
sin, unless we do consent unto it. Lastly, learn to mislike the blind
boldness of such Masters: who having so highly commended S. Augustines
judgment in this very matter, and advised all men to follow it, does
notwithstanding fly from it himself: presuming that some would be so
shallow-witted as not to epsy him, or else content to rely more upon his
only credit, then upon the authority of all the ancient Fathers. For a taste
of whose consent with S. Augustine in this question, I will here put the
sentences of some few, that I need not hereafter return to rehearse them.

S. Chrysostom says, Passions be not sins of themselves, Homil 11 in epist.
ad Romans
but the unbridled excess of them does make sins: And that I may for example
sake touch one of them: Concupiscence is not a sin; but when passing measure
it breaks his bounds, then lo it is adultery; not in regard of concupiscence,
but in respect of the excessive and unlawful riot of it.

S. Bernard ( whom M. Perkins often cites against us, Sermon. de se^ tribul.
and therefore may sometimes be alleged for us) has these words: Sin is at
the door, but if thou do not open it, it will not enter in: lust tickleth at
the heart; but unless thou willingly yield unto it, it shall do thee no hurt:
withhold thy consent, and it prevails not.

S. Aug. and S. Cirill, have been cited already, S. Hier. and S. Greg. shall be
hereafter: who with the confession of Calvin, may serve sufficiently to prove,
that approved antiquity is wholly for us. And if any desire to know the founder
of our adversaries Doctrine in this point, let him read the 64. heresy
recorded by that ancient and holy Bishop Epiphanius: where he registreth one
Proclus an old rotten sectary to have taught, that sins are not taken away in
Baptism, but are only covered, which is as much to say, as sin remains
still in the person regenerate, but is not imputed to him. Which is just M.
Perkins, and our Protestants position.

R. ABBOT.
If M. Perkins had no better fortified his positions, then M. Bishop does his
answers, he should with us have bin holden for too weak a man to meddle in
controversies of divinity. But as Tertullian said, that Tertul. de praescript.
Nusquam facilius proficatur qu^^^ in castris re^ellium, vbi ipsum esse illic
pro^^reri est.
it is no where more easy thriuing then in the camp of rebels, where to be
only, is to be in pay, so may we say, that it is no where more easy writing
then amongst heretics and rebels against the truth, where to write only is
sufficient to commend a man; it is no matter how or what he write. Such a
writer is M. Bishop; a bad one, God knows; but we can look for no better of
him then the matter will afford him. He says, that M. Perkins had but one
sentence of S. Austine for the maintenance of his position, and that nothing
for his purpose: but M. Perkins has alleged more then he has answered, and
it seems, that that one sentence was to the purpose, which he could no
otherwise shift of, but by loud dissembling and concealing of that, wherein S.
Austine with maine stream does run against him. Again he tells us, that
M. Perkins confesses ingenuously, that S. Austine in sundry places denies
concupiscence to be sin, and we confess as much, and expound S. Austines
meaning as he does, that it is not sin to the person, not that in it self it
is not sin. But this, he says, is already confuted, and we say that his
imagined confutation is already reconfuted. But he gives us a reason why it
cannot be so. For sin that is an accident, and so properly inherent in his
subject, cannot be at all, if it be not in some person, and the sin of the same
person. And we answer him by S. Austine, that it is sin in the person, and
the sin of the person by inherent quality and disposition, but it is not the
sin of the person by account of guilt and imputation. For the approouing
whereof M. Perkins alleged two places out of Austine, which M. Bishop honestly
passes over, as if he had not seen them, but they will meet with him again
anon. In the mean time he brings us in our Patriark, as he calls him,
John Calvin, referring his Readers to S. Austine, to know by him the judgment
of antiquity, concerning this matter of concupiscence. Where I answer him,
that we honor Calvin indeed as a singular instrument of God, for the
restoring of the light of his truth, and overthrowing of the throne of the
purple whore of Rome, but we make him no Patriarch, we follow him no further
then he approoueth unto us, that he is a follower of Christ; we tie not our
selves to him, but use our liberty to dissent from him, and to censure him
where he has gone awry. But M. Bishop and his fellows have their Patriarch
indeed, to whom they bind themselves, Antichrist the man of sin, the enemy
of Christ, whose dirt they must be content to eat, and to brook all the filth
of his abominations, and Did. 40. si Papae.
though he lead them to hell, yet no man may dare say unto him, Sir why do ye
so? Well, Calvin says, that Austine has diligently gathered the judgment of
antiquity, and what then? forsooth he says further thus: that Calvin.
Institut. lib. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 10.
between Austine and us there may seem to be this difference, that he dares
not call the disease of concupiscence by the name of sin; but we hold it to
be a sin that a man is tickled with any lust or desire against the law of
God. Whereupon M. Bishop gives his Reader these observations; first that S.
Austines opinion carries with Calvin the credit of all antiquity, which is the
cause, says he, that I cite him more often against them; which indeed he has
full clerkly and profoundly done, so as that I presume, I may assure the Reader
that he has scarsely ever read over one book of his. Secondly, says he, that
he is flatly on our side: but therein he reckons before his host; for Calvin
says to the contrary, that Ibid. sect. 12.
Austine differs not so much from our doctrine, as in show he seems to do,
and that he varieth but little from our opinion. Lastly, says he, learn to
mislike the blind boldness of such masters. But if Calvin were blind, alas
for poor M. Bishop, what can he see? and yet though he can see but little, he
is as bold as blind bayard, and doubts not to vilify him, to whom he might
very well be a scholar yet many years. Calvin justly commends Austines
judgment, and advises all men to follow it, and in substance flies not from
it himself, though in terms he somewhat differ. Neither did he presume upon
shallow wits not to be espied, knowing well that the whole rabble of the court
of Antichrist, would use their deepest wits for the sifting of that he should
write, but in the conscience of integrity and faithfulness, he despised all
their barkings and malicious fury, and with the invincible shield of truth
bears off all the poisoned darts of their reproaches. He never taught men to
rely upon his authority, but by authority of the word of God and testimony of
the ancient church, he labored to establish the faith of Christ, yet making
men witnesses only, not authors or dictators of the truth, and therefore not
doubting to censure them, where they swerve from the authority of the word of
truth. But now because M. Bishop will persuade us, that S. Austine is wholly on
their part, let us somewhat more at large examine his opinion and judgment in
this behalf. Which although it may be sufficiently perceived by those things
that have been scatteringly alleged already, yet fully to remove this cavil,
let us here lay together what shall be found necessary for the clearing
thereof. And first, we are to observe, that sin is considered two manner of
ways; one way as it is opposed to righteousness; another way as it is opposed
to forgiveness of sins. Sin properly taken, as every man's understanding
gives him, is opposite to righteousness, and so whatsoever is contrary to
righteousness, is sin. Thus have we before described the nature of sin,
and according to this description concupiscence in the regenerate, being Romans
7.23. Gal. 5.17.
contrary to righteousness is sin, neither ever came it into S. Austines
heart to think otherwise. But he considers sin in the proper effect of
sin, as it makes guilty, so that whatsoever is forgiven is no sin, because
forgiveness takes away the guilt of sin. So long as the guilt remains,
though the thing be past and gone, whereof or whereby the man is guilty, yet he
understands the sin to remain still. If the guilt be taken away, though
the thing still continue the same, by which the man became guilty, yet he
takes it not to be in the nature of sin, because the nature of sin is to
make guilty. The occasion of which construction was given him by the Pelagian
heretics, the predecessors of the Papists, who when he taught against them
Original sin, and the remainder of that blot of natural corruption in the
regenerate, as we do, took occasion to cavil against him, that he August
cont. duas epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 13. Dicunt, inquit, baptisma no^ dare
omnem induldgentiam pecc^torum nec auferre criminae sed radere, vt omnium
peccatorum radices in mala carne reneantur quasi ^asorum in capite capillorum
vnde crescant it^rum risecanda peccata.
said, that baptism did not give remission of all sins, neither did take
away faults, but only shave them, so as that the roots were still sticking,
from whence other sins should grow again. S. Austine the better to clear
this matter to popular understanding, affirms, that baptism does take away
all sin, because that albeit concupiscence of the flesh were still remaining,
yet it did not remain in the nature of sin, because the guilt thereof in
baptism was remitted. De nupt. et concupisc lib. 1. ca. 25. Dimittitur non
sit, sed vt in peccatu^ non imputetur.
It is forgiven, says he, not so as that it is not, but so as that it is not
imputed for sin. Ibid. cap. 26. In eis qui regenera^turr in Christo, cum
remissionem accipiu^t prorsus omnium peccatorum v^que necesse est, vt reatus
etiam huius licet manenus ad ^uc concup s^entiae remittatur, vt in peccatum non
impu^^tur Nam sicut c^ru^ peccatorum, qu^ manner non (...) sunt, quo^^am cum
(...) p^et^reunt (...), et ^isi remi^^ vt (...) in aeter^um ma^e^^; sic illius
concupiscen^ic quando remittitur reatus aufertur. Hoc est e^^im non habere
peccatum, non esse re^ym peccati N^^ si quisqu^^ ve^^^ gratia fecerit
adueterium etiam si nunquam de^^ces^^ faciat (...) est adulterij donec reatus
ipsias (...) Habet ergo peccatum quamuis illud quod admis^^ ^am non sit, quia
cum temp^re quo factum est praeti^^ijt, etc Man^^t ergo (peccata) nisi
remittantur. Sed quomodo manent si prae^^^ta sunt nisi quia praet^rterunt actu,
manent reatu, Sic itaque s^^rie contra^^ potest vt etia^ illud maneat act^^^,
aeterea^ rea^^.
In the regenerate, when they receive forgiveness of all their sins, the
guilt of this concupiscence, though it self still continue, is remitted, so as
that it is not imputed for sin. For as of those sins which cannot continue,
because when they are done they are past, yet the guilt still abides, and
except it be pardoned, shall abide for ever: so the guilt of concupiscence when
it is pardoned, is taken away, though it self abide. For not to have sin is
all one as to say, not to be guilty of sin. He that has committed adultery,
though he do it no more, is still guilty till it be pardoned. Therefore he
has his sin still, though that which he has committed now is not in being,
being past with the time wherein it was done. Such sins therefore remain
except they be forgiven. But how do they remain being now past, but because
they are past as touching their actual being, but remain still as touching
the guilt. Even so, says he, it may well be, that concupiscence of the flesh
remains still as touching the actual being, but yet as touching the guilt is
past and gone. He calls this concupiscence Ibid. cap. 23. Propter damnabile
vitium, quo vitiata est natura humana da^natur.
a damnable pollution and uncleanness, wherewith the nature of man is defiled,
and for which it is condemned. And he says thereof, that Contra Julian. Pelag.
lib. 2. Est in homine aliquid mali, quod non ipsum sed reatus qui ex illo
contractus fuerat, auferiu^ in Baptismo.
not the evil it self, but the guilt that is gathered thereof, is taken away
in baptism; that this sin is Jbid. Mortu^ est in eo reatu quo nos tenebat.
dead, as touching the guilt wherein it held us; that Contra duas Epistolas
Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 13. Reatus eius generatione tractus, regeneratione dimissus
est: and ideo iam non est peccatum.
the guilt thereof which we have drawn by generation, is pardoned by
regeneration, and therefore now it is not sin. Thus when Julian objected to
him, that if concupiscence were evil, then the baptized should be without it,
he answers, that Contr. Julian. lib 6. cap. 5. Baptizatus caret omni peccato,
no^ omni malo: quod plantus ita dicitur, caret reatu omnium maloru^ non omnibus
malis.
the baptized is voided of all sin, not of all evil. Which, says he, is
more plainly spoken thus, He is void of the guilt of all evil, not of all
that is evil, affirming the guilt only to be taken away, but that the evil
that before made him guilty, remains still. Therefore he says, that Ibid.
lib. 2. No^ eodem modo appellatur paccatu^ quo facit reum, and prius: Cuius
manentis reatus in sacro font remissus est.
concupiscence is not called sin, in such manner as sin makes guilty,
because the guilt thereof is released in the Sacrament of regeneration. The
places are infinite; wherein he speaks to the same effect, that De peccat.
mer. and remissa ib. 1. cap. 39. Ipsa lex peccati solu^o reatus vinculo manet,
etc.
the law of sin, the bond of the guilt thereof being loosed, continues
still: that Jbid. lib. 2. cap. 28. Manente ipsa lege concupiscentiae reatus
eius soluitur.
the law of concupiscence is still abiding, but the guilt thereof is released:
that Cont. Julian. lib 2. Sauet vitiatum a reatu statim ab infirmitate paulatim.
God heals the corruption of man, from the guilt forthwith, but from the
infirmity by little and little: that Ibid, Remittitur in baptismate lex peccati,
non finitur.
the law of sin is remitted and pardoned in baptism, but not ended: that Ibid.
lib. 5. cap. 5. Vitia ista curantur, prius vt reatu non teneant, deinde vt
conflictu non vincant: postremo vt omni ex part saenata nulla omnino remaneant.
the vices of concupiscence are cured by the grace of Christ, that they hold us
not in guilt, but that they remain for us to fight with and conquer, and last
of all, to be perfectly healed: not to be at all, still beating upon this, that
there is still remaining the same thing that was before, the law of sin
before, the law of sin still; evil before, evil still: a vice or corruption
before, a vice and corruption still, only the guilt taken away, and thereby
only denied to be sin. Now in this we contend not with Austin, nor Austin with
us: we shall easily accord with him, that concupiscence in the regenerate is
not sin, as sin imports and implies guilt, because the guilt thereof is
remitted and pardoned. But setting aside the respect of guilt, and considering
sin as it is oposite to righteousness, does he in that respect acquit
concupiscence from the condition of sin? No verily; for he acknowledges,
that Contr. Julian. lib. 2. Non eodem modo appellatur peccatum quo facit reum,
sed quod sit reatu primi hominis faction, and quod rebellando nos trahere
uttitur ad reatum.
though it be not called sin in that sort, as that it makes guilty, yet it
is called sin, for that by rebelling it labors to draw us into guilt. And
when Julian the Pelagian took hold of that that he said, that concupiscence
and rebellion of the flesh, was justly laid as a punishment upon the
disobedience of man, and hereupon argued that then it was no evil, but rather
a thing to be commended, as Gods servant for revenge upon him that had deserved
it, to refute his collection, answers, that it is not only the punishment of
sin, or the cause of sin, but also very sin it self, Contr. Julian. lib.
5. cap. 3. supr. sect. 7.
because there is in it a rebellion against the law of the mind, and therefore
that vainly he inferred, that concupiscence because it was a punishment was to
be commended. Where to say that S. Austin takes sin improperly, as M. Bishop
does, is to make him to speak very absurdly, if we consider the occasion
whereupon he speaks. But to show, that concupiscence though in respect of
guilt it be not sin, yet otherwise it is truly so, he calls it in the
regenerate De pecca. mer. and remis lib. 2. cap. 28. Peccatu^ remissum
superatu^, pere^ptum.
a pardoned sin, a sin conquered and destroyed; De nupt. and co^cup lib. 1 ca.
33. Peccatum illud quod remissum and tectum est, and non imputatur. Et lib. 2.
cap. 34.
a sin forgiven, covered, not imputed: and out of S. Ambrose Con^r. Julian.
lib. 2. Quia mortuum est in eo reatu quo nos tenebat, and donec sepulturae
perfectione sanctur, rebellat and mort^um.
a dead sin, because (says he) it is dead as touching the guilt wherein it
held us, and being dead, yet rebelleth until by accomplishment of burial it
be healed. So then as touching guilt it is conquered, destroyed, dead, and it
is not sin; but by rebellion it still lives, and therein it is truly sin. And
therefore does he paint it out even in the regenerate, with such names and
terms as do plainly convict it to be sin. He calls it De not. and gr.
cap. 38. Vitium, vitiosae affectionis appetitum.
vice, lust of vicious affection, De nupt. and concup. li. 1. cap. 31. Vitiosa
concupiscentiae.
vicious concupiscence, Epist. 54. Ab omni vitiositate.
vitiousnes or corruption, and what does vitiate, defile, corrupt the soul,
but only sin? He calls it De nup. and con. lib. 1. cap 29. In hoc m^^bo. Et
cap. 31. Vbi est morbidus carnis affectus. Ab capeste morboque san^ta.
a disease, a diseased affection of the flesh, a pestilence, De Temp. Ser. 45.
Vulnus tabe^. Et contr. Iul lib 6. cap. 7. Quodam operante contagio, id est,
concupiscentia affectu.
a wound and contagious filth, and what other disease, or pestilence, or wound
and contagion of man is there, but only sin? He calls this law of sin De
Temp. ibid. Legem foedam, legem miseram.
a filthy law, a miserable law, not for that it has a being by it self to be
filthy and miserable, but because we by it are in our selves filthy and
miserable, which nothing can cause but only sin. He calls it Contr.
Julian. lib. 6. cap. 5. Annon est malunis quis neget esse malam? Et ibid. cap.
7. Qualitat mala. De nup. and concupis. li. 1. ca. 25. Affectio malae
qualitatis.
an evil, evil concupiscence, an evil quality, an affection of evil
quality, and what evil quality is there of the soul, what spiritual evil,
but only sin? He calls the first motions and affections thereof Contr.
Julian. lib. 2. Civil bellum interiorum vitioruni. Aduersus ingenerata vitia
bellum gerunt. Vitia a quorum reatu absoluti sumus. Desideria stulia and noxia.
inward vices, vices borne and bred in us, vices from the guilt whereof we are
freed, foolish and hurtful desires, De nupt. and concup. lib. 1. ca. 25.
Vitiosa desideria. Et cap. 27. Desideria mala and turpia.
vicious desires, evil and filthy desires, In Joan. Tr. 41. Jllicitae
concupiscentiae in carne tua.
unlawful concupiscences, and how do these terms agree to them if they be no
sin? He calls it De Ciuit. Dei lib. 1. cap. 25. Illa concupiscentialis
inobedientia, qua in moribundis membris habitat.
a lustful disobedience, and says that Contr. Julian. lib. 2. and lib. 6.
cap. 8 supr. sect. 7
it is an iniquity that the flesh lusts against the spirit: though the guilt
thereof be acquitted, and all Romans 5.19.
disobedience and 1. Ioh. 5.17.
iniquity is sin. He says, that Contr. Julian. lib. 4 cap. 2. Desiderij
malimatu^ est, etiamsi et non consentiatur.
there is evil in an evil desire, though a man consent not to it for evil.
And whereas there are two sorts of evils, Tertul. cont. Marcion. lib. 2.
mala peccatoria and vltoria, evils of sin, and evils of punishment and
revenge, that we may know that in naming concupiscence evil, he means an
evil of sin: he cites the words of Hilarie, that Contr. Julian. lib. 2. ex
Hilar. in Psalm. 118. Samech. Ipsis Apostolis verbo licet fidei iam emundetis
atque sanctificatu, non deesse tamen malitiam per conditionem communis nobis
origenis docuit, dicens, Si vos cum sitis mali, etc.
though the Apostles were cleansed and sanctified by the word of faith, yet our
Savior teaches, that there was not wanting in them euilnesse, illness by the
condition of our common original, in that he says, If you being evil do know
to give good gifts unto your children. Where very evidently we are taught, that
of Original sin there remains still in the regenerate such an evil, as
whereby they are still evil; so that though they be Epi. 54. Ipse Dominus quos
dicit bonos propter participationem gratiae diuinae, eosdem etiam malos dicit
propter vitia infirmitatis humanae, donec totum quo constamus ab omni
vitiositate sanatum transeat in eam vitam, vbi nihil omnino peccabitur.
good by participation of the grace of God, yet they be still evil by reason
of the vices of humane infirmity, till all be healed a vitiositate, from
corruption, etc. Now though sometimes the name of evil be otherwise used then
of sin, yet never is a man called evil by any evil, but that that is sin.
Crosses and afflictions are evils, but by these evils, or for these evils, no
man is called evil. But concupiscence is such an evil, as whereby a man is
evil, and for which the regenerate man is still truly called evil: and
therefore is a sinful evil; an evil that is truly and properly a sin.
Therefore Saint Austine makes it an evil in the same kind and nature, as
sin is evil when he says, Cont. Julian. lib 6. ca. 5. Quis ita insa^u^ and
demens, qui cum peccata maia esse fiteatur, neget esse malam concupiscentiam
peccatorum, etia^ si aduersur eam concu^^sc^ntiam spiritu peccata concipere ac
pareri non sinatur? Tale porro ac tam magnum malum, tantum quia inest, quomodo
non teneret in morte, and per traheret in vltimam mortem, nisi and eius
vinculu^ in illa quae fit in baptism peccatorum omnium remissione solueretur?
Who is so mad, as that confessing sins to be evil, he will deny the
concupiscence of sins to be evil, albeit by reason of the spirit lusting
against it, it be not suffered to conceive and bring forth sins? And to take
away all exception, and at once to strike the matter dead, he adds that it is
such and so great an evil, as that only for being in us, it should hold us in
death, and draw us to everlasting death, but that the bond thereof is loosed in
baptism by the forgiveness of all our sins, even as he had said a little
before, that it should not only be in the faithful, but also grievously hurt
them, but that the guilt thereof which had bound us, is loosed by the
forgiveness of our sins. Which only words might suffice to declare unto us
S. Austines mind, that he never thought, but that concupiscence is sin in
that meaning, wherein we here dispute of sin. For if it be such an evil, as
that save only that the guilt thereof is pardoned it should greatly hurt us,
and so hurt us, as that it should draw us unto everlasting death, it cannot be
denied to be truly sin, because nothing could bring us to everlasting death,
but only sin. And yet more fully to show this, and to prove against Julian
the blot and stain of Original sin remaining after baptism, he alleges
further out of Hilary, Contra Julian. lib. 2. ex Hilar. in Psalm. 118. Gimel.
Nos in hoc terreni and morti c^^ corporis habitaculo mundos esse non posse.
that we cannot be clean in the tabernacle of this earthly and carrion body;
Jbid. ex homil quadam de lib. sancti Job. Memores and conscu^ illa ipsa corpora
vitiorum omniu^ esse materiem, pro quae polluti and sordidi ni il in nebis
mun^u^, nihil innotens ob^inemus.
that our bodies are the matter of all vices, by reason whereof being polluted
and defiled, we have nothing in us innocent, nothing clean, not as to condemn
the substance, of the body, die, but Ibid. pugnandi necistias contra malum,
non sub stantiam, sed sub stantie vitium.
vitium substantiae, the vicious quality of the substance, and to signify that
therewith we still continue in part stained and defiled, so long as we continue
upon the earth. Now there is nothing whereby we are unclean, polluted, defiled,
but only sin. Seeing therefore by the remainder of Original sin, that is,
by concupiscence we continue after baptism unclean, polluted, and defiled, it
follows necessarily, that co c^piscence after baptism is properly and truly
sin. And if concupiscence be not sin without consent, then by S. Austines
judgment the Apostles must be said to live without sin. For he affirms of
them, that they were Contr. duas Epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap 11. Apostolos
dicimus a prauorum libidinum consensione liberos, etc.
free from any consent to evil lusts, meaning it after they had received that
great measure of the holy Ghost. And so much he affirms particularly of the
Apostle Ju Joan. tract. 41. Faciebat vt concupiscentia non consentiret. Vide
Bernard in Cantic. Ser. 56.
Paul. But to affirm that the Apostles were free from sin, is De not. and
great. cap 36. Omnes sancti si interrogari potuissent vna voce clamassent, si
dixerimus quia peccatum non habe^^^^, etc.
contrary to the doctrine of S. Austine. Concupiscence therefore by S. Austines
judgment must necessarily be sin. And hereto agree also the judgments of
the rest of the Fathers. Cyprian calls it in the regenerate Cypri. de rat.
circumcis. Huius contagio corruptelae; Babyloniae fornax, domesticum malum, de
quo ^ruhescent quicunque munde cord regere in decore suo videre desiderant:
insaniens bestia corrupti anhelitus catenis ferreis in vltimis animae
recessibus alliganda.
a corruption, the furnace of Babylon, a domestical evil, of which they will
be ashamed, who desire with pure heart to see the king in his beauty; a raging
beast of stinking breath, to be tied up with iron chains in the furthest
passages of the soul. He says again of the Idem. de teiun. et tentat
Christi. Nec originali nec personali nec personalicaeruere delicto.
holy Prophets and Priests, that they wanted neither Original nor personal
sin, and thereby confesses that in holy men Original sin, continues
still. Ambrose calls concupiscence even in the regenerate; Ambros de Apol.
David. ca. 11. Deplorauit in se David inquinamenta naturae. Et ibid. cap. 13.
Iniquitas; operatrix cu^pae and delicti; radix and seminarium peccatorum, mala
radix affectus erroris.
a defilement of nature, iniquity, the worker of default and trespass, the
seed-plot of sins, an evil root, an affection of error. Bernard in the
like sort, calls it Bern. de sex tribulat. Quod in homine pimum ab hac
macula, immune ab hoc contagio poterit inueniri? Tribulatio dum resistirur
contaminationi, concupisce^tiae repugnatur. De cord exit pestiferum virus.
Huic multisariae pesti resistere. Fomes totius nequitiae. Fornax ambitionis,
etc, omnium denique vittorum affectibus vehementer acce^sa.
a contamination, a blot, a contagion, a pestilent poison, a manifold
pestilence, the cherishment of all naughtiness, a furnace strongly burning
with the affections of ambition, avarice, envy, wilfulness, lewdness, and
all vices. He again makes it even by it self, Bernar in Cant. ser 56. Pauli
animae ab aspecta and complexu dilecti vnus tantummodo paries obsistebat,
videlices lex peccati. Ipsa est carnis concupescentia, etc. paries primus
concupiscentia; secundus cons^nsus, etc.
a wall which so long as it is in us excludes and shuts us out from God, as
of Paul for example he says, that this one wall hindered his soul from the
sight and embracing of his beloved Savior. By all which the Reader may
esteem, what consciences they had in the Council of Trent, that set it down
to the world as an article to be believed, that concupiscence is Council Triden.
Sess 5. In renatis nihil quod odit Deus, nihil ab ingressu coeli remoratur.
not a thing that God hates, that it is not a thing that hinders from
entering into heaven. These speeches cannot be thus applied to any thing but
sin. We have no cause to be ashamed of any thing before God but only sin.
God cannot but hate all spiritual corruption, all filthiness, all iniquity,
all contagion and uncleanness of the soul, and seeing concupiscence is a wall
that shuts us out from God, it must needs be sin, because nothing can
divide us from God but only sin. Now therefore as touching the two places
which M. Bishop cites in the second section, wherein S. Austin denies
concupiscence to be sin, the answer is plain by Austin himself: De nupt.
and Concupis. lib. 2. cap. 34.
Quia remissa est in remissione peccatorum, non iam regeneratis in peccatum
reputatur: because it is forgiven to the regenerate by remission of sins, it
is not now reputed to them for sin. It is sin in it own nature, but
because the guilt thereof is pardoned, therefore and in that respect only it
is not accounted sin. And hereby the answer is plain to that other cavil
which they borrow also from S. Austin, that Epist. 200. Si nocti eorum
adhiberemus assensum non esset vnde diceremus patri nostro qui in coelis est,
Dimitte nobis, etc.
for concupiscence or the desires and motions thereof, we do not say, forgive
us our trespasses so long as we give no consent unto them. For the reason that
S. Austin gives of that assertion, is Cont. 2. epist. Pelag lib. 1. cap. 13.
Nec propter ipsam cuius iam reatus lauaecro regenerationis absumptus est dicunt
in oratione Baptizati, Dimitte nobis, etc. Et cont. lit. Petil. lib. 2. ca.
103. Neque de his peccatis hoc petimus quae nobis in Baptismo taem dimissa sunt.
because the guilt thereof is already taken away in Baptism: because the same
are already forgiven and pardoned in Baptism, thereby insinuating, that
concupiscence and the motions thereof in themselves are such, as for which we
should say, forgive us our trespasses, but that therefore we do not say so,
because we believe that they are already pardoned and forgiven unto us. Now it
is one thing to say, that we ask not forgiveness thereof, because it is
forgiven already; another thing to say, as M. Bishop and his fellows do, that
it is such in it self as needs no forgiveness. Whereby it plainly
appears, that they wholly abuse Saint Austin, and wrest him to far other
purpose and meaning then was intended by him. And yet this is a thing whereof
he himself also made some doubt. He propounds it as his own private
opinion. In Psalm. 118. conc. 3. Quantu^ quidem ego sapere possum.
So far as I can perceive, says he, it is so. It seems to me so. De
perfect. iusti prope fine^ Quod nisi fallor non esset opus dicere.
Nisi fallor: if I be not deceived, it is so, and dares not, as he says, Non
ande^ reprehendere, quanquam nec defendere valeam.
reprehend them, who did affirm, that just men might in this life be so far
without sin, as to be free from consent to any desires of sin, who, because
they should have nothing else for which to say forgive us our trespasses, must
needs say so for the very first motions and lusts thereof. And surely we dare
not altogether assent to Austin in this behalf, because he cannot conceive,
but that the acts and motions of concupiscence being new from day to day, must
be accounted new trespasses from day to day, and therefore from day to day give
us occasion to say, forgive us our trespasses. Yet does he advantage the
Papists no whit at all, because by his very question hereof it appears, that
he doubted not, but that evil concupiscences are in themselves such, as for
which we should say, forgive us our trespasses, when propounding whether for
evil concupiscences we pray so unto God, he makes the ground of his question
this, because in Baptism they are already pardoned. And thus I hope I have by
this time made it appear to M. Bishop, that S. Austin in this point was no
Papist, and that though in the signification of a word he differ from us, yet
in the very matter resolved the same that we do, and that both he and the rest
of the Fathers of the Church plainly agree with us, that concupiscence in the
regenerate has the proper nature and condition of sin. But yet he will not
yield, because he has yet somewhat further to allege out of the Fathers for
the proof of that he says. And first he alleges Chrysostom, saying, Chrysostom
ad R^hom. 13. Illi affectus peccatum haudquaquam erant sed illorum immoderatio
effraenata hoc efficiebat. Verbi gratia, vt vnum aliquem affectuum illorum
pertractemus; Concupiscentia peccatum quide^ non est, at cum ea ^^^dum non
seruat, etc. tum res ea in adulterium crumpit, non ab ipsa quidem
concupiscentia sed ab illius immodica cupiditate.
Passions be not sins of themselves, but the unbridled excess of them does
make sins. For example, Concupiscence is not a sin, but when passing
measure it breaks his bounds, then lo it is adultery; not in respect of
concupiscence, but in respect of the excess and unlawful riot of it. But here
he plays the iugler again, and by equivocation merely abuses his reader.
For Chrysostom speaks of passions as they are natural, and by God implanted
in man in his creation, and common to all men; and not of passions as they are
the remainder of Original sin in the regenerate. There were passions in
Christ, anger, sorrow, fear, and such like, yet in Christ there was no sin.
And thus does Chrysostom speak of concupiscence (which for distinction sake
should rather be translated desire) as it is a natural affection, not as it is
a humane corruption; as it is Gods creature, not as it is man's default; as it
is Ibid.
vnus aliquis affectuum, some one of the affections, not in that sort as we
question it, as it is the common disorder of them all. The distinction of
concupiscence, which Tertullian uses, serves fitly in this place, that there
is Tertullian. de Animae. cap. 6. Rationale quod animae a primordio est
ingenttum a rationali videlicet authore. Irrationale posterius intellige^dum
est, vt quod acciderit ex serpentis instinctu atque exinde ^^oleuerit and
coadoleuerit in anima ad instar iam naturalitatis, etc. non ex ea natura quae a
Deo est, sed ex illa quam diabolus induxit. etc. Non semper ex irrationali
censenda sunt indignatiu^ and concupiscentiuum, etc.
concupiscence reasonable and unreasonable. Reasonable he calls that which is
natural, which from the beginning was wrought in the soul by God the
reasonable author and maker thereof. Unreasonable he says, is that which
befell by the instinct of the Serpent, and thenceforth crew into the soul, and
became in a sort natural, not of that nature which is of God, but of that
which the devil has brought in Concupiscence as it imports the natural act
of desiring, he rightly affirms to have been in Christ, and that in us of it
self it is no sin. And thus is Chrysostom to be understood when he says,
that affections are not sin of themselves, but that it is the unbridled
disorder thereof that causes sin. Thus as he says, concupiscence referred
to the natural desire of the male to the female, is of it self no sin,
because it is the work of the God of nature. But our question here is of that
concupiscence or the remainder of that concupiscence which grew by the instinct
of the serpent, whereby all our desires are by another nature grown disordered
and evil, which disorder we say in part continues still in regenerate, and is
not by M. Bishop as yet freed from being sin. The place of S. Bernard
answers it self. Bernard. ser. de sex tribulat. Peccatum inforibus est; nisi
ipse aperias, non intrabit: appetitus in cord prurit, sed sub te est; nisi
sponte cesseris, non notebit.
Sin is at the door, but unless thou open it shall not enter in. If sin
be at the door, why does M. Bishop deny it to be sin? What he says first,
sin is at the door, he repeateth again in these words, lust tickleth at the
heart. If lust tickling at the heart be sin at the door, how does he
conclude by this place, that lust is no sin? He says, that M. Perkins often
cites S. Bernard against them, and therefore he may be sometimes alleged for
them, but if he do allege him no better then here he has done, his labor
shall be better saved then so idly bestowed. But he does not only cite him
impertinently, but also very lewdly. For in that very sermon is it wherein
Bernard so describes concupiscence, as before was said, calling it a
defilement, a contagion, a blot, a pestilent poison, etc. and saying thereof,
What can there be found in man cleave from this blot, free from this contagion?
thereby plainly conuincing that it is sin, because as has bin before said,
nothing defiles, blotteth, infecteth the soul but only sin. S. Austin and
S. Cirill, he says, have bin cited already, and I hope he has had a full
answer to those citations. As for Hierome and Gregory, when we hear what it
is that he will oppose out of them, he shall have our further answer, but
neither they nor Caluins confession do prove at all that approved antiquity is
wholly for them, as he fondly presumes without cause. But now forsooth to hit
the nail on the head, If any, says he, desire to know the founder of our
adversaries doctrine in this point, let him read the 64. heresy recorded by
that ancient and holy Bishop Epiphanius. And what shall he read there?
Forsooth, he registreth one Proclus an old rotten sectarie, to have taught,
that sins are not taken away in Baptism, but are only covered; which is as
much to say, as sin remains still in the person regenerate, but is not
imputed to him, which, says he, is just M. Perkins and our Protestants
position. Now he that had stood by him when he read this matter in Epiphanius,
might very well have said to him, Animus est in patinis; your mind is on your
mustard-pot: ye read ye know not what. For that which he alleges of Proclus
was not delivered by Proclus, but by Epiphanius is recorded out of a speech of
Methodius a Catholic and godly Bishop against Proclus. Yet this he thought a
fit matter wherewith to delude his liege and sovereign Lord, having before
mentioned it in his Epistle dedicatorie to the kings most excellent Majesty,
in the answer whereof I have set down the words of Methodius at large, and the
heretical fancy of Proclus against which they were directed. Now because the
words to which he alludeth, are the words of Methodius, and approved by
Epiphanius, let it be remembered, that Methodius and Epiphanius two ancient and
holy Bishops have taught, that sin is not taken away in Baptism, but is
only covered, that is, that sin remains still in the person regenerate,
but is not imputed unto him, and so as M. Bishop himself confesses, have
taught just the same that M. Perkins and the Protestants do now teach.

10. W. BISHOP.
Now let us come unto the arguments, which the Church of Rome (as M. Perkins
speaks) alleges to prove Concupiscence in the regenerate, not to be sin
properly.

1. Object. In Baptism men receive perfect and absolute remission of sin:
Which being pardoned, is taken quite away, and therefore after Baptism,
cease to be sin: M. Perkins answers, that it is abolished in regard of
imputation, that is, is not imputed to the person, but remains in him still.
This answer is sufficiently (I hope) confuted in the Annotations upon our
consent: in confirmation of our Argument, I will add some texts of holy
Scripture: First, He that is washed, needs not but to wash his feet, John.
13.
for he is wholly clean. Take with this, the exposition of Saint Gregory the
great, our Apostle; Lib. 9. Ep. 3^
He cannot (says he) be called wholly clean in whom any part or parcel of
sins remains: But let no man resist the voice of truth, who says, he that
is washed (in Baptism) is wholly clean: therefore there is not one dram of
the contagion of sin left in him, whom the cleanser himself, does profess
to he wholly clean. The very same does the most learned Doctor S. Jerome
affirm: saying. How are we justified and sanctified, Epist. ad Oc^^num. Psalm.
50.
if any sin be left, remaining in us? Again if holy David say, Thou shall wash
me, and I shall be whiter then snow: how can the blackness of hell still
remain in his soul? briefly it cannot be but a notorious wrong unto the
precious blood of our Savior, to hold, that it is not as well able to purge
and purify us from sin, as Adams transgression was of force to infect us.
Yea the Apostle teaches us directly, that we recover more by Christ's grace,
then we lost-through Adams fault, in these words: But not as the offense, Romans
5.
so also the gift, for if by the offense of one, many died; so much more the
grace of God, and the gift in the grace of one man Jesus Christ has abounded
upon many. If then we through Christ, receive more abundance of grace then we
lost by Adam, there is no more sin left in the newly baptized man then was in
Adam in the state of innocence, albeit other defects, and infirmities do
remain in us, for our greater humiliation and probation, yet all filth of
sin is clean scoured out of our souls, by the pure grace of God powered
abundantly into it in Baptism: and so our first Argument stands insoluble.

Now to the second.

R. ABBOT.
This argument as it was long ago urged by the Pelagians, so in them long ago
has received a full answer. It was rightly said by S. Austin to them: August.
cont. 2. epist. Pelag. li. 3. ca. 3. Quisquis baptismati derogat quod modo per
illud accipimus, corrumpit fidem: quisqu^ autem tam nunc and tribuit quod
quidem per ipsu^ sed tamen postea accepturi sumus amputat spem.
Whosoever does derogate or detract from Baptism that which now we receive by
it, corrupts Christian faith; but he that even now attributes to it that,
which by it indeed but yet hereafter we are to receive, cutteth of Christian
hope. We confess that Baptism does seal unto us the full remission and
forgiveness of all our sins; that thereby we are engraffed into Christ, to
become members of his body, and to be made partakers of his spirit, that by the
sanctification of the same spirit sin may be destroyed and decayed in us from
day to day, that the corruption of the old man being wholly put of in death,
perfect righteousness may thenceforth take place for ever at the resurrection
of the dead. But this does not satisfy M. Bishop: he will have it, that
Original sin is not only forgiven in Baptism, but also quite taken away,
and therefore rejects M. Perkins answer, that it is abolished as touching
imputation, but that otherwise it remains still. Yet the answer fully
accords with S. Austin, that Cont. Julian. lib. 2. Mali^ quod non ipsum sed
reatut eius au fertur in baptismo.
not it self, but the guilt of it is taken away in Baptism; that Ibid lib 6.
ca. 8. Manet actu. praeterijt reatu.
it remains as touching the actual being, but is taken away as touching the
guilt. Now his confutation hereof must needs be a very poor one, that thus
directly crosses S. Austins assertion, and has no further warrant but his
own bare word. We have examined that before, but here in confirmation of his
argument he will ad some texts of holy Scripture. And first he alleges the
words of Christ, Ioh. 13, 10.
He that is washed, needs not but to wash his feet, but is wholly clean.
Where we may wonder, that the man's wits should so much fail him, thus to cite
a place directly against himself. For Peter, to whom Christ there speaks,
had been baptized before, and yet he needed to be washed still, insomuch that
our Savior says to him, Ver. 8.
If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part in me. Therefore the uncleanness
of sin was not wholly taken away in Baptism, but remained in part still to be
taken away. Nay, in the very place it self the exception is plain. For it
namely specifieth, that he that is washed has still need to wash his feet,
and that he is not in such sort wholly clean, but that his feet are still
unclean. And what are these feet, but the corrupt affections and lusts of
sin, whereby we still cleave to the earth, and have a remainder of fleshly
and earthly conversation? Of these the Apostle says, Col. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
wantonness, evil desire, covetousness. Aug. cont. Julian. lib 6. cap. 5. Iam
baptizatis dicebat Apostolus, Mortificate, etc. Quomodo ergo mortificat
baptizatus fornicationem qua^ non iam perpetrat, n si cum desideria eius quibus
non consentit expugnat, quae in benefacientibus et omnino non fornicantibus nec
consensione nec opere etsi non desunt tamen quotidie minuentur?
Thus did the Apostle speak to baptized men, says Austin. How then does the
baptized man mortify fornication, which now he commits not, but by fighting
against the desires thereof, and not consenting to them, which are not yet
wanting, though daily they be diminished. Now if by reason of these earthly
feet, these corrupt desires being a part of original infection, we have still
need to be washed, it follows, that by reason of these desires we are still
unclean, even by the having of them, though we give no consent unto them. Now
Ambrose expressly expounds this place of a remainder of Original sin, from
which still after Baptism we remain to be cleansed. Ambros. de ijs qui
initiantur mist. ca. 6. Mundus erat Petrus, sed plantam lauare debebat. Habebat
enim primi hominis de successio^e peccatum quaendo eum supplantatut serpens and
persuasit errorem.
Peter was clean, says he, but yet he was still to have his feet washed. For
he had still the sin that comes by succession from the first man, whom the
serpent beguiled and persuaded him to error. Therefore his feet are washed,
that those hereditarie sins may be taken away: For our own sins done by
our selves are released in Baptism. Where speaking of men baptized in elder
years, as Peter was, he plainly signifies, that what sins they have by
their own action, they are in Baptism wholly abolished, but that Original
sin, as touching the matter and corruption of it, is still dwelling in us,
and that we have still need to be washed and cleansed therefrom. And this S.
Austin gives to understand, who writing upon those speeches of Christ, asks
the question, Aug in Joan. tract. 80* Quis est in haec vita sic mundus vt non
sit magis magisque mundandus?
Who is there in this life so clean, as that he is not more and more to be
cleansed or made clean? and so affirms that the faithful are here, mundi
and mundandi; clean, but yet so as that in part they remain still to be
cleansed, accordingly as the Apostle exhorts the faithful, 2. Cor. 7.1.
Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit,
and grow up to full holiness in the fear of God. But here M. Bishop alleges
Gregory, affirming by those words of Christ, that he that is washed has not
any thing remaining of his sin, etc. Which words Gregory indeed has, but
altogether to other purpose then M. Bishop cites them, disputing in that place
against some who held Greger. lib. 9. epist. 39 Siqui sunt qui dicunt peccata
in Baptismo superficietenus dimitis, quid est haec prae^^catione enfidelius?
peccata in Baptismo superficietenus dimitti, that sins in Baptism are but
superficially pardoned. Against them he alleges the words of Christ here
spoken, and infers, Si igitur peccata in Baptismate funditus minime
dimittuntur, quomodo is qui totus est, mundus est totus? Totus enim mundus dici
non potest cuide peccaeto aliquid remansit. Sed nemo resistit voci veritatit
quae ait, Qui totus est, etc. Nihil ergo ei de peccati sui contagione remanet,
que^ totum fatetur mundum ipse qui redemit.
Si igitur peccata in Baptismo fu^ditus minime dimittuntur, etc. If then sins
be not altogether forgiven in Baptism, how then is he wholly clean that is
washed? For he cannot be said to be wholly clean, to whom any thing is
remaining of his sin. And to that meaning he says, that there is nothing
remaining to him of the contagion of his sin, comparing the guilt of sin to
a contagion or infection, wherewith the person is still touched after that the
fact is past and gone, until by forgiveness it be taken away. Now let these
words be referred to the drift whereto they were written (which being expressed
in the next words before, M. Bishop has very guilefully concealed) and they
have nothing in them contrary to our assertion. For we deny not, but that
sins are fully and wholly pardoned to the regenerate: we deny not, but that
the guilt thereof is quite taken away, and therefore by Gregory's testimony M.
Bishop avails nothing. The very like does Ambrose say, Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
Ser. 18 Culpa in eo habere non potest portionem quem absorbuerit remissio
peccatoru^.
Sin can have no portion in a man whom forgiveness of sins has swallowed
up, who yet plainly affirms the remaining of Original sin it self after
the pardon thereof, as before is said. Now we may not think that Gregory was
so simple, as that he saw not in the words of Christ, that he that is said to
be wholly clean, has an exception set down as touching his feet, and
therefore could not intend any further, but that he is wholly clean, as touching
the guilt, yet partly still unclean by remainder of corruption. To Gregory he
adds Hierome, but the words which he alleges are a mere forgerie. He has
borrowed them from Bellarmine of trust, and Bellarmine has deceived him, as he
will do any man that puts any trust in him. Hierome in the Ad Oceanum,
epistle cited by him, speaks somewhat of Baptism, in behalf of one who had
had two wives, one before he was baptized another after, and was thereupon
questioned whether he might be Bishop or not, because the Apostle says, that a
Bishop should be the husband of one wife. He disputes at large, that if
Baptism take away sins, much more it should take away the imputation of that
that is no sin, but neither has the words which M. Bishop alleges, nor any
other that can serve M. Bishops turn. It is further alleged that David says,
Psalm. 51.^
Thou shall wash me and I shall be whiter then snow: how then, says he, can the
blackness of hell remain in his soul? But let me ask him, if Original
sin be taken quite away in the regenerate, how then comes it to pass, that
David having received the effect of Baptism in the Sacrament of Circumcision,
and now a long time continued in the state of grace, does yet complain of
Original sin, and does mention it as the fountain of those enormous sins,
which in that Psalm he bewaileth and bemoneth unto God? Ver. 5.
Behold, says he, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me. Why does he thus Ambros. Apoleg. David. ca. 12. Peccatorum
specialium atque communiem colluuium confitetur.
confess, as Ambrose says, the filth both of special, and also of common,
that is to say, Original sins, if there were now no Original sin in him to
be confessed? And as for that which M. Bishop urges, the same Ambrose tells
us thereof, Ibid. Suprae niuem dealbatur cui culpa dimittitur.
that he is made whiter then snow, to whom the fault is pardoned, who yet
affirms the continuing of Original sin in him that is pardoned, as we have
seen before. He was therefore whiter then snow, as touching imputation and
guilt, when the fault was pardoned, according to the saying of Austin, that
Aug. Retract. li. 1. c 19 Omnia mandata facta deputantur, qua^do quicquid non
fit ignoscitur
all the commandments of God are reputed as done, when that is pardoned that
is not done. But yet when he had heard it delivered unto him by the Prophet
Nathan, that 1. Sam. 12.13.
the Lord had taken away his sin, he prayed notwithstanding, Psalm. 51.7.10.
Create in me a clean heart; renew in me a right spirit, wash me and I shall be
whiter then snow, thereby acknowledging an uncleanness in himself, from which
he had still need to be renewed and washed; from which when he should be washed
he should be whiter then snow, but from which no man is so fully washed in this
life, but that he has need still to pray to be washed and cleansed more and
more. For what is it by washing to be made whiter then snow, but to be made
Ephesians. 5.27.
without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing? But to be made without spot or
wrinkle, August. de nu: and co^^ p^^ l^b ^ cap 34 Vt e^de a eam se^ non in ^sto
e culost in ^u^uco non hab^^ae ma^^ t^t etc.
befalls to no man in this life, as S Austin well observes. Therefore no man
in this life becomes whiter then snow, by being free from all internal blot
of uncleanness and sin. And therefore to take away from M. Bishop all matter
of cavil, Basil plainly says, that Bast. in Esa. cap. 1. lib vs^ qu^ ideo
si^^^ti^ns per^et treg^neran vto lati tirum vt totum pro^^cutat ad al^^tem mu^s
ad^^a ^; sed and op ri req^rutur; n c perf^scter^ aut qua^. cunquc d li ^^t^a
est opus adhoc vt lau^rum quidem sit ^ff^ctitium pucit etit and expu^gationis a
sor lib a, etc Et quem admodum in tincturis quod repetitis vicibus at multo cum
labor in tinctum est, tincturam excipit pressius inhaerescentem, etc. Ad
eundem se habet modum anima, sante peccatorum suppurata, and in habitudine
consti^nta mal^^iae. Ista e nim m^th assuetudo vix ac multo negotio potest
e^us, etc.
the washing of Baptism suffices not to bring a man to the whiteness of
snow, but that there needs also great labor and diligence, and that as to
make a perfect and abiding color, there needs often dipping and much pains,
so it is also in the soul corrupted with the filth of sin, and being in a
habit of evil, that hardly and with much ado it can be w^shed and cleansed
from it. But says M. Bishop, it is a notorious wrong to the precious blood of
our Savior Christ, to hold, that it is not as well able to purge and purify
us from sin, as Adams transgression was of force to infect us. And what does
he say therein more then we also say? We acknowledge as much, and not only so,
but we say further as he says, that we recover more by Christ's grace, then we
have lost by Adams fault, according to the words of the Apostle which he cites
to that purpose. What infers he now hereof? If then, says he, we through
Christ receive more abundance of grace then we lost by Adam, there is no more
sin left in the newly baptized man, then was in Adam in the state of
innocence. But this conclusion follows not. For although we recover more in
Christ then we lost in Adam, yet we do not presently receive the same. God has
Ephesians 1.3.
blessed us in Christ with all manner spiritual blessings in heavenly things,
but we have not as yet the fruition thereof. Christ has recovered for us
immortality and incorruption, yet mortality and corruption hitherto continue
still. The grace of Christ does not only yield us the state which Adam had
Posse non peccare, to have power not to sin, but also a higher perfection,
Aug. de correp. and great. cap. 11.
non posse peccare, to be without possibility of sin, and yet who sees not,
that we have not attained to this perfection? God has Ephesians. 1.6.
raised us up together with Christ, and made us sit together in heavenly
places: Aug. de bapt. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Nondum in re sed in spe, not yet indeed but in hope, says S. Austin. Thus
have we received more in Christ, then we have lost in Adam, not yet actually
and indeed, but in assurance of hope. Tertul. de resurrect. carnis.
Contemplatio est spei tu hoc spatio per sidem, no^ praese^tatio, nec possessio
sed expectatio.
Our state here, says Tertullian, is a contemplation of hope through faith,
not a presenting of things to us: it is not possession but expectation. And
this the Apostle confirms, saying, that Romans 8.24.
we walk by faith and not by sight; that we are saved in hope, but hope which
is scene is no hope; that Verse. 23.
we wait for the adoption, even the redemption of our bodies, Ephesians. 1.14. (...).
the redemption of possession, as it is rightly called, to the praise of his
glory. How is it that having already received adoption, we yet look for the
adoption; that being already redeemed, we yet look for a redemption; that
being regenerate in Christ, we yet expect a regeneration, but because the fruit
and effect and substance of our adoption, redemption, regeneration, the
adoption, redemption, regeneration of possession remains yet unperformed unto
us? We receive now Romans 8.23.
a first fruits, and some small beginnings, as for a taste, so for a pledge and
assurance of the rest, but Aug. de Tempore. Ser. 49. In comparatione
resurrectionis stercus est tota vitae quam gerimus.
in comparison of that that shall be at the resurrection, the life that now is,
is but even doung, as S. Austin says. Therefore M. Bishop stretches the
present effect of Baptism too far, when he says, that in the man newly
baptized, there is no more sin left then was in Adam in the state of
innocence. This is no Catholic doctrine; it is mere heresy, it is but the
dream of the Pelagians. So they said, that Cont. duas epist. Pelag. lib 4.
cap. 7. Dicunt Baptismo perfect homines innouari.
men in Baptism are perfectly renewed, and Epist. 106. Filios Dei non pesse
vocari nisi omnino absque peccato fuerint effecti.
that they cannot be called the sons of God, unless they be made altogether
without sin. And this by M. Bishops doctrine, is not only gained by the
Sacrament of Baptism, but also renewed every while by their Sacrament of
penance. M. Bishops absolution, if we believe him, will set a man for the
present as free from sin as Adam was in the state of innocence. Fie upon
these lewd paradoxes: why do they delude simple souls with these heretical
positions, which they themselves in their own consciences must necessarily
condemn? We have heard before, how Basil condemns this assertion of perfect
purity attained in Baptism. In the like sort does Hilary teach, that Hilar.
in Psa. 118 Gimel. Siquis existimet sibi in Sacramenta Baptismi perfectam illam
innocentiam and coelestis vitae dignam redditam puritatem, Ioannem Baptistam
dixisse recolat, Ego quidem, etc. Est ergo quantum licet existimare perfectae
illius emundatio puritatis est vt p^st Baptismi aquac reposita quae nos per
mortis t^uriam a labe morticinae and societate purgabit, etc.
we may not think that there is restored in the Sacrament of Baptism, that
perfect innocence and purity that is worthy of heavenly life, but that there
is remaining after the water of Baptism the cleansing of perfect purity,
which by the grieuance of death shall purge us from the blot and society of
that carrion wherewith we are now blended. Thus Epiphanius alleges out of
Methodius against Proclus, that Epiph. haer 64. Alioqui pest illuminationem non
contingeret nos iniusta facere, vt pote peccato penitus synceriter a nobis
ablato, etc. Quare constat contrahi quidem ac sopiri per fidem nunc peccatum,
vt ne fructus noxio producat; non autem radicitus tolls.
sin by enlightening grace is not taken quite away, for then men should not
sin after Baptism; it is therefore holden in and quieted (in the Baptized) by
faith, but is not yet pulled up by the roots. But most notably of all other
does S. Austin determine this point against the Pelagian heretics, affirming
still that in Baptism there is nothing perfectly yielded unto us but only the
forgiveness of sins. August. de peccataner. and rem. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Renouatio incipit a remissione omnium pe^catorum ^t inqu^ntum quisque spiritu
i^ta sapit qui tam sapit intantum renouatur, caetera vero in spe facta sunt
donec etiam in refiant, etc. In Baptismo quamitis tota and plena fiat remissio
peccatorum, tamen si in ipso aeninto qui est homo interior perfecta in Baptismo
nouitas fieret non diceret Apostolus, Etsi exterior, etc Profecto enim qui de
dic in die^ renouatur nondu^ totus est renouatus, and in quantum nondum est
renouatus intantum adhuc in vetustate est, etc. Et hoc vt faciant iam
baptizatos fidelesque adhortatur, quod adhuc monendi non essent, si hoc in
Baptismo iam perfect factum esset.
Our renewing, says he, begins at the remission of sins, and so far as
a man minds the things of the spirit, so far he is renewed, but the rest is
done in hope for the time till it may be done indeed. And albeit there be in
Baptism a total and full forgiveness of sins, yet if in the mind it self
which is the inner man, there were in Baptism a perfect newness, the Apostle
would not say, Though our outward man be corrupted, yet our inward man is
renewed from day to day. For he that is renewed from day to day, is not yet
wholly renewed, and so far as he is not yet renewed, so far is he yet in his
old estate. Therefore the Apostle exhorts the faithful baptized to put off
the old man, etc. which they should not be warned to do, if in Baptism it
were perfectly done already. Again he says, that Ibid. cap. 10. Homo totus
in sptiam and tamin re ex part in regeneratione spirituali renouatus.
a man by spiritual regeneration is wholly in hope, but in deed is yet but in
part renewed, and proposes it for a thing, Jbid. cap. 27. Illud praecipue
titendere ac meminisse debemus taentummodo peccatorum omnium plenam
perfectamque remissionem Baptismo fieri; hominis vtro ipsius quad tatem non
totam contriuo muta^. sed spirituales primitias in been proficientibus de die
in diem noutate crescente commutare in se quod carnaliter vetus est donec totum
renouetur.
specially to be regarded and remembered, that only forgiveness of sins is
full and perfect in Baptism, and that the quality of man is not forthwith
wholly changed, but that the spiritual first fruits in them that go well
forward by newness increasing from day to day, do turn or change to the same
that which is old according to the flesh, until there be renewing of the
whole. Now how does this stand with that which M. Bishop affirms, that not
only the guilt of sin is taken away by forgiveness, but also the whole blot
and deformity thereof is quite abolished in Baptism, and full and perfect
righteousness atchiued therein? If only forgiveness of sins be full and
perfect in Baptism, then there cannot be said to be a full and perfect
abolishing of sin it self. It is false therefore which he says, that in the
man newly baptized there is left no sin, no more sin then was in Adam in
the state of innocence. To which purpose he adds further, that albeit other
defects and infirmities do remain in us, for our greater humiliation and
probation, yet all filth of sin is clean scoured out of our souls, by the
pure grace of God powered abundantly into it in Baptism. Which now how far it
is from truth, it appears by that that has been already said. I will here
add only the words of Hilary, who says, Hilar. in Psalm. 118. Gimel. Habemus
etia^ nunc admixtam nobit materiam quae morus legi atque peccat: bonoxia est,
and in huius caducae carius infirmaeque domicilio corruptionis labe^ ex eius
consortio mutua^ur, ac nisi glorificato in naturam spiritus corpore vitae verae
in nobis non potest esse naturae, etc. Scit hanc mundi istius sede^ regionem no
esse viuentium: scit nos adhuc secundum praefiguraetionem legis emundandos
esse. Nunc enim admiscemur morticinae and in lege quisquis mortuis contrectas,
immundus est, etc.
We have as now a matter mingled with us, which is subject to the law of sin
and death, and that in the house of this mortal and weak flesh, we gather a
blot of corruption by the society thereof, and until the body be glorified
into the nature of the spirit, there cannot be in us the nature of true life;
that this world is not the land of the living, but that we are here still to be
cleansed by reason of being blended with the carrion (of concupiscence) and that
this was the thing figured in the law, where a man was unclean for touching
any dead body. Surely if in this life we remain still in case to be cleansed,
if there be still a blot of corruption by reason of concupiscence still
cleaning fast unto us, and it can be no otherwise till the body be glorified
into the nature of the spirit, then it is utterly false, as indeed it is, to
say that in Baptism all filth of sin is clean scoured out of our souls.
But whereas all men find by experience both in themselves and others, that
there is a wonderful prauity and corruption of nature still continuing,
whereby we are all forward to that that is evil, and altogether backward and
untoward to goodness, to prevent the objection hereof, M. Bishop acknowledges
a remainder of somewhat, but he qualifieth the opinion thereof with favorable
and gentle terms. He says, that defects and infirmities remain in us marry,
in no case must we think them to be sins. But these defects and infirmities
are such, as for which it is true of us which Saint Austin says, August. in
Psalm. 37.
Resumus adhuc filij irae, spe non sumus. By real state and being we are still
the children of wrath; it is in hope as touching which we are not so. How are
we yet the children of wrath, but by having in us the matter of In Psalm. 101.
J^^ cum qua omnes ^ati sum^^: ^ra de propagine ^aqudaetu, ^e massa ^eccati.
that wrath wherewith we were all borne, which what is it but only sin?
These defects then and infirmities, what are they properly and in truth but
only sin? But M. Bishop in using these terms alludeth to S. Austin, who
oftentimes so calls concupiscence and the lusts and motions thereof, which if
he did in the same meaning as S. Austin does, there should be no matter of
great question betwixt him and us. For S. Austin calls concupiscence vitium,
a defect, not as understanding thereby as the English word imports, a mere
privation and want of somewhat that should be but a positive evil quality that
ought not to be, a vicious and corrupt condition of man, such a defect, if we
will so call it (let us call it De lib arbit. lib 2 cap 1. (...) ^e^tmi ^ites
esse corruption.
a corruption, as he himself expounds it) as F^^st to ^ispra Sect. 8.
by reason whereof the same S. Austin says, that no man living shall be found
righteous in the sight of God, as we have seen before. It is vitium, such a
defect, as whereby De ciuit Dei lib. 12. cap. 3.
the nature of man is vitiated and corrupted, and so far as it is corrupted
is evil, and there is nothing that makes an evil man, but only sin. It is
Cont. Iul. li. 2.
defectus a iustitia, a defection or swaruing from righteousness, hindering,
that De perfect just. Rat. 17. sup. sec. 4
we love not God with all our soul, Cont. Iul. l. 4 c. 2. Inquantu^ inest
nocet etsi non ad perdenau^ de sort sanctorum, tame^ ad motuendam spirituale^
delectatione^ sanctaru^ mentium, illa^ de qua dicit Apostolus, Co^delector
legi, etc.
diminishing that spiritual delight that we ought to have in the law of God,
and De perfect. just Rat. 15. Supra Sect. 2.
it is sin when there is not that love in us that ought to be, or the same is
less then it ought to be. But it is not only after Baptism that S. Austin
gives to concupiscence this name of vitium, a defect, or rather a vice or
vicious quality; he calls it from the beginning De nupt. and concup l. 1. c.
23.
vitium quo vitiata est natura humana; a vice or vicious quality wherewith the
nature of man is vitiated and defiled. Now before Baptism there is no doubt
but S. Austin by vice imports sin, because for it he says, Ibid. Propter
quod damnatur, propter hoc and damnabili diabolo subrugatur.
the nature of man is condemned, and is under the power of the devil, and the
thing being still the same, how should it after Baptism be no sin? Albeit
after Baptism he calls it Cont. Iul lib. 2. Quia mortuum est in eo reatu quo
nos tenebat.
vitium mortuum, a vice or vicious quality that is now dead, because, says
he, it is dead as touching the guilt wherewith it held us, but otherwise it
lives still. He calls the lusts thereof Ibid.
vitia a quorum reatu absoluti sumus: vices from the guilt whereof we are
released, importing still, that save the guilt they are still the same that
they were before. Therefore albeit he forbear the name of sin after
Baptism, in respect that they have not the effect of sin to make guilty
before God, because they are already pardoned, yet he cannot be supposed
otherwise to exclude them from the nature and name of sin. They did make
guilty before, and should make guilty still, but that they are pardoned,
which cannot agree but to sin only. And this did Pighius a friend of M.
Bishops see very well, Pigh. de peccats Org. cont. 1. Vt vna eade nque manente
aequitatis and iustitiae regula, i^le^ aliquid in se manens nu^c proprie, primo
vereque peccatum sic, nunc non sit fieriprorsus non potest.
that it is impossible, that the nature of sin, and the nature of
concupiscence abiding still the same, that concupiscence before Baptism should
be sin, and after Baptism should be no sin. Now as both before Baptism
and after Baptism, it is called by S. Austin a defect, so is it also called,
infirmitas, an infirmity: la^guor, a faintness or weakness, not growing of a
bare privation, as I said before, but of a vicious constitution, a corrupt and
evil habit, which therefore he compares to a Aug. de nupt. and con u^^s l. 2
c. 34 Sicut utala in corpore valetudo etc. Et cont. Iul. l. 6. c. 7. Quodam
operamte contagio, id est, cocupiscentra affectir, sicut de pare ^tibus
morbidis m^rbida soboles procreatur.
corrupt and noisome distemper of the body, whereby diseases are propagated in
generation from the parents to the children. The Apostle expresses the whole
corruption of man's nature by the name of infirmity or weakness, when he
says, Romans 5.6.
When we were yet infirm or weak, Christ died for us. Whereas S. Austin
witnesses the Apostle, by Aug epist. 59. Hos dixit infirmos que^ impios: quos
infirmos, eos peccatores, etc.
infirm or weak, means the same as he does when he says immediately,
ungodly, sinners, enemies unto God. Infirmity therefore implies and imports
sin, ungodliness, enmity against God. Thus does Austin say, that De Triuit.
lib. 3. cap. 10. L^ue aliquid vinetur. infirmitas sed aliquando talis est vt
impietas nomi^ciur.
infirmity seems a light matter, but yet sometimes it is such as that it is
called impiety. And thus does he call the penal disease of Original sin,
D^ peccat. mer. and remiss. lib. 2 cap. 17.
an infirmity, as before was said. This is De nupt. and co^cupisc. lib. 2. cap
34.
languor quo been viuendi virtus perijt, the fainting weakness whereby we lost
the power of living well, otherwise by him termed, Ibid.
vulnus quod vulnerat ipsam vitam qua recte viuebatur; a wound that wounds
that life whereby man should live aright. This infirmity S. Austin
acknowledges every where to continue still, De pec^^t mer and re^^ss l. 2 ^ap
^ Non ex qua nota quisqu mi bap. izatur omnis vetus infirmitas eius absumitur.
It is not, he says, wholly consumed in Baptism; Cont. 2. epist. Pelag lib 3.
cap. 3 Propter hoc dicens, miserere mei Domine quonium infirmus sum.
of it and for it we have still cause to cry, Have mercy upon me, for I am
weak; Ibid. Haec infirmitas cum qua vsque ad corporis mortem defectu and
profectus alternante contendimus.
with it we are still to wrestle and strive so long as we here live, which
being the same that it was before, Gal. 5.17.
contrary to the spirit of God, Romans 7.23.
rebeling against the law of God, though the guilt thereof be pardoned, must
needs in it self be sin, as it was before. And thus much of M. Bishops
insoluble argument, containing nothing in it against us, which the ancient
Church does not wholly disauow.

11. W. BISHOP.
2. Object. Every sin is voluntary, and not committed without the consent
of man: but this concupiscence whereof we talk, has no consent of man, but
rises against his will: therefore is no sin. M. Perkins answers; That such
actions, as are used of one man toward another, must be voluntary, but sin
toward God may be committed without our consent. For every want of conformity
unto the law, even in our body, although against our will, be sins in the
Court of conscience. Reply: Full little knows this man what belongs to the
Court of conscience: the secret faults indeed be examined, but nothing is taken
for sin by any one learned in that faculty, which is done without a man's
free consent: all of them holding with S. Augustine: Lib. 3 de lib. ar^. cap.
17.
That sin is so voluntary an evil, that it cannot be sin, which is not
voluntary: And to say with M. Perkins that any want of conformity to reason
in our body is sin, is so absurd, that a man might (if that were true) be
damned for a dream, how well soever disposed he went to sleep: if he chance
to dream of uncleanness, whereupon does ensue any evil motion in his flesh.
This paradoxe^ of sinning without a man's consent, is so contrary unto both
natural and supernatural reason, Lib de vera Relig. cap. 14.
that S. Augustine auerreth, Neither any of the small number of the learned,
nor of the multitude of the unlearned to hold, that a man can sin without his
consent. What unlearned learned men then are start up in our miserable age,
that make no bones to deny this, and greater matters too?

R. ABBOT
To the objection here propounded, M. Perkins has given a double answer. To
the one M. Bishop replieth, making choice of that that his wit would best serve
him to play upon; but to the other, which is the same that S. Austin still used
against the same objection of the Pelagian heretics, he uses not a word. Let
us ask M. Bishop himself, What, is there not sin in infants before they be
baptized? He will tell us that there is. But then we urge him with their own
rule, Every sin is voluntary; but that that is in infants unbaptized is not
voluntary, because they have no act of will therefore that that is in infants
unbaptized is no sin. Will he not here say as M. Perkins does, according to
S. Austins doctrine, which indeed is true, that the sin that is in infants is
Aug. Retra^t. lib. 1. cap. 13. Supra Sect. 2.
voluntary by the will of him that first sinned, but not by the will of them
to whom it is original; that it is now De ciui^. Dei. li. 12. ca. 3 Quod
vrtium consuetudine ^mio: e progressu roboratum naturaliter ^nolenit, a
voluntate sumpsit exerdium.
natural to man, but yet the beginning of it was by the will of man. Which
answer when he has given us, let him take it back again to himself, that
the sin of concupiscence is voluntary by the will of him by whom it first
came, not by our will; and that if he mean that to be voluntary which is by
the act of a man's own will, his rule is true only in actual sins, and not
in sin Original whereof we dispute. But of this point I have answered
sufficiently before in the question of Sect. 18.
Free will, and need no further here to stand upon it; only I wish the Reader
to observe, how M. Bishop has here foisted in, that sin is not committed
without man's consent, whereof M. Perkins mentioned nothing. And therefore as
Austine said to Julian, obiecting how should sin be ascribed to that person,
which has neither will nor power to sin, so do I answer to this scholar of
Julian, that Cont. Julian, lib. 6. ca 4. Aliud est perpetratio propriorum,
aliud alienorum contagio delictorum.
it is one thing to speak of committing sins of a man's own; another thing
to speak of he contagion that comes by another sin. Our speech is here of
a sin, that without any consent or act of ours, is derived unto us by
contagion from our father Adam, which though it be ours without any consent of
ours, and against our wills does tempt us and entise us, yet we confess cannot
be perpetrated and committed, but by the consent and liking of the will. M.
Bishop if he had meant honestly, should have accordingly propounded the
objection, as M. Perkins did, that the answer might be seen to be direct and
plain as indeed it is. But he thought that was not for his turn; he knows
that by truth and simplicity he cannot thrive with bad wares, and therefore
must use shufling and shifting for the uttering of them. But let us now see
what his reply is to M. Perkins answer to that objection. M. Perkins says,
that the proposition, that every sin is voluntary, is a politic rule
pertaining to the courts of men, and does not hold in the court of conscience,
which God holds in men's hearts, in which every want of conformity to the law,
is made a sin. To this M. Bishop answers full wisely: Little knows this
man, what belongs to the court of conscience: there secret faults indeed be
examined, but nothing is taken for sin by any one learned in that faculty,
which is done without a man's free consent. Where when M. Perkins has spoken of
a court of conscience kept by God, he answers, of a court of conscience kept
by men, and those, as we must understand him his own fellows, and so to the
purpose answers nothing. In Gods court of conscience, Mat. 15.19.
evil thoughts defile a man; what they do in their courts of conscience, it
skilleth not. In Gods court of conscience, Romans 7.7.
to lust is to sin, because the law has said, Thou shall not lust: it is a
sign that they have no conscience, that keep a court of conscience to judge
against that that God has judged, that to lust is no sin. In Gods court of
conscience, 1. John. 5.17.
all unrighteousness is sin, and therefore all transgression of the law,
because it is unrighteousness, is sin: if their court of conscience
determine otherwise, it must abide the censure of his court, and receive check
and charm from thence. In Gods court of conscience is required Deuteronomy. 6.3.
all the heart, and all the mind, and all the soul, and all the strength, and
the true informed conscience for not giving all, rests convicted of sin:
what court of conscience do they keep, that give but a part in steed of all,
and yet have a conscience to say, that they sin not therein? What court of
conscience do they keep, that frame Gods commandments to their conscience, and
not their conscience to Gods commandments? whose conscience is like the bed of
Procrustes the giant; whatsoever God says, that is too short for it, they have
a rack to stretch it longer: whatsoever God says, that is too long for it,
they have an axe to cut it shorter. M. Bishop did amiss, in steed of a court
of conscience kept by God, to tell us of a court of conscience kept by them.
But if we will speak of a court of conscience for resolving cases of
conscience, we may well esteem by that that we see, that M. Perkins did much
better know what belongs to the court of conscience then M. Bishop does. As
for those learned in that faculty, of whom he speaks, all whelps of the same
fox, what they think it is nothing to us, but more learned then they are do
know, as has been showed, that sin may be without consent of the will, nay
against the will of him in whom it is sin. For evil motions and thoughts
arise in the regenerate man against his will, and it has been sufficiently
proved, that such evil motions and thoughts are sin: and who is there that
has a feeling conscience, that does not condemn himself in the arising
thereof, and ask God forgiveness, that his mind has been overtaken and
carried away into such thoughts, howsoever he have prevented the consent and
liking of them? But says M. Bishop, to say with M. Perkins that any want of
conformity to reason in our body, is sin, is so absurd, that a man might if
that were true, be damned for a dream, how well soever he went to sleep, if
he chance to dream of uncleanness, whereupon does ensue any evil motion in
his flesh. Where he has turned conformity to Gods law, into conformity to
reason; and makes M. Perkins to talk of conformity in the body, who
mentions nothing of the body, only that he may make way thereby to a
dreaming answer of an unclean dream. Which dreams notwithstanding are a
very strong argument, of a pollution and uncleanness of nature yet habitually
remaining, and a very proper effect thereof, which it is Gods mercy not to
impute unto us, for August. cont. Julian lib. 4 ca. 2. Cum sopitos deludunt
omnia sensus nescio quomodo etiam casiae animae in turpes labu^ ur assensus;
quae si imputares Altissimus, quis viueret castus?
if the most high should impute the same, says S. Austine, who should live
chaste? M. Bishop makes nothing hereof, but S. Austine says that such dreams
are breach of chastity, and therein sin, if God should impute the same. And
therefore he says, that when Jbid. Si qua^do ab eis vllum vel in somnis
furatur assensum, cu^ euigilauerint gemere compellit et inter gemitus dicere,
Quomodo impleta est anima mea illusionibus?
concupiscence thus in sleep steals a consent, when chaste souls hereby fall
into consent of filthiness, they mourn and grieve thereat when they are
awake. He teaches his hearers De Temp. ser. 45. Aliquando ista concupiscentia
sic insidiaetur sanctis vt faciat dormientibus quod non potest vigilantibus:
pudet hic immorari sed ne pigeat inde deu precari.
not to think, much to ask God mercy for it, when concupiscence so snareth
them to do that to them when they are a sleep, which it cannot do when they
are awake. And this he himself bemoneth to God concerning himself, Confess.
lib. 10 cap. 30. In somnis occursant mihi talium rerum imagines non solum vsque
ad delectationem, sed etiam vsque ad co^sensione^, factu^que simillimum, etc.
Potens est manus tua sanare omnes languores animae mea, etc. Perpetrat istas
corrupielarum turpitudines, etc Lugens in eo quod inconsummaetus sum, etc.
not only the delight, but also the consent and act that he admits in his
sleep, calling those lascivious motions a sickness of the soul, and saying
that the soul therein commits a filthiness of corruption, and lamenting
that in this kind of evil he continued imperfect still. Whereby it appears,
that whatsoever M. Bishop deem of these dreaming fancies and consents, yet
that they are indeed a sinful corruption and uncleanness of the soul, such
as God abhors, albeit to the faithful he imputes them not. And this happily
God would have to be considered in that, that by the law he was unclean, from
whom by such fancies Leuit. 15.16.
the seed of generation had issued by night, the outward uncleanness serving
to advertise of that that is within. And to the clearing of this whole point,
that sin may be where the will consents not, we may very probably make
application of sundry other pollutions that are noted in the law of Moses,
arising of those things which were either natural or casual, without any
procurement thereof by the will. Which Gregory plainly approves, when speaking
of the woman's monthly disease, for which by the law she was unclean, he says
thereof, that Gregor. apud Bedam hist. eccles. gent. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Resp. 10. Menstrua consuetudo mulieribus non aliqua culpa est, videlicet quia
naturaliter accidit, sed tamen quia natura ipsa ita vitiata est, vt etiam sine
voluntatis studio videature esse polluta, ex culpa venit vitrum in quo seipsa
qualis per iudicium facta sit humana natura cognoscat, vt homo qui culpam
sponte perpetrauit reatum culpae portet inuitus.
it is no sin, because it comes naturally, but yet because nature it self is
so corrupted, as that without any furtherance of the will it is seen to be
polluted, of sin came that infirmity, wherein the nature of man may take
knowledge, in what case it is become by the judgment of God, whilst man that
sinned by his will, does now bear the guilt of sin by that that he is against
his will, even by Jbid. Resp. 11. in fix^. Captiuus ex delectatione quam pertat
inuitus.
the delight (of concupiscence) which he bears in him against his will, as he
expresses it afterward. Let M. Bishop therefore learn, that there is a
pollution and uncleanness which is not voluntary to him that is thereby
unclean, but lies as a punishment upon the nature of man for that sin, that
voluntarily was committed in the beginning by man. Which serves him for answer
to those two places of Austine which he alleges, two as he cites them, but
indeed but one, and that in the book and chapter which he quoteth last; for in
the other place Austine has no such words. He says indeed, that August. de
vera relig cap. 14 suprae. sect. 2.
sin is so voluntary an evil, as that in no wise it is sin if it be not
voluntary, and this is so manifest, as that neither the small number of the
learned, nor the multitude of the unlearned do dissent therefrom. But as he
says so, so he himself tells us in what meaning he says it, which M.
Bishops learning should not have been ignorant of. Retract. lib. 1. cap 13.
It must be understood of that sin, says he, which is only sin, not which
is also the punishment of sin; that is to say, of Actual, not of Original
sin. But it is Original sin whereof we here dispute, and therefore by S.
Austines own interpretation, those words make nothing against us; albeit
Original sin also was voluntary by the will of the first man, as before was
said. Now therefore the unlearned learned men of whom he speaks, are learned
enough, to see that he wanted not only learning, but discretion also thus to
urge against us a saying of Austine against the Manichees, which the same
Austine to salve it against the Pelagians, has expounded in our behalf
directly against him.

12. W. BISHOP.
The third reason for the Catholic is this: Where the form of any thing is
taken away, there the thing it self cease: but in baptism, the form of
Original sin is taken away, ergo. M. Perkins shifteth in assigning a wrong
form: affirming us to say, that the form of Original sin is the
guiltiness of it: which we hold to be neither the form, 1. 2. q. and art. 3.
nor matter of it, but as it were the proper passion following it. See S.
Thomas: who delivers for the form of Original sin, the privation of
Original justice, which justice made the will subject to God.

The deordination then of the will, Mistres and commander of all other points
in man, made by the privation of original justice, is the form of Original
sin; and the deordination of all other parts of man (which by a common name
is called concupiscence, as that learned Doctor notes,) is but the material
part of that sin, so that the will of the regenerate bring by grace through
Christ rectified, and set again in good order toward the law of God, the
form of Original sin, which consists in deordination of it, is taken
quite away by baptism, and so consequently the sin it self, which cannot be
without his proper form, as the argument does convince.

R. ABBOT.
Of the first proposition of the argument there is no question, because the
essential form gives to every thing to be that that it is. The question then
is, wherein consists the form of sin; what it is that gives to it properly
the nature and name of sin. M. Bishop says, that M. Perkins shifteth in
assigning a wrong form; yet he assigns in their behalf the same form that
S. Austine does, and inasmuch as they make S. Austine the ground of their
opinion, there is great reason, that they should understand sin in the same
manner as S. Austine does. But herein appears their singular falsehood, and
they show plainly, that they allege him but only for a color, knowing that
if they take sin in the same meaning as he does, their opinion cannot stand.
Why do they bring us Austin to prove for the^, that concupiscence is no sin,
when in one meaning it is that he denies it, and they deny it in another? S.
Austine, as before I have showed, places the nature of sin in the effect of
it, which is, to make a man guilty. When it does not so, he understands it
not to be sin, opposing sin not to righteousness, as we understand it in
this question, but to remission and forgiveness of sins. He says, that
August. de nupt. et concup. lib. 1. ca. 26. supra. sect. 9.
to be guilty of sin, is to have sin; not to be guilty of sin, is to have
no sin. Cont. Julian. lib 6 ca. 5. supra. sect. 9.
The baptized is without all sin, but not without all evil, that is, says
he, he is without the guilt of all evil, not without the evil it self. And
thus much in infinite places he gives to understand. So far therefore as
sin implies guilt, he denies concupiscence in the regenerate, to whom it is
forgiven, to be any longer sin, because they are not thereby holden guilty,
and in this we gainsay him not, because it is but as if he should say, that
though in it self it be sin, yet to the faithful it is as if it were no
sin, because it is not imputed for sin, whereto willingly we accord. But
the question is, whether in it own nature it be not such, as that it should
make guilty, save only that it is pardoned, and that did S. Austine never
deny, as before has been proved: he confesses it to be Ibid. vt suprae.
such an evil, as should draw us unto everlasting death, only for being in
us, but that the guilt thereof is remitted. Now this cannot be affirmed of any
thing but that that is properly and truly sin, and therefore it cannot be
doubted, but that S. Austine did take concupiscence to be sin, according to
the true and proper understanding of the name of sin. This true and proper
nature of sin, is before showed to consist in a defect, obliquity or swaruing
from the law of God. For the law of God is the true image and description, and
perfect rule of righteousness, and every declining from the rule of
righteousness is unrighteousness, and 1. John. 5.17.
all unrighteousness is sin; therefore every declining from the law of God,
is sin. And this is so true, as that Pigh. de peccat. origin. cont. 1.
Propria^ veramque peccati rationem Ioannes explicat; peccatum est iniquitas,
etc. id est, obliquatio a rectitudine quae nobis lege praescribitur aut legu
transgressio.
Pighius in his time a maine pillar of the church of Rome, does fully approve
it, and maintains it with all his might, that it is a true and perfect
definition of sin, which S. John has set down, that sin is the
transgression of the law. Now because the law requires not only outward
actions, but also the inward fixed disposition and quality of righteousness;
not only works of charity, but also the inward habit of charity, whence all
such works are to proceed, it follows, that if there be a contrary quality
or habit, the same is sin, because it is a declining from the law. Seeing
therefore concupiscence not only in the first acts and motions of it, but even
habitually is August. cont. Julian. lib. 2.
defectus a iustitia, a defecting or declining from righteousness, as S.
Austine calls it; seeing it is a very habitual Romans 7.23. et 8.7.
enmity and rebellion against the law of God, all M. Bishops learning cannot
avoid it, but that it must necessarily be concluded to be sin. But yet to
give some show of avoiding it, he sends us to Thomas Aquinas, to learn of
him now in the end of the world another form and definition of sin, which
is, the deordination of the will; so that howsoever other faculties and powers
be distorted and corrupted, yet we must think there is no sin so long as
there is an integrity and right disposition of the will. Which position is
absurdly false, because the love of God requires Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luc 10.27.
all the heart, all the mind, all the soul, all the thought and strength.
August de doct Christ. lib. 1. ca. 22. Nullum ase riuulum duci extra patitur,
cuius deriuatione minuatur.
It endures not that any stream should be drawn from it, by the deriuing
whereof it should any way be diminished. But the will of man is not the whole
man, and therefore albeit there be supposed a rectitude and integrity of the
will, yet is not sin hereby excluded, if there be a defect or failing in any
other part. Yet that being granted to M. Bishop, he is no whit the nearer to
his purpose hereby. For if the deordination of the will be sin then
concupiscence is sin, because concupiscence is the deordination of the will.
For it has been before declared, that Retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. Jpsa capiditas
nihil est aliud quam volu^tas vitiosa. peccatoque seruiens.
concupiscence is nothing else but the will of man corrupted and serving sin,
and therefore the remainder of concupiscence in the regenerate, is nothing else
but a remainder of the corruption of the will, and according to that remainder,
a serving of the law of sin. Whereas then he affirms, that in baptism the
deordination of the will is taken quite away, it appears hereby that he is
wholly deceived, because so long as concupiscence remains, so long still
there remains in part a deordination of the will. And indeed that rectifying
of the will which he affirms, is but an Idea, a mere fantastical
speculation, contrary to the common sight and experience of all men. The
defendour thereof shows a will naughtily resolved against conscience and
truth. All men find, all men see and feel in themselves and others a great
distortion, a crosnesse, a crookedness and vntowardlinesse of will. And if
there be that cure and healing of the will of which he speaks, what hinders
that there is not perfect righteousness? For De spir. e^ lit. cap. 35. Fieret
(perfecta iustitia) si tanta ad^ib. retur voluntas quanta sufficii ^ ^aer^.
there should be perfect righteousness, says S. Austine, if there were so
great will as suffices for so great a matter. And that the will is less
hereto then it ought to be, Epist 29.
ex vitio est, it is by reason of De lib arbit. lib. 3 ca. 14. Vitij nomen
maxim solet esse corruption. Quod perfectioni naturae deesse perspexeris, id
vocas vitium.
a corruption, an imperfection whereby there is somewhat wanting to the
perfection of it. And if there be still a corruption, and a want of perfection
in the will, then the will is not yet fully rectified; and because the will is
not yet fully rectified, sin remains still, for sin says M. Bishop, is
the deordination of the will. But it is further to be observed, that to the
perfect rectifying of the will, belong clear light of understanding, and
perfect delight of love. For De peccat. mer. et remiss. lib. 2. cap 17. Nolunt
homines facere quod iustum est sieve quia latetan iustum sit sieve quia no
delectat. Ta^to enim quodque vehementius volumus quanto certuis quam bonum sit
nouimus, eoque delectamur ardentius. Ignorantia igitur and infirmitas vitia
sunt quae impediunt vsluntatemne moueatur ad faciendum opus bonum vel ab opere
malo abstinendum.
therefore have men no will to that that is just, either because they know it
not to be just, or because they delight not in it. For so much the more
earnestly do we will any thing, by how much the more certainly we know how good
it is, and more earnestly are delighted therein. Therefore ignorance and
infirmity (the one in the understanding, and the other in the will it self,
being the De nataet great. cap. 67. Paenalia omni animae, ignorantia and
difficultas.
two penalties of every soul of man) are defaults or corruptions hindering the
will both in the doing of that that is good, and eschewing of that that is
evil. So long then as these defaults of ignorance and infirmity do remain, so
long there cannot be a perfect rectifying of the will. But ignorance and
infirmity are not taken away in baptism. Therefore baptism does not wholly
take away the deordination of the will. Of the former of these, it is manifest
which S. Ambrose says, Ambros. in Psalm. 118. ser. 3. Omnes sanctem vmbra sunt
quamdus sunt in corpore: non perfect videns sed ex part cognoscunt.
All the Saints are in a shadow so long as they are in the body: they do not
see perfectly, but know in part only. He learned it of the Apostle saying, 1.
Cor. 13.9.
We know in part, we prophecy in part; we see through a glass darkly. And if
it might be so said of the Apostles, how much more is it to be understood of
the common condition and state of men? We cannot but acknowledge much
blindness, much error, much imperfection of knowledge, and therefore resolve
that the understanding cannot give due information to the will. And so long as
we are thus weak in knowledge, all other things must needs be imperfect in us,
because we cannot love beyond that we know, nor delight beyond our love.
Therefore our love is imperfect, our desire is imperfect, our delight is
imperfect, and yet not only because our knowledge is imperfect, but also
because we have yet received not the perfection, but Romans 8.23.
the first fruits only of the spirit, by whom all these things are effected
in us. For this cause S. Austine every where acknowledges, that this default
of infirmity continues still in the regenerate, and that there is not perfect
newness in the mind and inner man, as we have seen before; by reason whereof
the will is distracted and divided in it self, and by one motion of it self
fights against another, whilst August. in Joan. tract. 81. supra. sect. 1.
we will one way, because we be in Christ, and will another way, because as yet
we are in this world. Now since there is not by baptism perfection of knowledge
to direct the will, and the will it self by corruption yet remaining is
infirm and weak to the love and delight of the law of God, it cannot be but
absurdly said which M. Bishop says, that the will in baptism is fully
rectified and set in order again toward the law of God. Or if the meaning be,
that it is rectified and set in order, but yet not fully and perfectly, then he
says as we say, that the deordination of the will continues yet still in
part, and because sin consists in the deordination of the will, therefore
sin by baptism is not altogether and wholly done away. Thus we see him very
hardly bested, that making choice himself, yet he cannot find one corner where
he can in safety shroud himself.

13. W. BISHOP.
4. Object. Lastly says M. Perkins for our disgrace, they allege that we in
our Doctrine teach, that Original sin after baptism, is only clipped or
pared like the hair of a man's head, whose roots remain in the flesh, growing
and increasing after they be cut as before. His answer is, that they teach in
the very first instant of the conversion of a sinner, sin to receive his
deadly wound in the root, never after to be recovered. Confer this last
answer with his former Doctrine (good Reader) and thou may learn what credit
is to be given to such Masters, no more constant then the wind. Here sin is
deadly wounded in the root, there it remains still with all the guiltiness
of it, although not imputed there it still makes the man to sin, intangleth
him in the punishment of sin, and makes him miserable: All this be
comprehended before in this first reason, and yet blusheth not here to
conclude, that he holds it at the first: Neither clipped nor pared, but
pulled up by the roots: In deed they do him a favor, who say that he holds
sin to be clipped, and as it were razed for albeit hair razed grow out
again, yet is there none for a season: but this Original sin of his is
always in his regenerate, in vigor to corrupt all his works, and to make them
deadly sins. But let this suffice for this matter.

R. ABBOT.
This objection they have borrowed of the Pelagian heretics, who altogether
denying Original sin, and acknowledging only sins actual by voluntary
imitation and custom, defended that those being pardoned and forgiven in
baptism, a man was made fully and perfectly without sin. When therefore the
Catholic Bishops and Pastors of the Church, did teach that after baptism
there was concupiscence still remaining, whence did grow evil motions and
lusts, tempting and entising to sin and wickedness, they hereupon fell to
cauilling in this sort, that August. cont. duas epist Pelag lib. 1. cap. 13.
supra sect. 9.
sins then were not wholly remitted, and that baptism did not take away
sins, but only pare them and shave them so, as that the roots did still
stick, whence other sins should grow again in like sort to be cut off. Now
this Saint Austine denies, and teaches that baptism gives to the regenerate
Dicimus baptisma dare omnium indulgentiam peccatorum and auferre crimina non
radere, vt omnium peccatorum ra^ices in mala carne teneantur.
remission and release of all sins, and does not pare of faults (crimina,
faults of behavior and conversation) but does wholly take them away, because
of actual sins which only and no other they acknowledged, there remains
nothing when the same are forgiven and pardoned. Sed de ista carnis
co^upiscentiae falli eos credo vel fallere cum qui necesse est vt etiam
baptizatus et hic si diligentissime proficit et spiritu dei agitur pea mente
confligat.
But as touching concupiscence, says he, I hold that they are deceived and do
deceive others, with which the regenerate has still to fight, albeit he have
well profited, and be guided by the spirit of God. Yet this he says, is no
sin to him, that is, it is not imputed for sin, because the guilt thereof
drawn by generation, is remitted and forgiven by regeneration. Now this
concupiscence, as S. Ambrose says, is Ambros. Apolog. David cap. 13.
mala radix, an evil root; August. de verb. Dom. sermon. 12.
radix omnium malorum, the root of all evils, says Austine, even as charity is
the root of all goodness: Idem de verb. Ap^st. se^ (...) llo^ peccati nomine
appelat vnde oriuntur cuncta peccata, id est, ex carnali concupiscentia.
from which root of concupiscence he says again, that all sins do spring
and grow. Thus S. Austine confesses, that albeit there be remission of sins
in baptism, and nothing remaining of any actual sins, yet the root of
Original sin continues still, which being the same that it was before, must
needs be sin as it was before, albeit in respect that the guilt thereof is
released, he forbeareth to call it by the name of sin. But of this root M.
Perkins further says and that rightly, that though it be in substance the same
that it was before, yet in extent and power and strength, it is not the same.
It holds not the whole man captive as before; the yoke thereof is broken; the
kingdom of it is dissolved; it is as an enemy conquered and disarmed, not
having the Romans 6.13.
members at commandment, to be the weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, as
before it had. In the first instant of the conversion of a sinner, says he,
sin receives his deadly wound in the root, never afterward to be recovered.
Now here M. Bishop though he knew not well what to say, yet to show both his
wit and his honesty, would not forbear to say somewhat. He wishes the Reader
to confer this last answer of M. Perkins with his former doctrine, bearing
him in hand, that he shall find him no more constant then the wind. And why so?
Forsooth he says here, that sin is deadly wounded is the root, and had (...)
before, that sin remains still with all the guiltiness of it, (...)
^mouted. But what contradiction it there betwixt these (...) deadly wounded,
and yet remains sti^? What hin^^ (...) his deadly wounded, (...)
may truly be said to (...) to had (...) the guilt^ wherewith it held us, and
until it be healed by perfect burial it still rebelleth being dead. Yea, but
M. Perkins says, it remains s^ill with all the guiltiness of it, although
not imputed. But I answer him, that he abuses M. Perkins, who for this matter
stopped this wranglers mouth in the answer last before, and he dissembleth it
as though he saw it not. The guilt of sin he says remains potentially, not
actually, that is, it remains such as that in it own nature it is sufficient
to make a man guilty, but yet it does not so, became the guilt thereof is
remitted and pardoned, which S. Austine manifestly proves, as I have said
before. He does not say then, that it remains with all the guiltiness of it,
though not imputed, because it cannot be said to remain with all the
guiltiness of it, but it must also be said to be imputed. Therefore in this
whole disputation he confesses with S. Austine as touching actual guilt, that
Original sin is wholly and fully dead to the regenerate, but yet remains
still to rebel though it be dead. And yet as touching rebellion, it has also
received a deadly wound, because it has not now the same power to rebel, as
it had before to reign, and if sometimes it do gather power again, yet does
it never totally or finally recover the kingdom that it had, or prevail
utterly to separate the faithful from the love of Christ, as naturally it
does, but by the first stroke and wound that it received by the grace of
Christ, becomes in the end every way and altogether dead, and is utterly
abolished, never to be again. He further alleges, that M. Perkins first
says, that concupiscence makes a man to sin, intangleth him in the
punishment of sin, and makes him miserable, and yet here blusheth not to
conclude, that he holds it at the first neither clipped nor pared, but pulled
up by the roots. But where does he find this conclusion in M. Perkins words?
Surely the paper whereon he wrote this, would have blushed if it had had a
forehead, for very shame, to carry the report of so manifest a lie. But let the
paper do what it will, M. Bishop blusheth not; for if he had been a man of a
blushing face, he had wanted the name of being the writer of this book. What,
M. Bishop, is it all one to be deadly wounded in the root, and to be pulled up
by the roots? M. Perkins says not any where that concupiscence or sin is
pulled up by the roots, but as a man having received a deadly wound, yet lives
afterward for the time, and stirs and moves, even so concupiscence though
it receive a deadly wound, whereof in the end it dies, yet lives, and
strugleth, and rebelleth for the time, stirring up many noisome and evil
motions and lusts, from the consent whereof no man can say that he is
altogether free, and therein makes a man to sin, and entangleth him in the
punishment of sin, and makes him miserable, in such sort as before has been
declared. I may here turn M. Bishops words upon himself, Learn here gentle
Reader, what credit is to be given to such masters as he is: to such Masters
did I say? nay to such remorselesse beasts, who make no scruple or conscience
to lie, to falsify, to deprave those things against which otherwise they can
have nothing to except. As for that which he glaunceth at in the end, that
concupiscence defiles all the works of the regenerate, so that though they be
in themselves good works, yet they are stained with that, which though it be
not imputed, yet is in it self mortal and deadly sin, it has been in part
already declared and proved in the Sect. 19.
answer to his epistle dedicatorie, and shall be more fully handled in his due
place in the question of justification, where he professedly disputes of that
matter.

CHAPTER. 3. OF THE CERTAINTY OF SALVATION.
1. W. BISHOP.
M. PERKINS FIRST CONCLUSION.
WE hold and believe, that a man in this life, Page 37.
may be certain of salvation: and the same does the Church of Rome teach.

M. P. 2. Conclu. We hold, that a man is to put certain affiance in Gods mercy
in Christ for the salvation of his soul: and the same holds the aforesaid
Roman Church.

M. P. 3. Conclu. We hold, that with assurance of salvation in our hearts is
joined doubting, and there is no man so assured of his salvation, but he at
sometime doubts thereof, especially in the time of temptation: and in this
the Papists agree with us. Not so Sir.

M. P. 4. Conclu. They go further and say, that a man may be Certain of the
Salvation of men, and of the Church, by Catholic faith: and so say we.

M. P. 5. Conclu. They hold, that a man by faith may be assured of his own
salvation, through extraordinary revelation; In this sense only the first
conclusion is true.

M. P. 6. Conclu. The sixth, and second be all one: that we may be assured of
our Salvation, in regard of God that promises it: though in regard of our
selves, and our own indisposition we cannot.

THE DISSENT.
1. WE hold, that a man may be certain of his salvation in his own
conscience even in this life, and that by an ordinary and special faith. They
hold, that a man is Certain of his Salvation, only by hope, both hold a
Certainty, we by faith, they by hope.

2. We say our Certainty is infallible: they, that it is only probable.

3 Our confidence in Gods mercy in Christ, comes from certain and ordinary
faith, theirs from hope: False. Thus much of the difference, now let us come to
the reasons, to and fro.

R. ABBOT.
In this first division M. Bishop gives us only some brief notes, which need
not to be stood upon. In the third conclusion, he denies their agreement with
us, but if he understand it as M. Perkins does of ordinary assurance, he had no
cause to deny it. For seeing in the first conclusion of dissent, he grants
Certainty or assurance by hope, and requires therewith doubting, yea affirms
still that it cannot be without doubting, what reason had he to deny the
conclusion, being indifferently propounded of assurance afterward more
particularly to be distinguished, but that he well knew not what he was to say?
But in that conclusion, he should have taken knowledge what manner of Certainty
or assurance of Salvation it is that we teach, not such as whereby a man is
merely secure, and made absolutely out of doubt, but such as many times is
assaulted and shaken with many difficulties, and fears, and doubts, which often
do intricate and perplexe the soul of the righteous and faithful man. Which
notwithstanding arise not of the nature and condition of faith, as if it ought
so to be, but of the frailty and corruption of our evil nature, by reason
whereof faith is not such as it ought to be. For the true and proper work of
faith, is to give to the believer a steadfast and immovable assurance of the
love of God, that he may fully enjoy the comfort thereof without interruption
or let; and whatsoever is adverse and contrary to this assurance and comfort,
is to be accounted the enemy of faith. Therefore it is not the office of faith
to cherish and maintain such fears and doubts, but to resist them, to fight
against them, and so much as is possible to expel them and drive them out. But
yet by reason of the strength of our natural corruption and the weakness of
our faith, we attain not to this, and how much the weaker our faith is, so
much are we the further from it. So that the case stands betwixt faith and
doubting, as it does betwixt righteousness and sin. For there is true
righteousness in the faithful, and sometimes it mightily prevails, and the
conscience even gratulateth it self, and rejoices in the use and practice
thereof. But anon it begins to find defect, the temptations of sin iustle
it aside, the man stumbleth and falls, and the light whereby he shined before
as a star in the firmament, becomes eclipsed and darkened, and he seems to
himself not to be the man that he was before. Neither does this seldom fall
out, but even daily is there a vicissitude and change by turns, every day
bringing his griefs of infirmity and weakness, and sometimes giving occasion
of great lamentation and mourning, by great and grievous trespass against God
and men. But God that 2. Cor. 4.6.
commands the light to shine out of darkness, and can of a poison make a
preservative, turns these infirmities to their good, making them by
experience of sin, to love righteousness the more, and to become more wise
and wary against temptation, and in rising to take the better heed not to fall
again. Even in like sort the case stands with the assurance of faith,
wherein is a comfortable testimony of the love of God toward us, which we
receive as 1. Kings. 19.7.8.
Elias did his meat from the hands of the Angel, securing our selves to go in
the strength thereof unto the mount of God, and that 1. Pet. 1.5.
thereby we shall be kept through the power of God unto that salvation, which
is prepared to be showed in the last time. But yet in the course thereof there
is much variety and change, by reason that we apprehend not this assurance
directly and immediately as a principle, but by consequence and collection as a
conclusion, so that being subject to alteration in the apprehending of the
premises, there must necessarily be an alteration in the apprehending of the
conclusion. Our eyes are not always alike intent to the word of God; we do not
always alike conceive the promises of God, nay temptation sometimes hides
them out of our sight. The effects of grace do not always appear the same,
yea sometimes they seem to be quite overwhelmed with contrary effects.
Moreover in nature it self is a voluntary shrinking and relinquishing of the
comfort of faith, through the seeds of unbelief that originally are sown in
us, so that the ground of our own hearts is every while casting up objections
and questions, as mire and dirt, to trouble John. 7.38.
the spring of the waters of life, that they run not so pure and clear, as
otherwise they should do. By all which occasions it comes to pass, that the
days of faith are as the days of the year, some fair, some foul; one while
a sunneshine summer, another while a long and tedious winter, sometimes no more
but a storm and away; one while cast down as it were to hell, another while
seeming to be as it were in the courts of heaven, where is assured standing and
no falling; sometimes laboring and struggling, some other times triumphantly
rejoicing; but in all perplexities and distractions conceiving still what it
has felt, and striving to attain to the same again. And as a child
affrighted runs to the father, looking for defense and help of him, even so
in the midst of all fears and temptations faith, is still running unto God,
still importuning of him, calling upon him, expostulating with him, casting it
self still upon him, depending upon his aid, and expecting of him that things
become otherwise then presently they are, and seldom going so far, but that
it sees a glimse at least of light in darkness, of hope in despair, of
comfort in distress, of life in death, of heaven in hell, or if it loose the
sight thereof, yet recouereth it soon again. Of all which we see pregnant
example in the distresses and temptations of the Saints, which for our
instruction and comfort, are recommended unto us in the word of God. And this
God does, to the intent that being in some sort for the time put off from him,
we may take the faster hold when we return again; that the taste of his love
may be the sweeter, and our joy thereof the greater, when out of these floods
of temptations we arrive unto it; that Romans 5.3.
affliction may bring forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope never to be ashamed, whilst by this means the love of God as touching
the assurance thereof toward us, is more and more shed abroad in our hearts by
the holy Ghost which is given unto us. This have I set down the more largely,
good Christian Reader for thy sake, that thou may understand hereby what
manner of certainty and assurance it is that we defend; that thou may know
that it is the property of true faith to give this assurance, and that our
assurance is the greater, by how much our faith is greater, and the weakness
of our assurance the weakness of our faith; that so thou may see what it is
whereunto thou art to strive, rejoicing in that that thou have attained unto
already, and for that that is behind praying as the Apostles did, Luke 67.5.
Lord increase our faith; not being disco^forted at the feeling of thine
imperfection, because it is the common frailty of Gods children, and faith that
it may be strong, must have time and occasion to grow, and happily seems weak
to thee when it is strong to God; but always resolving, that those sparkles of
true light which God has kindled in thee shall never be quenched, and thy
little grain of faith, even Mat. 17.20. Mar. 11.23.
little as a grain of mustard seed, shall yet be strong enough to cast all
mountains into the sea that shall rise up to divide betwixt God and thee. As
for M. Bishop, it is no marvel if being an enemy of faith, he be unacquainted
with the secret of faith, the joy of the faithful being Cant. 4.12. Bernard.
Epist. 10^. Eli fons signatus cui alienus non communicate: sol iustitiae qui
timentibus Deum tantum oritur. etc.
as a garden enclosed, and a spring and fountain shut and sealed up to be
private to themselves; Psalm. ^8.9.
a gracious rain, which God has put apart for the refreshing of his own
inheritance. What marvel is it if he know not that Revel. 2 17.
new name which no man knows but he that receives it, because the John.
14.17.
world knows not nor receives that COMFORTER the spirit of truth, by which
it is written, yet grudgeth at the sheep of Christ, that they should feed in
pastures which they know not, or should be said to know that which they cannot
conceive or understand. And this is the cause that he talks so rudely and
absurdly of the hope of salvation in all this discourse, overthrowing the whole
doctrine of the Gospel, crossing the whole use of faith and of the word of
God, and speaking no otherwise of this question then a Philosopher, or Jew, or
Pharisee would do, as hereafter we shall see. In the mean time to go forward
with his brief notes, he tells us in the fifth conclusion of consent, that
only in the sense there expressed the first conclusion is true, that is, that
only by extraordinary revelation a man may be certain of his salvation,
which being the maine point of the controversy, I refer to the process of
this discourse. At the sixth conclusion he notes, that the sixth and second are
all one, but the tautologie was in his head, not in M. Perkins writing. For the
second conclusion serves to note the efficient and material causes of
salvation, whereupon our affiance rests, which is the mercy of God in Christ;
but the sixth serves to note the manner of our apprehending thereof. To the
third conclusion of dissent, he notes that it is false, namely that our
confidence in Christ comes from certain and ordinary faith. But we say that
it is true, and now he and I must join upon that issue.

2. W. BISHOP.
Here M. Perkins contrary to his custom, gives the first place to our
reasons, which he calls objections, and endeavors to supplant them: and
afterward planteth his own. About the order I will not contend, seeing he
acknowledges in the beginning that he observes none, but set down things as
they came into his head. Otherwise he would have handled Justification before
Salvation. But following his method, let us come to the matter.

The first Argument for the Catholic party is this.
1. Object. Where is no word of God, there is no faith, for these two are
Relatiues. But there is no word of God: saying, Cornelius believe thou Peter,
believe thou that thou shall be saved: therefore there is no such ordinary
faith, for a man to believe his own particular salvation.

M. Perkins answer.
Although there be no word of God to assure us of our particular salvation: yet
is there another thing as good, which counteruailes the word of God, to wit,
the Minister of God applying the general promises of salvation unto this and
that man. Which when he does, the man must believe the Minister, as he would
believe Christ himself, and so assure himself by faith of his Salvation.

Reply. Good Sir, seeing every man is a liar, and may both deceive, and be
deceived, and the Minister telling may err: how does either the Minister know,
that the man to whom he speaks is of the number of the elect; or the man be
certain that the Minister mistaketh not, when he assures him of his
Salvation? To affirm as you do, that the Minister is to be believed as well as
if it were Christ himself, is plain blasphemy: equalling a blind and lying
creature, unto the wisdom and truth of God. If you could show out of Gods
word, that every Minister has such a commission from Christ, then had you
answered the argument directly, which required but one warrant of Gods word:
but to say that the assurance of an ordinary Ministers word counteruailes Gods
word, I cannot see what it wants of making a pelting Minister Gods mate. On
the other side, to auerre that the Minister knows who is predestinate (as it
must be granted, he does if you will not have him to lie when he says to
Peter, thou art one of the elect,) is to make him of Gods privy Council,
without any warrant for it in Gods word: Yea S. Paul not obscurely signifying
the contrary in these words. 2. Tim. 2.19.
The sure foundation of God stands, having this seal: our Lord knows who
be his, and none else, except he reveal it unto them. M. Perkins then flies
from the assurance of the Minister, and leaves him to speak at randon, as the
blind man casts his club; and attributes all this assurance unto the party
himself, who hearing in Gods word, Seek ye my face, in his heart answers:
Lord I will seek thy face: And then hearing God say, Thou art my people, says
again: The Lord is my God. And then lo without al doubt he has assurance of
his Salvation. Would ye not think that this were rather some seely old Woman's
dream, then a discourse of a learned Man? How know you honest man, that those
words of God spoken by the Prophet 2000. years past to the people of Israel,
are directed to you? Mine own heart, good Sir, tells me so. How dare you build,
upon the persuasion of our own heart any such assurance? Ierem. 17.
When as in holy writ it is recorded: Wicked is the heart of man, and who shall
know it? Are you ignorant, how Saul before he was Saint Paul, being an
Israelite, to whom those words appertained, persuading himself to be very
assured of his faith, was notwithstanding foully deceived, and why may not you
far more unskillful then he, be in like manner abused? Moreover suppose that
this motion comes of the holy Ghost, and that he truly says, The Lord is
God, how long knows he that he shall be able to say so truly? Math. 22.
When our Savior Christ Jesus assures us that many be called, but few of them
are chosen to life everlasting; how knows he then assuredly, that he being
once called, is of the predestinate? M. Perkins says, that he who believes,
knows that he believes. Be it so; if he believe aright, and meddle no further
then with those things, which be comprehended within the bounds of faith: But
that the Certainty of Salvation is to be believed, is not to be begged, but
proved, being the maine question: he says further, that he who truly
repents, knows that he repeateth: he knows indeed by many probable
conjectures, but not by certainty of faith: as witnesses that holy person: If
God come to me, Job. 9.
(as he does to all repentant sinners;) I shall not see him, and if he depart
away from me, I shall not understand it: Which is sufficient to make him
thankful, yea if he received no grace at all, yet were he much beholding unto
God, who offered him his grace, and would have freely bestowed it upon him, if
it had not been through his own default. And thus our first Argument stands in
his full strength and virtue, that no man can assure himself by faith of his
Salvation, because there is no word of God that warranteth him so to do.

R. ABBOT.
He was beholding to M. Perkins, that their reasons being no better then they
be, he did vouchsafe here to give them the first place. By the first of these
reasons, they labor to defeat us of all profitable use of the word of God,
denying us liberty to believe any thing particularly of our selves, because
the word of God does no where speak namely and particularly to any of us. M.
Perkins rightly answers, that God has appointed the ministry and preaching
of his word, for the particular application thereof, whilst thereby it is
laid to the heart and conscience of every particular man, so as that by the
word of Christ delivered out of the Gospel by the minister, Christ himself in
effect says, Cornelius believe thou and thou shall be saved, Peter believe
thou and thou shall be saved. M. Bishop somewhat deformeth the answer by his
butcherly and slouinly handling of it, as his manner is, but though in more
words, it is to the same meaning that I have mentioned. Now M. Perkins intended
not in that answer, that the minister speaks to every man particularly one
by one, but that speaking to the assembly, he labors to make every man
conceive of that that is spoken as particularly spoken to himself. For the
word of God being as a Proclamation in writing common to all, the minister is
as the voice of the crier, to give notice to that congregation, that the matter
of the Proclamation concerns them and every of them, saying in effect, Act.
13.26.
To you is the word of this Salvation sent. Cap. 3 26.
Unto you has God raised up his son Jesus, and has sent him to bless you,
in turning every one of you from your iniquities. Cor. 5.50.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ; as though God did beseech you through
us, we pray you in Christ steed that ye be reconciled to God. 2. Act. 2.28.
Amend your lives every one of you, etc. Therefore as every man conceiueth the
proclamation, according to the matter of it, no less to concern him, then as
if it had been spoken in particular to him alone, so does the minister leave
every man alike interested in the message of Salvation; what he says to all
men, he says to every man; what to penitents, to every penitent; what to
believers, to every believer, what to sinners, to every sinner. Therefore
sometimes he speaks in the singular number as to one, that it may be known
that he speaks to any or every one. Ephesians. 5 14.
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light. Romans 10.9.
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be safe, even thou, or thou, or
thou, or whosoever it be amongst you. Thus God gave his law to all Israel,
speaking to all, as if he had spoken namely and particularly to every one,
Exodus 20.^.
Thou shall have no other gods; Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
image: Thou shall not take the name of the Lord in vain, etc. every man was
therein to conceive that he himself was spoken to. Thus the message both of
life and death, both of Salvation and damnation is delivered, that thereby
every man particularly may take knowledge of his own estate. Therefore a man
duly hearing the word of God, and receiving it not as the word of the minister,
1. These. 2.13.
not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God, and accordingly
believing it as from God, from that which he believes generally, frames a
conclusion to be believed privately as touching himself: The minister says,
Luc. 13.3.
Except ye repent, ye shall perish. This he believes, and therefore believes
as touching himself, Except I repent, I shall perish. The minister says, Mar.
1.15. and 16.15.16.
Repent and believe the Gospel, and ye shall be saved. This he believes, and
therefore also believes of himself, If I repent and believe the Gospel I
shall be saved. Now the minister sometimes has occasion to speak to some one
man alone, and then he himself out of the general deduceth a particular to
that one man, as Paul does to the iayler, Act. 16.31.
Believe thou in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved. For by what authority
Paul spoke this to the iayler, by the same authority does the minister in the
like case speak the same to any other man. For Christ said nothing namely as
touching the iayler, that if he did believe he should be saved, but only said,
John. 3, 15.
whosoever believes shall be saved. Thence the Apostle infers: Believe thou
and thou shall be saved, because whosoever believes shall be saved. Upon the
same warrant therefore the minister says to any man upon the like occasion,
Believe thou and thou shall be saved. This whether spoken publikly, or
privately, the conscience of the hearer apprehends, this he believes, and
therein believes not the minister, but the word of Christ, and because he
believes in Jesus Christ, and by the word of Christ believes that whosoever
believes in him shall be saved, therefore he believes concerning himself
that he shall be saved. Thus much is implied though not expressed in M. Perkins
answer; now let us hear what M. Bishop says to the contrary, and there we
shall hear not one wise word. Good Sir, says he, seeing every man is a liar
(as M. Bishop namely for example) and may both deceive and be deceived, and the
minister telling may err, how does he know that the man to whom he speaks is
of the number of the elect? I answer him; Good Sir, M. Perkins no where tells
you that the minister takes upon him to know that the man to whom he speaks
is of the number of the elect, but does only assure him, that if he believe in
Christ he shall be saved; and therein the minister knows, and the man to whom
he speaks knows that be mistaketh not, when under this condition he
assures him of salvation, because he assures him not upon any deceivable
word or warrant of his own, but upon the undeceivable word and warrant of
Christ, that Romans 9.33.
whosoever believes in him shall not be confounded. He goes on: To affirm as
you do, that the Minister is to be believed as well as if it were Christ
himself, is plain blasphemy. I answer him again, To talk as you do, you
know not what, is the part of a brabling Sophister, not of a learned divine.
For M. Perkins does not affirm that the minister is to be believed as well as
Christ himself, but that the word of the Gospel preached by the minister, is
to be believed as if Christ himself did here personally speak, because it is
the word of Christ himself, who when he says, whosoever believes shall be
saved, does therein say, Cornelius, believe and thou shall be saved; Peter
believe and thou shall he saved, or if he mean not so, cannot truly say,
whosoever believes shall be saved. And for this he has the warrant of Gods
word, and commission from Christ, because being for Christ a minister of the
Gospel, his office is to preach the Gospel, and it is the word of the
Gospel, that whosoever believes in Christ shall have everlasting life.
Therefore this is not to say, that the ministers word counteruailes Gods word,
or to make every pelting minister Gods mate, as the paltry shaueling prateth,
but it is to challenge assent and credit to the word of God, to the Gospel of
Christ, upon which only and not upon the minister, the faithful believer does
rely himself. But to quit M. Bishop with a question we will ask him, Good
Sir, may John a Style believe that you have authorie from Christ to give him
absolution of all his sins? You will undoubtedly tell him, Yes, that he must
so in any case. But John a Style asks again, I pray Sir, where does Christ
speak of you or of me? For I do not find in the Gospel that ever Christ made
mention of either of us. M. Bishop will tell him, that Christ said to the
Apostles, and to all Priests their successors, John. 20.23.
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and because he is a Priest
therefore this authority belongs to him. So then because Christ has said to
all Priests, whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, though he said it to
far other purpose then M. Bishop practices it, therefore John a Style must
believe that M. Bishop has authority from Christ to absolve him from all his
sins. Now will not M. Bishop be so favorable to us, as that from a general
we may infer a particular, as well as he. Surely if when Christ said, Whose
sin sye remit, they are remitted, he spoke in effect of M. Bishop and John a
Style, we see no reason why we should not be permitted the like construction
that when Christ says, Whosoever believes in me shall not perish but have
everlasting life, he says, and by the minister may be reported to say in
effect to this man or that man, Believe thou in the Lord Jesus and thou shall
have eternal life. This matter need not so many words, but that we have to do
with impudent wranglers, who being blinded with malice are as far from common
discretion as they are from truth. Whereupon it is that in the next words he
cauilleth again, as if M. Perkins had said that the minister knows who is
predestinate, or did say to Peter, for example, Thou art one of the elect,
whereas he has not a letter or syllable to give any show hereof, but only
expresses a conditional assurance by the word of the Gospel to this man, or
that man, or whomsoever, that if he repent and believe the Gospel, he shall be
saved, the minister not taking upon him to know that any man truly repents or
believes, which God only can know, but leaving the man to apprehend the
promise upon conscience of his own repentance and faith in Christ. Therefore
all this idle talk of M. Bishops is but for want of matter, as his alleging
of the words of the Apostle, to prove that whereof there is no question made,
that the Lord only knows who are his, and none else but only as it is
revealed from him. He goes on and tells us, that M. Perkins flies from the
assurance of the minister, and leaves him to speak at randon as the blind man
casts his club. Bur M. Perkins flies from nothing that he had before said, but
still leaves the word of Christ only preached by the minister in Christ's
name, to be the only assurance for the faithful to build upon. Neither does
the minister speak at randon, but certainly and definitely he affirms by the
same word to him that repents and believes, that he shall be saved, though
he know not who it is that shall repent or believe and so be saved, and
therefore in that respect, if M. Bishop will needs have it so, speaks at
randon even as the blind man casts his club, not knowing whom he shall strike;
as the fisherman casts his net, not knowing what fish he shall catch; no
otherwise then the Apostles did, at whose preaching some believed, other some
blasphemed and believed not, according to that which S. Austin says, August.
de praedest. sanct. cap. 6.
Many hear the word of truth; some of them believe it, some contradict and
speak against it. So therefore the minister as touching the effect of
preaching, speaks vncertatnly, not knowing where the seed shall grow, but yet
certainly delivering, that wheresoever it shall bring forth the fruit of faith,
it shall also bring forth eternal life. Which assurance he gives by the word
of Christ, and the faith of the hearer thence apprehends, and thereof
concludes assurance to himself. Thus does M. Perkins refer the assurance to
the ministry of the word, and thus to the party, and no otherwise after then
he had done before. But to distinguish true assurance of the heart from carnal
presumption and floating fancies swimming in the head, he notes it to be
accompanied with the spirit of grace and of prayer, or rather to issue
therefrom, by which the heart is so seasoned and conformed to the voice of God,
as that his word does still rebound from it by joyful acceptance and
affectionate desire, and prayer, and purpose, and promise of that that is
uttered thereby. So that when God says, Psalm. 27.8.
Seek ye my face, the faithful soul answers to God, Thy face Lord will I
seek. When God says, Z^ch. 13.9.
Thou art my people, it sounds from it back again, Thou art the Lord my
God. When Christ says, Mar. 9.23.
If thou believe, all things are possible to him that believes, it answers,
Lord I believe, help my unbelief. When God requires to Psalm. 40.7 8.
do his will, it says to him, Lo I come o my God, I am content to do it, yea
thy law is within my heart. This is the fruit and effect of that Romans 8.16.
spirit of adoption, which gives witness to our spirit, that we are the
Sons of God, and 1. Ioh. 5.6.
bears record that God has given unto us eternal life. Which we do not
wonder, that to M. Bishop it seems rather an old woman's dream, then a
discourse of a learned man, because Act. 17.18. 1. Cor. 2.14.
the things of God seem but babbling and foolishness to profane and carnal
men. And out of that profaneness issues that speech of his that follows,
How know you, honest man, that those words of God spoken by the Prophet 2000.
years past to the people of Israel are directed to you, etc. Where many an
honest and faithful soul is ready to answer him, Good Sir, because Romans 15.4.
whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, and
because I find that the Scripture it self does apply to every of Gods faithful
people, that that was said to Iosuah, Iosuah. 19. Heb. 13.5.
I will not fail thee nor forsake thee, and teaches thereupon every
faithful soul to say as David did, Psalm. 118.6.
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me, therefore I 1.
Cor. 7.27.
having obtained mercy to be faithful, do in like sort take to my self
whatsoever God has any where spoken for the comfort of his elect, and the
rather because I know that God Ephesians. 46.
being one Father of all, carries without respect of persons, the like regard
to all his children. Neither is it mine own heart that gives me this assurance;
for mine own heart could minister no such comfort unto me, but being cast down
with the acknowledgement of mine own misery, God gave me a heart to hearke^ to
the voice of Christ, delivered by the minister out of the Gospel, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will refresh you, and
I found in him indeed that refreshing and joy John. 16.22.
that no man shall take from me. And though I be a sinner, yet that dismaieth
me not, for 1. Tim. 1.15.
Christ came into the world to save sinners, repentant sinners, of which by the
grace of Christ I am one. And though Paul were deceived when he builded
himself upon himself, yet when he built upon Christ, as I do, he was not
deceived. And whereas you ask me, Sir, whether I know how long I shall say so,
I must tell you, that my assured trust and confidence is, that God will never
forsake the work which he has begun, because he has said, that Romans 9.33.
he that believes in Christ, shall never be confounded or ashamed, that is,
August. in Psalm. 36. conc. 2. Infra. sect. 20. John. 10.2^.
his hope shall not be deceived, and Christ has taught me that his sheep
which hear his voice, of which I am one, shall never perish, but that he will
give unto them eternal life. And howsoever I know that the wickedness and
corruption of mine own heart is such, that being left unto my self, I should
soon fall away from God, yet I look unto that promise that God has made to al
his faithful servants, Ierem. 32.40.
I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me,
resting my self not only in this, that I have apprehended Christ, but much
more in that Phil. 3.12.
that he has apprehended me; not only in this, that I know God, but much more
in this, Gal. 4.9.
that I am known of God. Neither does it touch me that you say, that many are
called but few are chosen, for many are called which come not indeed though
they seem to come, and thereby show that they are not chosen, but there is a
calling, August. de praedest sanct. ca. 16. Ex vocante non quacunqut vocatione,
sed qua vocatione, fit credens.
whereby God so calls, as that he makes a man to believe, of which Christ
says, John. 6.45.
Every one that hears and learneth of the Father comes unto me, and of which
S. Paul says; Romans 8 30.
Whom he has predestinate, he has called, and whom he has called, he has
justified and glorified. Of which inward and effectual calling, he has made
me partaker, opening the ears of my soul to hearke^ unto him, and subduing
the affections of my heart to the obedience of his will. And because Ibid. 11.29.
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, therefore I rest
undoubted, that Ibid. 14.8.
if I live, I shall live unto the Lord, and if I die, I shall die unto the Lord,
and whether I live or die, I am the Lords, Ibid. 8.39.
neither shall any thing separat me from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Thus many an honest faithful christian would answer M. Bishop,
and stop his mouth as the poor Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. cap. 3.
simple man did the mouth of the proud philosopher in the counsel of Nice,
that he could not tell for his life what to reply against him. But let us ask
him in the behalf of this honest man, whereas he says Sect. 3.
afterward, that he believes that he shall have life everlasting if he
fulfill that which Christ taught the young man in the gospel, to wit, if he
keep all Gods commandments, how he knows that those words of Christ spoken
to the young man so many hundred years past, are directed unto him, or that
there is any such condition made with him, that if he keep the commandments
he shall enter into life. Look by what rule he shall answer us, that that
co^ditio^ belongs to him, that if he keep the commandments he shall enter
into life, by the same rule does the honest man take upon him to believe, that
because he believes in Christ he shall have everlasting life. By the same rule
does he hearken to all the promises of God as pertaining to him. By the same
rule does he interest himself in all the gracious and lovely speeches, wherewith
God from time to time has comforted his people, and therefore as occasion
serves he puts himself into the person and co^ditio^ of the saints and
faithful that formerly have bin, into their ioys, and sorows, and hopes, and
fears, and prayers, and complaints, taking unto himself those answers and
assurances that God has at any time given unto the^, resolving of all the rest
that which in one case the Apostle exe^plifieth of that that was written of the
justification of Abraham, Romans 4.23.24
that those things were not written for the^ only, but for us also which
believe as they have done, that we may be assured that God will be the same God
to us as he has bin to the^. As for certainty of perseverance and testimony of
predestination and election, more follows to be said hereafter. But here he
confesses, that he that believes knows that he believes; whereof we infer,
that then he knows and believes that he has eternal life, because 1. John.
5 13.
they that believe in the name of the Son of God, are to know that they have
eternal life: which is not to be excepted from being within the bounds of
faith, because S. John has so delivered by the word of faith, and therefore
that the certainty of Salvation is to be believed, is not begged but proved,
and shall yet further be proved if god will. M. Per. says, that he that truly
repe^teth, knows that he repents. M. By. answers, that he knows it
indeed by many probable conjectures, but not by certainly of faith, as if we
made our repentance and faith the matters of our faith to believe that we
believe, or to believe that we repent, idly talking he knows not what. Our
faith and repentance are not matters of faith, but matters of conscience and
feeling, which in our affections we discern and know; and finding the same in
our selves, do believe the word of God, that he that repe^teth and believes in
the Son of God has everlasting life. As for that which he says, that a man
knows his repentance no otherwise but by probable co^iectures, it is a
ridiculous device. He that repe^teth knows further the^ by conjecture the
wound of his own heart, and the grieua^ce that he has toward himself, by the
conscience of his own sin. Surely if he himself had ever truly repented, he
would make it no question whether he that repents does know himself to repent
or not, but hitherto he has bin unacquainted, what either repentance or faith
do mean; God give him the true knowledge thereof before it be to late. But to
prove that a man knows not his own repentance but by probable co^iectures, he
brings a place of Job most absurdly and impertine^tly: If God come to me I
shall not see him, and if he depart from me I shall not understand it. Which
words of Job rightly translated, Job 9.11.
When he goes by me I see him not, and when he passes by I perceive him not,
do serve to set forth unto us the vnsearchablenes of the ways and works of
God, which we are not able to co^prehe^d eue^ in those things which are by us
and before us, and wherein he seems most nearly to approach unto us. But let us
take the words as he reads the^, and I pray thee gentle Reader to observe in
what sort he uses the^. The thing that he would prove, is that a man knows
not his own repentance but by probable co^iectures. And how is it proved?
Because we see not nor understand Gods co^ing to us or departing from us.
Whereupon he infers, which is sufficient to make a man thankful: yea though
he received no grace, yet were he beholding unto God who offered him his grace,
and would have freely bestowed it on him, if it had not been through his own
default. Now what is that that is sufficient to make the man tha^kful? That he
knows not his own repentance? that he neither sees nor understands Gods
coming to him nor departing from him? If Gods visitation be not perceived nor
understood, what thanks can there be, or conviction of unthankfulness? Does a
man thank God and not know for what, or whether there be any thing or not to
tha^k him for? How does he know any default in this case, or can say that God
offered him any grace, or that he would freely have bestowed the same upon him?
Out of doubt his wits were a wool gathering when he wrote this, or else his hand
out ran his head; yet happily he thought it good enough for the^ to whom he meant
it, who must think of their ghostly father, that he speaks most learnedly when
they understand him least. But let me answer him to the place, that indeed we
see not God, nor perceive him coming to us, or departing from us, but yet we
feel him working in us, and as Ber. notes by the alteration that we find in
ourselves, take occasion to say, Bernard.
Haec est mutatio dexterae Excelsi: This change comes of the right hand of the
most high. Of this visitation Cyprian speaks most fitly for our purpose: Cypr.
Prolog. de cardinalibus Christi operibus. Quomodo fulgur nubes disrumpit and
repentina coruscaetio non tam illuminat quam hebetat oculum, ita aliqua^do
nescio quo motu ta^geris and tangi te sentis, eum tame^ quite tangit non
intueris. Dicuntur tibi quaedam verba aercana intrinsecus quae efferre non
sufficis vt dubitare non possis, quiae juxta te est imino intra te qui te
solicitat nec tame^ sicuti est se tibi videndum concedat.
As the lightning breaks the clouds, and the sudden shining thereof does not
so much enlighte^ as dull the eye, so sometimes thou art touched with I know not
what motion, and feel thy self to be touched, and yet see not him that
touches thee. There are inwardly spoken unto thee certain secret words, which
thou art not able to utter; so as that thou can not doubt but that he is
near thee, yea eue^ within thee which does solicit thee, and yet does not
yield thee to see him as he is. Which words plainly show, that though a man see
not God either coming or departing, yet he certainly knows and perceives in
himself the work of God. Therefore of the very words which M. Bish. cites Hier.
says; that Hieron. in Job. cap. 9 Dicit quod venie^tis Dei praesentia sit
quando homini innotescit and quando occulitur quasi abeu^tis absentia indicitur.
the presence of God coming to a man, is when he beco^eth known to him, and his
hiding of himself is termed the absence of him as going away; in neither of
which we are able sufficiently to conceive or comprehend him. Whereby we may see
with how great discretion this place was brought to prove that gods work in
ma^s repe^ta^ce, is not certainly known to him Now therefore the word of God is
warrant to a faithful man to assure himself of his Salvation. For it bids
him to Mar. 1 15.
believe the Gospel, and the Gospel is, that Ioh. 3.15.16.
whosoever believes in Christ shall have everlasting life. He is therefore to
believe, that whosoever believes in Christ shall have everlasting life. He is
therefore to believe of himself, that because he believes in Christ he shall
have everlasting life. Or if he do not believe of himself, believing in Christ
that he shall have everlasting life, he believes not the Gospel, that
whosoever believes in Christ, shall have everlasting life. And thus the
strength of M. Bishops argument is very feeble, neither is it only vain in it
self, but he has dealt as absurdly in the handling of it.

3. W. BISHOP.
The second is. It is no article of the Creed, that a man must believe his own
Salvation, and therefore no man is bound there unto.

M. Perkins answers. That every article of the Creed contains this
particular faith of our own Salvation, namely three: First (says he) to
believe in God, is to believe that God is our God, and to put our trust in him
for our Salvation.

Answer. I admit all this, and add more (that M. Perkins be no longer ignorant
of the Catholic knowledge of the Creed) that we must also love him with all
our heart and strength: thus we understand it more fully then he: Yet find not
out that thirteenth article, Thou must believe thine own particular Salvation.
For albeit, I believe and trust in God, yet not being sure of my love toward
him, I am not assured of Salvation, for as S. John testifies, He that loves
not, 1. John. 3.
abides in death.

So I answer to the second article named by M. Perkins, that is, I believe that
God of his infinite mercy, through the merits of Christ's passion, does pardon
all those, who being heartily sorry for their sins, do humbly confess them,
and fully purpose to lead a new life: that I my self am such a one, I do
verily hope, because I have as far forth as I could, to my knowledge
performed those things which God requires of me, but because I am but a frail
creature, and may perhaps not have done all that so well as I ought, or am not
so well assured of that, which by Gods help I have done, I cannot believe it,
for in matter of faith (as you shall hear shortly) there can be no fear or
doubt.

The like answer is given to the article of life everlasting. Mat. 19.
I believe that I shall have life everlasting, if I fulfill that which our
Savior taught the young man, demanding what he must do to have life
everlasting: to wit, if I keep all Gods commandments, but because I am not
assured that I shall do so (yea the Protestants (though falsely) assure us, that
no man by any help of Gods grace can so do,) I remain in fear. But (says M.
Perkins) the devil may so believe the articles of the Creed, unless we do
apply those articles to our selves. First, I say the devil knows to be true
all that we do believe, and therefore are said by S. James to believe, but they
want a necessary condition of faith, that is a godly and devout submission of
their understanding unto the obedience of faith, and so have no faith to speak
properly. Again, they trust not in God for Salvation, nor endeavor not any
manner of way to obtain Salvation, as Christians do, and so there is great
difference between their belief in the articles of the Creed, and ours.

R. ABBOT.
To this argument M. Perkins justly says, that the pillars of the Church of
Rome do not understand the Creed, who having corrupted all points of Christian
faith, must needs frame the articles of the Creed to the same corruption.
Whether they were the Apostles or other after them, that laid together this
brief of faith, they intended not therein a narration of common history, but
a profession of private hope. And that may appear by the phrase wherein they
have expressed this belief; I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER; I BELIEVE IN JESUS
CHRIST; I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST. For well does M. Perkins note that to
say, I believe in God, is all one as to say, I believe that God is my God, and
I have an assured confidence and trust in him to be saved by his mercy. M.
Bishop mentions the answer in superficial and general terms, that to
believe in God is to believe that God is our God, and to put our trust in him
for our Salvation, and in this sort admits it, but to that purpose as M.
Perkins spoke it, he will by no means admit it, because so to admit it, should
be to grant the point in question. He can be content that we in common believe
God to be our God by right of sovereignty and authority, but he will not
endure that any man shall say as M. Perkins intended, I believe that God is my
God, by affection of love. He will like well enough that we put our trust in
him for our Salvation, so as to look to be saved by him if we be saved, and
happily to carry some probable opinion that we shall be saved, but in no case will
suffer us to conceive so of our selves, as to say with the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
5.9.
God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation by the means of
Jesus, as M. Perkins meant. To believe that God is our God, is to believe that
he is our life, our peace, our strength, our deliverance and Salvation; not
only that he is these things in himself, but that he is indeed the same to us,
assuredly persuading our selves, that because God is ours, therefore whatsoever
is his is ours, that is, for us and for our use, his mercy, his power, his
providence, to watch over us, and to preserve and keep us to himself both in
life and death. This did God import when by his new covenant he bound himself
to his heirs of promise, saying, Ierem. 31.33.
I will be their God and they shall be my people, whereupon they shall be
emboldened to say, Esa. 25.9.
Lo this is our God, we have waited for him and he will save us; we will
rejoice and be joyful in his Salvation. And thus does S. Austin teach us to
make August. in Psalm. 32. conc. 2. An temere dicimus faciendo nobu Deum
possessionem? etc. Dicat anima, secura dicat, Deus meus es tu quidicit animae
nostrae, salus tua ego sum, etc.
God our God, to make him our possession, as he speaks, and therefore without
doubting to say unto God, Thou art my God, because he says to our soul, I am
thy Salvation. And indeed no man can with a true heart say unto God, Thou art
my God, whose soul does not with inward comfort hear God saying unto him by
his word, I am thy Salvation. Seeing therefore that M. Bishop cannot deny, but
that to say, I believe in God, is as much as to say, I believe that God is my
God, he must grant, that for a man to profess to believe in God, is to
profess the assured belief of his own Salvation. The first degree of faith
is credere Deum, to believe that God is. The second degree is credere Deo, to
believe God, that is to believe that his words and promises are true. But
credere in Deum; to believe in God, adds further to trust in God according to
that word and promise, and to believe the same, not only generally and
indefinitely, but particularly and to his own use, firmly resolving that God
will do to him according to that that he has promised, and therefore to his
repentance and faith, according to his promise will give everlasting life. Thus
Eusebius Emisenus distinguishing those phrases rightly, says, that Eusebius.
Emissen. de symb. hom. 2.
no man is approved to have believed in God, but he that has devoutly trusted
in him, which is that that the Prophet David names, to put trust in his
mercy, whereby we steadfastly expect at his hands, and of his mere goodness,
to receive all things for our safety and Salvation. But M. Bishop making show
to admit that which M. Perkins says, adds more, that he might not be
ignorant of the Catholic knowledge of the Creed, that we must also love God
with all our heart and strength, and thus says that they understand it more
fully then we do. Where we may observe what a wise construction he makes for
himself. For he tells us by and by that he is not sure whether he love God
or not, and afterward again that charity is seated in the dark corners of
the will, and a man cannot be sure that it is in himself. So then because to
believe in God, is to love God with all his heart and strength, and M. Bishop
does not know whether he love God or not, it must needs follow that for ought
he knows, he does but lie so often as he says, I believe in God. This does
he gain by his understanding this point more fully then we do. But we respect
not here any largeness or fullness, but rather propriety of understanding. It
is true indeed that Saint Austin sometimes declares believing in God by the
love of God, and other such signs and tokens thereof, not as properly to
define what it is to believe in God, but rather to show who they are that
truly do believe in God, that men may not flatter themselves with opinion of
believing, when indeed they do not believe. Thus does he say, that August. in
Psalm. 77. Adhaerere ad ^ene cooperandum bona operanti Deo.
to believe in God is to cleave unto God, to work well with him, working that
that is good in us; that De verb. dom. ser 61 Jlle credit in Christum qui and
sperat in Christum and diligit Christum.
he that believes in Christ both hops in Christ and loves Christ; that In
loan. tract. 29. Quid est crederem eum? Credendo amare, credendo diligete, etc.
to believe in Christ, is in believing to affect, in believing to love Christ.
But it is one thing to describe a thing by adjoined properties and effects,
another thing to define it out of the nature and propriety of it self. We
doubt not but that faith and love are always conjoined, and true belief in
God does always infallibly bring forth the love of God, but yet as diverse
members of the body necessarily concurring for the perfecting of the whole,
have every one their several office, the eye to see, the ear to hear, etc.
so these virtues of the soul, namely faith and love, though they always meet
and never are divided, yet in office and act are distinct each from other,
neither is to believe the same as to love, nor to love the same as to believe.
For we do not make the question that Christ asked the man that had been blind,
John. 9.35.
Beleeuest thou in the Son of God; to be the same with that that he demanded
of Peter, Cap. 21.15.
Love thou me? Now therefore to believe in God, is in it self to have a full
affiance and assured trust in him that he will save us, and accordingly the
sum of that that I profess to believe in the Creed, is that God is my God
and Father by the mediation of Jesus Christ, through the sanctification of the
holy Ghost, whereby he has made me a member of his Catholic Church, which is
the communion and society of his Saints, to which, and all the members whereof,
and so namely to me, he will give remission and forgiveness of sins, and a
happy resurrection of the body, to be partaker with the soul of everlasting
life. And that this is a matter of belief without any thirteenth article of
the Creed, let him learn of David saying, Psalm. 27.13.
I believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Which
what is it else but to say, I believe mine own Salvation? And let him learn
of Fulgentius, that it was not proper to say so; for Fulgent. ad Monim. lib. 1.
Justus ex fide viuens fiductaliter dicit. Credo vt lere bona Domini etc.
the just living by faith, says he, boldly says, I believe to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, Let S. Austine also teach him
this matter of belief: August. in Psalm. 148. Quid tibi promisti Deus o homo
mortalis? Quia victuri es in aeternum. Non credu? Creed, creed: Plus est ta^
quod fecit quam quod promisit.
God has promised thee, O man, that thou shall live for ever. Do thou not
believe it? Believe it, believe it; for that that he has already done for
thee, is a greater matter then that that he has promised. To the same effect
Cyprian speaks, Cyprian. de mortalit. Deus tibi de hoc mundo recedenti
immortalitatem pollicetur atque aeternitatem, and tu dabitas? hoc est Deum
omnino non nosse; hoc est Christu^ credentium magistrum peccato incredulitatis
offendere; hoc est in ecclesia constitutum fidem in domo fidei non habere.
God has promised unto thee when thou departest out of this world, immortality
and eternity, and do thou doubt thereof? This were not to know God: this is
to offend Christ the master of believers with the sin of unbelief? this is
for a man being in the house of faith to be without faith. So that by Cyprians
judgment to have faith, is for a man to believe his own Salvation, and not to
believe his own Salvation, is to be without faith. But Saint Bernard handles
this point most pregnantly of all other. Bernard. in Annunciat. ser. 1. Necesse
est primo omnium credere quod remissionem peccatorum habere non possis nisi per
indulgentiam Dei, etc postremo quod aeternam vitam nullis potes operibus
promereri nisi gratis detur and illa, etc. Verum haec non omnino sufficient sed
magis initium quoddam and velut fundamentum fidei sunt habenda. Ideeque
sicredis peccata tua non posse deleri nisi ab eo cui soli peccasti benefacis;
sed add adhuc vt and hoc credas quia per ipsum tibi peccata donantur. Hoc est
testimonium quod perhibit in cord nostro Spi. sanctus dicens, Dimissa sunt
tibi peccata tua; Sic enim arbitratur Apostolus gratis iustificari hominem per
fidem. Sic and de vita aeterna habeas necesse est testimonium spiritus quod ad
eam sis diuino munere peruenturus.
It is necessary for thee to believe that thou can not have forgiveness of
sins but by the mercy of God, and that by no works thou can obtain
eternal life, unless it also be given thee. But these things are not
sufficient, nay they are to be accounted but the beginning and as it were the
foundation of faith. Therefore if thou beleeuest that thy sins cannot be put
away, but by him to whom only thou have sinned thou do well, but add
hereto to believe, THAT BY HIM THY SINS ARE FORGIVEN THEE. This is the
testimony that the holy Ghost gives in our heart, saying, Thy sins are
forgiven thee: for thus does the Apostle define, that a man is freely justified
by faith. So also as touching eternal life, it is needful that thou have the
testimony or witness of the spirit, THAT THOU SHALL COME UNTO IT BY THE GIFT
OF GOD. Here then it is plain, that without any thirteenth article of the
Creed, the faith whereby the Apostle says a man is justified, is such a faith
as whereby I believe mine own Salvation; whereby I believe that my sins are
forgiven me, and that I shall attain by the very gift of God unto everlasting
life. But says M. Bishop, I believe and trust in God; Yet not being sure of my
love toward him, I am not assured of Salvation. Where he plainly shows, that
he has no love toward God, because where love is, it cannot but be certainly
felt and known, and if he loved God, he could not but assure himself thereof.
Now therefore it is no marvel that he has no assurance of Salvation, when
there wants in him the certain and infallible effect of that faith whereby
he should be assured of Salvation. For true faith is the fountain of our love
toward God, whilst believing God to be such and so merciful unto us, it
swaloweth up our affections, and draws our love and devotion unto him. Which
is not unfelt in us, but by the feeling thereof in our selves, we gather a
further confirmation and assurance to our selves, that we are beloved of God.
Both which S. Bernard well declares, saying of the faithful man: Bernard.
epist. 107. Vermis vilissimus and odio dignissimus sempiterno, tamen confi lit
amari, quia se sentit amare; immo quia se amari praesentit non redar^are
confunditur.
A vile worm and worthy to be hated everlastingly, yet assures himself that
he is beloved, because he feels himself to love; nay because he first
feels himself to be beloved, therefore he is ashamed not to love again. So
again he says, that Jdem in Cant. ser. 69. Amor Dei amorem animae parit etc.
Ex eo quod se diligere sentit eti am diligi non ambigit.
the love of God breeds in the soul love toward God, and by feeling it
self to love, it is also out of doubt that it self is beloved. Now what a
miserable case is M. Bishop in, that neither is sure of his love toward God,
nor dare assure himself of Gods love toward him? If he had not a senseless
and dead heart, he could not but much grieve and lament at his own estate. And
yet forsooth he tells us, that he does believe and trust in God; but therein
he lies unto God. For Cyprian. de duplici martyr. Non credit in deu^ qui non
tu cosolo collocat totius faelicitatis suae fiduciam.
he does not believe in God, that does not place the confidence of his felicity
in God only; which he does not place in God only, but partly in God and
partly in himself. He does not trust in God, that does not rely wholly upon
Gods mercy, and thereby look for that at his hands for which he trusts in
him, so as to account himself deceived by him if he fail thereof, which never
has befallen to any, not shall befall that does put his trust in God. M.
Bishop divides this trust betwixt God and himself, and so trusts in God, as
that he makes that for which he professes to trust in God, to hang chiefly
upon himself, and therefore no marvel if he have no assurance of Salvation,
because he incurreth rather the curse denounced by the Prophet, Ierem. 1^.5.
Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm. For what
does he else when he leaves the whole work of God, as we have heard before,
to be confirmed and made good by his own free will? Now as touching that other
article of believing in Christ, to have by his merits remission of sins, S.
Austine teaches us, that August. in Joan. tract. 29. and de verb. dom. ser.
61. Credendo in cum ire and membru ^ius incorporari. etc. Quoquo modo vnitur in
eum and menibrum in corpore ^ius efficitur.
to believe in Christ is to be united unto Christ, to be made one with him, to
be incorporated, to be members of his body. He expounds it to be all one with
that which Christ says in the Gospel, of Idem in Joan. tract. 26. Credere in
Christum hoc est manducare panem viuum.
eating his flesh and drinking his blood, which whosoever does, John. 6.54.56.
dwells in Christ and Christ in him; he has eternal life, and Christ will
raise him up at the last day. Thus the Gospel of Christ instructs us, and he
that believes in Christ, because he believes the Gospel, must believe that
he is a member of Christ, one with Christ and Christ with him; that he dwells
in Christ and Christ in him, that Christ has given unto him eternal life, and
will raise him up at the last day; being assured, that as a head will not suffer
a member of it own body to perish, which it has in his power to preserve; so
Christ having made him a member of his body, and having power to save him, will
not suffer him to perish, but as a faithful Mediator will perform that
charge, which John. 6.39.
the will of the heavenly Father has laid upon him, that of all that he has
given him he should loose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. Now
M. Bishop says, that he believes that God for the merits of Christ's passion,
does forgive them that are heartily sorry for their sins, and humbly confess
them, with a full purpose of a new life. And this he hops that he has done,
but he cannot assure himself that he has done it, or that he has done it so
well as he ought to do, and therefore cannot believe the forgiveness of his
sins. Where we see, that the merit of Christ's passion is not sufficient in
his opinion, to purchase for him the forgiveness of sins, but it must
further hang upon the sufficiency and perfection of his own repentance. It is
not enough that he truly repent, unless he repent so well as he ought to do,
that his repentance may deserve the pardon that he seeks for* But we for our
parts know and confess, that our repentance, our faith, our righteousness,
are never such as they ought to be: we are short and imperfect in the sorrow for
our sins; our purposes of new life and amendment of our defaults, prove often
times like Ose. 6.4.
the morning dew that is quickly dried up. And therefore it is not the value
and worth of our repentance that we rest upon to merit pardon and
forgiveness, but we require a sincerity and truth thereof, faithfully to crave
the same, being but as the pain and grief which makes to seek the medicine
whereby it is eased; as the hunger and thirst which makes to crave the food
whereby it is relieved; as the feeling of beggerie and want, which makes to
seek the treasure and riches by which it is supplied. Which supply and relief
spiritually we find in this, that Romans 3.24.
we are justified freely by the grace of God, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be an atonement for us (not by the
merit of our repentance) but by faith in his blood. Rhem. Testam. Explicat. of
certain words: in the end.
Freely, for god a mercy, for nothing, as the Rhemists expound the word gratis,
willing to show a little truth in giving the right signification of the word,
but craftily suppressing the same truth, and plainly contradicting it by a
colorable gloss devised against the text of the Apostle, and against the
signification of the word, which force of truth has wrested from themselves.
Ambros. in Romans cap. 3. Gratit quia nihil operantes, neque vitem reddentes sola
fide iustificati sunt dono Dei.
Freely, says Ambrose, because having no works, nor yielding any requital
even of the gift of God, we are justified by faith only. Chrysostom. ni Romans
hom. 7. Nullu ad hoc vsus operibus sed fidem tamum exigens.
Freely, says Chrysostom, because he uses hereto no works of ours, but
requires faith only. And he requires faith only, only as a hand whereby we
receive, not as a work whereby we deserve this forgiveness of our sins,
that so the true penitent may firmly expect it in Christ only by believing,
not hang in suspense of it by being in doubt of insufficiency in repenting;
God having therefore appointed it to be Romans 4.16.
by faith that it may be of grace, that the promise (thereof) may be sure (not
in it self, not with God; who doubts but in that respect it is sure enough?
but) to all the seed, that is, to every one that believes; the promise being
that Act. 10.43.
through the name of Christ, every one that believes in him shall have
forgiveness of sins. Which faith, though it be yet but weak and little, and
sometimes interrupted with fears and doubts, yet God accepts it and
cherishes it, that by more experience it may grow to more strength, neither is
it true which M. Bishop says, that in matter of faith there is no fear or
doubt, as anon after shall appear. In the mean time he further adds as
touching the article of Eternal life, that he believes he shall have it, if
he shall keep all Gods commandments, but because he is not assured that he
shall so do, he remains in fear. And very justly may he be in fear that
looks for eternal life upon no other condition then he does. The Apostle
indeed does plainly debar him from all hope and expectation thereof, when he
says, Gal. 3.10.
So many as are of the works of the law; are under the curse, for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the book of the law to do them. Where he plainly takes it for granted,
that no man continues in all things that are written in the law, that is, that
no man keeps all Gods commandments, and therefore concludes, that he that
for eternal life depends upon keeping all Gods commandments, cannot avoid
the curse. Yea, but Christ says to the young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19.17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments. It is true; but Christ
says it to induce the young man to the knowledge of himself, and very ill is
it applied to seduce men from the true acknowledgement of the faith of Christ.
The young man asks what he might do to inherit eternal life? Our Savior
Christ refers him to the law, as Gal. 3.25.
the Schoolemaister to train him unto Christ; that finding it Romans 8.3. Gal.
3.21.
a thing impossible for the law to give him life, and therefore casting off all
vain confidence of the righteousness thereof, he might be fitted to embrace
Act. 4.12.
the faith of that name, in which only life and Salvation is offered unto us.
Which it plainly appears this young man conceived not, by reason of a
presumption that he had by misunderstanding the law, that he had observed the
law. The vain opinion whereof to discover, our Savior bids him to sell all
and give to the poor, promising him treasure in heaven, and willing him in the
mean time to come and follow him, that it might appear how far he was from
that love of God and his neighbor which the law required, in whose heart the
love of riches bare so great a sway, as that he could not be content at Gods
commandment upon promise of heavenly treasure, to bestow the same to the
necessity of his neighbor. Now if he had rightly esteemed of himself how
far he was from being answerable to the righteousness of the law, he would
have profited by the words of Christ, and have taken occasion thereby to come
to Christ for the obtaining of eternal life, the true means whereof he
directs when he says, John. 17.3.
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent. Which knowledge of Christ seeing this man had not, without
which M. Bishop himself I hope will say there is no eternal life, surely even
by his own grounds it must be absurd, to say that Christ by these words did
simply intend to direct him a way for the obtaining of eternal life. And if he
will say, that he was indeed first to believe, and then by faith to keep the
commandments, thereby to enter into life, the Apostle takes exception against
that, when citing the words of the Prophet, The just shall live by faith, he
infers, Gal. 3.11.
Now the law is not of faith, but says, He that does these things shall live
in them. For if the law saying, He that does these things shall live in them,
do not accord with the faith of Christ, then it is not for them that profess
the faith of Christ, in the doing of these things, that is, in the keeping of
the commandments to expect the obtaining of eternal life. Yea, Tertull. de
praescript. Euaetuatur gratiae Euangelica si ad legem Christum redigit.
the grace of the Gospel is made void if it bring Christ to the law, says
Tertullian, which he learned of the Apostle, saying, Gal. 5 4.
Ye are voided of Christ, ye are fallen from grace that will be justified by
the law. Therefore he says: Romans 4.14.
If they which be of the law be heirs, then faith is made void, and the
promise is made of none effect: Gal. 3.18.
If the inheritance be by the law, it is no longer by promise. But God has
given it by promise, and therefore faith believes 1. Ioh 5.10.11.
that God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is (not in our
keeping the commandments but) in his son, and in him only we are to expect
it, that from the beginning to the end we may still confess, that Romans 6.23.
eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. The
commandments of God therefore are now laid before us, not as the condition for
obtaining of eternal life, but as the way to walk in unto eternal life,
assured unto us by the free promise and gift of God. And of this promise and
gift of God the keeping of Gods commandments is a part, who has said, Ierem.
31.33.
I will put my law in their hearts, and in their minds will I write them;
Ezech. 36.27.
I will put my spirit into them, and will cause them to walk in my statutes,
and to keep my judgments and do them. Whereto agree the words of the Apostle,
Ephe. 2.10.
We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has prepared for us to walk in. Which workmanship when by the grace of God it
is begun in us, albeit by reason of many imperfections it be not such, as that
by the virtue thereof we may expect eternal life, yet our faith receives
further confirmation and assurance thereby, that he that has wrought this
beginning of life, will go forward therewith to the end, and having made us
partakers of one part of his promise, will make us also partakers of the other,
taking these first fruits of sanctification, as an earnest and pledge from him
of the performance of the whole. Therefore albeit we well know, that we do not
keep the commandments of God as we ought to do, yet we do not for that cause
stand in doubt of eternal life, but finding our hearts truly affected toward
God, Mat. 5.6.
hungring and thirsting after righteousness, unfeignedly hating sin, and
groaning under the burden of it Heb. 12.1.
hanging so fast on, we comfort our selves, that God has made the light of his
Salvation to shine unto us, resolving according to his promise, that this
Sunne-rising though it be not yet fully clear, and may happily sometimes be
ouercast with clouds, yet shall never have any night, but that accepting our
godly endeavors, pardoning our defects and wants, forgiving us all our sins,
he will Phil. 1.6.
perfect the good work which he has so graciously begun in us, so that the
true faithful soul may always boldly say, Psalm. 23.6.
Thy loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I
shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Now because M. Bishop lays no
other but a rotten foundation, no marvel if he build no other but a tottering
and shaking house; because he looks to have life grow out of his keeping of
the commandments, which is as a reed continually shaken with the wind, no
marvel if he deny to himself any steadfast assurance and trust of attaining
thereunto. But yet it is a falsehood of his to charge the Protestants with
affirming, that no man by any help of Gods grace can keep Gods commandments.
The Protestants only say, that God gives us not that fullness of grace
whilst here we live, as that we can fully and perfectly keep the
commandments of God so as to be justified thereby, but they deny not, but that
all the faithful according to the degrees and measure of grace received, do in
a measure keep Gods commandments, and as grace is increased, so they increase
in the keeping of the commandments, and that this grace shall yet further renew
and sanctify them, in such sort, as that in the end corruption and sin being
wholly abolished for ever, they shall be fully conformed to that image of
righteousness that God has described in the law. But of this hereafter. In
the mean time we see by that that M. Bishop has told us of faith, that the
Church of Rome indeed teaches no other faith but the same that devils have.
Which being objected by M. Perkins, he labors to clear, but says nothing
to serve the turn, but by overthrowing that which he builds otherwhere. He
says, that the devils know all to be true which we believe, but yet do want a
necessary condition of faith, which is a godly and devout submission of their
understanding to the obedience of faith, and so have no faith to speak
properly. But if godly and devout submission of the understanding to the
obedience of faith, be a necessary condition of faith, as he tells us here,
so as that that which is called faith without this is not properly so called,
how then stands it which elsewhere he determines, that faith truly and
properly so called, may be without charity and good works? For what godliness,
what devotion, what submission or obedience can there be where charity is not?
Godliness, devotion, submission, obedience, what are they but good works? If
then faith properly so called, cannot be without these, then it is true which
we say, that true faith can never be without charity and good works. But that
he denies in the other place, and with common consent they all deny it.
Therefore he must deny that which here he himself says, that godly and
devout submission of the understanding to the obedience of faith, is a
necessary condition of faith properly so called, and so, as yet there is no
exception but that their faith is the same with the devils faith. But taking
this which he says, which indeed is true, though he by no means must stand to
it, that godly and devout submission, etc. is a necessary condition of true
faith, yet because it is but a condition adioined, and not the very nature of
faith it self, surely unless he describe faith in other sort then he does, he
answers yet nothing as touching the very act of faith, but that the faith of
devils is all one with their faith. His other exception is, that the devils
trust not in God for Salvation, nor endeavor any manner of way to obtain it
as Christians do. Which is even as vain as the former was, because he
answers nothing to put difference as touching faith it self, he himself
still denying that trust in God for a man's own Salvation, is any part of
faith. But he should have answered directly to the point, what there is in the
very nature of faith it self, whereby their faith is to be distinguished from
the faith of devils, whereof he is not able to give us any certain answer. And
to be short, all that he has here said is but framed for a show, to serve for
present shift, because he dares not deny but that there have been and are many
desperate rakchels (yea of their Popes and Cardinals there have not wanted
such) in whom there is no godly or devout submission of understanding to the
obedience of faith, no trust in God for Salvation, no endeavor to obtain it,
who yet have had their Catholic faith, to believe that Christ has died, and
risen again, and that by his blood there is forgiveness of sins, though not
for them, yet for them that repent: so that in that which he says hitherto,
there is nothing at all whereby to put difference betwixt their faith and the
devils faith, and hereafter we shall see, that he is able to say no more then
here he has said.

4. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins in his first exception graunts: Page 54.
That commonly men do not believe their Salvation, as infallibly as they do the
articles of the faith (yet says he) some special men do.

Whereof I infer by his own confession, that our particular Salvation is not
to be believed by faith: for whatsoever we believe by faith, is as infallible
as the word of God, which assures us of it. Then if the common sort of the
faithful do not believe their Salvation, to be as infallible as the articles
of our Creed, yea as Gods own word, they are not by faith assured of it. Now
that some special good men, either by revelation from God, or by long exercise
of a virtuous life, have a great Certainty of their Salvation, we willingly
confess: but that Certainty does rather belong to a well grounded hope, then
to an ordinary faith.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins rightly says, that the Scriptures in this matter of faith and
assurance, do direct us the duty of faith, what it ought to do, and what we are
to pray and labor for, though we do not all and always attain unto it.
Secondly, that though commonly men do not with the like assurance believe their
own Salvation, as they do the doctrine of faith expressed in the articles of
the Creed, yet that some special men do so, as did Abraham, and the Prophets,
and Apostles, and martyrs of God in all ages, who without doubting laid down
their lives for the testimony of God, and for the name of Christ, assuring
themselves to receive a better resurrection. And so we make no question, but
that by the same spirit that certified them, many faithful also now do receive
the like certificate of eternal bliss, and are thereby ready if occasion
serve to do the same that they have done. Now because he says that commonly
men do not so infallibly believe their own Salvation, though some special men
do, hereof, says M. Bishop, I infer by his own confession, that our
particular Salvation is not to be believed by faith. But of his confession
follows no such illation. For he cannot conclude, that therefore our own
Salvation is not infallibly to be believed by faith, because men do not
commonly so believe it, but rather that it is so to be believed by faith,
because some special men do believe it so, for that in those special men is
example to the rest what they ought to strive unto. But says M. Bishop,
Whatsoever we believe by faith, is as infallible as the word of God that
assures us of it. And we grant that it is as infallible in it self, but not
always so in our apprehension and feeling. And if he will say that it is
always as infallible to us and our understanding and conscience, he speaks
very falsely and absurdlie: for there are diverse degrees of faith, Mat. 8.26.
little faith, Cap. 15.28.
great faith, Romans 4.21.
full assurance of faith, even as a weak eye and a strong eye. And as a weak
eye sees but weakly and imperfectly, and a strong eye sees strongly, and more
fully discerns the thing seen, so a little faith believes faintly, though
truly, greater faith believes more steadfastly; full assurance of faith Ibid.
ver. 18.
believes under hope even against hope. The disciples of Christ said unto him,
John. 6.69,
We believe and know that thou art Christ the Son of the living God. Which in
it self was infallibly true, and yet they did not so infallibly apprehend it,
but that this faith was soon shaken: and because they did not yet infallibly
believe it, our Savior tells them, that therefore he forewarned them of his
death and resurrection, that Ibid. ca. 14.29.
when it was come to pass they might believe, namely as S. Austine says,
August. in Joan. tract. 79. Quo vtso illud fuerant creditu ri quod ipse esset
Christus filius Dei viui, etc. Creditur autem hoc no fide noua sed aucta, aut
certe cu^ mortuus esset defecta, cum resurrexisset refacta. Neque enim eum Dei
filium non and ante credebant, sed cum in illo factu^ est quod ante praedixit,
fides illa quae tunc qua^do illit loquebatur fuit parua and cum moreretur pene
ta^ nucta and reuixit and creuit.
that he was Christ the Son of the living God. Which, as he adds, they should
believe not with a new faith, but with a faith increased, which was quailed in
his death, but repaired in his resurrection. For they were not without this
faith before, that he was the Son of God, but when it came to pass which he
foretold, that faith which when he spoke unto them was little and small, and
when he died in a manner none, both revived and increased. It was faith that
made Mat. 14.28.
Peter upon Christ's word to step into the sea to go to Christ upon the waters,
believing that he should be safe; but yet he believed it not infallibly, and
the faintness of his faith made him begin to sink, so that being vehemently
afraid, he cried out unto Christ for help, saying, Master, save me. Therefore
our Savior says to him, Ver. 31.
O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? In which sort when another
time the disciples were afraid, by reason of a tempest upon the sea, and awaked
him being asleep, saying unto him, Cap. 8.25.
Master save us, we perish, he answered the^, Why are ye fearful, O ye of
little faith? in both these places showing that little faith, such as now the
faith of the Apostles themselves was, does not make a man so infallibly to
believe, as that he is thereby wholly voided of fear and doubt; yet shows it
self to be true faith, in that the same fear and doubt makes him always to
run to Christ, as expecting succor and strength in him. Such is the faith
whereby the common sort of faithful men do believe their own particular
Salvation, truly and effectually to the comfort of their souls, yet not so
fully and infallibly, as to be altogether freed from fear and doubt. For it is
to be observed, which was intimated before, that matters of faith concerning
our own Salvation, do consist partly in principles delivered by the word of
God, and partly in conclusions thence derived to our selves. Now albeit faith
sometimes do waver and stagger, as touching the very principles themselves and
immediate words of God, yet because the truth and Certainty thereof is more
easily and better conceived, they are for the most part more familiarly and
readily believed. But the conclusions, because of themselves they are unknown,
and have their light only from the principles, are not so firmly apprehended as
the principles themselves, whilst doubts happily may be cast, least there be any
error committed in the application and use thereof. It is a principle
delivered for assurance of Salvation; Act. 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved. Hereupon the
faithful man infers to himself, I believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore
I shall be saved. In this either co^fusely or expressly inferred, he comforts
himself, and rejoices in God, and in hope hereof cheerfully serves God,
calls upon his name, and in patience expects the revealing of his
Salvation. And yet sometimes it falls out that he questioneth his faith, and
not seeing such effects thereof as he supposes there ought to be, makes doubt
least happily he be deceived, and though the principle be true by which he first
believed, yet is ielous least he have misapplied it to himself. Thus sometimes
by other temptations true faith is assaulted and greatly shaken, so that he
that greatly rejoiced in the Salvation of the Lord, by hasty cogitations is
overtaken and brought to say as David in that case did, Psalm. 31.22.
I am cast out of the sight of thine cies. This was the manner of the Apostles
faith at first, and this manner of faith and assurance do we teach, and do
teach men to pray with the Apostles, Luke 17.5.
Lord increase our faith, that from weakness of faith and slender assurance,
we may grow to strength of faith and full assurance, as the Apostles did. In
the mean while therefore it is false and contrary to the word of God which M.
Bishop says, that the faithful have not by faith assurance of Salvation,
unless they believe it to be as infallible as the word of God it self. Now
for conclusion he confesses, that some either by revelation from God, or by
long exercise of virtuous life, have a great Certainty of Salvation, but that,
he says, does rather belong to a well grounded hope, then to an ordinary
faith. But we answer him, that there is no well grounded hope, but that which
is grounded upon ordinary faith and belief of that that is hoped for. For
hope is the proper effect of ordinary faith, and nothing else, as we shall see
hereafter, but a patient expectation of that that we believe shall be, and if
we do not believe that it shall be we cannot be said to hope for it in that
sense wherein the Scripture teaches hope. Of ordinary faith it is that the
Apostle says; Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God through Jesus Christ our
Lord, by whom we have access through faith unto this grace wherein we stand
and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God; thereby showing, that to
rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, is the effect of an ordinary
faith, whereby we are assured of peace with God. Of ordinary faith S. John
speaks where he says, 1. John. 5.13.
These things have I written unto you that believe in the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life. By ordinary faith therefore
the faithful are (not uncertainly to hope, but assuredly) to know, that they
have eternal life. But it is here to be observed, that Master Bishop
affirms not only of that Certainty that is gotten by long exercise of
virtuous life, but also of that that s by revelation from God, that it rather
belongs to hope then to ordinary faith, writing he wist not what himself,
because if he be asked the question, he will not deny, but that whatsoever God
has revealed is to be believed by ordinary faith, because he says afterward
that it is the Catholic faith, that is, ordinary ^aith to believe all that to
be true which God has revealed. Howsoever the revelation be extraordinary, as
we know he intends it, yet it is ordinary faith by which a man believes
such extraordinary revelation, so as that neither that assurance that is had
by this extraordinary revelation, is altogether free from fears and doubts,
shaking sometimes the confidence of that which a man has received immediately
from the oracle of Gods own mouth, or by special messengers directed from God
for certificate in that behalf. Which is to be seen in the examples of
Abraham, and Isaac, and David, and others, to whom God has given special
promise of his protection and favor, and yet upon occasions they have bewraied
great infirmity in the apprehension thereof. And if this befall to faith in
those things that are extraordinarily revealed, much more we may assure our
selves that it befalls there, where we have no other but ordinary revelation
by the written word of God. Therefore on every side M. Bishops assertion is
false, that there can be no assurance by faith of our own Salvation, unless
we believe it with the like infallible Certainty, as we do the truth of the
word of God.

5. W. BISHOP.
The th^rd reason for the Catholics, is, that we are bidden to pray daily for
the remission of our sins. But that were needless, Math. 6.
if we were before assured, both of pardon and Salvation.

M. Perkins answers, First, that we pray daily for the remission of new
sins committed that day. Be it so. What needs that, if we were before assured
of pardon? Marry (says he) because our assurance was but weak and small, our
prayer is to increase our assurance. Good Sir, do you not see how you overthrow
your self? If your assurance be but weak and small, it is not the assurance
of faith, which is as great, and as strong, as the truth of God.

We give God thanks for those gifts which we have received at his bountiful
hands, and desire him to increase, or continue them, if they may be lost. But
to pray to God to give us those things we are assured of by faith, is as fond
and frivolous, as to pray him to make Christ our Lord to be his Son, or that
there may be life everlasting to his Saints in heaven, of which they are in
full and assured possession. And so these three Arguments by M. Perkins
propounded here for us, are very substantial and sufficient, to assure every
good Christian, that he may well hope for Salvation doing his duty, but may
not without great presumption, assure him by faith of it.

R. ABBOT.
The comfort of the faithful man's prayer, is the same assurance that David
had, Psalm. 4.3.
When I call upon the Lord, he will hear me, it being a promise of God to his
people, 50.15.
Call upon me and I will hear thee, in which sort our Savior Christ gives us
encouragement to pray, saying, John. 14.13.
Whatsoever ye ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. Therefore S. John says, 1. John. 5.14.
This is the assurance that we have of him, that whatsoever we ask according
to his will he hears us, and if we know that he hears us, we know that we
have the petitions that we ask of him. Being therefore bidden to pray for the
forgiveness of sins, and having the promise of God, Ierem. 31.34.
I will be merciful unto them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember
no more, we believe and by faith stand assured, that when we do pray to have
our sins forgiven us, God hears us and gives us pardon and forgiveness
thereof. We do not then teach at randon the assurance of the forgiveness of
sins, but in such tenure and form as we are directed by the word of God,
according to which S. Austine says of himself, August cont. Julian. Pelag.
lib 6. ca. 5. Qua gratia liberor, vt scio, ne intrem in tentatione^, etc. atque
vt exaudiar cum confort^hat meis, dicens. Dimitte nobis, etc.
By the grace of God I am freed, I know, that I enter not into temptation, and
that I am heard saying with my fellows, Forgive us our trespasses. Psa. 32.6.
For this therefore, that is, August. in Psalm. 31. Pro hac: pro ipsa venia
peccatorum.
for forgiveness of sins, shall every one that is godly, says David, make
his prayer unto thee in a time when thou may be found, so being assured that
in the great water floods they shall not come nigh him. Our faith then assures
us not of forgiveness of sins without prayer, but that God forgiueth us when
we pray; so that his objection being framed to our doctrine aright, is as if he
should say, Seeing faith assures us of forgiveness of sins when we crave it
of him by prayer, what need we pray? Which was one of Wrights drunken reasons,
whereby he would have laid an absurdity upon our Church, being himself an
absurd blind-asinus, and not understanding what we say. But to make the matter
more plain, it is to be noted, that in three respects we continue daily to
ask of God forgiveness of sins, of which M. Perkins has noted two. First
as S. Austine says, August. de vera and falls. paenit. ca. 5. Quia quotidimana
est offensio oportet vt sit quotidiana etiam remissio.
because we daily commit offense, we have need daily to crave pardon. But what
needs that says M. Bishop, if we were before assured of pardon? I have
answered him, that our assurance before hand and always is, that our prayer
obtains it at Gods hands. Therefore we pray, and by faith do rest assured,
that undoubtedly we have that for which we pray. Secondly, we pray for
forgiveness, not for that we have no assurance thereof, but for that we desire
greater assurance and more comfortable feeling of it, that as forgiveness with
God is full and perfect, so the same may accordingly be sealed in our hearts.
Our faith being weak gives but weak assurance, and therefore we beg of God
that our hearts may be enlarged, that Bernard. in Annunciat. ser. 1. supra
sect. 3.
the testimony of the spirit may more freely sound unto us, Thy sins are
forgiven thee. Now here says M. Bishop: Good Sir, do you not see how you
overthrow your self? And why so? Forsooth if your assurance be but weak and
small, it is not the assurance of faith, which is as great and strong as the
truth of God. But good Sir, we have already showed you, that therein you tell
us a senseless and unlikely tale. The truth of God is always alike, not
subject to alteration, never increased or diminished; but our faith is greater
and less; sometimes has a full and sometimes a wane, and to us the truth of
God is according to our faith, and according to our apprehension and feeling of
it. Wherein we are variable and diverse, even after the manner of Peter's faith,
of whom S. Austine says: August. de verb. Dom. ser. 13 Illum vidite Petrum qui
tunc erat figura vestra modo fidit, modo titubat; modo immortale^ confitetur,
modo^ timet ne moriatur.
Peter was the pattern of us all; sometimes he believes, sometimes he
wauereth; one while he confesses Christ to be immortal, another while he is
afraid least Christ should die. The poor distressed man says in the Gospel,
Mar. 9.
Lord, I believe, help my unbelief. August. de verb. Dom. ser. 36. Credo
inquit, ergo est fides. Sed adiuua incredulitatem meam; ergo non est plena
fides.
He says, I believe; therefore there is faith, says Austine: help my
unbelief says he; therefore there is not, yet full and perfect faith. If
there be true faith, and yet with faith a remainder of unbelief, then the
assurance of faith cannot be said to be as great and strong as the truth of
God; yea the untruth hereof is so palpable and gross, and contrary to the
common experience of all believers, as that we may justly marvel at the
wilful absurdity of this man in the assertion of it. The third reason of our
praying continually for forgiveness of sins, is for the obtaining of the
fruit and effect thereof. For so long as we 2. Cor. 5.7.
walk by faith and not by sight, we still pray for the sight of that as
touching which we have now but the comfort of faith and hope. We believe that
we are redeemed both in body and soul, yet still we Romans 8.23.
sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption even the redemption of our
bodies. August. in Psalm. 37. Gaude te redemptum, sed non du^ re: spe securu
esto. Ece nim si no gemueris in spe, no^peruentes adrem.
Joy that thou art redeemed, says Austine, but not yet in real effect; in
hope, or as touching hope, be without all doubt. If thou shall not now groan in
hope, thou shall not attain to the real effect. Thus then by prayer we sigh
and groan for our redemption, who yet by faith believe that already we are
redeemed. So therefore albeit we believe that God has forgiven us our sins,
yet still we pray for forgiveness of sins, that that may appear to us which
we now believe. The Prophet David gives us to understand, that Psalm. 32.1.
forgiveness of sins is bliss and happiness, and therefore a freedom from
all misery and sorrow. We still live in misery and sorrow, and seem wholly
strangers to all title of blisfull state. Therefore being still in case as if
our sins were not forgiven us, we still pray for forgiveness of sins, that
as we have heard so we may see, and by effects may discern and enjoy the same
forgiveness. But here M. Bishop tells us, that to pray to God to give us
those things we are assured of by faith, is as fond and frivolous, as to pray
him to make Christ our Lord to be his son, or that there may be life
everlasting to his Saints in heaven, of which they are in full and assured
possession. Which is so fond and frivolous a speech, as that well we may
persuade our selves that it never came from any wise man. For matters of faith
are of diverse sorts. Some are already fully acted and done, and those we only
believe, we do not pray for them, as the creation of the world, the birth, and
death, and resurrection of Christ, and other such like. Other some are
believed, as designed and pronounced by God, but not yet fully acted and
effected to us, which we so believe, as that still we pray for them till they
be effected, prayer being nothing else but August. de verb. Dom. ser. 36.
Ostendit fide^ fontem ^sse orationu^ ^e^ posse ^re ru^u^ vb. caput aquae
siccatur.
the stream or river of faith, and an issue of the desire of that which
joyfully we believe. A notable example whereof we see in David, who when God
had sent Nathan to him, to certify him that he would stablish the kingdom for
ever in his house and posterity, albeit he believed and joyfully accepted the
tidings hereof, yet forbeareth not therefore to pray that it might be so. 2.
Sam. 7.25.
Now therefore, says he, confirm for ever the word that thou have spoken
concerning thy servant and his house, and do as thou have said. For thou O Lord
of hosts have revealed unto thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house;
therefore has thy servant been bold to pray this prayer unto thee. Therefore
now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue
for ever before thee; for thou O Lord God have spoken it. Where we plainly see
him praying unto God, that that might be, whereof he was assured by faith upon
the promise of God that so it should be, and not only so, but did therefore
pray, because God had revealed unto him that it should be so. And do we not
think that David believed the word spoken to him from God by the same Prophet,
when he had admonished him of his grievous trespass, and he repented, 2. Sam.
12.13.
The Lord has taken away thy sin; and yet afterward he prays: Psalm. 51.1.
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses. Our Savior Christ believed
that his Ioh. 10 28.
sheep shall never perish, and therefore that the Father would keep them, and
none should take them out of his hands, and yet he prays, Cap. 17.11.
Holy Father keep them in thy name, even them whom thou have given me. He was
assured by faith that God would deliver him from death, Psalm. 16.10.
that he would not leave his soul in hell, nor suffer his holy one to see
corruption; yet Heb. 5 7.
in the days of his flesh did offer up supplications with strong crying and
tears to him that was able to save him from death, and was also heard in that
which he feared. He was assured by faith that God would glorify him; yet he
prays; Ioh. 17.5.
Now glorify me O Father with thine own self. The Apostle S. Paul was
assured by faith, that 2. Tim. 4.18.
the Lord would deliver him from every evil work, and preserve him unto his
heavenly kingdom; yet he ceased not to pray, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. We believe by faith, and are assured that Christ's
kingdom shall come; yet we daily pray, Let thy kingdom come. Thus therefore
albeit by faith in the promise of God, we now rest assured of the remission of
sins, yet because it is not yet revealed, we still pray, Forgive us our
trespasses, that we may enjoy by realitie and possession, what we believe we
already have in Gods affection. Now albeit these three arguments hitherto be
idle and vain conceits, yet for conclusion he commends them for substantial
and sufficient, to assure every good Christian that he well may hope for
Salvation doing his duty, but may not without great presumption assure him of
it by faith. But it has been already showed, that doing of duty can yield us
neither faith nor hope truly so called, because we come so short of the doing
of it. Therefore Hierome rightly says, that Hieron. in Esa. lib. 17. cap. 64.
Si consideremu^ merita nostra desperandu^ est.
if we consider our own merits, we must needs desfaire. But God would have
August. in Psalm. 88. Non secundum merita nostra sed secundu^ ill^us mi
sericordiam firma est promissio.
the promise to be sure, not according to our merits, but according to his
mercy. He would have it to depend upon his promise and his oath, Heb. 6.18.
that by two immutable things wherein it was impossible that God should lie, we
might have strong consolation, which can be but very weak, yea none at all, so
long as we hang it upon any other thing. It is therefore a wicked presumption
to hope for Salvation by virtue of our own doings, but the presumption that
grows of faith, is a commendable presumption. Ambros. de Sacrament lib. 5.
cap. 4. Praesume non de operatione su^ sed de Christi gratia, etc. Bona
praesumptio.
It is a good presumption, says Ambrose, to presume, not upon thine own
work, but upon the grace of Christ. Such a presumption S. Austin teaches,
August. in Psalm. 85. Quicquid est circae te vel inte vnde possit praesum^re,
abijce a te and tota praesumptio tua Deus sit.
Whatsoever there is about thee, or in thee to presume of, cast it from thee,
and let God be thy whole presumption, or presume wholly upon God. Namely in that
sort as S. Ambrose teaches by occasion of David's words, Psalm. 119.116.
Receive me according to thy word. Ambros. in Psa. 118. Ser. 15. Intolera^dae
praesumptionis videretur Deo dicere, suscipe me nisi promissum eius adiungeret,
hoc est, vt auderemus ipse feei^^i, tuo te chirographo conuenimus.
It were a matter of intolerable presumption, says he, to say to God, Receive
me, but that he adds the promise of God, as if he should say, Thou have
caused us to presume, we challenge thee upon thine own bond. This is the
presumption of true faith, whereby we withdraw our eyes from our selves, and
cast them wholly upon God, assuredly believing that we shall receive, because we
believe in him that promises. Therefore Gregory says, Greg. Magn. in Ezech.
hom. 22. Per praesumptionem gratiae and vitae caniant iusti iudicium quod ti
iusti omnes pertimescunt.
By presuming of grace and life, the righteous sing of that judgment which all
the unrighteous are afraid of. Let M. Bishop then learn, that there is a godly
presumption of Salvation and eternal life, which because it cannot arise of
any sufficiency of our works, must necessarily be grounded upon faith alone.
Wherein notwithstanding faith receives comfort and strength by the good fruits
and effects of grace, in the fear and love of God, in faithful care and
conscience of duty toward God and men, because albeit of themselves they
cannot be presumed of, yet being fruits of faith, even in their beginnings and
imperfections, are Bernard. de great. and lib. arbit. Occuliae praedestinationis
indicia, future foep^citatis praesagia,
tokens of Gods secret election, foretokens of future happiness, so that a man
Idem. epist. 107. Vocatus quisque per timorem, iustificatus per amorem,
praesumit se qu^que esse de numer^ beatorum.
called to God by fear, and framed to righteousness by love, presumes that he
is of the number of them that shall be blessed. M. Bishop is not acquainted with
true faith, and professes that he knows not whether he have any fear or
love of God, and therefore no marvel that he is a stranger to this presumption,
and do take that to be an unlawful presumption, which indeed is nothing but
true faith.

6. W. BISHOP.
To these I will add two or three others, which M. Perkins afterward seeks
to salve by his exceptions, as he terms them. To his first exception, I have
answered before. The second I will put last for orders sake, and answer to the
third first, which is:

The Catholics say, Page 56.
we are indeed to believe our Salvation on Gods part, who is desirous of all
men's Salvation, very rich in mercy, and able to save us, but our fear rises
in regard of our selves, because the promises of remission of sins depend upon
our true repentance: Unless you do penance, ye shall all perish. Luke 13.
And the promises of Salvation, is made upon condition of keeping Gods
commandments. If thou will enter into life keep the commandments. Again,
No man shall be crowned, Math. 19.2. Tim. 2.
except he combat lawfully. Now we not knowing whether we shall well perform
these things required by God at our hands, have just cause to fear, lest God
do not on his part, perform that which he promises upon such conditions. To
this M. Perkins answers, That for faith, and true repentance, every man that
has them knows well that he has them. To which I reply, that for faith
being rightly taken, it may be known of the party that has it, because it is
a light of the understanding, and so being like a lamp, may be easily seen:
but true repentance requires besides faith, both hope, and charity, which are
seated in the dark corners of the will, and cannot by faith be seen in
themselves, but are known by their effects: which being also uncertain, do
make but conjectures and a probable opinion, so that place of S. Paul may be
omitted where he says: Prove your selves whether you be in faith or no. 2.
Cor. 13.
Because we accord that it may be tried by us, whether we have faith or no:
although I know well, that Saint Paul's words carry a far different sense.
But let that pass as impertinent. To the other. 1. Cor. 2.12.
That we have received the spirit, which is of God, that we might know the
things which are given of God. What things these are which the spirit reuealeth
to us, S. Paul teaches in the same place, That which the eye has not seen,
nor ear has heard, etc. God has prepared for them, that love him: but to us,
God has revealed by his spirit: All this is true: but who they be that shall
attain to that blessed Banquet by God so prepared, God only knows, and by
his spirit reuealeth it to very few. And will you learn out of S. Jerome that
ancient Doctor, the cause why: In 3. caput. Ion.
Therefore (says he) it is put ambiguous and left uncertain, that while men
are doubtful of their Salvation, they may do penance more manfully, and so may
move God to take compassion on them.

R. ABBOT.
The condition of repentance is required, not as whereby we work our
Salvation, but whereby we seek it, and that not by the keeping of the
commandments, wherein we all fail, but in Christ alone, by faith in him,
whence follows a measure of keeping Gods commandments, and of striving
lawfully unto him, not as any proper cause of Salvation, but as parts and
tokens and preparations of and to that Salvation which we receive and have by
Christ alone. Now here M. Perkins brings in the Popish Doctors, affirming
that we cannot be assured that we have true faith and repentance, because we
may lie in secret sins, and so want that which we suppose our selves to have.
M. Perkins answers, that he that does truly repent and believe, knows that
he does so. To this M. Bishop replieth, that faith being rightly taken, may be
known of the party that has it, but true repentance cannot. But how must we
conceive of faith when it is rightly taken. Forsooth he tells us that it is a
light of understanding, and so being like a lamp may be easily scene. But true
faith is not only a matter of understanding, but a mixed action of the
understanding and will* and consists not only in knowing, but in seeking,
and desiring, and embracing the thing that we understand. Therefore Oecumenius
observes, that the faith recommended by S. Paul beside steadfast assent,
imports O^cumen. in epist. Iac. cap. 2. Consecutionem ex affectu procedentem
cum firmo assensu no mine fidei vocamus.
a further matter prooceeding out of the affection. So we saw before that
Bernard makes it to be such as whereby a man believes that his sins are
forgiven him, Which M. Bishop might have learned also of Ferus one of their
own Prophets, though a more faithful Prophet then commonly theirs are, who
faith, that Ferus in Mat. cap 27. Credere est confidere Deu^ per Chr^stum
peccata non imputaturum.
to believe is to trust that God for Christ's sake will not impute our sins.
But that we may see the spirit of giddiness wherewith this man is carried up
and down, he himself but a little before has told us, that godly and devout
submission of the understanding to the obedience of faith, is a necessary
condition of faith properly so called. Faith then is not only a light of
understanding, but implies godliness, devotion, and submitting of the
understanding to the obedience of faith, which because it cannot be without
repentance, hope and charity, it necessarily follows, that if a man knows
that he has faith, he knows also that he has godliness, devotion,
obedience, repentance, hope, charity, and so M. Bishops reply even by
himself is utterly overthrown. And to this purpose S. Austin tells us, that
August. de verb. Dom ser. 61 Qui fidem habet sine spe and dile^^ane Christum
ess^ cred^, non in Christum credit.
a man cannot believe in Christ without hope and love, and S. Bernard, that
Ber^ard. in Cant sermon. 24. Mors fi^es separatio esi charitatis.
the separation of charity is the death of faith, and Origin, that Ori^enan
To. ca 4 Scie^s fidei spe^ insen^ ibiater conarere.
hope cleaves inseparably unto faith. Then if a man know that he has faith,
he cannot be ignorant that he has also hope and charity, without which there
is no true faith. It is therefore a mere fiction of M. Bishop, that a man may
know that he has faith, but he cannot know that he has true repentance,
because repentance requires hope and charity, which forsooth are seated in
the dark corners of the will, and cannot certainly be discerned. What a fond
toy is this, that a man hops, and knows not that he hops; that he
repents, and knows not that he repents; that he loves, and knows not
that he loves? Surely where these things are, they are known; and if they be
not known, it is because they are not. For 2. Cor 2.11.
the spirit of man knows the things that are in man; he discerns what is in
himself, though not always the measure and quantity thereof. Otherwise how
does S. John say: 1 Ioh. 3.14.
By this we know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. How shall we know that we are translated from death to life, because
we love the brethren, if we cannot know that we love the brethren? August. i^
Joan. epist. tract. 5. Attendat in cor: vidcat si habeat charitatem, and tunc
dicat, natus sum ex Deo.
Let a man look into his heart, and see if he have charity, and then let him
say, I am borne of God, says S. Austin, but to what end, if a man cannot see
and know whether he have charity or not? The same S. Austin says: De ver.
Apost. ser. 6. Si quis spiritum Christi non habet, non se fellat, hic non est
eius. Ecce adiuu^n^e ipsius misericordia, spir^tum Christi habemus ex ipsa
dilectione iustitiae, integra fide, catholica fide, spiritum Dei nobis inesse
cognoscimus.
If a man have not the spirit of Christ, let him not deceive himself, he is
none of Christ's. Behold says he, by the help of Gods mercy we have the
spirit of Christ. By the love of righteousness and true faith, the Catholic
faith, we know that there is in us the spirit of God. How shall we know by the
love of righteousness that the spirit of God is in us, if we cannot know that
there is in us the love of righteousness? But to infringe that idle device, M.
Perkins alleges the words of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves whether you are in the faith. For to what end is this
spoken, if we cannot know whether we are in the faith or not? But M. Bishop
says, that they accord that it may be tried whether a man have faith or not,
importing therefore that the place is nothing against them. But he may not so
avoid; for the being in the faith whereof the Apostle speaks, signifies
more then he intends thereby. Which appears plainly by the words which the
Apostle adds: Know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?
thereby showing that to prove a man's self whether he be in the faith, is to
prove whether Christ be in him, because the faith of which he speaks is that
Bernard. in oc^aua Pasch ser. 1 Eacommendatur fides per qua^ Christus in
cordibus nostris habitat.
lively faith, whereby Christ dwells in our hearts. And Romans 8.10.
if Christ be in you, says the same Apostle, the body is dead as touching
sin, but the spirit is life for righteousness sake, which cannot be without
repentance, hope, charity, and such other virtues wherewith the spirit of
Christ endueth them in whom Christ does dwell. He therefore that knows
himself to be in the faith, as the Apostle means it, knows Christ to be in
himself; he knows himself to be dead to sin, and alive to righteousness,
and that he is not without repentance, hope, charity, and other virtues
wrought in him by the spirit of Christ. As for that other meaning of the place
which M. Bishop speaks of, if he had set it down, I doubt not but we should
have taken him tardie therein, as well as we do in all the rest. To the other
place of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.12.
that we have received, not the spirit of this world, but the spirit which is
in God, that we may know the things that are given unto us of God, he
answers, that the Apostle means it of those things whereof he there
speaks, The things which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, etc.
God has prepared for them that love him, etc. but who shall attain to that
blessed banquet, says he, by God so prepared God only knows, and reuealeth
it by his spirit to very few. Which answer of his gives him no evasion at all.
For if we do understand the words concerning the joys of heaven, and that
blessed banquet of which he speaks, the Apostles words must import, that we
know the same to be given unto us. For how shall we be said to know the things
that are given unto us of God, if we do not know that they are given unto us?
Neither may we conceive it as he does, to know that such things are prepared
for the faithful and righteous; for that the devils themselves also know.
Balaam a wicked castaway knew so much when he said, Numb. 23.10.
Let my soul die the death of the righteous, and let my latter end be like
unto his. Saul knew so much, when 1. Sam. 10.10.
he prophesied, as the Hieron. tradit. Hebraic. in lib. Regum. Prophetasse eum
ibi Iudaei dicunt de futuro seculo, de Gog and Magog, and de praemijs iustorum
and poena impiorum.
Jews say of the world to come, of the rewards of the just, and punishments of
the unjust. We have therefore received the spirit of God, that we may know not
only that such things are prepared of God, but that we may know that God has
given the same unto us. But the Apostle there means not only the joys and
bliss of heaven, but all the gifts of God, whereby the same are wrought and
effected unto us. The original of all which gifts is the giving of Christ unto
us, whereof the Prophet speaks, Esa. 9.6.
Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given, in whom 2. Cor. 1.20.
all the promises of God are yea, and are in him Amen, for his sake first made,
and in him performed; whom the Father giving to us and for us, Romans 8.32.
has together with him given us all things, the gift of 1. John 4.13.
the spirit, the gift of Act. 5.31.
repentance, the gift of Ephesians 2.8.
faith, the gift of Romans 5.17.
righteousness, the gift 2. Tim 1.7.
of love, the gift of Phil. 1.29.
suffering for Christ, the gift of 2. Pet. 1.3.
all things pertaining to life and godliness, the gift of Romans 6.23.
eternal life. All these things Oecumonius compriseth when he expounds the
things which eye has not seen, etc. to be Oecumen. in 1. Cor. ca. 2. Quae
praeparau^ Deus? etc. Christum videlic^t and salute^ quae per incarnationem
facta est.
Christ and the Salvation which is wrought by his incarnation, even as
Chrysostom does understand the same, of Chrysostom. in Cor. 1. hom. 7. Quoniam per
eam, quae videtur esse stultitia praedicationis orbem terrae superabit, and
gentes allicientur, et Dei ad homines erit reconciliatio and tanta nobis
accedent bona.
the surprising of the world by the foolishnes of preaching (as the world
accounts it) of the conversion of the Gentiles, of the reconciliation of God
to men, and the great benefits that should come thereby, even as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 1.3.
all manner spiritual blessings in heavenly things. In a word we are to
understand in the Apostles words, Cap. 3.5.8.9.
the unsearchable riches of Christ preached unto the Gentiles, a mystery which
from the beginning of the world was hid in God, and not opened to the sons of
men, eye had not seen it, neither had man's heart conceived it, nay to the very
Verse. 10.
Angels, principalities and powers, it was not known, so that when it was
done, 1. Pet. 1.12.
they did even desire and delight to look into it. The accomplishment of which
riches is the glory and joy of heaven, which yet we know not nor can conceive,
as the Apostle S. John says, 1. John 3.2.
Now are we the sons of God, but yet we know not what we shall be, we know
not the glory and happiness that he has prepared for us; for we are Col. 3.3
4.
now dead, and our life is hidden with Christ in God, but when Christ which is
our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory; for we
know that when he shall appear we shall be like unto him, for we shall see him
as he is. In the mean time the Apostle says, that by the spirit we know the
things that are (already) given us of God, not by speculation only of
understanding, but by practicke, and experimental, and effectual knowledge,
2. Pet 1.3.4.
whereby we are made partakers of the divine nature, and Col. 3.10.
renewed to the image of him who first created us. These things therefore we
know in our selves, when we know the things that are given us of God, and
consequently do know our faith, repentance, hope, love, in which consists
that newness and communion with God. As for the bliss and glory of heaven,
though yet we know it not, yet we know that God has given unto us the interest
and title of it already, and by faith do stand assured through the spirit,
that he will in due time give us the full sight and fruition of it. Which
indeed none can know but they that have it revealed unto them from God, but God
reuealeth it by the spirit in his word to all those that do believe in him. As
for the place of Jerome which M. Bishop alleges to the contrary, it shows
his wretched unfaithfulness, but makes nothing against us. Jonas had preached
destruction to Niniue within forty days. The king of Niniue calls his
people to repentance, to sackcloth and ashes, to fasting and mourning, and
crying mightily unto God; for Jonas 3.9.
who knows, says he, if God will turn and repent and turn away from his
fierce wrath? thereby signifying, that albeit God had by peremptory sentence
threatened their destruction, yet by repentance and earnest entreaty they might
happily find mercy. Hereupon Hierome says, Hieron in Ion. cap. 3. Illud quod
dicitur, Quis scit. etc ideo ambiguum ponitur and incertum, ^t dum homines dis
bij sunt de salute fortius agant paenitentiam and magis ad misericordi^m
improuocent D^um.
That that is said, Who knows if God will turn, is therefore set down
uncertain and doubtful, that whilst men are doubtful of their safety, they
may the more earnestly repent, and the rather move God to take mercy on them.
Now what a reason is this, that because God threatening destruction to wicked
and ungodly men, leaves it in doubt whether he will spare them, that they may
the more earnestly repent and call for mercy, therefore the faithful and
godly man whom God has delivered from everlasting destruction, and called to
the hope of everlasting life, should stand in doubt of that Salvation that God
has promised unto him? The very place and occasion of the speech might have
made M. Bishop to forbear to use the same to that purpose that he has done;
but that he is still like his master Bellarmine; so that it carry some show,
it never skilleth whether it be right or wrong.

7. W. BISHOP.
Another reason of this uncertainty, De cor. and gra. cap. 13.
yields Saint Augustine in these words: In this place of temptation, such is
our infirmity, that assurednes might engender pride. To this agrees S.
Gregory, Lib. 9. moral. cap. 17.
saying: If we know our selves to have grace, we are proud. So that to strike
down the pride of our hearts, and to humble us, and to make us travail more
carefully in the works of mortification, God does not ordinarily assure men at
the first of their own Salvation: but to cheer up their hearts on the other
side, does put them in great hope of it, like to a discreet and good Lord, who
will not at the first entrance into his service, infeofe his servant in the fee
simple of those lands, which after upon his good deserts he means to bestow
on him. This is another kind of Doctrine, then that which M. Perkins in his
last supply delivered, to wit: That if we regard our own indisposition, we
must despair, because we be not worthy of his mercy. Not so good Sir:
Because we know that he bestows mercy upon the unworthy, at the first
justification of a sinner, but will not admit into the Kingdom of heaven any
unworthy, but gives men grace while they live to work, that they are made
worthy of his heavenly Kingdom, according to that: Apoc. 3.4.
They shall walk with me in whites, because they are worthy, but of this more
fully in the chapter of Merits.

R. ABBOT.
The place of Austin is true, as touching immediate and perfect assurance, such
as is free from all assault and impeachment of doubt and fear. For this is a
place of temptation and weakness, as he truly says, by reason whereof as we
never attain to a perfection of righteousness against sin, so we never
attain to a perfection of assurance against doubting. But yet as we have a
measure of true righteousness against sin, wherein we doubt not but God
accepts us, so have we also a measure of true and comfortable assurance
against all fear and doubt, whereby our hearts do rest persuaded, that God for
ever will preserve us. Thus God as a wise and careful father both gives
comfort to his children, and yet provides to keep them within their bounds,
that tasting the joy of his Salvation, and finding it thenceforth bitter and
grievous unto themselves to be distracted by perplexities and fears from the
quiet enjoying thereof, they may the more carefully endeavor to cleave fast
unto him, and beware of doing any thing that should interrupt their joyful
peace. He knows how ready we are by the corruption of our nature to abuse
the comforts and assurances that he gives unto us, and therefore so orders
the same, as that sometimes out of our nature, sometimes by other afflictions
they are nipped and sneaped, that they grow not proud and rank to the decaying
and destroying of themselves. And as sometimes by his admirable wisdom he makes
sin the whetstone of righteousness, so by affliction and trouble of mind, by
distrusts and fearful doubts, he whetteth and sharpeneth our faith and
assurance, which by fighting increases, and the longer it wrastleth the
stronger it waxes, whilst August. de verb. Dom. ser. 36 Fides fundit
erationem, fusaoratio impetrat fidei firmitatem.
faith (specially when it is assaulted) powers forth prayer, and pouring forth
of prayer obtains further strength of faith. And as a man in danger of
drowning catches for hold to save himself, so whilst the comfort of life
makes offer to go from us, we take the better hold thereof, and it becomes
so much the more precious and dear unto us. But as we do not approve sin,
for that it is used sometimes for a help of righteousness, so no more do we
commend doubting, for that it is used for the increase of faith, but as against
the one so against the other we fight and labor to abandon it wholly from us,
that we may say, Romans 8.35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, etc? Nay in all these things we are
more then conquerours through him that loved us. For I am persuaded that
neither life, nor death, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any
creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Thus therefore we so take the words of Austin, as that we leave
place for that which elsewhere he says, that August. in Psalm. 32. Non est ista
remeri^as: affectus est desiderij, dulced^ spei. Dicat anima, omnino secura^
dicat, Deus meus es tu, qui dicit animae, salus tuaego sum.
God says to the soul of the faithful, I am thy Salvation, whereupon it is
boldly to say to him, Thou art my God, which, says he, is no rashness or
presumption, but affection of desire and sweetness of hope. For that voice of
God whereby he says to our soul, Psa. 35.3.
as David for himself prays, I am thy Salvation, what is it else but Romans
8.16.
the spirit that gives witness to our spirit that we are the sons of God?
The words of Gregory, if there be any such, for in the place by him cited they
are not, may import, how ready our corruption is to misconuert the graces and
gifts of God, but to deny to the faithful man the knowledge of Gods grace in
himself, is to bereave him of all steadfast hope, and to quench in him all true
conscience of thankfulness toward God, because he cannot hope, that knows
nothing whereupon to hope, nor heartily give thanks, that knows not whether he
have cause to give thanks or not. And how does S. John say, 1. John. 4.13.
By this we know that we are in him and he in us, because he has given us of
his spirit if we do not know that he has given us of his spirit? and how
should we not know that we have received grace, if we know that we have
received the spirit of grace? But of this matter sufficient has been spoken in
the former section. Now whereas M. Bishop says that God does not ordinarily
assure men at the first of their own Salvation, if he mean that God does not
at the first offer any such assurance, he says untruly. For God speaks by
the same word in the beginning and in the end, and therefore both in the
beginning and in the end, gives the same assurance, although our faith being
perhaps weak, does not by and by so fully and firmly lay hold thereof.
Therefore whereas he compares God to a master who will not at the first entrance
into his service infeofe his servant to the fee simple of those lands which
after upon his good deserts he means to bestow upon him, he does wrong to the
majesty of God, thus to limit his bounty to the provident and wary courses of
men, occasioned, partly by their ignorance and uncertainty of other men's future
condition, and partly by their impotency and unableness to prevent and help
that, that happily may prove amiss. For man knows not what the behauior of his
servants hereafter will be, whereas he inte^deth his gift no otherwise to him but
upon his good behauior, neither is it in his power to better it, if he become
of worse quality then he expected: but God from the beginning knows our
mould and making, and that there is no good quality to be expected of us, but
what the power of his own hand graciously works in us, and therefore his
promise is what he will do for us, not what he would have us to do for our
selves, and as he freely gives us the inheritance, so takes upon himself
Col. 1.12.
to make us meet to be parta^ers of his inheritance. To which purpose S.
Austin notably speaks, wholly overthrowing M. Bishops comparison; August in Ps
l. 109. Promisit hominibus diu ^itatem, mortalibus immortalitatem, pe^catoribus
iustifi^ationem, ab^xtis glorifi^atione^ Quicquid promisit indigma promisit, vt
non quasi operibus merces promitteretur sed gratiae a suo nomine gratis duetur;
quia hoc ipsum just viuere inquentum homo potest just viuere non meriti
humani sed beneficij diuini est.
God promised to men fellowship with God, immortality to us being mortal,
justification to us being sinners, glorification to us being abiects and
castawayes. Whatsoever he promised, he promised to us being unworthy, that it
might not be promised as a wages or reward for works, but being grace by
name, might be gratis and freely given, because to live justly, so far as man
can live justly, is not a matter importing man's merit but the benefit and
gift of God. Let M. Bishop therefore learn hereby, that God does not rest upon
our good behavior to infeofe us to the fee simple of the land of the living,
but that good behavior it self is a part of that blessing whereto by his free
promise he has infeofed us. The original of which infeofment consists in
the grace of Gods election, the liuerie and seisin in the grace of his
adoption, wherein he has made us his children, and Tit. 3.7
heirs as touching hope of everlasting life, which therefore we expect by
title of inheritance, not by purchase of merit, having received for Ephesians. 1.14.
earnest and pledge thereof the spirit of Christ, sanctifying and preparing us
thereunto. Which sanctification notwithstanding he so measures out unto us
whilst we live here, as that he leaves us nothing whereof to glory in our
selves, but when we measure our selves to his judgment, we see still that
there is that corruption remaining in us, for which he might take occasion
justly to condemn us, that therefore Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 50. Vt s^ramus in
die illa quia non ex operibus iustitia, etc.
we may know at that day, as Saint Bernard says, that not for the works of
righteousness which we have done, but of his own mercy he has saved us.
Rightly therefore does M. Perkins say, that in regard of our selves and our
own indisposition we have to despair of our Salvation, even to the very
death, as being unworthy thereof. But says M. Bishop, Not so good Sir,
because we know that he bestows mercy upon the unworthy in the first
justification of a sinner. But what is that to give us hope, to say that God in
Baptism shows mercy to us though unworthy, if it be true which he adds,
that he will not admit into the kingdom of heaven any unworthy; when as after
Baptism we are all so far from being worthy thereof? Nay says he, God
gives men grace while they live to work that they are made worthy of his
heavenly kingdom. But where is that man that has received so great grace, as
that he may be thought to be made worthy of the heavenly kingdom? John
Baptist says of Christ, Mar. 1.7.
I am not worthy to loose the latchet of his shoe; and who is he then of whom
it may be said, that he is worthy to reign with Christ in his kingdom of
glory? The Centurion of whom Christ gave testimony, that Mar. 8.10.
he found not so great faith, no not in Israel, yet confesses of himself,
Verse. 8.
I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof; who is he then of
whom we may be persuaded that he is worthy to enter under the roof of heaven?
Chrysostom. in Col. hom. 2 Nemo talem vitae conuersationem ostendit vt regno
dignus esse possit, sed hoc totum est donum Dei.
No man shows such conversation of life, says Chrysostom, as that he is
worthy of the heavenly kingdom, but this is wholly the gift of God. How then
shall we believe M. Bishop, that any man so works, as that thereby he is made
worthy of the heavenly kingdom? As for the place which he cites out of the
Revelation, it is at large to be handled, as is this whole point concerning
worthiness, in the question of Merits, and therefore thither I refer the
Reader for the explication thereof.

8. W. BISHOP.
The fifth reason for our opinion is taken out of M. Perkins second exception,
to wit; howsoever a man may be assured for his present state, yet no man is
certain of his perseverance to the end. And therefore, although we might be
assured of our Justification, yet can we not be certain of our Salvation. For
he only that perseuereth to the end, shall be saved. M. Perkins answer is,
that prayer does assure us to persevere to the end: for God bids us pray, that
we fall not into temptation, and promises an issue forth: 1. Cor. 10.
So then the assurance depends upon prayer, and not upon our former faith. What
then if we do not pray so as we should? may not the enemy then, not only
wound, but kill us to? it cannot be denied: and therein, as in diverse other
works of piety, many have been too too slack, as the pitiful fall of
thousands have taught us. Oh says M. Perkins, it cannot be, that he which was
once a member of Christ, can ever after be wholly cut off. O shameless
assertion, and contrary to many plain texts, and examples of holy Scriptures:
John 15.
Does not our Savior say in express words, That every branch in me not
bearing fruit, he will take it away? And again, If any abide not in me, he
shall be cast forth as the branch, and shall wither, and be cast into the fire:
which does demonstrate, that some which were members of Christ, be wholly cut
off, and that for ever. Are we not by faith made members of Christ by our
adversaries own confession? and does not our blessed Savior say, expounding
the parable of the sower, Luke 8.
That the seed which fell upon the rock, does signify them, who with joy
receive the word, and these (says he) have no root, but for a time they
believe, and in time of temptation revolt. Does not S. Paul in express terms
say, 1. Tim. 1.19.
That some having faith and good conscience, expelling good conscience, have
made shipwreck of their faith: of whom were by name, Hymenaeus and Alexander.
The like, 1. Tim. 4.
That in the last days, some should revolt from the faith: Again, 1. Tim. 6.
That some for covetousness sake, had erred from the faith. And for example
amongst other, take Saul the first king of Israel, who was at his election (as
the holy Ghost witnesses) so good a man, 1. Reg. 19.
that there was no better then he in all Israel, and yet became reprobate, as
i^ in Scripture signified. 1 Reg. 15. and 16.
The like is probable of Solomon, and in the new Testament of Judas the
traitor, and Simon Magus whom S. Luke says, that he also himself believed,
Act. 8.
and after became an Arch-heretike, and so died: the like almost may be
verified of all Arch-heretikes, who before they fell, were of the faithful.

R. ABBOT.
This argument were somewhat worth, if God having made us partakers of his
grace did thenceforth leave us to our selves and to our own keeping, for then
there were not only casualtie but certainty of our falling away from him. But
look by what our faith assures us of present standing, by the same and a^
far it secureth us against future falling, the assurance of faith being that
Romans 8.38.
neither things present nor THINGS TO COME shall separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ our Lord. It looks upon God as a careful father, who
himself Esa. 54.13. Ierem. 31.33.
teaches all his children that they may be sure to learn; as a good shepherd
that Iere. 23.3.4.
so gathers his flecke as that none of them shall be lacking: as a good
husbandman, that so fenceth Esa. 27.3.
his vineyard and keeps it night and day, that none assail or hurt it; as a
Mat. 16.18.
rock strong and sure, so that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
the Church of the faithful, that are founded and built upon it. It looks
unto Gods promise, Ier. 32.40.
I will put my fear into their hearts that they shall not depart from me,
whereby it expects perpetual and assured establishment from him alone. It
looks unto the mediation of Christ, who has not prayed for Peter only, that
Luke 22 32.
his faith might not fail, but Ioh. 17.11.20.
for all that believe in him, Holy Father keep them in thy name, whereupon the
Apostle Peter tells us, that 1. Pet. 1.5.
we are kept by the power of God through faith unto Salvation. He that keeps
us by faith, must necessarily be understood to preserve and keep our faith,
not by any power of ours, but by his own only power, August. de bono
persevere. cap. 7. supra. Of Free will Sect. 14.
who since the fall of man will not have it to belong to any thing but his only
grace, that either we come unto him or do not afterward depart from him. In a
word, faith sees in the word of God that the work of grace is irreuocable,
and stands fast and inuiolate for ever, Idem ad artic. Sibi falso impos. art.
12. Nec qua illuminatu^ obcaecat, nec quae aedificauit destrui^, nec quae
plantauit euellit. Sine paenitentiae enim sunt dona and vocatio Dei.
neither does God blind them whom he has enlightened, nor destroy what he has
builded, nor pluck up what he has planted, because the gifts and calling of
God are without repentance, De praevest. sanc. ca 16 tu est, sine mutatione
stabiliter fixa sunt.
that is, they are firmly established to be without any change, so that Romans
8.30.
whom he has called and justified, them he glorifieth, because August. de
prae^^st. sanct ca. 17. Non a^t^s sed quos praedestinauit, ipsos and vocauit,
etc.
he calls and justifies none but whom he has predestined unto glory, and
therefore it follows, that he gives them perseverance for the attainement of
the said glory. Ambros de Jacob. and vit. beat. ^b. cap 6. Number Deus p^ior ipse
qui comtilit potest dona ^ua resindere, e^ quos adoptione ^u^cepit eos a
paterni affect^^ gratia relegere
The Father, says Ambrose, that was the giver cannot revoke his gifts, nor put
away him from the grace of his fatherly affection, whom he has entertained and
received by adoption. Chrysostom. in Romans hom 9. ^alis ipsa Dei gratia finem nullum
habet, t^rminum non nouit sed and ad maiora sin. per propagatu^ atque
progreditur. Id quod non itam hominibus vsuuenit; verbi gratia, assecutus est
quis magistratum, gloriam pri^ci^atum: tamen in eo perpetuus non manet, sed
confestim ab^o excutitur. Nam vt honorem ilium humano ma^u^ (...) eripiat,
certe superuenie^s mors omnin^ ereptura est. At quae Deus bona largitur
haudquaquam talia sunt, a quibus v^ delicet non homo, non tempus, non rerum
aduersarum vu, non ipse diabolus, non mors ingruens deturbare nos p^t^^ qui^
vel mortici cum sumus, ium demum firmius ea possidemus, atque adeo quo
progredimur magis, eo ma^oribus effectis f^uimu^.
For such is the grace of God, says Chrysostom, it has no end, it never
determines, but still proceeds to greater benefits. Which is not wont to be
so in the gifts of men: for a man having obtained an office, an honor or
principality, has no perpetuity therein, but is soon bereft of it. For
albeit the hand of man do not take it away, yet death will which speedily shall
overtake him. But the good gifts which God gives are not so, as from which
neither man, nor time, nor any power of adversities, nor the devil, nor death
approaching can remove us, yea when we are dead, we do more assuredly possess
the same. In a word Origin in Ierem. hom. 1. Impossibi^e est quod semel
viuificauit Deuteronomy aut ab eo ipso tut abalio occidi.
it is impossible, says Origin, that that which God quickens should be
slain, either by himself or any other. It is true then that he (only) that
perseuereth to the end shall be saved, but it is true also that God gives
preseuerance unto Salvation to all them to whom he has given the true faith of
Salvation, Aug. de corrupt. and great. ca. 12 Sanctis in regnum Dei per gratiam
Dei praedestinatis tale adiutor^um perseu^rantiae ditur vt eis pers^uera^tia
ipsa d^netur, non solum vt sine isto d^no perseuerantes esse no^^possint,
verumetiam vt per hoc donum non nisi persiuirantes sint, and sides eorum non
deficies vsque insinem, nec eam nisi manent^m vitae huta inueuit fi^^.
such a gift of perseverance, as not only without which they cannot persevere,
but by which they do no other but persevere, or by which they do certainly
persevere, so as that their faith does never finally fail, neither shall their
end find it but continuing in them. As touching this point M. Perkins answered
very effectually, that we pray that God would not suffer us to be wholly
overcome of the devil in any temptation, when we say, Lead us not into
temptation, and that to this petition we have a promise answerable, that God
with temptation will give an issue, and therefore that the devil howsoever he
wound the faithful, yet shall never be able utterly to overcome them. Whereto
M. Bishop very idly replieth according to his manner, by a fallacy of
division, that then the assurance depends upon prayer, and not upon our
former faith. But let him take the same answer in effect again, that the
assurance still depends upon faith, which Aug. de verb. Dom Ser 36. Fides
fo^s orationis
faith is the fountain of prayer, which prayer beggeth of God as Christ has
commanded. Lead us not into temptation, which to whomsoever it is granted,
Idem de bono persevere. cap. 6. Si conce^^tur ei quod orat vt non inferatur in
tentat one^ in sanctifi^^tione vti^ue qu^m Deo do^^nte percepit, Deo donante
persi^tit. Et pa^lo prius. Neque ^uisquam perseuerare d^sistit nisi i^
t^tati^te^ pri^^^tus infera^ur.
he by the gift of God perseuereth in that sanctification which by the gift of
God he has received, because no man fails of perseverance but by being led
into temptation, and concerning temptation the Apostles words import the
promise of God to all the faithful, 1. Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength,
but together with the temptation will give the issue, that ye may be able to
bear it. Whereupon S. Ambrose says most notably to the purpose we have in
hand. Amb in 1. Cor. 10. I^eo fidelem dicit Deum, etc. qui^ d^tucu^ se promisit
Deus dilig^^tibus se regna caelestia, and de^ necesse est quia fidelis est.
Propter^a ergo tribulatis pros^^^rit, (...) possit. sed faciet vt aut^sto
cesset tentatio, aut si prolixa fuere^ti^ (...) promisit quia ^^^cetur qui
patitur. Homo est enim infirmitati subre^tu (...) promisit, subuenit vt impleat
quod prom^sit, etc. Non plus per^^^ (...) ^^^tatur qui scitur vl^ra noc posse
quam tridu^ to^e^^.
Therefore does the Apostle say, that God is faithful and will not suffer them
to be tempted above their strength, because he has promised to give the
kingdom of heaven to them that love him, and must needs give the same because
he is faithful. For that cause therefore he will be present to them being in
trouble for his sake, and will not suffer so much to be laid upon them as is
not to be suffered, but either will cause the temptation to cease, or if it be
long, will give strength to endure it: otherwise he shall not give that which
he promised, because the party suffering shall be overcome, being a man subject
to infirmity, and so shall not be to receive the promise. But because God is
faithful which has promised, he helps him, that he may fulfill his promise,
and no more is permitted to be laid upon him, then it is known to God that he
is able to bear, so that he is not suffered to be tempted the fourth day that
is known not to be able to endure beyond the third day. So then by this
Fathers judgment, the Apostle in those words gives to understand, that God
having promised to the faithful the kingdom of heaven, does so provide, as
that he may perform unto them his promise, which he should not perform, if
either their own lightness or any adverse power should prevail to make them
incapable thereof, and therefore he suffers them not by any temptation to be
taken away from him, but gives them constancy and perseverance, whereby they
wade out of the floods thereof, that they never be drowned in them. This is the
promise of God, and this promise faith apprehends, and accordingly prays
and believes according to the promise, that it shall obtain that which it
prays for, and therefore shall not by any temptation be utterly overthrown.
But what then, says M. Bishop, if we pray not so as we ought? may not the
enemy then not only wound but also kill us? We answer, Yes indeed M. Bishop,
he would so, and both faith and prayer and all would fail, if God were not the
keeper and maintainer thereof. But it has been before said, that faith is the
fountain of prayer, and therefore God in the keeping of our faith, continues
our prayer, because the stream cannot fail, so long as the fountain fails
not. Prayer is the breath of faith, which never cease to breath, so long as
it is alive. Prayers are the beams of faith; if the light of faith be not
quenched, it certainly sends forth his beams of prayer. August. de corrept.
and great. ca. 12. Prohit interpellante Christo ne deficiat fid^s eorum, sine
dubio non deficies vsque in finem.
Christ therefore having prayed for his, that their faith may not fail, it
shall never fail finally in any of them. And therefore they shall never utterly
give over to pray unto him, that it may be fulfilled to them which is promised,
Romans 10.13.
Every one that calls upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. And surely
God wants not means whereby to preserve and continue both the one and the
other, not only by instruction and advertisement of the word and sacraments,
but also by correction and discipline of crosses and afflictions, and many
grieuances of temptations, by which as occasion serves, he fretteth off the
rust, and blows away the ashes of carnal security; by occasion whereof as
children affrighted or grieved, run to their father for succor, so we are
moved to go by prayer unto God, according to the saying of the Prophet Esaias:
Esa. 26.16.
Lord in affliction they have visited thee, they have powered forth a prayer
when thy chastisement was upon them. Albeit therefore of our selves we easily
grow slack both in prayer, and in all other works of piety and godliness, yet
God provides to the contrary, to keep the fire of his spirit continually
burning in our hearts, Job. 33.16.17.
opening our ears by his corrections, to cause us to cease from our (evil)
enterprises, and to heal our pride, and to keep back our soul from the pit,
which is the same that the Apostle says: 1. Cor. 11.32.
When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned
with the world. And whereas M. Bishop alleges, that thousands pitifully fall
away, we answer him, that they which finally fall, did never truly stand,
though they seemed to stand, nor ever did truly believe, though they seemed to
believe, but even of their falls does God also make use, to make those that are
truly his to stand the faster, striking thereby a dread and fear into their
hearts, whereby they abhor to think of that befalling in themselves, which
has befallen in the other, that they may the more instantly call upon him, and
embrace the means whereby they should firmly apprehend and take hold of him.
We say the same that M. Perkins does, that it cannot be that he that is once
indeed a member of Christ, can ever after be wholly cut off. But this disliketh
M. Bishop much, so that he exclaimeth, O shameless assertion! Where we may
more justly cry out of him, O shameless man, that makes Christ l^sse
affectionate and kind to the spiritual members of his mystical body, then he
himself is to the earthly members of his own natural body. M. Bishop will not
suffer any member of his body to putrify and rot away, if he can save it; and
will he make us believe, that Christ suffers his members to rot away from him?
Shall we think that Christ does less respect a faithful soul, the^ any of us
does respect a finger or a toe? Ambros. de Jacob and vit. beat. l. 1. ca. 6.
Poterit ergo ille te damnare que^ red^mi^ a m^rte, pro quo se ob^u^it, cuiu^
vitam mortis suae mercedem esse cognoscit? Nonne dicet, Qu^ vtilitas in
sanguine meo, fidamno quem ipse salua^^?
Can Christ condemn thee, says Ambrose to the true believing man, whom he
himself has redeemed from earth, and whose life he knows to be the reward
of his own death? Will he not say, What profit is there in my blood, if I
condemn him who^ I have saved? He is faithful and will not deny himself; he will
not undo that which he has done, nor blot out his own name, or suffer it to
be blotted out, which he has written by his spirit, in the heart of every one
that believes. He will not dismember himself, or receive a maime in that Ephe.
1.23.
body which (generally in the whole, and respectively in every part) is the
fullness of him that fills all in all. Seeing therefore every true believer is
truly a member of this body, and helps to make up this fullness of Christ, it
cannot be that Christ should suffer any true believer to perish, but quickens
and cherishes every such member with his spirit of life, and heals the
wounds and sicknesses thereof, that it may never die. But of this point further
in the section next save one, here it shall suffice to examine those texts and
examples of holy Scriptures, which he says are contrary to that that M.
Perkins here affirms. Which if they be many and plain, as he says, we may
think him a very silly man, that of those many could make no better choice then
he has done. The first place is that of our Savior Christ, John. 15.2
Every branch in me not bearing fruit, he will take away. Wherein the Reader
may easily see, that he does but only abuse the simplicity and ignorance of
such as cannot epsy his fraud. He tells us of taking away the branches that
bear no fruit, whereas the matter in question is of the perseverance of those
branches that do bring forth fruit. We doubt not but the branches which bear
no fruit shall be taken away, but we speak of branches, which as touching
present state do bring forth fruit, and of the^ our Savior adds; Ibid.
Every branch that bears fruit the Father purges that it may bring forth
more fruit. The branch then that bears fruit shall persevere, and shall never
be cut off, because the Father purges it that it may bring forth more fruit.
But M. Bishop will urge that Christ says, Every branch in me, thereby to
signify, that eue^ those branches which do not bear fruit are in Christ, and
yet are cut off and taken away. But there is no necessity of any such
construction: the words are rather to be taken as we read the^, Every branch
that bears not fruit in me. For every man is compared to a branch, and
naturally we are al branches of a wild vine, as we grow from the corrupted
stock of Adam, and bring forth none but sour and unsavory fruit, so that to
bring forth good fruit we had need to be transplanted and removed from the
stock of Adam, to be ingraffed into Christ. And this may the words of Christ
import, that the Father takes and destroys every branch that still continues
to bring forth fruit in Ada^, and is not implanted into Christ to bring forth
fruit in him. Which construction if we follow, as it carries most probability,
then here is nothing said of any to be cut off that is a branch in Christ the
true vine, but of branches taken and cast away that are not in him. But yet
granting him that reading of the words which he desires, yet he is no whit
the nearer to his purpose thereby. For men are diversely understood to be in
Christ; some by semblance and show, other some in deed and truth: some by
outward calling and profession only; other some by grace and inward
regeneration: some according to the flesh, and in the eye of the Church; other
some according to the spirit and power of Christ, and in the eye of God. The
Church is the floor wherein is both corn and chafe; the field wherein
grows both wheat and tares; the net that catches all sorts of fishes both
good and bad; the pasture where feed both sheep and goats: the banquet house
that entertaineth all guests that come both clothed and unclothed, all yet
coming under the name of friends; all saying, Lord, Lord; all professing
themselves to take part with Christ: August. de v^^t. eccles. cap. 13. Vnde
appellat s^nas nisi propter malignitatem morum? Et eas^e^ vnde filias nisi
propter cemmunionem sacramentorum? and cap. 12. Propter sacramenta quae cum
sanctis communiter habent in eu est quaedam forma pietatis cuius virtute^
negant.
all children by communion of Sacraments, whereby there is in them a show of
godliness, but many thorns by malignity of behavior, whereby they deny the
power thereof: all sheep in outward complement and couplement to the Church,
but De bapt. cont. Donatist. lib. 6. ca. 1. Charactere^ dominicu^ multi and
lup^ and lupis insigunt qui videntur quide^ intus esse, veruntamen ad ^ll^m
ouem quae etiam ex mul^^^na est non pertinere morum suoru^a fructibus
^^^^ncuntur.
many woolues in sheeps clothing, lying in wait to make a spoil. Now we are to
distinguish them that truly are in Christ, from them that are not so. Of them
that truly are in Christ, and in present state of justification, our speech
here is, that they can never wholly be cut off: the rest we know are cut off
from that Luc. 8.18.
which they seemed to have, but indeed had not: which if they had had indeed as
they seemed to have, Mat. 13.12.
they should have had more given, that they might have abundance, and not be
cut off from that they had. It is therefore nothing against us, which M. Bishop
alleges, that fruitless branches, which indeed are not in Christ, though
they will seem to be, are cut off from seeming any longer to be that which in
truth they never were. Every one that truly is a branch in Christ, brings
forth fruit in him, and every branch that brings forth fruit, the Father
purges that it may bring forth more fruit. Every one therefore that is truly a
branch in Christ, as every true believer is, shall continue a branch in him for
ever, that it may be verified which the Prophet says, (...) 92.^3.
Such as be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of
our God, They shall still bring forth fruit eue^ in age, and shall be fat and
flourishing. By this the answer is plain to the other place; If a man abide
not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and shall wither and be cast into the
fire. For hereby is imported what befalls to them, who carrying semblance to
be in Christ, bear no fruit in him, who because they are not truly that which
they seem to be, therefore abide not in that which they seem, and either by
death or by other occasion become August. epist. 39 Separantur multi ab
ecclesia, sed cum moruntur, qui tamen ^um viuunt per sacrame^toru^ commionem
v^^tansque Catholicae v^^^^r ecclesia co^^lati.
corporally separated from the Church, to which they before (but only) seemed
to be coupled. It is true then, that if a man abide not in Christ, though for
the time he seem to be in Christ, he is cast forth and perishes; but it
follows not therefore, that any man that faithfully believes in Christ, and
therefore truly is in Christ, does not abide in him. Nay our Savior himself
teaches us the contrary when he says; Io n. 6.56.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me and I in him. For
what is it to eat the flesh of Christ and to drink his blood, but August. in
Joan. tract 25, 6
to believe in Christ; De doct Christ. l b 3 cap. 16. Fig^ra est praecipi^^s
pa^liom Domini esse communicandum, and su^^itur atque vitater recodendum in
mem^ria quod caro eius pro nobis crucifixa and vubierata sit.
to be partakers of his passion, and with comfort and use to lay up in our
minds that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us? Every one then that
truly believes in Christ, eats his flesh and drinks his blood, and
therefore abides in Christ and Christ in him. No man therefore that truly
believes in Christ, is ever cut off or cast forth to wither or to be thrown
into the fire. Now to an indifferent Reader I might allege, and it easily
appears by the use of that term of abiding, that by abiding in Christ, is
meant our very being in Christ, which is therefore so expressed, because no man
is in Christ truly and indeed, but the same abides in him for ever. So that
the meaning of Christ's words shall be, If any man be not truly ingrafted into
me as the true vine, to grow upon me, and to bring forth fruit by me, he is
cast forth as a dead and unprofitable branch, and shall come to naught. But it
booteth not to allege this to a wrangler, who whatsoever appear otherwhere,
will not here understand it otherwise then to serve his own turn. Against him
therefore the other solution is plain, that whosoever believes in Christ, the
same abides in him, and therefore shall never be cut off, so that yet he is
far enough from any demonstration, to prove any who are truly members of
Christ, are: wholly and for ever cut off from him. Let us see whether the rest
will afford him any better demonstration. Are we not by faith, says he, made
members of Christ by our adversaries own confession? Yes, M. Bishop, but yet
not by every kind of faith; for S. James says, Iam. 2.19.
The devils believe, and yet they are not thereby the members of Christ. We are
made the members of Christ only by true and lively faith, whereby Christ
dwells in our hearts, of which it is that the Apostle says, Gal. 3.26.
Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. You will not say M.
Bishop, that by every faith a man is spiritually made a member of Christ,
because you say that there is faith without charity, and you dare not say that
without charity a man may be a member of Christ. Which being so, how vainly
does he allege, that Mat. 13.20.
our Savior says in the parable of the sower concerning them that receive the
word in stony ground, that with joy they receive the word, but have no root,
and for a time believe, and in time of temptation revolt? For though it be said
that they believe, yet it follows not that they believe with that faith
whereby they should become the members of Christ. For Herod in that sort
believed the word preached by John Baptist, Mat. 6.20.
whom he reverenced as a lust and holy man, and heard him gladly, and did many
things accordingly, and yet he was not therefore a member of Christ. By
conviction of conscience men often times receive the word, and cannot but believe
and acknowledge the truth thereof, when yet they embrace it not with affection
of love, and therefore have not that Gal. 5.6.
faith which works by love, which only is true faith. And how can he
persuade us that true members of Christ are by Christ himself compared to the
stony ground? We are persuaded that only the good ground are the true members
of Christ; as for the rest they are August. in Joan. tract. 3. Infra. sect. 10.
as bad humors in the body, as S. Austine says, but members they are not. And
how should there be true faith in them of whom Christ says; They have no root?
Can true faith grow where there is no root for it to grow upon? Nay S. Austine
tells us, that faith it self is Idem. in Psalm. 31. Laudo fructum boni operis
sed in fide agnos. coradicem.
the root whence all good fruit does grow, and how then can they be said to
have true faith, of whom it is truly said, that they have no root? To be short,
these are said to believe (but) for a time, but of them that truly believe, it
is said, Romans 9.33.
Whosoever believes in him shall not be confounded, and therefore their faith
shall never fail. The next place is lewdly falsified by him, alleging that
some having faith and a good conscience, expelling good conscience have made
shipwreck of their faith, whereas S. Paul says not, that they had faith and a
good conscience, but instructs Timothy for the fighting of a good fight, to
1. Tim. 1.19.
have faith and a good conscience, which (good conscience) some, says he,
rejecting have made shipwreck concerning the faith, of whom are Hymeneus and
Alexander. Where by faith as Oecumenius observes, he means Oecumen. in 1.
Tim. 1 Fidem dicit quae est circa dogmata; conscientiam vero quae circa
conuersationem est. Quam inquit, conscientiam quae est de recte viuendo
repellentes non nulli. Vbi enim quis reprobe vixerit etiam circa fidem
nan-fragium facit. Siquidem ne terrore futurorum crucientur, suo ammo
persuadere nuuntur mendacia esse quaecunque apud nos de resurrectione ac
iudicio dicuntur.
a faith or belief concerning doctrine, and understands conscience as
touching conversation; which conscience of good life, says he, they rejecting,
made shipwreck of faith. For when a man lives wickedly, he makes shipwreck
concerning faith. For men, that they may not be troubled with the terror of
things to come, labor to persuade their own minds, that those things are lies
which with us are spoken concerning the resurrection and judgment to come. S.
Paul's words then import that they had professed the faith, that is, the
doctrine of faith, the doctrine which in Christianity we believe and profess,
but they held not 1. Tim. 3.9.
the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, they lived lewdly and wickedly in
the profession of the faith; their consciences were fraught with the guilt of
following their own ungodly lusts; and therefore they renounced the faith, the
doctrine of God, that they might not thereby find any cross or check in their
damnable and wicked courses. What is this to that true faith, whereby we
believe in Christ to justification and righteousness; whereby we repose the
trust and confidence of our Salvation in him, and do truly call upon the name
of the Lord? That they had not this faith, it is plain, because S. Paul says
plainly, that they rejected a good conscience; for a 1. Tim. 4 1.
good conscience is always an inseparable companion of an unfeigned faith. The
greater is the impudency of this brabler, who says as out of the Apostle, that
they had a good conscience, whereas the words of the Apostle are directly
contrary to that he says. The other two places are of the same sort, 1. Tim.
1.5.
some in the last days shall revolt from the faith, and Cap. 6.10.
some for covetousness, have erred from the faith, meaning by faith the
doctrine of the Church, as where it is said, Act. 6.7.
some of the Priests were obedient to the faith; and again, Gal. 1.22.
He preaches the faith which before he destroyed, and again, Tit. 1.13.
Rebuke them sharply that they may be found in the faith, and therefore in the
former of those two places, he opposes to faith 1. Tim. 4.1.
the doctrines of devils, that so faith may be known to signify the doctrine
which is of God. That revolt the^ is from the faith of public preaching, which
wicked men make show to receive only by hypocritical and fained faith; not
from faith of private conscience, whereby only true believers make use of the
faith of public preaching, to their own comfort and Salvation, which is
therefore called Tit. 1.2.
the faith of Gods elect, because it is found in none but only the elect. Thus
therefore his places serve not his purpose, let us see now the examples which
he alleges. First, he brings Saul, who he says at his election was so good
a man, as that there was no better then he in Israel, and yet became a
reprobate. But his translation is false; for by the very circumstance of the
place it is manifest, that the holy Ghost there describes the goodlinesse of
Saul's person, not the goodness of his condition. Our translation reads
according to the truth of the text, that 1. Sam. 9.2.
he was a goodly young man and a fair, so that among the children of Israel
there was none goodlier then he: from the shoulders upward he was higher then
any of the people. Which last words do plainly show whereto the rest are to be
referred. So Pagnine translateth it, and shows that the Hebrew writers do so
take it, neither does there appear any thing whereby we may conceive
spiritually any goodness in him at all, being from the first cross and thwart
to the commandment of the Lord. The second example is of Solomon, of whom he
says, that it is probable that he also was a reprobate. But that is not
probable; nay it is altogether improbable, that so notable a figure of Christ,
2. Sam. 19.24.
whom the Lord loved, and in token thereof gave him a name Ver. 25.
Iedidiah, that is, beloved of the Lord; of whom in figure of Christ he said,
2. Chro 22.10.
I will be his Father and he shall be my Son, whom it appears in the
Canticles, he acquainted so inwardly with the riches and secrets of his grace,
that he, I say, should after be utterly reprobate and cast away. For although
God suffered him very grievously to fall, that by the distraction of that
kingdom thereby occasioned, it might appear that the kingdom promised was
not accomplished in him, yet it is more the^ probable by that that we read in
his book of Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher, that he wrote that book as a
monument and token of his conversion and repentance, wherein he took upon him
the person of a Eccles. 1.12
Preacher, for redress of that which he had offended in the person of a King.
Further, he cites to his purpose the examples of Judas the traitor and Simon
Magus, of whom Saint Luke says, that he believed. Where we may wonder at his
notable impudency, or rather impiety, that he makes Judas and Simon Magus
once members of Jesus Christ. Of Judas our Savior Christ says, when he was at
the best, that John. 6.70.
he was a devil, and S. John out of the experience of his whole conversation,
that Cap. 12 6.
he was a thief, thereby showing that it never was with any true heart that he
followed Christ, but only to make a commodity to himself. Of Simon Magus S
Luke says indeed that Act. 8.13.
he believed, but so as that Peter perceives amidst his believing, that Ver.
21.23.
his heart was not right in the sight of God, that he was in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, whereby it appears, that his
believing was no more but Occumen. in epist. Jacob. cap. 2. Et de simplici
assensu fidem dicere solemus.
a bare assenting, as Occumenius calls it, to the doctrine of faith, and not
that true and effectual believing whereof we speak. Such members of Christ
does he make, doing wrong to Jesus Christ, only to hide his own shame, that
he might not be thought to maintain a wrong. The like he affirms of all
Archheretikes, the first they were of the faithful, expressly contrary to that
which S. John says, 1. John. 2.19.
They went out from us, but THEY WERE NOT OF US: for if they had been OF US,
they would have continued with us. Which being so plainly affirmed by the
Apostle, we may marvel that M. Bishop should say the contrary, but that he
has harnessed his face and his conscience, that it may be no blush nor scruple
to him, to avouch one lie for the upholding of another. What his exception is
to that place of John, we shall see in the next section but one, where he has
taken upon him the answer of it.

9. W. BISHOP.
But what need we further proof of this matter, seeing that this is
cosengerman, if not the very same, with one of that infamous heretic Iouinians
erroneous articles, condemned and registered by S. Hierome, Here Is. 82. lib. 2.
cons. Iouin.
and S. Augustine, who held, that just men after Baptism could not sin, and
if they did sin, they were indeed washed with water, but never received the
spirit of grace: his ground was, that he which had once received the spirit of
grace, could not sin after, which is just M. Perkins proposition: so that to
uphold an error, he falls into an old condemned heresy. And which is yet
more absurd, in the next confirmation, he lets slip at once a brace of other
heresies, these be his words: And if by sin one were wholly severed from
Christ for a time, in his recovery he is to be baptized the second time. Where
you have first rebaptizing, which is the principal error of the Anabaptists,
and withal the heresy of the Nouatians, who held, that if any in persecution
denied Christ after baptism, there was no remedy left in Gods Church for
their recovery, but must be left to God; so says M. Perkins, for that of
rebaptizing he seems to bring in ex absurdo: so that the common saying is
verified in him, (one absurdity being granted, a thousand follow after.) But
does he know no other means then Baptism to recover one cut off from Christ?
has he forgotten that corrupted sentence of the Prophet, wherewith they begin
their Common prayer? What hour soever a sinner does repent him of his sin,
etc. With them repentance, and with us the Sacrament of Penance, serve a man at
any time of his life to be reconciled to Christ.

R. ABBOT.
We may here take knowledge of the absurd folly of this prater, who having
before challenged M. Perkins for affirming that sin is always in the
regenerate corrupting all his works, goes about here to lay upon him an
imputation of maintaining, that the regenerate cannot sin. Surely both these
cannot stand together, and if M. Perkins hold the one, he must needs be a
stranger to the other. But thus he bableth without fear or wit, never
regarding how one part of his speech has coherence with the other. As touching
Iouinian, if he simply taught that which Hierome and Austine affirm, that the
regenerate cannot sin, he erred greatly therein, and we join with Austine
and Hierome in the condemning of that opinion. But if they did misunderstand
his opinion, and that he held only this, as in likelihood he did, that the
regenerate cannot finally and utterly fall away by sin, or sin that sin
which is unto death, 1 John 3.9.
and only meant as S. John does, Whosoever is borne of God sins not,
neither can he sin, because he is borne of God, he erred no whit at all, nor
affirmed any thing therein, but what Hierome and Austine have affirmed as well
as he: and M. Bishop knew well enough, that it is this only that M. Perkins
delivered; not that the regenerate cannot, or do not sin, whose falls we
confess to be very many, and to themselves very grievous from day to day, but
that the regenerate does not so sin, as utterly to be cut off from Christ;
that the faithful man does never finally or wholly fall away from the grace of
God. To which purpose S. Bernard says: Bernard. de implic. haerint. vincul.
etc. No^^ Dominus qui sunt etus. and propositum Dei manet immobile. Et si
horrendorum crimirum nos: David muritur etsi Maria Magdalene sep ^ saemonijs
cumulatur, ets. priaceps Apostolorum in profundum negationis submergitur, non
est tamen qui de manis Dei possit cruere.
The Lord knows who are his, and the purpose of God abides immovable.
Although David be branded with the brand of horrible sins, although Mary
Magdalen be fraught with seven devils, although Peter the chief of the
Apostles, be drowned in the depth of denying his master Christ, yet there is
none that can take them (or pluck them) out of the hands of God; not that it is
incident to the faithful, to walk in malicious and wilful sin, but when by
occasion or temptation he falls, the Lord Luc. 22.61.
looks upon him as he did upon Peter, that he may repent; the Psalm. 37.24.
Lord puts under his hand, and lifts him up again. We see therefore how
little trust is to be given to him, who sticks not to deliver so manifest and
apparent untruth. He is like the cariers horse, that brooketh not to go out of
his accustomed way: we had had no book of him, if he had been tied to speak
nothing but what is true. Now M. Perkins for assertion of the perseverance of
the faithful, adds further, that if a man be a member of Christ, he cannot
be wholly cut off, not so much as for a time, much less for ever. For if he
could wholly be cut off for the time, then at his return he ought to be
baptized again, which being absurd to affirm, it follows that a man cannot
wholly be cut off. In which confirmation M. Bishop says, that he has let slip
a brace of other heresies. Where we may conceive, that he was mightily
a-dreamed of heresies the night before he wrote this, and they ran so thick
in his head, that he imagined every man that he met with, to be an heretic.
Surely M. Bishop, if he have let slip a brace of heresies, he has let them
slip out of your collars, and therefore you must take them to your selves; for
his they are not. You say by and by after, that he brings in that of
rebaptizing ex absurdo, and if he bring it in as an absurdity, then it is not
likely that it should slip from him. Full wisely therefore do you say, that the
common saying is verified in him, one absurdity granted, a thousand follow
after, when the absurdity granted is yours and not his, that a man is wholly
cut off from Christ, having been a member of his body, whereupon he infers,
that there should then be a necessity of rebaptizing, as a consequence of your
absurdity, not as an assertion of his own. A man would scant think you well
in your wits, to handle a matter so crossely and untowardly as you do. As
touching the matter, albeit literally it be true, that a man being wholly cut
off from Christ, must necessarily be baptized to enter him again, yet in that
sense, wherein we here speak of cutting off from Christ, namely concerning
spiritual and inward grace, I confess ingenuously that there is no necessity
of that consequence which Master Perkins infers thereupon. If a man be
wholly cut off from Christ, he has no interest in Christ, nor Christ in him;
the bond of baptism is dissolved, neither does there stand any relation
thereby betwixt Christ and him. For if there stand any trial or bond betwixt
Christ and him, then is he not wholly cut off. Supposing then a man after
baptism to be wholly cut off, which cannot be till final impenitencie have for
ever divided him from the body of the Church, but this yet being supposed,
there should be a necessity of baptizing him again, to give him admission
into the society of Christ's Church. For that this cannot be done by M.
Bishops sacrament of penance, he himself must needs confess, because their
sacrament of penance is as they call it, secunda tabula post naufragium; and he
that is so wholly cut off, wants the first, without which the second has no
place. Or if he do not want the first, if he do not want the title of baptism,
then he is not wholly cut off, which is the thing to be supposed. The Church of
Rome holds, that baptism leaves in the soul indelebilem characterem: a
character or print that can never be disprinted. But suppose the same to be
defaced and disprinted, and then I suppose that Master Bishop will grant,
that there is a necessity to be baptized again. It cannot be, says he, and
so say we, that it cannot be, that a man baptized should wholly be cut off from
Christ, but that by outward calling Christ and his Church has interest in him
during life, so as that by true repentance without any further baptism, he is
restored again; yet upon supposall it follows which we have said. Now if
Master Perkins spoke upon this supposall, it should so follow indeed, but the
drift of the matter in hand necessarily draws us to another understanding.
For when we say that the regenerate man is never wholly cut off from Christ, we
mean it as touching inward and spiritual grace, that it never so defecteth,
but that there is still 1. John. 3.9.
a seed thereof remaining, that shall grow again. Yet if we suppose it to be
true, which the Papists say, that inward grace of regeneration may be utterly
extermined for the time, I do not conceive that it should thereof follow, that
another baptism should be needful for being restored again. For by the mark
of Christ first set upon him, Christ shall still stand entitled to him, and it
shall be his sin in the mean time, that he applies not himself to him, whose
by right he cease not to be. And if a man in hypocrisy receive baptism, so
as that he becomes not thereby at all the member of Christ, yea and
thenceforth for the time run into Paganism or heresy, we will not hold that
if he be afterward truly converted, he should need for the making of him a
member of Christ, to be secondly baptized, but that baptism before received,
now comes to use and effect, and yields that spiritual fruit which it did
import before. So therefore though it be supposed that the grace of Christ in
any man be utterly razed and defaced, yet shall it not follow, that he shall be
baptized a second time, but baptism before received, shall return to the same
use that it had before, not by the counterfeit Sacrament of penance devised by
men, but by true and faithful repentance directed by God, whereof not by a
corrupted sentence as this cauiller obiecteth, but by a true expressing of the
Prophets meaning, we say in the beginning of our Common prayer, Ezech. 18.21.22.
At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the bottom of
his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the
Lord. As for the Sacrament of penance, it is a bastard salve of a false
Surgeon: it closes wounds, and heals none, but leaves them to fester and
corrupt unto everlasting death. There is in it a special policy of Satan, to
hold men in opinion of forgiveness of sins where it is not, that they may
neglect to seek it where indeed it is. To come to an end of this matter,
whether way M. Perkins meant this cutting off from Christ wholly, I will not
precisely say; but whether way soever he meant it, it avails M. Bishop
nothing at all, if happily he did err in inferring a necessity on their part,
to maintain an heresy or heresies of others, by maintaining a perverse
opinion of their own. From which heresies (of Anabaptists and Nouatians) he
well knew that we are far enough; only he would name them, that we might
understand that he had heard somewhat thereof.

10. W. BISHOP.
But we must answer unto that of S. John: They went out from us, 1. Joan. 2.
but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have continued
with us. I answer. If they went out from us, they were before with us, which
confirms our assertion, that men may depart from their faith and Christ's
profession: but such men were not indeed of the number of the elect, of which
Saint John was, for then either they would have continued with them in the
Christian faith, or else by hearty repentance would have returned unto it back
again, which is Saint Augustines own exposition. De bono perse. cap. 8.
And these be the Arguments for the Catholics, which M. Perkins through his
confused order touches here and there. To which I will add, one taken out of
the words of S. Paul: Romans 11.20.
But thou by faith do stand, be not too highly wise, but fear, if God has
not spared the natural boughs, lest perhaps he will not spare thee neither.
Phil. 2.12.
And again: Work your Salvation, with fear and trembling. There be above an
hundred such texts in holy writ, wherein the Holy Ghost exhorts us to stand
in fear of our Salvation, out of which I thus frame my argument.

No man must stand in fear of that, of which he is by faith assured. But the
faithful must stand in fear of their Salvation. Ergo, they be not assured of
it by faith.

The Minor or second proposition is plainly proved by these places cited
before: the Mayor is manifest: there is no fear in faith, he that fears,
whether the thing be assured or no, cannot give a certain assent thereunto:
Dubious in fide infidelis est. Put the case in another article, to make it more
evident: He that fears, whether there be a God or no, do we esteem that he
believes in God? So he that fears whether Jesus Christ be God is he a
Christian? has he a true faith? You must needs answer, no. So he that fears
whether he shall be saved or no, can have no faith of his Salvation.

R. ABBOT.
The place of S. John does fully overthrow that which M. Bishop labors to
build, inuincibly proving, that reuolters and renegates wholly falling away from
Christ, were never of the faithful, though for the time outwardly they held
profession with them. For if they had been of us, says he, they would have
continued with us, therein implying this rule, that they that once are of the
faithful, do certainly continue with them, so as that they never wholly and
finally depart from them. For as falling stars were never stars indeed,
though they seemed to be stars, so apostataes and backsliders were never
faithful indeed, though they seemed so to be. But here Master Bishop
answers, If they went out from us, they were before with us. Be it so, but
yet as the gloss says, Thom. Aquin. in Joan. ca. 2. ex glossa. Erant de
ecclesia, numero non merito; sacramentorum perceptione, non charitatis
communione.
by tale and account, not by worth; by participation of sacraments, not by
fellowship of love. This place then proves, that men may depart from the
profession of the faith of Christ, but it confirms not his assertion, that
the faith of any does ever fail, that is truly faithful in the profession of
the faith of Christ. And therefore it is but one of his iuglers tricks, to make
his Reader believe that the place confirms his assertion, when in truth it
does directly contradict it. If those reuolters had had true faith, Saint John
would not have said, They were not of us; for he is of the faithful, whosoever
is endued with true faith. But, says he, S. John's meaning is, that such were
not of the number of the elect, and this is S. Austines exposition. And we
acknowledge S. Austines exposition to be true; August. de bono perseu^^ ^a. 8.
Non erant ex eis quia no^ erant secundum propositum vocant non erant in Chr sto
electi ante constitutione^ ^undi, non erant in eo sort in consecuti; non erant
praedestinauit secundum propositu^ eius qui vniuersa operatur.
They were not of them, because they were not called according to purpose,
because they were not elect in Christ before the foundations of the world;
because they had not obtained any lot (or portion) in him, because they were
not praedestinate, according to the purpose of him who works all things. But
because they were not such, therefore they were never truly faithful. For if
they were not called by purpose, then did they never truly believe, because
Jdem de praed. sanct. cap 16. Qua vocatione sit credens.
by that calling it is that a man does believe. Now J^^ p. 17. Quos
praedestinauit ipsos and vocauit, illa scilicet vocatione secundum propositum
Non ergo alios sed quos praedestinauit, ipsos and vocauit; nec alios sed quos
ita vocauit, ipsos and iustificauit, nec alios sed quos praedestinauit,
vocauit, iustificauit, ipsos and giereficauit, etc.
by this calling God calls no other but whom he has praedestinate; therefore
only the predestinate do believe. And no other does God justify, but whom he
has called with that calling, therefore only the elect are partakers of
justification; and if only the elect be justified, then all that are justified
do certainly persevere, because the elect do never fall away. Now if backsliding
reprobates were never partakers of justification, then were they never of the
body of the faithful, howsoever in outward appearance they seemed to be. And
this the same S. Austine very notably confirms, when he says of reprobates;
Cont. Julian. Pelag. lib. 5 cap. 3. Jstorum neminem adducit ad poenitentiam
salubrem and spiritualem qua homo in Christo reconciliatur Deo, sieve illis
ampliorem patientiam (quam electis) sieve non imparem praebeat.
None of these does God bring to spiritual and healthful repentance, whereby
man in Christ is reconciled unto God, whether he yield them patience for longer
or shorter time. And as he excludes them from true repentance, so does he also
from forgiveness of sins, saying, that Cont. aduersar. seg. and prophet,
lib. 2 ca. 11. Qui no^ omnium, sicut iste au, sedeorum quos ante praes^^on and
praedestinauit delicta dimittit.
God forgiueth the sins, not of all, but of them whom before he foreknew and
predestined. Origin yet goes further, and says, that Origin. cont. Cells.
lib. 7. Conceditur cognitio Dei duntaxat his qui ad hoc praedestinati sunt vt
cognito Dei digne viuant.
the knowledge of God (meaning the true and effectual knowledge of God) is
granted only unto them, who are hereto predestinate, that knowing God they
may live worthy of him. Now if reprobates never have any true knowledge of God,
if they be secluded from repentance, faith, justification, and forgiveness of
sins, then these things are proper only to the elect, which do certainly
persevere, and our assertion is true, that where there is true repentance,
faith, justification, knowledge of God, there infallibly follows perseverance
to the end. Saint John therefore when he says, They were not of us, as he
means that they were not of the elect, so he means that they never were of
the number of true believers, never true members of Christ, or of the
spiritual body of the Church, which if they had been, he concludes for us,
that they should have so continued, and not in that sort have utterly fallen
away. Therefore does Saint Austine expound the words of them, August. de
corrept and great. ca. 9. Filij Dei propter sus^epta^ vel temporaliter gratia^
dicuntur a nobis nec sunt tamen Deo.
who for grace temporally received, are of us called the children of God, but
yet are not so to God, affirming plainly, that with God they are not children,
though we call them so, because they seem no other to our sight. And to the
same purpose he adds soon after: J^^d. Cum filij Dei dicunt, Non erant x
nobis, etc. quod aliud dicum, nisi non erant filij, etiam quaendo erant in
professt. (...) and nomine siliorum.
They were not of us, what means it, but they were not children of God, when
they went under the profession and name of children? Now if they were never
children of God, then were they never truly regenerate; for by being borne of
God, they must needs have been the children of God. Neither ever had they true
faith; for John. 1.12.
to so many as believed in him, he gave a dignity (or prerogative) to be the
sons of God. Therefore when he says of such, that they were in goodness,
they were in the faith, it must be understood as touching outward profession,
and to the judgment of the Church, and by assent and approbation of judgment
and understanding, but never by integrity and soundness of affection, or true
regeneration of the heart. Which may appear by the exposition that he makes
thereof upon that epistle of S. John, where speaking of those apostataes he
says; Aug^^^ in. 1. (...) 3. Sic sunt in corpore Christ's quomodo hunores mal;
qu in lo (...) corpus.
So are they in the body of Christ as evil humors in our body. No members
then, no parts of the body, but as evil humors in the body, of which some are
more kind and less offensive, other altogether unkind and hurtful, even as of
these temporizers in the Church, some come nearer to the true faithful, other
some are wholly wicked and dissembling hypocrites, but of them all it is true,
Ibid. Tentatio probat quia non sunt ex nobis. Quando illius tentatio venerit
velut occasion venti volant for as quia grana non erant.
Temptation proves that they are not of us. When temptation befalls them,
even as it were by occasion of a wind, they fly out, because they were not
corn. They might seem to be corn, but indeed they were but chafe; they had
a semblance, but they had not the realitie of the state of children. M. Bishops
exposition therefore avails nothing, but that it still stands true which we
affirm, that true faith as it assures of present state, so does assure also
of future perseverance, to the end that God may perform to every believer that
which he has promised, that he shall not perish but have everlasting life. But
because he cannot prevail by answering, he will make further trial what he can
do by arguing, taking for ground the words of S. Paul, first to the Romans,
Romans 11.20.
Thou stand by faith; be not high minded but fear: secondly to the
Philippians, Phil. 2.12.
Work your Salvation with fear and trembling. And to make the better show he
says, that there are above a hundred such texts in holy writ, wherein the holy
Ghost exhorts us, to stand in fear of our Salvation. But if they be such
texts as these which he has here alleged, they are admonitions against
carnal presumption, and no discouragements to true faith to stand assured of
Salvation. The Scripture speaks diversely of fear, and he does but dally upon
that equivocation. There is a doubting and distracting fear, which God
forbids, as being the enemy of all spiritual comfort and assurance of
faith; and there is an awful and regarding fear, which God commends as the
undivided companion of true faith. As we understand fear to he opposite to
faith, we hear God appointing his ministers to call his people from it. Esa.
35.4.
Say unto the fearful, Be you strong, fear not; behold your God comes with
vengeance, he will come and save you. Cap. 41.10.
Fear not, for I am with thee; be not afraid for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee and help thee, and sustain thee with the right hand of my
justice. And again, Cap. 43.1.
Fear not, for I have redeemed thee; I have called thee by name, thou art
mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, that they do
not ouerflow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Cap. 54.4.
Fear not; for thou shall not be ashamed, neither shall thou be confounded.
Verse. 14.
In righteousness shall thou be established, and be far from fear, for it
shall not come near thee. Verse. 17.
This is the heritage of the Lords servants, whose righteousness is of me,
says the Lord. These gracious and comfortable speeches the Lord uses to the
faithful, that under him they may rest in full assurance of safety, without
all fear or doubt, because he promises to prevent all those occasions whence
any fear or doubt should rise. Whereupon it is that Zachary says, that Luke
1.74.
he has delivered us out of the hands of our enemies to serve him without
fear, and Christ is said to have died, Heb. 2.15.
that he might deliver them who for fear of death were all their life time
subject to bondage, and the Apostle S. Paul accordingly says, Romans 8.15.
that we have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more, but the 2.
Tim. 1.7.
spirit of adoption to cry Abba, Father; that God has not given us the spirit
of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. There is no greater
bondage then fear of death, which represents to a man nothing but
ghastlinesse and horror, when he is uncertain therein what shall become of
him. Therefore Christ has delivered his from this bondage of fear, and that
they may rest stablished in the assurance of Salvation, says unto them, Luke
12.32.
Fear not little flock; for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
kingdom. The Church of Rome bids Christ's flock to stand in fear of their
own Salvation; but Christ the master of the flock says, Fear not, little
flock; it is the Fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. Thus when he says
to his disciples, Mat. 8.26.
Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith, and to Peter, Cap. 14.32.
O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? he shows that faith
imports an assured belief of a man's own safety, and forbids fear and
doubt, as contrary thereunto. Now therefore when the Scripture commends
fear, it imports not any such fear as should in the faithful shake the
assurance of Salvation; nay the faithful man because he finds in himself
that fear, does thereby gather the greater assurance to himself. It is with
every faithful man as it was with Job, Job. 31.23.
the punishment of God is fearful unto him; he dreadeth the judgments and
threatenings which God has denounced against pride and unthankfulness, against
rebellion and contempt of God, knowing assuredly that the same shall be
performed, and that God will make it appear that he has not spoken in vain.
Therefore he abhors the courses of the wicked, and walks not in their
ways, but laboring in righteousness stands fully resolved, that God will
save him from that destruction that he has provided for them. Neither does he
dread the sentence of God only in respect of eternal destruction, but also in
respect of temporal plagues and judgments, wherewith he chasteneth his own
children, when they behave themselves wantonly and undutifully toward him. In
the inflicting whereof God has regard to make them by the smart thereof much
more to dread his eternal wrath, that they may cease and shun the ways
whereby they should be in danger to incur the same. Now in this sense does
the Apostle in the first place recommend fear to the Churches of the Gentiles,
and specially to the Church of Rome, that whereas God had rejected the Jews,
because of their Act. 13.46.
rejecting the word of God, and they now by faith did stand, that is, by
obedience to the faith and preaching of the Gospel, had received the calling
and state of the people of God, and his Church, they should learn by the
example of the Jews to be wise and wary for themselves, trembling at the
fearful wrath that was befallen upon them, and therefore not flattering
themselves in the opinion of their outward calling as the other before had
done, but laboring to do those things which might be correspondent to the
grace and mercy which God had vouchsafed unto them. Which if they did neglect,
God would Mat. 21.43.
take away his kingdom from them, as he did from the Jews, and they should
lose that glory wherein now they took upon them to rejoice. To the very same
purpose does he admonish the Corinthians, that the Israelites had the same
calling, and in effect the same Sacraments that we have, and yet when they
behaved themselves unthankfully and wickedly, God did not forbear to punish
them, whereof he had made record in holy Scriptures for example unto us; and
hereupon concludes, 1. Cor. 10.12.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. Whereby he gives
to understand, that outward standing and professing of the faith, without
inward grace and fear of God issuing into a godly life and conversation, is
not standing indeed, but seeming to stand, and therefore that he that
glorifieth therein, if he be afraid to fall, must lay a better foundation for
himself to stand upon. These aduertisements true faith hears, and
apprehends the same to make use thereof; it is afraid to fall, and therefore
shunneth that security and rejoicing in outward state, wherein they, that
applaud themselves without correspondencie of inward affection and godly
conversation do merely delude themselves. Whereby it comes to pass, that in
the public desolations of Churches for the contempt of duty toward God, yet
whosoever has believed the word of God and feared his judgment, though lapped
in the folds of outward calamities, yet is saved from that damnation which he
was fearful by contempt to run into. To be short, as a man upon the top of
a high tower, is afraid to fall, and trembles to think thereof, when
notwithstanding being environed with the battlements he is without danger of
falling, and not afraid that he shall fall, so the true believer trembles with
the horror of the conceit of falling away from God, knowing the end of them
to he most unhappy that so do, when yet he reposeth assured trust in God, that
being compassed about with his protection, and dwelling under his defense, he
himself shall be preserved for ever. Under whose defense that we may dwell,
there is another fear necessary, whereby we are drawn away from presuming of
our own strength, that we may be Ephesians. 6.10.
strong in the Lord (only) and in the power of his might. And of this fear are
we to understand the latter place cited by M. Bishop; Phil. 2.12.
Work your Salvation in fear and trembling. In fear and trembling, that is,
in humility, in due acknowledgement of your own frailty, in fearing to be
left to your own selves, in depending wholly upon God; For, says he, it is God
that works in you both to will and to do, the adding of which reason
plainly shows, that fear and trembling is to be taken in that meaning as I
have expressed. And in that sort S. Austin does expound it: August. de great.
and lib. arbit. cap. 9. Ideo cum timore and tremore ne sibi tribuendo quod been
operantur de bonis tanqua^ suis extollantur operibus. Tanqua^ ergo interrogitur
Apostolus and diceretur et, Quare dixisti cum timore and tremore, horum
verborum rationem reddidit, dicens, Deus est enim, etc.
Therefore does S. Paul say with fear and trembling, least attributing to
themselves that they work well, they should be proud of their good works, as
if they were their own: therefore as if one had asked him, why do thou say,
with fear and trembling, he gives reason of those words, saying, For it is
God which works in you both to will and to do. In sundry De not. and great.
cap. 27. De Corrept. and great. cap. 9. in Psalm. 65. and 118. conc. 31.
other places does he expound those words to the same effect. So does Prosper
also say, that the Apostle by those words Prosper. apud Ambros. epist. 84.
Vigilant te^tatoris iusidiae vt vbi proficit deuotio subrepat elatio and vt
homo de bono opere in se potius quam in Domino glorietur. Sed solicundo nos
Apostoli contra hoc periculum monet dicentis, Cum timore and tremore, etc.
does admonish us against the danger of that pride, whereby a man of a good
work rejoices in himself rather then in the Lord. Here is nothing then that
the faithful should stand in fear of their own Salvation, but only that they
should fear to commit themselves to themselves, in working to the
accomplishment of the Salvation to which God has called them, and should
remember, that all is to be expected of Gods mercy, whence only it is that
either we will or do any thing that is good. Which fear is so far from
giving us cause to doubt of Salvation, as that it much rather serves to
strengthen the assurance thereof, whilst it makes us to rest only upon God,
and not upon our selves, knowing that our Salvation depends not upon any
thing which we can do for our selves, but upon him Esa. 26.12.
who has wrought, (and so will work) all our works for us, and will not
leave that imperfect which he has begun. And when sometimes we forget this
fear, and incline to trust in our selves, and say with David, Psalm. 30.6.
I shall never be removed, he leaves us to the trial of our own strength, so
as that wanting his support, we fall and run into enormous offense, thereby
to be the better instructed how little safety we have in our own defense, and
therefore how necessary it is for us to depend wholly upon his grace. Thus the
Apostle Peter presuming too much of himself, and being left thereupon to
himself, fell even to the denying and abiuring of his master Christ, that he
in himself and we in him might learn, that 1. Sam 2.9.
by his own might shall no man be strong, and that evil would our state be,
if our safety did not rest only and altogether in the Lord. Thus therefore in
both places cited by M. Bishop, and in many other we read of fear; to fear
the judgments and threatenings of God, which the faithful always does,
because faith believes them; to fear to trust in our selves, which every
faithful man also does, because faith it self imports trust in God: but we
no where read any thing whereof to gather that which he affirms, that the
faithful ought to stand in fear of their own Salvation. Now therefore his
argument is easily answered, for the minor proposition which he says is
plainly proved by the places cited, is merely false, and has no proof at
all, either by those places of any other. And how absurdly does he abuse his
Reader, that whereas the proposition by him to be proved is not expressed in
the places alleged, he notwithstanding skippeth over with mere quoting of
them, without showing how the matter to be proved is to be inferred thereof.
But such pretty shifts do best become the cause that he has in hand. About the
mayor proposition whereof there is less question, he bestows a little pains
to little purpose: No man must stand in fear of that of which by faith he is
assured. Which we grant, as it imports a duty, that no man ought to have any
fear of that which he is taught to believe, but we deny that which he says
for the prosecutio^ or explication thereof. For it is false, that there is no
fear in faith, that is, that there is no faith where there is fear, or fear
where there is faith. For when our Savior Christ vpbraideth his disciples with
Mat. 8.26. and 14.31.
fearfulnes and doubting, and yet attributes unto them little faith, as before
is alleged, he plainly shows, that little faith it subject to fear and
doubt, and yet cease not thereupon to be faith. He says that he that fears
cannot give certain assent. We answer him, that our assent is according to the
measure of our faith; little faith yields but weak assent, but yet it is a
true assent, whereby we embrace that whereto we assent. The truth of which
faith and assent hereby appears even in fear, because fear causes it to
fall to prayer, which what is it else, but as it were the casting forth of the
arms of faith, to catch hold of him in whom it believes, as expecting succor
and help of him; for Romans 10.14.
how shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? Thus the faith of
the disciples appeared in the places even now cited, when their fear made them
to go unto Christ and say to him, Master, save us, which they would not have
said, but that they believed to have safety and deliverance by him. Whereas
therefore M. Bishop alleges the old said saw, Dubious in fide infidelis est,
he that is doubtful in the faith, is an infidel or unbeliever, we tell him
that it is true in him that wholly and absolutely doubts. But there is a
difference to be made betwixt him that absolutely doubts, and him that weakly
assenteth, and in assent is only interrupted with some fear or doubt. For
which interruption I trow M. Bishop will not say, that the disciples of Christ
were faithless, when Christ himself expressly acknowledges their faith. And
thus, by reason the seeds of all impiety lie still hidden in the corruption of
our nature, it comes to pass, that faith sometimes is assaulted with doubts,
even in the maine and principal articles of our belief, and out of our own
sinful condition we question upon occasion the godhead, the power, the
wisdom, the providence, the justice and mercy of almighty God, when yet our
faith does not wholly relinquish the assent thereof. Which though in generality
it more seldom come to pass, yet in application of our general faith to
particular occasions, we many times go halting and lame, and stagger somewhat
at that whereof our faith should give us full assurance by the word of God.
Thus did Genesis 18.12.
Sarah cast doubt of Gods promise as touching the having of a child, who yet is
said Heb. 11.11.
through faith to have received strength to conceive when she was past age,
because she judged him faithful that had promised. Thus did Numb. 11.21.22.
Moses call in question the power of God, as touching providing flesh for the
people of Israel when he promised so to do. So Psalm. 73.2.3
David and Habac. 1.2.13
Habacuk staggered as touching the providence of God, and his care of just and
righteous men. So I showed before how the disciples upon the death of Christ
were in a mammering concerning the godhead of Christ, and the hope of
redemption by him, which before they had embraced. Yet we do not think, that
such doubts and mammerings did in these men wholly extinguish the light of true
faith. In like sort therefore we also resolve, that the faith whereby we
believe our own Salvation, is not by and by overthrown, because sometimes the
assurance thereof is shaken and interrupted with casting of fears and doubts.
And thus the argument which he added for supply of those which M. Perkins
brought, is found to be of as little, indeed less worth then all the rest, and
it well appears that M. Perkins was better able to speak for M. Bishop, then
M. Bishop is able to speak for himself.

11. W. BISHOP.
To these invincible reasons grounded upon Gods word, let us join some plain
testimonies, taken as well out of the holy Scripture, as out of the ancient
Fathers. First, what can be more manifest to warrant us, that the faithful
have not assurance infallible of their Salvation, Eccles. 9.
then these words of the holy Ghost: There be just (and therefore faithful) and
wise men, and their works be in the hand of God, and nevertheless a man does
not know whether he be worthy of hatred or love, but all things are kept
uncertain for the time to come. Where is then the Protestants certainty? And
because one heretic cauilleth against the Latin translation, saying, that a
word or two of it may be otherwise turned, hear how S. Jerome, Comment. in
hunc locum.
who was most cunning in the Hebrew text, does understand it. The sense is
(says he.) I have found the works of the just men, to be in the hand of God,
and yet themselves not to know, whether they be loved of God or no.

R. ABBOT.
To his former invisible reasons, we shall have now some further testimonies
adjoined, that make as little for him as his reasons have done. And first he
alleges a place of Solomon, A man does not know whether he be worthy of
hatred or love, but all things are kept uncertain for the time to come. But he
knew well that the translation of this place might justly be excepted against,
which indeed is very false. He says that one heretic cauilleth against it,
but neither is he one only, nor an heretic, neither does he cavil, but
justly rejects it by warrant of the original text, so as that M. Bishops
own friends do translate the words far otherwise then he alleges them. The
Hebrew word for word according to the Septuagint translated by Hierome, is
thus; Eccles. 9.1. Et quidem charitatem and quidem ^^lium no est cognoscens
homo omnia in facie eoru^. Hieron.
Also love, also hatred, a man knows not all in the face of them. The
obscurity of which words has caused men very diversely to conceive of the true
meaning thereof. One construction is made by Olympiodorus, that Olimpiod. in
Eccles. ca. 9. Qui adhuc sapit quae hominis sunt, neque plane Deo se tradidit,
nescit discreto rudicio quae dilectione sunt digna quae odio.
he that yet sauoureth the things of men, and has not sincerely given himself
to God, knows not what things are worthy to be loved, and what to be hated.
Another exposition he alleges taken from the translation of Symmachus; Ibid.
Nescit homo si qu^m nunc maxim odit, mutatis vicibus amicum and beneficum sit
experturus, contraque an time^dum sibi quandoque sit abeo quem nunc amore
prosequitur.
A man knows not whether upon some change he shall find him loving or kind
whom he now hates, or shall have cause to be afraid of him whom he now loves.
With least mutation or change we translate the words thus, A man knows not
love or hatred (that is, who is loved or hated) by all that is before them, and
then the meaning is plain; that by outward things, by the things that are
before our face, a man knows not whether he be beloved or hated of God;
whereof the reason follows, because all things come alike to all, and there
is the same condition (outwardly) to the just and to the wicked, etc. And to
this effect the translation of Symmachus tends, though Olympiodorus gathered
otherwise thereof. Symmac. apud Hieron in Eccl. cap 9 Insuper neque amicitias
neque immicitias scit homo, sed omnia corarae eis incerta, propterea quod
omnibus eueniunt similia iusto and iniusto.
Moreover a man knows not love or hatred, but all things are uncertain
before them, because the like things befall to all, both to just and unjust.
Which translation as Hierome approves, so he confirms also the meaning of
it, saying, Hieron ibid. Quod autem ait, Euentus est vnus omnibus iusto and
impio sieve angustiarum sieve mortis significat eue^tum, and idcirco nec
charitatem Dei eos in se nosse nec odium.
Whereas he says that there is the same condition to all, he means it of
affliction or of death, and that therefore men know not the love of God or his
hatred toward them. And thus indeed true it is as M. Bishop cites out of
Hierome, that a man cannot esteem by any outward state whether he be loved or
hated of God; for neither do the righteous only prosper, neither are the wicked
only crossed and afflicted, but the wicked flourish many times more gloriously
then the just, and the hand of God often lies heavier upon the just then upon
the wicked and ungodly, and both are subject to death, both are laid in the
grave without any appearance or show of difference betwixt the one and the
other. But this makes nothing against us; for although by the eye the believer
cannot discern the love of God toward himself, yet that hinders not but
that by faith he apprehends and embraces the same. And thus S. Bernard
excepteth against that place, being so translated as M. Bishop reads it.
Bernard. in dedic. eccles. ser. 5. Sed de possibilitate iam cert^ de voluntate
quid agimus? Quis scit si est dignus amore an edio? Quis nouit sensum Domini,
aut quis consiliarius eius fuit? Hic iam plane fidem nobis subuenire necesse
est, hic oportet succurrere veritatem vt quod de nobis latet in cord paetris
nobis per ipsius spiritum reueletur and spiritus eius testifica^s persuadeat
spiritut nostro quod filij Dei simus.
Being sure of Gods ableness to save us, how do we to be assured of his will
thereto? for who knows whether he be worthy of love or hatred? who has
known the mind of the Lord, or has been his counselor? But here faith must
help us; bear Gods truth must be our succor, that that which lies hidden
concerning us in the heart of God our Father, may by his spirit be revealed
unto us, and his spirit by the testimony thereof may persuade our spirit that
we are the children of God, and that by calling and justifying us freely by
faith. Thus though we take the place translated as M. Bishop alleges it, yet
by S. Bernards judgment it avails him nothing, because albeit otherwise we
cannot know whether we be beloved or hated of God, yet by faith and by the
spirit of God, that secret is revealed unto us, that we are the children of God
and beloved of him. Only that we take that worthiness of the love of God, to
be meant of Gods acceptance and vouchsafing to think us worthy, because
otherwise the place so translated sounds a manifest untruth and contrary to
the Scripture. For if we speak simply of worthiness, who does not know
himself worthy of hatred; what faithful man does not say as Daniel said,
Dan. 9.7.
To thee, O Lord, belongs righteousness, but unto us (reckoning himself for
one) belongs confusion of face. David says, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight no man
living shall be justified. 130.3.
If thou straightly mark what is done amiss, who shall be able to stand? It is
false then to say that a man knows not whether he be worthy of love or of
hatred, for he knows or should know himself worthy to be hated, but yet by
faith a man believes himself in Christ to be beloved, though he know that in
himself he worthily deserves to be hated. And so S. Bernard again says of
the faithful, Bernard. epist. 107. Supra scit. 3
A vile worm worthy of everlasting hatred, yet is confidently persuaded that
he is beloved, because he feels himself to love. Thus S. Bernard both ways
contrarieth M. Bishop, affirming that the faithful man knows himself
worthy to be hated, and yet by faith confidently presumes that he is beloved
of God. As yet therefore we have no proof that the faithful man ought to
stand in fear of his own Salvation.

12. W. BISHOP.
Another plain testimony is taken out of S. Paul, where he shows that it is
not in us to judge of our own justice, 1. Cor. 4.
but we must leave to God the judgment of it, these be the words: I am not
guilty in conscience of any thing, but I am not justified herein, but he that
judges me is our Lord, therefore judge not before the time until our Lord do
come, who also will lighten the hidden things of darkness, and will manifest the
counsel of the heart, and then the praise shall be to every man, of God. So
that before Gods judgment by S. Paul's testimony, men may not assure
themselves of their own justice, much less of their Salvation, Sermon. 5. in
Psa. 118. De constitut. monas. cap 2.
how innocent soever they find themselves in their own consciences. See upon
this place S. Ambrose, S. Basil, Theodoret on this place, who all agree, that
men may have secret faults, which God only sees, and therefore they must live
in fear, and always pray to be delivered from them. For the rest let S.
Augustines testimony (whom our adversaries acknowledge to be the most diligent
and faithful register of all antiquity) be sufficient. This most judicious,
and holy Father thus defines this matter: As long as we live here, we our
selves cannot judge of our selves, I do not say what we shall be to morrow, De
verb. Domini. sermon 35. De ciuit. Dei lib. 11. cap. 12.
but what we are to day. And yet more directly: Albeit holy men are certain of
the reward of their perseverance, yet of their own perseverance, they are
found uncertain. For what man can know that he shall persevere, and hold on in
the action and increase of justice until the end, unless by some revelation he
be assured of it from him, who of his just, but secret judgment does not
inform all men of this matter, but deceives none: So no just man is assured
of his Salvation by his ordinary faith: by extraordinary revelation, some man
may be assured, the rest are not. Which is just the Catholic sentence. And
because S. Bernard is by our adversaries cited for them in this point, Sermon. 1.
de Soptuag.
take his testimony in as precise terms as any Catholic at this time
speaks. Thus he writes: Who can say, I am one of the elect, I am one of the
predestinate to life, I am one of the number of the children? Who (I say) can
thus say, the Scripture crying out against him: A man knows nor, Eccles. 9.
whether he be worthy of love or hatred? Therefore we have no certainty, but
the confidence of hope does comfort us, that we be not vexed at all with the
perplexity of this doubt. The word of God (according to S. Bernard) cries out
against all them, that certainly assure themselves of their Salvation: whereon
then do they build their faith that believe it?

R. ABBOT.
The sum of his argument in this place is, that we are uncertain of our own
righteousness, and therefore can have no certainty of our own Salvation. To
prove the uncertainty of our righteousness, he alleges the words of the
Apostle, Cor. 4.4. Of this place see further the fourth Section of the next
question, concerning Justification.
I am not guilty to my self in any thing, yet am I not therein justified.
Where it is worth the noting, that whereas the Apostle says by express
negative, I am not justified thereby, he makes as if the Apostle had meant, I
cannot tell whether I be justified or not. It may be I am just, it may be I am
not just. If I be, my justice shall merit heaven: if I be not, I know not what
may happily become of me. But the Apostle never made any such doubt; he well
knew, that the cleerenesse of his conscience was not it that could yield him
justification before God. He knew it to be true which S. Austin says, that
August. de peccat. mer. and remiss. lib 2. cap. 19 Quantum ad integerronam
regulam veritatis eius pertinet, non iustifibabitur, etc.
according to the most entire rule of Gods truth, no man living shall be found
just in the sight of God, and therefore professes, that Phil. 3.8.
he accounts all things but loss for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus
our Lord, for whom, says he, I have counted all things loss, and do judge
them to be doung, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, not
having mine own righteousness which is by the law, but the righteousness
which is by the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God by
faith. Here is then a renouncing of his own righteousness, and an
acknowledgement of justification and righteousness only by faith in Christ. A
notable fruit of which faith it was so to walk as that he could say, I am not
guilty to my self in any thing, in which sort he speaks elsewhere, 2. Cor.
1.12.
This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly pureness, not by carnal wisdom but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world. Of which testimony of
conscience S. John says, 1. John. 3.19.21.
If our heart condemn us not (but that we are of the truth) then have we
boldness toward God, and shall before him assure our hearts. Whereby we are
taught, that to walk with a good conscience in the faith of Christ, ministers
great boldness and assurance toward God, and therefore that the Apostle in
the place cited protesting the innocence of his conscience, was far from
professing to stand in doubt of his own Salvation, yea and were not M. Bishop
a man of an iron face, he would not attribute to the Apostle any such doubt.
For the true understanding of the place we are to observe, as appears by the
process of this epistle, that there were divisions and part-takings amongst
the Corinthians, some magnifying one of their teachers, and some another, and
they willingly accepting the applause and praises of their followers, and each
thinking highly of himself above the rest. Now the Apostle under his own
name, and the names of Apollo and Cephas, instructs those teachers against
this vain affectation of human applause: he wishes them to be content to be
reckoned each with other the ministers of Christ, and therein to have a care to
deal faithfully toward him whose stewards they are, endeavoring to their
uttermost to please the Lord, not thinking the better of themselves for that
men magnify them above others, because men know the^ not, nor can duly esteem
of them. Nay, how should other judge of us, when we cannot sufficiently judge
of our selves, who in our greatest innocence as seems us, yet cannot
justify our selves to God, and when to our selves we are guilty of nothing,
yet with him are found guilty many ways; because he sees in as that that we
see not in our selves, and espieth iniquities and defaults where we by our
sight can descry none, so that to his sight happily they are found superiors to
us, whom we think to be our inferiors; and they are approved for the better,
who^ men's judgments take to be the worse, and therefore rejecting the
vainglorious co^mendations of partially affected men, we are to refer our
selves wholly to the judgment of the Lord. And thus are those words expounded
by those very authors who^ M. Bishop cites, not that men may have secret
faults, which perhaps may hinder their being just, but that the best have
secret faults at least, by reason whereof in themselves they are not just. Thus
Ambrose takes it; Ambros. in Psalm 118. ser. 5. Delicti conscius sibi non erat,
sed quia homo erat, peccatorem se fatebatur, scieus vnum esse Iesum lumen verum
qui peccatum, non fecit, etc. ipsum solii iustificari qui vere alienus esset a
lapsu.
The Apostle was not to himself guilty of default, but because he was a man,
he confessed himself a sinner knowing that Jesus only is the true light who
did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth, and that he only is
found just, who was indeed free from falling. The words of Theodoret are not so
plain, but Basil evidently makes the Apostle to say; Basil. in Constit.
monast. cap. 2. Hoc est, multa pecco quae non intelligo; vnde and propheta
dixit, Delicta quis intelliget? etc. Licet multa peccamus, plura tame^
dilectorum nostrorum ignoramus.
I offend in many things which I know not, as it is written, who knows how
often he offends? For although we sin many ways, yet we do not know (or we
are not ware) of many of our sins. The Apostles words then import not a
doubt, but an absolute denial of his being just, even by the testimony of M.
Bishops own records. And this shall further appear in the next question, upon
further examination of the same words. M. Bishop therefore must change his
antecedent proposition, and not say, We are uncertain of our own justice or
righteousness, but rather, We are certain and sure that in our selves we are
not just. And if hereof he will conclude, that we must therefore doubt of our
own Salvation, we must tell him that his argument holds not. Indeed if our
Salvation were to stand upon our own righteousness, we were not only to
doubt, but wholly to despair of our own Salvation; because by inherent
justice, as shall be showed, no man shall be justified in Gods sight. Even in
our greatest perfection, when we look unto our selves and our own
righteousness, we are subject to that amassed distraction which the Apostle
describes, even to say, Romans 10.6.
Who shall ascend into heaven? as if Christ were not ascended to make way for
us; and Who shall descend into the deep? as if Christ had not died to deliver
us from thence: we can never satisfy our selves how either to escape the one,
or to attain the other. Therefore we according to the promise of the Gospel
rest the assurance of Salvation upon faith in Christ, fully believing that his
merit is our righteousness, and that by the virtue thereof we are accepted
unto eternal life. Which since M. Bishop knew well enough, it was but an idle
vagarie of his, to allege this so impertinently for an argument against us.
Now as touching the testimonies that he further alleges, the first of them is
nothing to the matter in hand, to say nothing that he quoteth it from a place
where it is not found, and where it is found is not Austins, though it be in an
homily amongst his. The author of those words speaks to the same purpose as
the Apostle did, to dissuade from taking delight in the praises and
commendations of men, because they cannot know what commendation should be due
unto us. Yea says he, Aug. homil. 35. Quamdus viuimus hic. de nobisipsis
nosipsi iudicare non possumus, non dico quod eras erimus sed quod hodie simus.
Quante minus delemus moueri iudicijs alienis quam de conscientia nostra quae
nobis perhibet testimonium? Nam gloria nostra debet esse conscientia nostra.
So long as we live here we our selves cannot judge of our selves, I say not
what we shall be to morrow, but what we are to day; how much less then should
we be moved with other men's judgments then with our own conscience which
gives testimony unto us: for our conscience should be our glory? We are not
then upon other men's opinions of us to swell in opinion of our selves; we do
not for the present sufficiently conceive our own imperfections and defaults,
which with God may detract from us much of that which men attribute unto us; we
know not whether God may suffer us to fall, as he does many times his dearest
children, to stain that commendation and vain glory that we take too great
pleasure in; but all this hinders nothing but that faith is assured by the
word of God that God will never suffer it so to fail, or us so to fall, as to
fall utterly away from him. The other place of Austin speaks indefinitely of
all, who Aug de ciuit. Dei lib. 11. cap. 12. Quos videmus just ac pre cum spe
futurae immortalitatis hanc vita^ ducere, etc. Licet de suae perseuerantiae
praemio certi su^t, de ipsa tame^ perseuerantia sua reperiuntur incerti, etc.
to our sight live justly and godlily with hope of future immortality, who
though they be (all) sure that there is a reward of perseverance, yet are not
(all) sure to persevere, because all are not indeed the same that to our sight
they seem to be. Only they are assured thereof, as he says, Quis sciat, etc
nisi aliqua reuelatione ab illo fiat certus qui de hac re iusto latentique
iudicio no^ omnes instruit sed neminem fallit.
whom God assures by revelation from him; who does reveal it by faith,
through the spirit in our vocation and justification, as we have heard before
out of S. Bernards words. The same S. Austin says to his hearers; De ver.
Apos. ser. 16. Fidei quae per dilectionem operatur si est in vobis, iam
pertinetis ad praedestinatos, vocatos, iustificatos.
If there be in you faith which works by love, even now ye belong to them
that are predestined, called, justified. Now since the faithful by S. Austins
judgment do belong to the^ that are predestined, called, justified, it
follows by S. Austins judgment, that they are to be assured that they belong
to them that shall be glorified, and therefore shall certainly persevere, because
Romans 8.30.
whom God has predestined, called, justified, them he has glorified, as the
Apostle says. And therefore does S. Austin will the faithful man August. in
Psalm. 148. Supra Sect. 3.
to believe that he shall live for ever, as before was showed, and if he must
believe to live for ever, he must believe also to persevere, not doubting
thereof, because what Christ says in the Gospel to one, belongs to every
one, Mat. 9.29.
According to thy faith so be it unto thee. Such is then the certainty and
assurance that we teach, not as commonly we understand certainty and assurance
by sense or by reason, by evidence and plain appearance, whereby directly and
immediately we know the thing whereof we are assured (this certainty and
assurance S. Austin denies, and so do we) but an assurance of faith, whereby
by signs and arguments we believe by the word and promise of God that so it
shall be, and rest assured that so it shall be, because we do believe. And this
is ordinary faith, whereby God ordinarily in some measure reuealeth the secret
of his election to the faithful, neither is there any necessity to restrain
S. Austins words to extraordinary revelation, as M. Bishop does. That former
certainty S. Bernard also denies in the words alleged by M. Bishop, but we
have before seen how he avouches the certainty of faith against the words
cited in the place here alleged, A man knows not whether he be worthy of
love or of hatred. No man by any apprehension or light of flesh and blood can
say, I am one of the elect, I am one of the predestinate: no man by judgment
of reason or humane knowledge can conceive it, but yet as he says in the very
place here cited, Bernard. in septuag. ser. 1. Data sunt signa quaedam and
indicia manifesta salutis vt indubitabile sit eum esse de numero electorum in
quo ea signa permanserint.
there are certain manifest signs and tokens of Salvation, such as that it is
without all doubt that he is of the number of the elect in whom those tokens do
remain. Of which signs he speaks thus in another place: Jdem id octaua.
Paschae. ser. 2. Quomodo sine testimonio electos suos deserat Deus? aut certe
quaenam eis esse poterat consolatio inter spem and metum solicitudine anxia
fluctuantibus, si nullum omnino electionis suae testimonium habere mereretur?
Nouit Dominus qui sunt eius, and solus ipse scit quos elegerit a principio.
Quis vero scit hominu^ si est dignus amore vel odio? Quod si vt certu^ est
certitudo nobis omnino negatur, nunquid non tanto delectabiliora erunt siqua
forte electionis huius signa possimus inuenire? Quam enim requiem habere potest
spiritus noster dum praedestinationis suae nullum adhuc testimoniu^ tenet,
fidelis proinde sermo and omni acceptione dignus quo salutis testimony
commendantur.
How should God leave his elect without testimony (of their election?) or what
comfort might there be unto them wauing carefully betwixt hope and fear, if
they did not find the favor to have some testimony thereof? The Lord knows
who are his, he only knows whom he has chosen from the beginning: but what
man knows if he be worthy of love or hatred? But if, as certain it is, that
certainty be denied unto us (in such sort as before was said) how much the more
delightful shall they be, if we can find any tokens of this election? For what
rest can our soul have, so long as it has yet no testimony of it own
predestination? Therefore it is a word to be believed, and worthy by all
means to be received, whereby the witness and testimony of our Salvation is
commended unto us. Thus he denies that absolute certainty that before I
mentioned, but denies not that certainty of faith which is gathered from such
signs and tokens as by the word of God are delivered unto us, which he gives
to understand is such as whereby we are kept from that wauing and wavering
betwixt hope and fear, which M. Bishop requires to take place in every
faithful man. And this certainty is such as that Bernard himself thus
expresses it in himself: Idem de Eua^g. sept panum. ser. 3. Tria su n quae
sic (...) and confirmant cer (...), vt nulla (...), meritorum, nulla const^^
propriae vilitatis, nulla (...) coelestis bratitudinis ib altitudine spes de
scere possit in ea firmiter radicatum, etc. Tria considero in quibus tota spes
mea consistit, charitatem adoptionis, veritatem promissionis, potestatem
redditionis. Murmur etiam quantum voluerit insipiens cogitatio mea, dicens,
Quis enim es tu, aut quanta est illa gloria, quibu sue meritis hanc obtinere
speras? Et ego fiducialiter respondebo, scio cui credidi and certus sum quia in
charitate nimia adoptauit me, quia verax in promissione, quia potent in
exhibitione, etc.
There are three things which do so strengthen and stablish my heart, as that
no want of merits, no consideration of mine own vileness, no estimation of
the heavenly bless, can cast me down from the height of my hope, being fast
rooted therein; I consider three things, I say, in which my hope wholly
consists: the love of God in adopting me, the truth of his promise, and his
power to perform the same. Let my foolish thought now repine and murmr as
much as it will, saying, Who art thou, and how great is that glory, and by
what merits do thou hope to obtain the same? and I will boldly answer, I
know whom I have believed, and I am certain or sure, because he has adopted
me in great love, because he is true in his promise, because he is of power to
make good the same. Thus Saint Bernard expressly affirms a certainty of
faith, and speaks so like a Protestant, as that if he were now alive he
should at Rome be condemned for an heretic as well as we. He was not of the
mind that M. Bishop says, that the word of God cries out against them that by
faith take assurance of their Salvation, but only denies that there is any
assurance of Salvation to be taken from our own immediate and absolute
knowledge and apprehension thereof, which we also confess as well as he.

7. W. BISHOP.
If it may be permitted to join modern opinions with anncient, bad men with
good, I could prove by the testimony of every principal sect of this time,
that all other sectaries were deceived in this their persuasion of their
Salvation. For both Lutherans, Caluinists, and Anabaptists (to omit the rest)
do hold every one of themselves assured of their Salvation, and yet each sect
holds every one not of his own band assured of damnation: so that by the
sentence of the Lutherans, all Caluinists, and Anabaptists, are miserably
deceived when they assure themselves of their Salvation: In like manner if the
Anabaptists be true censurers, both Lutherans, and Caluinists, and all other,
not of their heresy, err foully, when they bear themselves in hand that they
shall be saved. Certain it is therefore by the consent of all the world, that
very many who assure themselves of Salvation, are indeed assured of damnation.

R. ABBOT.
A fools bolt is soon shot. Bad men, says he, with good, but of all those
bad men are there any so bad as he and his fellow Seculars have described the
Jesuits to be, and the Jesuits them? Let us turn the argument then upon
themselves; The Secular Priests hope for Salvation, yet the Jesuits hold them
for proud men, contentious, irregular, scandalous, and in a word for
schismatikes, and therefore in case of damnation. So the Jesuits hope for
Salvation; yet the Seculars, though being brought in case to leap at a crust,
they now dissemble it, hold them for very villains, the notable impostors and
cosiners of the world, for very rakehels and devils incarnate, for heretics
and what not? Thus M. Bishop has been conceited; thus has Watson in his
Quodlibets discovered them, and thereby to be assuredly in state of damnation
also. Their grounds therefore on both sides are false, whereby they conceive
any hope of Salvation. Yea, and in the body of their unity amongst their Popes,
their Cardinals, their Bishops, and the rest, there are many who upon false
grounds do hope for Salvation. Is it an argument therefore that they have no
true grounds, whereupon to build the hope thereof? The Turks hope for Salvation
by their superstitions, the Jews hope for Salvation by their traditions, and
both take the Papists to be damned; and will M. Bishop take this to be any
impeachment of their hope? So therefore although Papists and Anabaptists, and
such other absurd heretics do think the faithful to be in state of
damnation, yet this nothing hinders, but that the faithful themselves upon
the grounds that God has laid before them, should stand assured of Salvation.
As for that which he says of Lutherans and Caluinists, it is but the casting
of his gall, the bitterness whereof remains only to himself. We joy not in
any such titles, nor love to divide our selves as Popish Moonks and Friars do,
by the names of men. And in that difference of opinions that is betwixt them
that are so called, there is none that is soberly minded, that does preiudicate
the others hope toward God, but rather by unity of faith in the maine,
learneth of the Apostle to say, Phil. 3.15.
If any be otherwise minded (then he ought) God will even reveal the same unto
him. There may be difference of opinions betwixt good men, as it fell out of
old betwixt Cyprian and Stephanus Bishop of Rome, betwixt Hierome and Austine,
betwixt Chrysostom and Epiphanius, and sundry others, yea and the same may
grow to some egernesse and anger whilst each maintains his own conceit, but
S. Austines rule ought to be remembered: August. in Psalm. 33. Non possunt nisi
existere rixae aliquae quomodo inter fratres and inter sanctos extiterunt,
inter Barnabam and Paul^ sed non quae occiderent concordia^, no^ qua
interimerent charitatem.
There may be braules, as there have been sometimes betwixt brethren, betwixt
Saints and holy men, as betwixt Barnabas and Paul, but not to break concord of
heart, not to destroy charity and love. Which rule so long as we retain, and
do Ephe 4.15.
follow the truth in love, as the Apostle exhorts God does pardon our error,
and will in his good time bring our darkness into light, that in the end Ver.
13.
we may all meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of
God, to be 1 Cor. 1.10.
of one mind and of one judgment, which we all ought to strive unto. This mind
Cyprian bare in his private opinion of rebaptizing, saying to them that were
assembled in counsel with him, Cyprian in council. Carthag. De hac ipsa re quid
singuli sentiamus proferamus, neminem iudicantes nec a iure co^munionis alique^
si diuersum senserit ameuentes.
Let us every man deliver what we think of this matter, judging no man, nor
seuering any man from the right of our communion for being minded otherwise.
With this mind Austine said to Hierome, August. epist. 15. Si fieri potest vt
inter nos quaeramus and disseramus aliquid quo sine amaritudine discordiae
corda nostra pascantur fiat. Si autem non possum dicere quid mihi emendandum
videatur in scriptis tuis nec tu in meis sine suspicione inuidiae aut laesione
amicitiae, quiescamus ab his, and nostrae vitae salutique parcamus. Minus certe
assequatur illa quae instat, dum non offendatur illa quae edificat.
If it may be that we may search or reason betwixt us any matter, whereby
without bitterness of discord our hearts may be fed, let us so do. But if I
cannot say what I think is to be amended in thy writings, or thou in mine,
without suspicion of envy, and breach of friendship, let us give over these
matters, and favor our own life and Salvation. Let knowledge which puffs up
have the less, that there may be no offense to love which edifieth. They who
in the profession of one true religion, do prosecute their differences with
other mind, do bewray their own corruption, and break that Ephe. 4.3.
unity of the spirit, that should be preserved by the bond of peace. Seeing
therefore we bear this mind in some difference of opinions, it is nothing else
but M. Bishops malice to infer thereof, that we each to other deny the hope
or assurance of Salvation. But his conclusion of all this babblement is a wise
one, Certain it is therefore that very many who assure themselves of
Salvation, are indeed assured of damnation. For what is it to the question, if
any by carnal security dreaming of Salvation, have in the end failed of that,
which rashly and without ground they have presumed of? We doubt not but many
presumptuous hypocrites and heretics come to naught, who for the time by vain
opinion have flattered themselves in the false hope of that which they never
embraced by true faith. But the fall of them in whom there never was any true
faith, no whit impeacheth the assurance of them, who truly and unfeignedly do
believe.

14. W. BISHOP.
With the testimonies of the ancient Doctors for us, Page 55.
I pray thee gentle Reader, confer those which M. Perkins in his sixth reason
alleges against us. First, S. Augustine in these words: Of an evil servant,
De verb. Domini. sermon. 28.
thou art made a good child, therefore presume not of thine own doing, but of
the grace of Christ. It is no arrogancy, but faith to acknowledge, what thou
have received, it is not pride, but devotion. What word is here of Certainty
of Salvation? but that it belongs to a faithful man, to confess himself
much bound to God, for calling of him to be his. Which every Christian must do,
hoping himself so to be, and being most certain, that if he be not in state
of grace, it is long of himself, and no want on Gods part. The second place
has not so much as any show of words for him, thus he speaks: Let no man
ask another man, Tract. 5. in Epis. Joan.
but return to his own heart, and if he find Charity there, he has security
for his passage, from like to death. What need was there to seek charity in
his heart for security of his Salvation, if his faith assured him thereof,
therefore this text makes flat against him.

R. ABBOT.
The words of Austine, or rather of Ambrose (for he indeed is the author of
them) are these, August. de verb. Dom. ser. 28. ex Ambros. de sacram. lib 5.
cap. 4. O homo no^ audebas oculos tuos ad coelum attollere: oculos tuos ad
terram dirigebas and subito accepisti gratiam Christi. Omnia tibi peccata
dimissa su^t. Ex malo seruo factus es bonus filius. Ideo praesume non de
operatione tua sed de Christi gratia. Gratia enim saluati estis, Apostolus ait.
Non ergo hic arrogantia est sed fides praedicare quod acceperis non est
superbia sed deuotio.
O man thou did not dare to lift thine eyes to heaven; thou did cast them
to the earth, and upon the sudden thou receiuedst the grace of Christ: all thy
sins are forgiven thee. Of an evil servant thou art made a good son.
Presume therefore not of thine own working, but of the grace of Christ. For by
grace ye are saved, says the Apostle. Here therefore is no arrogancy, but
faith; to speak of that which thou have received, is not pride, but devotion.
To which words Master Bishop answers, What word is here of Certainty of
Salvation, when as expressly against his assertion it is affirmed, that the
faithful regenerate in Christ, does presume, that his sins are forgiven him,
that he has received the grace of Christ, that he is made the child of God,
and that this is no arrogancy, no pride, no unlawful presumption, but a
matter of faith, a matter of devotion, and a good presumption, as he calls it
afterward. Now all these things he comprehends under the name of Salvation,
citing to that purpose the words of the Apostle, By grace ye are saved. For how
does the Apostle say, By grace ye are saved, as of a thing done already, but
for that we are made partakers of the forgiveness of sins, have received the
grace of Christ, and are become the children of God? Therefore in presuming of
these things, as Ambrose wills the faithful to do, we consequently presume,
and stand assured of our own Salvation, because in these things our Salvation
is begun, as appears by the words of Christ concerning Zacheus; Luke 19.9.
This day Salvation is come to this house, because this man is become the son
of Abraham. And whereas M. Bishop says, we may not presume hereof, because we
know not our own works or righteousness, S. Ambrose tells us, that this is
not to be presumed of our own works, but of the grace of Christ, the true
calling whereof is such, as makes us that whereunto we are called, because we
are thereby called, not at the ear only, but inwardly, and in the heart.
Therefore them that are thus truly called, S. Ambrose wills not coldly to
hope, according to the manner of M. Bishops hope, where fear is as strong as
hope, but faithfully and devoutly to presume that they are in the state of
grace; not with doubting to think, that if they be not so, it is long of
themselves, but to resolve that without themselves they are so indeed, only by
the grace of God. We may well think that it was a frostie morning, that made
M. Bishop to make so cold construction of so effectual and plain words. But
in the next place cited out of Austine, he goes beyond himself. Let us take
the whole words as he has them, upon these words of S. John; 1. John. 3.14.
By this we know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren. Hereupon says he, August. in Joan. tract. 5. Quid nos scimus? Quia
transiuimus de morte ad vitam. Vnde scimus? Quia diligimus fratres. Nemo
interroget hominem: redeat vnus quisque ad cor suum. Si ibi inuenerit
charitatem fraternam se uros sit, quia transcit de morte ad vitam. Iam in
dextera est. Non attendat quia mo lo gloria eius occulia est: cum venerit
Dominus tunc apparebit gloria eius. Viget enim sed adhuc in hyeme: viget radix,
sed qu est aridi sunt raini. Intus est medulli quae vigis tintus sunt solit
arborum, (...) fructus, sed aestatem expectant. Ergo nos (...), etc.
What do we know? That we are translated from death to life. Whereby do we know
it? Because we love the brethren. Let no man ask of another man; let him
return to his own heart: if he find there love to the brethren, let him be
without doubt that he is passed from death to life. He is now on the right
hand. Let him not regard that his glory is now hid; when the Lord shall come,
then his glory shall appear. For he is alive, but yet as in the winter; the
root is alive, but the branches are in a manner dry. Within is the pith that
lives, within are the leaves, within are the fruits, but they look for a
summer. Therefore we know, that we are translated from death to life, because
we love the brethren. Where we see both by the text it self, and by the
exposition of this ancient Father, that by love toward them that are our
brethren in the faith of Jesus Christ, we are to take knowledge and assurance
of our being translated from death to life, that is, of our own Salvation, and
that so as to be without doubt thereof, and yet this wrangler doubts not to
say, This place has not so much as any show of words for him. The point in
question is affirmed, not in ambiguous and doubtful words, but evidently and
apparently, and yet he goes away with, This place has not so much as any show
of words for him, nay this text makes flat against him. But why so, I pray
you? What need was there, says he, to seek charity in his heart for
security of his Salvation, if his faith assured him thereof? But why does he
not answer to the point? Does not S. Austine teach the faithful an assurance
of Salvation, be it by faith, be it by charity, let not that here be the
question? Is there to the faithful by S. Austines judgment, any assurance of
Salvation? He could not tell how directly to deny it, and yet with a Romish
and impudent face passes it over, as if there were no such thing. The only
shift that he insinuates, is this, that this assurance spoken of by S.
Austine, is by charity, and not by faith. But what then, is there assurance by
charity? No such matter; for he has told us before, that charity is seated
in the Sect. 6.
dark corners of the will, and we cannot tell whether we have it or not. And
so whereas the Apostle, and by him S. Austine say, that we know that we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren, he contrariwise
says; We cannot know that we are translated from death to life, because we
cannot know that we love the brethren, in both points absolutely contradicting
both the one and the other. But to his foolish question I answer him, that the
affirming of the assurance of faith, is no denial of the means and helps from
which it gathers and increases this assurance. Faith gives assurance of
Salvation by the word of God, not only by apprehending the promises of life
and Salvation, but also by observing such marks and tokens as the word of God
sets down, to describe the^ to whom this Salvation does appertain, which
when a man finds in himself, his faith thereby gives him the comfort of
Salvation, because it believes that which the word of God has delivered,
concerning them in whom those signs and marks are found. Therefore it does not
only look to that which Christ says, that John. 3.16.
whosoever believes shall have everlasting life, but because Christ also says,
John. 8.47.
He that is of God, hears Gods word, therefore the faithful man delighting in
the word of God, believes concerning himself, that he is of God. Because the
Apostle says, Romans 10.13.
Every one that calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, therefore the
faithful man unfeignedly calling upon the name of the Lord, believes of
himself that he shall be saved. And so whereas S. John says, that we know that
we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren, it is our
faith whereby we take this knowledge, that we are translated from death to
life, because we love the brethren; for how should we know it, but that our
faith believes that which the word of God has taught us in that behalf? How
idly then does he argue, that we need not seek for charity for assurance of
Salvation, if we be assured thereof by faith, when charity it self is
appointed for a help of that assurance which we have by faith; when from
charity it is in some part that faith by the word of God, conceiueth a reason
of that assurance? But by his answers to these places, the Reader may esteem
of his wilfulness in all the rest. How miserable is the case of those men, who
being so fast bound with the bonds of truth, as that they know not which way to
stir, yet have no heart nor conscience, to give assent to that which they are
no way able to resist?

15. W. BISHOP.
Sup. 5. cap. Mat.
The next Author he cites is S. Hylarie, in these words: The Kingdom of
heaven which our Lord professed to be in himself, his will is that it be hoped
for, without any doubtfulnesse of uncertain will (at all, is an addition)
otherwise there is no justification by faith, if faith it self be made
doubtful. First, he faith, but as we say, that the Kingdom of heaven is to be
hoped for, without any doubtfulnesse; for we profess Certainty of hope, and
deny only Certainty of faith, as M. Perkins confesses before. And as for
faith, we say with him also, it is not doubtful, but very certain. What
makes this to the purpose, that a man must believe his own Salvation, when S.
Hilary speaks there of faith of the resurrection of the dead? His last Author
is S. Bernard: Who is the just man, Epist. 107.
but he that being loved of God, loves him again? which comes not to pass but
by the spirit, revealing by faith the eternal promise of God, of his Salvation
to come, which revelation is nothing else, but the infusion of spiritual
grace, by which the deeds of the flesh are mortified, the man is prepared to
the kingdom of heaven, together receiving in one spirit, that whereby he may
presume, that he is loved and loves again. Note that he says the revelation
of the spirit, to be nothing else but the infusion of spiritual graces, and
comfort, whereby a man has some feeling of Gods goodness toward him, by
which (he says) he may presume, but not believe certainly, that he is loved of
God. But let S. Bernard in the same place interpret himself, there he speaks
thus, as I cited once before: It is given to men to taste before hand, somewhat
of the bliss to come, etc. Of the which knowledge of our selves now in part
perceived, a man does in the mean season glory in hope, but not yet in
security. His opinion then is expressly, that for all the revelations of the
spirit made by faith unto us, we are not assured for Certainty of our
Salvation, but feel great joy, through the hope we have hereafter to receive
it.

R. ABBOT.
The words of Hilarie are very plain, that Hilar. in Mat. cap. 5. Regnum
coelorum vult Dominus sine aliquae incertae voluntatis ambiguitate sperari:
alioqum iustificatio ex fide nulla est si fides ipsa sit ambigua.
without doubting we are to hope for the kingdom of heaven, and that it is the
will of Christ that we do so. Whereof he adds a reason, Otherwise there is no
justification by faith, if faith it self become doubtful, which if we will
accommodate to that that goes before, it must import thus much, that we cannot
by our faith be justified, to the obtaining of the kingdom of heaven, if we do
not undoubtedly believe to obtain the same. M. Bishop answers first, that
Hilarie says but as they say. No does? Why, do they say that without doubting
we must hope for the kingdom of heaven? He says yea, but forgetting the
proverb, that a liar must bear a brain. For in the leaf Sect. 10.
before he has set it down for a principle, confirmed as he says, by above
an hundred texts of holy writ, that the faithful must stand in fear of their
own Salvation. There cannot be certain and undoubted hope, where there is a
necessity of fear. If a man must stand in fear, then can he not hope without
doubt. Thus he knows not what he says, nor what to say; We must fear, and
we must not fear; we must doubt, and we must not doubt: there is Certainty,
and there is no Certainty. Whereas he says that M. Perkins confesses, that
they profess certainty of hope, he speaks to that purpose somewhat, but so
as that he confesses that certainty to be as they affirm it, only probable
and coniecturall, and not that which is here spoken of, which is without
doubting. These words therefore are directly contrary to that which they say,
because here it is said that we must without doubt hope for the kingdom of
heaven, whereas they say, we must never so hope for it but that we must fear
and stand in doubt. Whereas he makes a difference betwixt certainty of hope,
and certainty of faith, it is nothing to this place. For when Hilarie for
reason of that he says, that we must hope without doubting, brings in, that
faith if it be doubtful does not justify, he plainly shows that he
confounds faith and hope, and takes them here both for the same, and
imports that we are to believe to be made partakers of the kingdom of
heaven, which is the same as to believe our own Salvation. But says M.
Bishop, Hilarie there speaks of the faith of the resurrection of the dead.
Very lewdly and unhonestly: for there is not a word there spoken of the
resurrection of the dead, but only to show how Christ confirms his to the
undoubted Confirmare nos in spem honorum aeternorum (fiduciam futurorum)
laborat.
confidence and hope of those good things which are to come, and shall continue
for ever. And that he may yet further understand that Hilarie by hope means
otherwise then they do, he says in another place; In Psalm. 2. in fine. Non
trepidam spem neque ambiguam perfectio beatitudinis exigit. Confidentia ad id
opus est firmae opinionis scilicet and indemutabili voluntate; quia plus sit
confidere quam sperare. Confide^dum ergo est ne nos a via iusta exardescens
breui ira Dei deperdat. Fidelis enim est qui ait, Qui credit in me, etc.
that the accomplishing of our bliss requires a hope that is without fear or
doubt. We have thereto need of the confidence of a firm and constant opinion,
and an unchangeable mind, because to be confident is more then to hope. We are
therefore to be confident therein, least the wrath of God waxing hot, do
suddenly destroy us from the right way. For he is faithful who says, He that
believes in me, shall not be judged, but shall pass from death to life. By
which words it appears manifestly, that the true hope is not, as M. Bishop
takes it, a probable and likely conceit joined with uncertainty and fear,
but a confident hope, a settled and constant hope, believing steadfastly without
fear or doubt to receive that life and bliss that Christ has promised. At
the next place of Bernard he again very wilfully shuts his eyes, and
refuses to see that which he cannot choose but see. What can be more directly
spoken to the matter in hand, then Bernard. epist. 107. Reuelante spiritu per
fidem homini aeternum Dei propesitum super salute sua futurae.
that the spirit by faith reuealeth to a man the eternal purpose of God
concerning his own Salvation to come? Why does he deny to a man to believe
his own Salvation, when the spirit by faith reuealeth to him the purpose of
God, that he shall be saved? Here is no ambiguitie of words, here is an
express affirming of the point in question, that the spirit by faith reuealeth
to a man the everlasting purpose of God concerning his own Salvation. What
have we now for answer hereof? Note, says he, that he says the revelation of
the spirit, to be nothing else but the infusion of spiritual grace. But what
is that to the purpose what this revelation is? Why does he not answer to the
point, that the spirit of God by faith reuealeth unto a man the purpose of God
concerning his own Salvation? Let that revelation be howsoever, it is
sufficient for us that God by his spirit reuealeth to a man that, whence he
has to believe his own Salvation. Now Bernard indeed declares this Quae sane
reuelatio no est aliud quam infusio gratiae spiritualis, per qua^ dum facta
carnis mortificantur, homo ad regnum praeparatur quod caro and sanguis non
possident, simul accipiens in vno spiritu and vnde se praesumat amatum, and
vnde redamet ne gratis amatus sit.
revelation to be nothing else but the infusion of spiritual grace, by which
whilst the deeds of the flesh are mortified, a man is prepared to the kingdom
which flesh and blood inherit not, receiving together in one spirit, both
whereby he may presume that he is loved, and does also love again. But this
impeacheth nothing that we say, nay it serves wholly to strengthen our
assertion. For how does faith by the infusion of spiritual grace, apprehend
the purpose of God concerning our Salvation, but in that it believes by the
word of God, that they to whom such and such graces are given, are the children
of God, and shall be saved; that they who are called and justified, shall also
be glorified? And thus S. Bernard at large declares in that epistle, that Sic
adortu^ solis iustitiae sacramentum absconditum a seculis de praedestinatis and
beatificandis emergere quodammodo incipit ex abysso aternitatis, dum quisque
vocatus per timorem, iustificatus per amorem, praesumit se quoque esse de
numero beatorum, s^iens nimirum quia quos iustificauit illos and magnificauit.
at the rising of the sun of righteousness (in our justification) the secret
that was hidden from the beginning, concerning them that are predestinate and
shall be blessed, begins to appear out of the depth of eternity, whilst a
man called by the fear of God, and made just by love, presumes that he is one
of the number of the blessed, knowing that whom he has justified, them he has
also glorified: that Habes homo huius arcani indicem spiritum iustificantem,
ecque ipso testificantem spiritui tuo quod filius Dei and ipse sis. Agnosce
censilium Dei in iustificatione tui.
a man is to take for the declarer of that secret the spirit justifying him,
and thereby testifying to his spirit, that he is the child of God; that Id
quisque accipit iniustificatione sui vt incipiat and ipse cognoscere sicut and
cognitus est, cum videlicet datur and ipsi praesentire aliquid de sua ipsius
futura beatitudine, quemadmodum ab aeterno latuit in praedestinante, before
appariturum in beatificante.
in his justification he is to take knowledge of the counsel of God, and that
therein he begins to know even as he is known, there being given to him to
perceive somewhat before hand of his future bliss, accordingly as has lien
hid from everlasting in God by whom he was predestinate, and shall more fully
appear in the same God, when he shall make him blessed. This is the revealing
that Saint Bernard speaks of by infusion of spiritual grace: this we approve
and confirm, and hereof before I noted, that faith to strengthen it self in
the assurance of Salvation, looks to those fruits and effects of faith and of
the grace of God, which are set down as signs and marks of them to whom the
promises of Salvation do belong. But now M. Bishop ouerturneth all that Bernard
speaks in this behalf; for whereas he sets down the fear of God,
repentance, charity, prayer, purpose of new life, as the things whereby that
revelation is performed unto us, he denies that there can be any such
revelation, because repentance, the fear of God, charity and such like are
seated in the dark corners of the will, and a man knows not whether he have
the same or not. A man, he says, may hope that he is in the state of grace,
and must think that if he be not so, it is long of himself, but he cannot
know that he is so. Thus S. Bernard teaches, that God of his great goodness
brings the heart of man into his wonderful light; but M. Bishop keeps him
in horrible darkness, where a man awake and in his right wits, can conceive
nothing but dread and fear. Therefore it is but for a shift that here he
makes Bernard to say, that by infusion of grace a man has some feeling of
Gods goodness toward him; for how can he have any feeling of Gods goodness
toward him by infusion of grace, when he cannot know that he has any infused
grace? Albeit Bernard does not say only, that a man has some feeling of Gods
goodness toward him, but that to the justified man, it is given to have a
fore-feeling of his own bliss. Therefore he so presumes that he is beloved
of God, as that he certainly believes it. For a man is certainly to believe
what the spirit of God reuealeth. But the spirit reuealeth to the justified man
the purpose of God concerning his own Salvation. He is therefore certainly to
believe, that he is beloved of God, and shall be saved. And so S. Bernard
says, that Agnoscit se merito quide^ non tam ira sed gratiae filium, quippe
qui paternu^ erga se diuinae bonitatis experitur affectum, etc. se considet
amari, praesentit amari, etc praesumit se esse de numero beaterum.
he acknowledges himself to be the child of grace, that he has the trial
and proof of the fatherly affection of Gods goodness toward him; that he
perceives, and co^fidently resolves that he is beloved of God, that he
presumes himself to be of the number of the blessed. And what is it to presume
but to take for certain, and certainly to believe that that is true whereof we
do presume? But says M. Bishop: Let S. Bernard interpret himself in the same
place. Be it so; but I will translate for him, unless he could translate more
faithfully then he does. Datur ipsi praesentire aliquid de sua ipsius futurae
beatitudine.
It is given to the justified man, says Bernard, to have some fore-feeling of
his own bliss to come. And what? will M. Bishop deny him to believe that which
S. Bernard says he does in part already feel? Yea, but it follows: De qua
tamen tam percepta suimet ex part notitia, interim quidem glorietur in spe,
nondum tamen in securitate.
Of which knowledge of himself now already perceived in part, he for the time
reioiceth in hope, but not yet in security. And what of this? Marty, says he,
his opinion then is, that for all the revelations of the spirit made by faith
unto us, we are not assured for Certainty of our Salvation, but feel great
joy through the hope we have hereafter to receive it. But he has a very wrong
opinion of Bernards opinion. What? because a man reioiceth not in security for
the present, does it follow that he has no assured Certainty of Salvation to
come? And what? is there not assured Certainty to be conceived of that that is
revealed by the spirit of God? Surely 1. John. 5.6.
the spirit is truth, and we are fully to assure our selves of that that is
revealed thereby, as before was said. And if there be no assurance, what
glorying or rejoicing can there be? He says, that we feel great joy through
the hope we have hereafter to receive it. But what joy can there be of that, of
which as he says we must continually stand in fear? If there be no assurance,
there can be no ioying or glorying; if there be ioying and glorying, it must
arise from Certainty and assurance. S. Bernard in that phrase of rejoicing or
glorying in hope, alludeth to the words of the Apostle, Romans 5.2.
We rejoice or glory under the hope of the glory of God. Upon which words
Chrysostom observes, that by the word of Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 9. Gloriamur
ait, vt intelligat quali animo praeditum eum esse oportet, qui fidem suam Deo
obstrinxit. Neque enim illi solum plenam persuasionem factam esse oportet de
ijs quae data sunt, sed de futuris tam quam tam datis. Gloriatur enim quis
super ijs quae tam in manu habet. Quontam igitur rerum futurarum spes sic firma
est atque euidens vt and tam datarum, aeque inquit and super illis gloriamur.
glorying, the Apostle declares what mind he is to bear that has tied his
faith to God. For he must have a full persuasion, says he, not only of the
things that are already given, but also of the things to come, as if they were
already given. For a man glories or reioiceth of these things which he has in
hand. Because therefore the hope of the things to come, is as sure and certain
as the things already given, the Apostle says, we alike rejoice thereof. So
then Saint Bernard by the same phrase teaches the justified man as touching
Certainty of expectation to glory in hope of the bliss to come, as if the
same were already given unto him. Therefore he says of him in the same
epistle: Epist. 107. post med. Gloriari incipit praeter spem in spe gloriae
filirium Dei quam tam nimiru^ e vicino reuelata facie exultans nonc in lumine
speculatur and dicit, signatu^ est, etc.
He glories in the hope of the glory of the sons of God, which now even
near at hand with open face he beholds, leaping for joy at this new light
and saying, The light of thy countenance is sealed upon us, O Lord, thou have
put gladness in my heart. Now therefore whereas he says he glories in hope,
but not yet in security, we must not think that by denying security he
overthrows reioicing in hope, but signifies that much conflict remains for
the attainment of that, which notwithstanding certainly and undoubtedly he
hops for. He denies him so to rejoice, as if there were no further dangers
to be feared, no further opposition to be expected, no further temptations to
be endured, no further enemies to be resisted, and imports that there is much
fighting and wrestling, much care and sorrow, many perplexities and troubles yet
to be forecast and looked for. We may not then be secure, as if there were
nothing any more to trouble us, but we may be secure and without doubt of an
happy issue and deliverance from all troubles, and this is the hope that we
rejoice in. Therefore S. Austine says, as before was cited: August. in Psalm.
37. Spe securus est.
Joy that thou art redeemed, but yet not in real effect: as touching hope be
secure (be without fear.) So again: Idem in epist. Joan tract. 3. supra sect.
14.
If a man have in his heart love toward the brethren, let him be secure (let
him be without doubt) that he is passed from death to life. And thus does
Cyprian describe the condition of faithful Christians, Cyprian cont. Demetr.
Viget apud nos spes robur and firmitas fidei, and inter ipsa seculi libentis
ruinas erecta men's, and immobilis virtus and nunqua^ nisi laesa patientia, and
de Deo suo semper anima secura.
There is with us strength of hope, and steadfastness of faith, and amidst the
ruins of the decaying world a courageous mind, and constant virtue, and
patience, always joyful, and a soul always secure (or without doubt) of God
to be our God. To be short, how far Saint Bernard was from denying the
security of particular faith and hope, appears by that that before has been
said in the twelfth section, whereby it is plain that it was not his purpose
here to require that necessity that M. Bishop does, of doubt and fear.

16. W. BISHOP.
This passage of testimonies being dispatched, let us now come unto the five
other reasons, which M. Perkins produces in defense of their opinion.

The first reason is, That in faith there are two things, the one is an
infallible assurance of those things which we believe: This we grant, and
therehence prove (as you heard before) that there can be no faith of our
particular Salvation, because we be not so fully assured of that, Apoc. 3.
but that we must stand in fear of losing of it, according to that, Hold that
which thou have, lest perhaps another receive thy crown. But the second point
of faith, puts all out of question. For (says M. Perkins) it does assure us of
remission of our sins, and of life everlasting in particular. Prove that Sir,
and we need no more. It is proved out of S. John: As many as received him,
John. 1.
he gave them power to be made the sons of God, namely, to them that believe
in his name. This text comes much too short: he gave them power to be the
sons, that is, gave them such grace, that they were able, and might if they
would, be sons of God, but did not assure them of that neither, much less
that they should so continue unto their lives end. I omit his unsavory
discourse of eating, and believing Christ, and applying unto us his benefits,
(which he might be ashamed to make unto us, that admit no part of it to be
true:) I confess that therein faith has his part, if it be joined with
charity, and frequentation of the Sacraments. This is it which S. Paul
teaches, That not by the works of Moses law, Gal. 3.
but by faith in Christ Jesus we receive the promises of the spirit, and shall
have hereafter the performance, if we observe those things which Christ has
commanded us. But what is this to Certainty of Salvation? But (says he) it is
the property of faith, to apply Christ unto us, and proves it out of S.
Augustine, Believe and thou have eaten: Again, Send up thy faith, Tract. 25.
in Ioh.
and thou may hold Christ in heaven: etc. To which, and such like
authothorities, I answer, that we find Christ, we hold Christ, we see Christ,
by faith, believing him to be the son of God, and redeemer of the world, and
Judge of the quick and the dead: and we understand, and digest all the
mysteries of this holy word. But where is it once said, in any of these
sentences, that we are assured of our Salvation? we believe all these points
and many more: but we shall be never the nearer our Salvation, unless we
observe Gods commandments, The servant which knows his Masters will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Luke. 12. Ioh. 15.
Then you are my friends (says our Savior) when you shall do the things which
I command you: which we being uncertain to perform, assure not our selves of
his friendship but when to our knowledge we go as near it as we can, and
demand pardon of our wants, we live in good hope of it.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins affirms, that the nature of true faith stands not only in an
infallible, but also in a particular assurance of remission of sins and life
everlasting. Infallible assurance M. Bishop acknowledges, but thence will
conclude against particular assurance of our own Salvation, because, says he,
we be not so fully assured of that, but that we must stand in fear of loosing
it. This he says he has proved before, but his proof thereof is already
disproued: only here for supply he brings the words of Christ to the Church
of Philadelphia; Revel. 3 11.
Hold that which thou have, least another receive thy crown. Which supply of
his is even according to the manner or his former proof; he names a place and
so leaves it; be it right or wrong what is that to him? If ye ask him how he
infers that that he would prove thereby you must pardon him, he cannot tell.
It is very doubtful what may here be imported by the crown: whether the
Angel, that is, the Bishop of the Church of Philadelphia be particularly warned
to take heed of forgoing or loosing any of them whom he should account, as S.
Paul speaks, Phil. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians 2.19.
his joy and crown of rejoicing at the coming of Jesus Christ; or whether the
same Church be generally admonished to take heed of loosing the crown of the
public calling and grace of God. For so God to signify the establishing of
his kingdom of grace amongst the Jews, amongst other words says, Ezech.
16.12.
I set a beautiful crown upon thy head. To which honor done unto them, when
they yielded not correspondence of dutiful obedience and thankfulness to God,
our Savior Christ foretold them, that Mat. 22.43.
the kingdom of God (which was their crown) should be taken from them, and
given to a nation that should bring forth the fruit thereof. The like we take
to be the importment of the crown in this place, and that the Church of
Philadelphia is admonished to take heed, least by relapsing from her goodness
and virtue, she should loose the honor of the condition, and state of a Church
which God had called her unto: even as the Church of Ephesus is before
threatened; Revel. 2.5.
I will come against thee shortly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his
place, except thou repent; the candlestick in the one place being meant of the
same, which by the crown is intended in the other. But if Master Bishop will
needs understand the crown to be meant of Salvation and life eternal, we
answer him, that this crown being proper to Gods elect, cannot be lost by them
to whom it is assigned; yet so as that withal we say, that God in his wisdom
has appointed a means, whereby he will preserve them that they may not loose
the crown. To this end he uses many exhortations and admonitions, many
terrors and fears, many corrections and chastisements, whereby he hedgeth and
compasses them in, that whereas by relinquishing their faith and obedience,
they should indeed run into hauock and ruin of themselves, they may hereby
be wrought to persevere and continue therein, to the obtaining of the crown.
Thus his Master Bellarm. de great. and lib. arbit li. 2. ca. 13. Reuera si non
perseueraret, etc amitteret corona^ suam, sed hac admonitione perterritus, etc.
sine dubio fortissime tenebit quod habet, and eo modo tande^ perueniet ad
coronam qua^ non habet.
Bellarmine confesses, that this place has his use in respect of them who
notwithstanding by Gods predestination are holden that they cannot lose the
crown. If then we do so understand the crown, yet the place avails M.
Bishop nothing: but being so taken, how one man should have the crown, and by
his losing it, another should receive it in place of him, all his wit and
learning is not able to resolve us. This place therefore makes nothing against
the particular assurance of faith, but for proof thereof M. Perkins has
brought that that is very pregnant and clear. First, he alleges the words of
Saint John, John. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even
to them that believe in his name. Where he argues, that to receive Christ, and
to believe in Christ, do both import the same thing, because the one of them is
put for the exposition of the other. Now to receive, is to take in particulars
a man's self, to apply to himself, to apprehend or lay hold of, for conueying
a thing to himself. Because therefore to believe in Christ is to receive
Christ, it follows, that to believe in Christ is to take Christ, to apprehend
him, and by hold of him with all his benefits, for conueying and applying of
him particularly to a man's self; to believe particularly for himself, to make
use of Christ, according to that the Scripture describes him, to himself.
True faith therefore according to the measure of it, assures infallibly, not
in the general only by principle, but in particular also by conclusion and
application to it self. This being the collection that we make from this
place, and plainly noted by M. Perkins, M. Bishop to it answers nothing,
either his eyes dazeling that he could not see, or his wits failing that he
knew not what to say. But to delude the Reader, he will say somewhat to the
place, though he say nothing to the purpose; yet that which he does say, he
says out of the school of Pelagius the heretic, and not out of the doctrine
of Jesus Christ. He gave them power; that is, says he, he gave them such grace
that they were able, and might if they would be the sons of God. But what?
did he give them to be able only, and did he not give them to will also to be
the sons of God? Did he leave them to their own will, either to be or not to
be the sons of God? Of them to whom he gave this power, he says, that John.
1.13.
they are borne, not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God, who not of our will, but Iam. 1.18.
of his own will begat us by the word of truth, that we should be as the first
fruits of his creatures, and will M. Bishop go about to persuade us, that it
is at our own will that we are begotten and borne again? The power here
spoken of, should rather be translated a prerogative then a power, and
therefore Cyrill expresses it by the term of Cyril. in Joan. lib. 1. cap. 13.
Ascendemus ad supernaturalem dignitatem per Christum.
a supernatural dignity, and affirms, that thereby is meant Cap. 14.
the adoption and grace of God, which is not such as Master Bishop speaks
of, whereby it is only given unto us August. de corrept. and great. cap. 11.
Est in nobis per hanc gratiam no^ solu^ posse quod volumus, verumetiam velle
quod possumus.
to be able if we will, but also to will, not only whereby we may be, but whereby
we are the sons of God, as before has been declared in the question of Free
will. And whereas he adds: He did not assure them of that neither, much less
that they should so continue unto their lives end; he should understand, that
by 1. Pet. 5.12.
the true grace of God that comfort is ministered unto the faithful, to say as
Saint John directs them; 1. John 3.1.
Behold what love the Father has given unto us, Vt filij Dei nomin^mur and
simus. Vulgat.
that we are called, and are the sons of God: Even new are we the sons of
God, and we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like unto him, thereby
teaching the effect of faith, both to give assurance of present state, and of
perseverance also to future glory. But all this Master Bishop hangs upon the
will of man, having learned of his father Pelagius, to ascribe to God August
co^t. Pelag. and Celest. lib. 1. ca. 3. Possibilitatem (qua potest homo esse
iustus) datam confitetur a creatore naturae: voluntate^ and actionem nostra
esse asserit.
the power whereby we are able to be or may be, but to our selves the willing
and acting of our adoption, whereby we are indeed the sons of God. But of
this thus briefly, as being beside the matter here in hand, and the question of
Free will being debated at large before. To show somewhat further that point of
particular assurance, Master Perkins adds, that Christ sets forth
himself, as the bread of life and water of life, and commends unto us the
eating of his body, and the drinking of his blood, and makes this eating and
drinking the same as to believe in him. Hence he infers a proportion betwixt
eating and believing, that as he that eats receives and takes to himself
the meat that he eats* and digesteth the same to the nourishment of every
part, even so he that believes does by his faith as the hand, and mouth, and
stomach of the soul, receive and take unto him Jesus Christ with all his
benefits, to become particularly his strength, and comfort, and nourishment
unto everlasting life. Now all this speech of eating, and believing, and
applying unto us the benefits of Christ, M. Bishop says he omitteth as an
unsavory discourse, but the reason is because pearls are unsavory to swine,
and gross Capernaites know no eating of Christ but by the mouth, nor receiving
of him but into the belly. But most ridiculous is that which he adds, He
might be ashamed to make (this discourse) unto us that admit no part of it to
be true. For so might I briefly reject his whole book with the same words,
that he might be ashamed to write the same to us that admit no part of it to be
true. He should understand, that M. Perkins had in hand to write that that is
the truth, and not that that they would admit to be true, who are sworn to
Antichrist to maintain his untruths. And seeing he has so pregnantly showed
thereby the nature of true and lively faith, not by any invention of his own,
but out of the very words of Christ, M. Bishop might himself be justly
ashamed to answer it so childishly and simply as he has done. I confess,
says he, that faith has his part therein. But Saint Austine attributes to
faith not only a part therein, but to be the thing it self, even the eating
and drinking of the body and blood of Christ. August. in Joan. tract. 26.
Credere in Christum hoc est ma^ducare panem viuum.
To believe in Christ, says he, is to eat the bread of life: he that
believes, eats. Why does he refuse to speak as Saint Austine speaks, but
that like a carnal Anthropophagus he refers it to the mouth and to the
belly to eat the flesh of Christ, and to drink his blood, not listening to
that that M. Perkins had alleged unto him out of the same Austine, Ibid.
tract. 25.
Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten. But
faith, he says, has his part therein, if it be joined with charity and
frequentation of the Sacraments. Which if of his is very idle to us, who hold
no true faith but that Gal. 5.6.
which works by charity, and seeks after the Sacraments, as being Romans 4.11.
the seals of the righteousness of faith, the very proper use thereof is to
give particular assurance to the faithful of the mercy of God toward them
in Jesus Christ. For as in humane contracts and gifts somewhat commonly is
delivered by earnest or seal for confirming and sure-making of the maine, so
has God thought good in his covenants and promises of grace, to appoint his
Sacraments particularly to be used and applied to every man, that every
believer knowing Christ by the same Sacraments to be figured and offered unto
us, may take knowledge by the delivery thereof, that Christ is his to eternal
life by faith in his name; it being in effect said unto him thereby; Thou
bel^euest the promises of God in Christ concerning grace and forgiveness of
sins unto everlasting life: take this for seal and assurance, that by thy
faith in Christ the whole benefit thereof appertains unto thee. Therefore
Christ says very effectually, Take, eat, this is my body, Drink ye, this is
my blood, as by the Sacrament delivering himself unto us, and in himself the
whole fruit and benefit of that that he has done for us. Why does he deliver
these seals of the righteousness of of faith particularly unto me, but that
he would have me know, that the promises of righteousness are thereby through
my faith sealed particularly unto me? Thus therefore says joined with
frequentation of the Sacraments, does so much the more effectually minister
unto us this comfort of particular assurance toward God. All this is unsavory
to M. Bishop, but let us leave him to his acornes and draffe, and let him leave
this feeding to them who therein have learned to 1. Pet. 2 3.
taste how gracious the Lord is. Now to show that the use of faith is to
receive, M. Perkins alleges the words of S. Paul, that Gal. 3.14.
through faith we receive the promise of the spirit, importing thereby that
faith is as it were the hand into which, being holden forth unto God, he gives
the spirit which he has promised: that faith apprehends and imbraceth the
promise of God concerning this gift of his spirit, and that thereby we become
partakers thereof. To this also M. Bishop answers nothing, only he will
seem to allege the words, and wholly peruerteth them. For whereas the Apostle
makes the spirit the thing promised, he cites the place, as if the spirit
were named as the promiser. And whereas the Apostle speaks as of a thing
Ibid. ver. 2.
already performed to them to whom he wrote, he cites it as of a thing
futurely to be performed, and that with a condition, if we observe those things
which Christ has commanded, whereas the spirit is promised, not if we observe,
but Ezech. 36.27.
to cause us to keep his statutes and observe his iudgemens and do them. Yet
hereupon he demands, What is this to the Certainty of Salvation? I answer
that it is so strong to prove the Certainty of Salvation, as that against it
he could find nothing more safe for himself then to say nothing to it. For if
to believe in Christ be to receive Christ, and so to receive him, as that
thereby we eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood, the believer has
this for a certainty delivered unto him by Christ himself, that he has
eternal life, and that Christ will raise him up at the last day. For John 6.54.
whosoever eats my flesh, satih Christ, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. The believer therefore by his
faith conceiueth a particular certainty and assurance of his own Salvation,
and is thereby 1. John. 5.13.
to know that he has eternal life. Now to show the effect of faith, M.
Perkins brings sundry places of Austin, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Tertullian,
Bernard, that by faith we touch Christ, we lay hold of him, we find him, we see
him, we eat him, we digest him. Whereto M. Bishop answers full wisely, we
find Christ, we hold Christ, we see Christ by faith, believing him to be the
son of God, and redeemer of the world, and judge of quick and dead, thereby
making this finding, and seeing, and holding, and digesting of Christ by faith,
to be no other thing but what is incident to the devil, because all these
things the devil believes and knows as well as he. But to see the
giddiness of his head reeling and staggering he knows not whither, he says
we find Christ, we hold him, and see him, we eat him, we digest him by
believing thus and thus, when he has plainly given us before to understand,
that for all his believing he cannot tell whether he have any thing to do with
Christ, whether he have received the grace of Christ, whether he have any true
repentance, hope, charity, and such like, without which Christ is neither
holden nor had at all. But such darkness is fit for them who leave the ways
of God, and make choice to tread the Labyrinthes and maze-rounds of their own
brain-sicke imaginations. To his question where it is once said in any of these
sentences that we are assured of our Salvation, I answer him, that it follows
of that for proof whereof these sentences were alleged. For if the office of
true faith be not only generally to believe, but also particularly to apply
that which it believes, as has been showed, and all those speeches alleged
do import, then it follows that according to the measure of it, it yields a
particular assurance of Salvation to every one that does believe. We believe,
says he, these points and many more, but yet we shall be never the nearer our
Salvation unless we observe Gods commandments. But if we believe as the
Scripture teaches us to believe, we are thereby the nearer our Salvation,
though we do not observe Gods commandments in that sort and to that end as he
intends. For therefore do we believe in Christ, therefore do we seek him,
take hold of him, eat him, drink him, digest him, that in him we may find the
comfort of Salvation, which otherwise we cannot find for want of the keeping of
Gods commandments. Therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 2.16.
Even we have believed in Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the law, (not by our keeping of Gods
commandments) because that by the works of the law no flesh shall be
justified. And in this respect we are not uncertain of performing Gods
commandments, as M. Bishop speaks, but very certain, that we never do or
can perform them, having continually cause to demand pardon of our wants, and
therefore never finding any assured trust of Salvation, so long as we ground it
hereupon. But although we deny any such keeping of Gods commandments, as may
serve for the purchase of our justification and Salvation, yet we acknowledge a
keeping thereof as a fruit of our justification, and a part of the work of our
Salvation, because Ephesians. 2.10.
we are Gods workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which he
has prepared for us to walk in. And this keeping of Gods commandments our
Savior has recommended unto us, as M. Bishop alleges, and of it S. John
says, 1. John. 2.4.
He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. But this keeping of Gods commandments cannot be
severed from the finding, and receiving, and holding, and eating, and digesting
of Christ, because no man receives or eats Christ by faith, but who lives
by him, and in whom he lives, that he may say, Gal. 2.20.
Not I now, but Christ lives in me, and that I now live in the flesh, I live
by the faith of the son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me.
Very idly therefore in this behalf does M. Bishop tell us, that by the one
we are never a whit the nearer without the other, when the one can no where be
without the company of the other. Now of this keeping of Gods commandments
and perseverance therein, true faith, as before has been showed, rests
assured, because God has so promised, and so far are we from being doubtful
of Salvation by any doubt thereof, as that we rather gather hence greater
strength of assurance, by that we perceive the beginning of that good work of
God in us, whereby he fitteth and prepares his unto everlasting life.

17. W. BISHOP.
The second reason is, Whatsoever the holy Ghost testifies unto us, that
certainly by faith we must believe: but the holy Ghost does particularly
testify unto us our Salvation: ergo. The first proposition is true. The second
is proved thus, S. Paul says, Romans 8.
the spirit of God bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God. The Papists to elude this reason allege, that it does indeed witness
our adoption, by some comfortable feeling of Gods favor toward us, which may
often be mistaken, whereof the Apostle warns us when he says, believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God or no. 1. John. 4.
But says (M. Perkins) by their leave, the testimony of the spirit, is more
then a bare feeling of Gods grace. For it is called the pledge and earnest of
Gods spirit in our hearts. And therefore it takes away all doubting, as in a
bargain, the earnest given puts all out of question. 1. Cor. 1.
I answer first out of the place it self, that there follows a condition on
our parts to be performed, which M. Perkins thought wisdom to conceal. For
S. Paul says that the spirit witnesses with our spirit, that we are the
sons of God, and coheires of Christ, with this condition, If yet we suffer
with him, that we may be glorified with him. So that the testimony is not
absolute, but conditional, and then if we fail in performance of the
condition, God stands free of his promise, and will take his earnest back
again. And so to have received the earnest of it, will nothing avail us, much
less, assure us of Salvation.

This is the direct answer to that place, although the other be very good,
that the testimony of the spirit, is but an inward comfort and joy, which
breeds great hope of Salvation, but brings not assurance thereof. This M.
Perkins would refute, by the authority of S. Bernard; in the place before
cited, see the place, and my answer there. Epist. 107.


R. ABBOT.
To show that the holy Ghost does particularly testify our adoption and
Salvation, and therefore that we are by faith to believe the same, M. Perkins
alleges the words of the Apostle, Romans 8.15.16.
We have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The
same spirit bears witness with our spirit that we are the sons of God.
Which words so express and plain, might be sufficient to stop the mouths
of these brabling sophisters, but that they measure the portion of Gods
children by their own carnal sense and conceit, and being destitute of true
faith and of the spirit of God, are no more fit to judge hereof, then blind men
are to judge of colors. It is apparent that the faithful have a testimony of
the holy Ghost, bearing witness with their spirit that they are the sons of
God. Let him wrest and wrie this testimony while he will, it will not serve
the turn, unless he make it such as whereby the spirit bears witness with
our spirit that we are the sons of God. He says that it is a good answer of
theirs which M. Perkins mentions, that the testimony of the spirit is but an
inward comfort and joy which breeds great hope of Salvation, but brings not
assurance thereof. But this is no good answer, because it is not answerable to
the words of the Apostle, who speaks of such a witness of the spirit, as
whereby it is witnessed unto us that we are the sons of God. Let him remember
what S. Austine says: August. cont. Julian. li 5. ca. 2. Vbi manifesta res est
scriptura diuinae sensu^ nositum sensum addere non dibemus: non enim hoc sit
human^ ignorantia sed praesumptione peruersa.
where the matter is manifest we are not to add our meaning to the sense of
holy Scripture: For this comes not of humane ignorance but of froward and
wilful presumption. Here is a plain assertion of a witness given to our
faith, that we are the sons of God. Now his comfort and joy is but a matter
of perhaps, a matter of very uncertain and doubtful hope, wherein he
confesses it may be he mistaketh, and indeed has no cause but to think that
he does mistake; which notwithstanding it be had, he thinks it a presumption
for a man to persuade himself that he has thereby any certain witness that
he is the child of God. But 1. John. 5.6.
the spirit that bears witness, as Saint John says, is truth, being John.
14.17.
the spirit of truth, and therefore being sent for Verse. 16.
a Comforter, surely in comforting he tells or testifies nothing but the
truth. If then the spirit of God bear witness to us that we are the sons of
God, we know that it is true, and we are sure that indeed we are the sons of
God. Now this witness of the spirit, albeit by some it be taken to consist in
the fruits of sanctification, as by Ambrose Ambros. in Romans cap. 8. Dignam
vitam huic veci exhibemus, and hoc est testimonium filioru^, si in eu per
spiritum videtur signum paternum.
in leading a life fitting to the name of the sons of God, whereby through
the spirit the fathers mark is seen in us: and by Origin in Origin. ibid.
Confirmat spiritum nostru^ quod sumus filij Dei cum tam nihil inest timoris, id
est, nih l propter amorem patris poenam gerimus sed propter cuncta perficimus.
doing all things (toward God) not for fear, but for love of him as a father,
and by Bernard, Bernard. epist. 107. Sic reuera sic vnici filij spiritus
testimoniu^ perhibet spiritus no^tro quod filij Dei sumus, and nos cum
suscita^s ex operibus mortuis largitur opera vitae, etc. vocatus per timorem,
etc. supra sect. 15.
in that God raising us from dead works does give us the works of life; in
that he calls us by fear, and frames us to righteousness by love, yet most
properly is declared by the Apostle himself to stand in the true spiritual
invocation and calling upon the name of God, whereby upon all occasions as
children to a father, we make our recourse unto him. Gal. 4.6.
Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. When therefore God does send forth his spirit
into our hearts, crying, and making us to cry, Abba, Father, the same is a
witness to our spirit that we are the sons of God, because for no other
reason does God send forth this spirit into our hearts, but because we are
sons. When God gives unto us this light and feeling that he is our father,
there follows necessarily a certificate that we are his children, because
these as relatiues mutually depend one upon another. And this is a certificate
and testimony that cannot be counterfeited, and wherein there is no error.
For neither the spirit of man himself nor any other spirit can give him that
spiritual eye of the inner man whereby to look upon God as a father; that
sincere, and single, and pure affection, and invocation wherewith the faithful
soul tendereth it self unto God, but only the spirit of God himself. It is
no way incident unto us to have in heart and conscience that familiar and
lovely access unto the throne of grace, Hieron. in Gal. ca. 4 Nunquam
auderemus dicere Pater noster, etc. nisi de conscientia spiritus habitanus in
nobis.
but upon conscience of the spirit dwelling in us, as Saint Hierome speaks.
We know there is otherwise a formal course of praying, and we doubt not but M.
Bishop daily mumbleth a task and ordinary thereof, as Jews and heretics are
wont to do, but that is rather saying of prayers then praying indeed: true and
faithful prayer, and the crying of the heart unto God, Abba, Father is a
further matter, and a thing peculiar only to the sons of God, and this
Zechar. 12.10. Tremel.
spirit and prayer a true witness unto them, that they are the sons of God.
But M. Bishop to take away the force of this proof, answers further out of
the place it self, that there follows a condition on our part to be
performed, If yet we suffer with him, that we may be glorified with him. Which
words the Apostle indeed uses in the next verse, but upon other occasion, and
to other end, then as to impeach or question that testimony of the spirit,
which by an entire and absolute assertion he has here expressed. For having
affirmed that the spirit testifies with our spirit that we are the sons of
God, he infers, If we be sons, then are we also heirs, even heirs of
God, and ioynt-heires or fellow heirs with Christ. Now how this fellowship
with Christ is performed, he declares by adding those words; if yet we suffer
with him, that we also may be glorified with him. Thus are we ioynt-heires with
Christ, says he, if we attain to our inheritance the same way that he did,
being first partakers with him in sufferings, as we shall afterward be in
glory. M. Bishop therefore does amiss to tie those words as a condition to
the former words, which naturally serve for explication of the latter. But
admitting the speech to be conditional, it does nothing preiudicate the
assurance of the faithful, because thereby God instructs them which way he
himself will bring them to himself, not what he will leave them at
uncertainty to do for their coming unto him. He expresses a condition, the
performance whereof faith expects from himself, because Phil. 1.29.
of him it is given unto us for Christ's sake, not only to believe in him, but
also to suffer for his sake, Col. 1.11.
being strengthened with all might through his glorious power, to all patience
and long suffering with ioyfulnesse. To this end, as 2. Cor. 1.5.
the sufferings of Christ abound in them, so he causes their consolations to
abound through Christ, and their Verse. 7.
hope is steadfast in this behalf, because they know, that as they are
partakers of the sufferings, so they shall be also of the consolation, that the
grieuance of the one may be the more easily borne by means of the joy and
sweetness of the other. In a word, faith rests upon that that is written,
Heb. 13.5.
He has said, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: therefore we may boldly
say, The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me. Romans
8.29.
He has predestined us to be made like unto the image of his son, and
therefore Bernard. epist. 107. Habes spiritum huius arcans indicem.
having received the spirit to reveal unto us, as Saint Bernard says, this
secret of his predestination, we stand assured that accordingly he will
accomplish in us the image of his Son, that together with him we may bear
the cross, and together with him also we may wear the crown, and therefore
will so order all things, as that there shall be Romans 8.3^.
nothing to come that shall separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Now the spirit as he is the reuealer of the secret, so
is he the earnest of the effect of Gods predestination, by the gift whereof God
gives unto us the certain assurance of all the rest that remains to be
given. Tertul. de Titius. Hic est pignus promissae hae^^d tatis and quasi
^haregraph^nt quc^dam aeternae salutis, qui nos Dei faciciat temp^t^m and nos
eius efficiat domum ^inh^bitator corperibus nostris d^tu^ and sanctitatis
effector, qui id agens in nobis ad aeternitatem and ad resurrectionem
immortalitatis corpora nostra pro iucat dum illa i^se ass^. efacit ^^m ^oelesti
v^ri^^te n^ ^eri, and c^u spiritus sanc^^^ ^^^taeto^^^tate ^^^ri.
It is the pledge of the inheritance promised, and as a handwriting (or bond
for assurance) of everlasting Salvation, not upon uncertainty, if we do thus
or thus, but framing us to be and to do whatsoever belongs to the
attainment thereof, making us the temple and house of God; being the worker of
holiness in us, that he may bring our bodies to eternity, and to the
immortality of the resurrection, vvhilest in himself he accustometh them to
be tempered with heavenly virtue, and to be accompanied with the divine
eternity of the holy Ghost. Therefore God does never take this earnest back
again, because it is so (...).
the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of possession, as that it
is an earnest also that in the mean time God 2 Cor. 1.21.22
stablisheth us in Christ, and that ^^r 5 5.
he has created us even for this thing, namely to cloth us with immortality
and eternal life. To be short, God in giving earnest for assurance of the end,
does thereby undertake against all lets and impediments that should hinder the
atchieuing of that that is earnested thereby, and therefore as Chrysostom
says, (...).
the things present which thou have attained already, do assure unto thee
those things that are yet to come. As for the words alleged out of Saint John,
that ^^chn. 4.1.
we believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God or
not, as if we were willed to be distrus^tfull of the revelation and testimony
of the spirit that we are the sons of God, least by any false spirit we
be abused and deluded, they are very adsurdly wrested and forced to that
purpose, being very apparently a caveat against false prophets speaking out
of their own spirit, and yet pretending the spirit of Christ, as is very
plain by the reason added in the next words, For many false Prophets are
gone abroad into the world. And yet if we admit them as meant of this
testimony of the spirit, they are so far from serving their turn, as that
they make altogether against them. For if in that behalf we be willing to try
the spirits whether they be of God or not, then it follows that there is a
way whereby to try the same. And if there be a means whereby to try whether
the spirit that testifies unto us that we are the sons of God, be of God
or not, then there is a means for us to be assured that we are the sons of
God. For if by trial we find that the spirit that so testifies is of God,
then because the same spirit is truth, we cannot make question but that we
are indeed the sons of God. So therefore we resolve of that testimony
whereof the Apostle speaks, whereby the spirit bears witness with our
spirit that we are the sons of God. Be it that some men by false opinions
and imaginations of carnal security do herein deceive themselves, yet as it
is no reason for a King to doubt whether he be a King, for that frantic and
melancholicke persons are falsely so persuaded of themselves, and as a
goldsmiths does not therefore doubt whether gold be gold, for that some
unskillful man takes copper in steed of gold, so no reason is it that they
who have received the undoubted testimony of the spirit, shining unto them
out of the true light of the word of God, should therefore call in question the
truth thereof, because many men are mocked with false presumptions, which they
themselves have builded out of their own brains. The testimony of the
spirit is certainly known and felt wheresoever it is found, neither can any
spirit work in any man's heart any lively counterfeit thereof, as before was
said. Therefore it stands firm and sure against all M. Bishops exceptions,
that there is a testimony of the spirit, whereby according to the measure of
our faith we stand assured that we are the sons of God.

18. W. BISHOP.
The third reason is, That which we must pray for by Gods commandment, that
we must believe: but every man must pray for Salvation, therefore we must
believe that we shall have Salvation. The proposition he confirms thus: In
every petition must be two things, one a desire of the thing we ask, another
a particular faith to obtain it, which is proved by Christ's words: Mar. 1^.
Whatsoever you shall request when you pray, believe that you shall have it,
and it shall be done.

This Argument is so proper for their purpose, that we return it upon their
own heads: We must pray for Salvation, therefore we are not yet assured of it:
For who in his wits, prays God to give him that, whereof he is assured
already? And a godly act of faith it is, in that prayer to believe that God
will give that, which he is assured of before hand: such foolish petitions
cannot please God, and therefore after their doctrine it is to be denied, that
any faithful man may pray for his Salvation, but rather thank the Lord for
it. But to answer directly, he who prays, must believe he shall obtain that
which he prays for, if he observe all the due circumstances of prayer, which
be many, but to this purpose, two are required necessarily: the one that be who
prays be the true servant of God, which first excludes all those that err
in faith, touched in these words, What you of the faithful shall desire when
you pray, shall be given you: The other is, when we request matters of such
moment, that we persevere in prayer, and continue our suit day by day, of these
suits of eternal Salvation, we must take these words of our Savior to be
spoken: We must always pray, Luke 1^
and never be weary: and then no doubt, but we shall in the end receive it.
But because we are in doubt, whether we shall observe those necessary
circumstances of prayer or no, therefore we cannot be so well assured to
obtain our suit, although we be on Gods part most assured, that he is most
bountiful, and readier to give, then we are to ask.

But says M. Perkins, S. John notes out this particular faith, 1. John. 5.
calling it, Our assurance, that God will give unto us, whatsoever we ask
according to his will. But where find we that it is Gods will, to assure every
man at the first entrance into his service, of eternal Salvation? is it not
sufficient to make him an assured promise of it, upon his faithful service and
good behauior toward him?

R. ABBOT.
The argument is very pregnant and clear. Christ has taught us to Mat. 11.24.
believe that we shall have that that we pray for. We are to pray for
forgiveness of sins and eternal life. We are therefore to believe that we
shall have forgiveness of sins and everlasting life. Nay says M. Bishop, we
must pray for our Salvation, therefore we are m^ assured of it. He forbear to
answer strictly by the very terms of the argument, because therein his notable
impudency and w^^^ll contradiction to the word, of Christ had very notably
appeared. For then he must have answered thus, We must pray for our Salvation;
therefore we must not believe that we shall have Salvation, directly against
the words of Christ instructing us to believe that we shall have that that we
pray for. But to take that which he does say, I answer him again, that our
praying for Salvation is an argument that we are not yet assured of it by
possession, but it hinders not but that we are assured thereof in hope. We
are not assured of it as a thing in present, but yet we are assured of it as a
thing to come. As for his conceit, that we are not to pray for any thing that
we have assurance to obtain, the folly and blind ignorance therein bewrayed,
is sufficiently discovered before in the fifth Section. We believe the promise
of God as touching our Salvation, not doubting but that he will make us
partakers thereof, according to his promise to those that do believe in him,
but as yet we enjoy not this Salvation. He leads us on in the hope and desire
of it, and by our prayer we utter our desire, still resolving that he will
effect it, but yet still begging and craving till he do effect it. So then we
thank God that he has called us to this hope, and we rejoice therein, but
still we beg the accomplishment of that that he has taught us to hope for.
But to leave this as handled before, he will further give us, as he says, a
direct answer, and that is, that he that prays must believe he shall
obtain that which he prays for, if he observe all the due circumstances of
prayer. But we answer him, that it is not for the perfection of our prayers
that God accepts us but for the true affection of our hearts. We many times
fail in the due circumstances of prayer, and much faintness and weakness we
show therein, when yet we believe that God mercifully respects us therein by
the intercession of Jesus Christ. Now of these circumstances he sets down
two as necessarily required, the one that he that prays be the true servant
of God: the other that he persevere in prayer. And what of these? Marry says
he, because we are in doubt whether we shall observe those necessary
circumstances of prayer or no, therefore we cannot be so well assured to
obtain our suite. Behold he is in doubt whether he be the true servant of God
or not, and we may therein see the blindness wherein Popery holds men, not
discerning the misery of their own estate. He knows no faith but what is
incident to devils and damned men; he cannot tell whether he have any true hope
toward God, any love, any true repentance, whether he be the true servant of
God, whether God hear or regard his prayer, but walks altogether in the
dark, and knows not whither he goes. But true faith yields a man whereof
to say, Psalm. 116.16.
Behold, O Lord, for I am thy servant: 119. verse. 125.
I am thy servant, O give me understanding, that I may I keep thy
commandments. 143. ver 2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, etc. As for perseverance in prayer,
says expects it also of him that Psalm. 10.17.
prepares the heart, and Zach. 12.10.
powers upon us the spirit of grace and of prayer, Romans 8.26.
which makes request for us (that is, August. epist. 105. Quia interpellare
nos facit, and nobis interpellandi and g^^nendi inss. rat affectum.
makes us to make request for our selves, and inspireth into us the affection
of prayer) with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed. If the faithful
man in these things depended upon himself, he should have just cause to fear
and doubt his own perseverance, but he says with the Apostle, 2. Tim. 1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and I am sure that he is able to keep that which
I have committed unto him against that day, even my self, my faith, my hope,
my prayer, my soul, my life, knowing my self to be a very unsafe keeper of
my self. Yea he prays also for perseverance, and because he is willed to
believe that he shall have that that he prays for, therefore he believes
that he shall persevere, and the word of Christ assures him that he shall so
do, because he says; Mar. 11.24.
Believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be done unto you. To which purpose
Saint Bernard well says; Bernard. in Cant. ser. 32. In bonis Domini quatenus
fiduciae pedem porrexeris, eatenus possidebis.
In the benefits of God look how far thou treadest the foot of thy faith,
so far thou shall possess. For as Cyprian says, Cypr. lib. 2. ep. 6. Dat
credentibus tantu^ quantum se credit capere qui sumit.
God gives to them that believe, so much as he that receives believes
himself to receive. He does therefore undoubtedly persevere in faith and
prayer, who praying for perseverance believes that he shall receive the same.
And this is further confirmed by the words of Saint John: 1. Ioh. 5.14.15.
This is the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will he hears us, and if we know that he hears us,
whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we have desired of
him. To which M. Bishop answers; But where do we find that it is Gods will,
to assure every man at the first entrance into his service of eternal
Salvation? Where the limitation that he uses at the first entrance into his
service before also delivered, is but an idle trick of his vagating wit. For
the question is not of assurance at the first entrance into Gods service, but
whether first or last there be any assurance at all. For he denies whether in
the entrance or in the continuance that God by faith does give any man
assurance of his own Salvation. Or if that be not his meaning, but that though
not at the first entrance, yet afterward God does by faith give that
assurance, let him tell us, and we shall be glad that he has so far forth
forsaken the doctrine of his Romish mistress. But because that is his meaning,
he must acknowledge his absurd folly, in makings a show of exception in words
where he intended none. As for us, we say indeed, that God even at the very
first entrance into his service offers us this assurance. For even at the
very first entrance he says, as he did to the iaylor, Act. 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved, and from the
beginning our faith as it is greater or less, so either strongly or weakly
apprehends and embraces this assurance. And in this assurance we labor and
endeavor to grow, and to go on Rom 1.17.
from faith to faith, from Psalm. 84.7.
strength to strength, till we learn to stand as it were upon the battlements
of heaven, and to set the world at defiance, saying, Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ, etc. But that answer of his is otherwise also a
ridiculous and vain shift. Where do we find that it is Gods will to assure
every man of eternal Salvation? Marry speaking of them that believe, even in
the very place alleged, M. Bishop, if you dissemble it not. By other places
we are taught to pray for forgiveness of sins, for Salvation, for eternal
life, and you deny not but that we are thus to pray according to the will of
God. By this place we have assurance and are taught to know that we have the
petitions that we desire of him, and therefore that according to our prayer we
have forgiveness of sins; we have Salvation and everlasting life. Speak
strictly to the point, M. Bishop: let us have no shifting of words. We have
assurance to know that we have what we ask of him according to his will.
It is according to his will that we ask of him forgiveness of sins and
eternal life. We have therefore assurance, and are to know, that we have
forgiveness of sins and life eternal. M. Bishop is dumb, and to this has
nothing more to say; but goes forward to ask the question, Is it not
sufficient to make him an assured promise of it upon his faithful service and
good behavior toward him? I answer him, No, it is not sufficient; For God
made that promise by the former covenant, Gal. 3.12.
He that does these things shall live in them, and it auailed not; Heb. 8.9.
for they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, says the
Lord. Therefore God made another covenant and promise, not like the former, not
conditional upon faithful service and good behauior, but absolute and without
exception, the performance whereof should depend wholly and only upon his
mercy, so that he would not expect as of us, but did undertake to give us and
to work in us whatsoever faithful service and good behavior should be
necessary thereunto. Therefore he says, Verse. 10.
I will put my laws in their minds, and in their hearts will I write them,
and I will be their God and they shall be my people; they shall all know me;
for I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and I will remember their
sins and their iniquities no more. So that although comparing the one part of
the work of our Salvation with another, the latter is usually tied to a
condition of the former, and God accordingly proceed in the execution thereof,
yet if we entirely consider the whole, it issues absolutely out of the purpose
and promise of God, who intending the end, disposes and works himself
whatsoever belongs to the accomplishment and attainment of the end. Inasmuch
therefore as true faith expects all of God, and on Gods part M. Bishop
confesses we are most assured, it must follow that by true faith we stand
assured of Salvation, because God is never wanting to do that that appertains
unto him.

19. W. BISHOP.
The fourth reason is, Whatsoever God commands, that a man must and can
perform. But God commands us to believe our Salvation: ergo, we must believe
it.

The proposition is true, yet commonly denied by all Protestants, for God
commands us to keep his commandments, and they hold that to be impossible:
but to the assumption: That God commands us to believe our Salvation, is
proved (says M. Perkins) by these words: Repent and believe the Gospel:
Spectatum admissi, risum teneatis amici: Where is it written in that Gospel,
believe your own particular Salvation? show us once but one clear text for
it, and we will believe it. I do believe in Christ, and hope to be saved,
through his mercy and merits, but know well, that unless I keep his words, I
am by him likened to a fool, Math. 7.
that built his house upon the sands. He commands me to watch and pray, Math.
26.
least I fall into temptation: and elsewhere, Math. 25.
warns me to prepare oil to keep my lamp burning against his coming, or
else I am most certain to be shut out with the foolish Virgins. An hundred
such admonitions find we in holy Scriptures, to shake us out of this security
of our Salvation, and to make us vigilant to prevent all temptations of the
enemy, and diligent to train our selves in godly exercises of all virtue.

R. ABBOT.
The proposition, says he, is true, and yet as he propounds and
understands it, it is not true, nor was ever intended by M. Perkins to be
true, and justly is it denied by all Protestants, that we can perform
whatsoever God commands, as in the next question God willing shall appear in
the handling of that point. But the proposition as M. Perkins expresses it is,
Whatsoever we are commanded in the Gospel, that we must and can perform. The
reason whereof he takes from a distinction of the commandments of the law
and the Gospel, because the Gospel is the ministry of spirit and life,
giving us to do whatsoever it does command, which the law does not. Now M.
Bishop confounds Law and Gospel, and makes the proposition general and
without exception, being still desirous to show himself like himself. But that
God in the Gospel commands us to believe the remission of our sins and
life everlasting, Master Perkins shows by the words of Christ, Repent and
believe the Gospel, being the brief sum of the ministry and preaching of
Christ, and the same in effect, as if he had said, Repent you of your sins,
and believe the tidings that God has sent unto you, of the forgiveness
thereof by Jesus Christ, through faith in his name. For the declaring of which
point, he shows, that to believe the Gospel, is not only generally to
believe, that Christ is a Savior, and that the promises made in him are true,
for then the devils may be said to believe the Gospel, and we suppose that
Master Bishop has more wit and grace, then to say that Christ in saying,
Believe the Gospel, did commend nothing to us, but what the devils may do, and
therefore that the repentant is hereby willed particularly to believe for
himself, to have the forgiveness of his sins by the blood of Jesus Christ.
Which declaration being very effectual to the point, this Hickscorner because
he knew not what to answer to it, passes over with Spectatum admissi? etc. and
Where is it written in that Gospel, believe your own particular Salvation?
show us once, faith he, but one clear text for it, and we will believe it;
even as the Jews said of Christ, Mat. 27.42.
Let him come down from the cross, and we will believe in him. Though he had
come down from the cross, yet would they not have believed in him, because
they had seen him do greater works then that, and yet they did not believe,
and even so Master Bishop, whatsoever is showed him, remains still Psalm.
58.4.
like the deaf adder, that stops his ears, refusing to hear the voice of
the charmer charm he never so wisely. But tell us Master Bishop in what sense
it is, that the repentant man is willed to believe the Gospel? Do not make the
believing of the Gospel a thing incident to the devil, because we shall then
hold you a partaker with the devil. This you would have told us, and not only
have recited the place, but spoken to that that was inferred upon it, had you
not resolved to play the part of a lewd sycophant, and sought to carry the
matter with bare words. The Gospel is Luke 2.10 1^
the glad tidings of great joy, that unto us a Savior is borne; Esa. 9 6.
unto us a child is borne, unto us a son is given, Ambrosi. de^^ de. lib 3
cap ^ Prop^cia^^^, ^^^is, ho^ce^^ cre^^^ (...) increa^^.
that is, unto us that do believe. To believe the Gospel, is to believe this,
and how do I believe, unto us, if I believe not unto me? Therefore by believing
the Gospel, I believe that Christ is borne and given a Savior unto me, Mat.
1.21.
to save me being one of his people 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
from my sins, and from the wrath to come. The Gospel is, that Act. 10.43.
through the name of Christ every one that believes in him, shall have
forgiveness of sins; John. 3.15.
every one that believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life.
If I believe the Gospel, I believe this, and therefore because I believe in
Christ, I believe that I shall have forgiveness of sins, that I shall not
perish but have everlasting life. If I believe in Christ, and yet believe not
this, that I have everlasting life, I believe not the Gospel, because the
Gospel says, Ibid. ver. 36.
He that believes in him has everlasting life. 2. John. 5.10.
He that believes not God, says S. John, has made him a liar, because he
believes not the record that God witnessed of his Son, and this is the
record, that God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his
Son. Unto us, says he, namely unto us that believe in the name of the Son
of God, as afterward he expounds. If then I believe in the name of the Son
of God, and do not believe that God has given unto me eternal life, I make
God a liar, in not believing the record that God has witnessed of his Son.
Therefore he adds, Ver. 13.
These things have I written unto you that believe in the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life. Where is now this pelting
Sophister, that asks us where it is written in the Gospel, to believe our
own particular Salvation? It is written there, where it is written to them
that believe, to know that they have eternal life. But says he, I believe in
Christ, and hope to be saved through his mercy and merits. But take heed you
lie not, M. Bishop; take heed you lie not unto God. You have told us before,
that Sect. 3.
to believe in God, is to love God with all your heart, and that you are not
assured of your love toward him. How then can you dare to to say, that you
believe in God? You have told us that Sect. 6.
hope and charity are seated in the dark corners of the will, and that you
have but a conjecture and probable opinion thereof in your self, and why then
do you here tell us an uncertain tale of you know not what, that you hope to
be saved through the mercy and merits of Christ. Again, whereas you say that
you hope to be saved through the mercy and merits of Christ, you therein
again dissemble with Christ, because notwithstanding the mercy and merits of
Christ, you hang your Salvation upon that that you are to merit, and do for
your self, and make your own Free will the finisher and perfecter of that
that by Christ is only but begun. You will have the mercy and merits of
Christ to serve to make you able to save your self, and it you do so, you will
thank your self, but you will have nothing further to thank Christ for. And
so whereas you would avoid to be like unto the fool, you show your self a
fool outright, building so, as that you know not whether you build or not; you
know not whether you have any foundation to build upon, or any matter to build
with; you know not if you have builded any thing, whether the same be likely to
stand or fall, and what is this else but to be a fool? As for us, we know that
we must keep his words, that he commands us to watch and pray, to prepare
oil to keep our lamps burning, and such like, but these admonitions serve not
to shake our faith, but rather instruct and sharpen it. They do not propound
conditions for us to perform to make up the work of God in us, but
aduertisements and instructions what those laws are, whereof God has said,
Ierem. 31.33.
I will put my laws in their hearts, Ezech 36.27.
and cause them to keep my statutes, faith being hereby moved to beg of God,
August. de spir. and lit. ca. 13. Lege opera^ dicit Deus, fac quod iubeo: lege
fidei dicitur Deo, Da quod iubes. Ideo enim iubet lex vt admoneat quid faciat
fides.
to give what he commands, and assured that he will to the end perform what
he has promised, and seeing in his visitations and corrections, his fatherly
providence and care to effect the same, whilst thereby he awaketh us out of
our security, and causes us to make use of the admonitions of holy Scripture,
to fight against the devil and sin, and to exercise our selves in all
godliness and virtue.

20. W. BISHOP.
The fifth and last reason is this, The Papists teach assurance of hope, Romans 5.
even hence it follows, that he may be infallibly assured, for the property
of a true and lively hope, is never to make a man ashamed. Answer. Hope indeed
of heaven, makes a man most courageously bear out all storms of persecution,
and not to be ashamed of Christ's Cross, but to profess his faith most boldly
before the bloody tyrants of the world, our hearts being by charity fortified
and made invincible. And this is that which the Apostle teaches in that place:
and says before, Ver. 2.
that the faithful glory in the hope of the sons of God, and do not vaunt
themselves of the Certainty of their Salvation. This Certainty of hope, is
great in those that have long lived virtuously, specially when they have also
endured manifold losses, much disgrace, great wrongs and injuries for Christ's
sake, for he that cannot fail of his word, has promised to requite all such
with an hundred fold: But what is this to the Certainty of faith, which the
Protestants will have every man to be endued with at his first entrance into
the service of God; when as Saint Paul insinuates, Heb 6.
that godly men partakers of the holy Ghost, yea after they have tasted the
good word of God, and the power of the world to come, that is, have received
besides faith, great favors of Gods spirit, and felt as it were the joys of
heaven, have after all this so fallen from God, that there was small hope of
their recovery?

R. ABBOT.
This last reason taken from the doctrine of the Papists concerning hope, I do
not hold to have been fitly applied against them. For with them as there is not
that faith, so neither is there that hope which the Scripture teaches, neither
can they be said to teach assurance of hope, who professedly deliver, that a
man must always stand in fear and doubt of that that he should hope for, and
that he has no more but only a probable opinion of any thing in himself
whereof to conceive hope. Therefore the Council of Trent says, that Council.
Trident. Sess. 6. cap. 9. Sicut nemo pius de Dei miserecordia etc. dubitare
debet, sic quilibet dum seipsum suamque propriam infirmitatem and
indispositionera respicit, de sua gratiae formidare ac timere potest.
as no man may doubt of the mercy of God, and of the merit of Christ, so every
man whilst he considers his own infirmity and vndisposednesse, has to
stand in fear of his own being in grace. So Andradius affirms, that their
Andrad. Orthod. explicat. lib 6. sub finem. Ita certa est spes vt semper cum
metu and dubitatione coniuncta sit and copulata.
hope is always joined and coupled with fear and doubt, not only meaning
that it is so, but also that it ought so to be, accordingly as Master Bishop
has before delivered, though untruly, Sect. 10.
that there are above an hundred texts in holy writ, whereby to prove, that the
faithful must stand in fear of their own Salvation. The Certainty of hope
therefore that Master Bishop names, by occasion that it was named to him, is
nothing else indeed but mere uncertainty, it being a thing senseless to
reckon a Certainty, where a man is bound to stand in fear. So that their hope
is but a conceit of selfe-seeming probability, whereby they imagine that happily
^ may be (...) them, but yet doubt least it be otherwise; in (...) ^en vulgarly
men talk of hope, where they hau^ (...) for that they hope. But the hope which
the Sc^^ (...) of is another matter, importing a patient and (...) of that that
we believe we shall receive (...) the promises of God concerning forgiveness
(...) ^^^erning our bliss and happiness to come. It (...) God undoubtedly
will make good whatsoever he (...) ^sed, but as yet we see not the effect, and
performa^^^ ^ereof. Hope therefore expects and waits, looking (...) the
Lord to reveal his righteousness, and to make the truth (...) his word and
promise fully to appear, and in this expectation is content with patience to
bear the cross, and to endure the afflictions and troubles that are incident
to the faith and profession of the name of Christ. Thus says Chrysostom, that
Chrysostom hom. de fide, spe and charit. Qui^quid fides credendo acquirit, hoc
spes sustinendo praesumit.
what faith gets in believing, that hope presumes of in enduring and
suffering. This hope therefore is not uncertain and doubtful, but by the
direction of faith, fully resolves of the accomplishment of that that it
hops for. It is not as Hilarie well notes, Hilar. in Psa. 64. Spem oporiet
non ex mani esse praes^mptam, ne mag^ s^t incerr^ru^ praesumptio quam
expectatio cognitorum.
a presuming of things uncertain, but an expectation of things known unto us.
For that cause is it that Saint Paul says, that Romans 5.5.
hope makes not ashamed. Which Master Bishop not understanding, expounds as
if the Apostle had said, that it makes a man not to be ashamed of the cross
of Christ; but Saint Paul respected a further matter, to signify the
infallible assurance and Certainty of hope, that it never puts a man to
shame, it never gives him occasion to be ashamed, as having hoped for that
whereof in the end he is deceived. August. in Psalm 36. conc. 2. Confunditur
que^ fallit spes: qui dicit. quod sperabant non inueni.
He is ashamed, says Austine, that fails of his hope. Who is put to shame
but he that says, I have not found that that I hoped for? Theodo. in Rom cap.
5.
They that hope, says Theodoret, and are deceived of their hope, do blush and
are ashamed thereof. Therefore, says Saint Austine, August. in Psalm 37. Certi
samus de spe: non est enim inceria spes nostra, vt de illa dubit^mus.
We are certain of our hope: for our hope is not uncertain, that we should
doubt thereof. Yea, so are we certain thereof, as that Saint Paul says, Romans
5.2.
We rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, as being no less assured
thereof, then if we were already in possession of it, as Sect. 15. ex
Chrys^st. in Rom, hom 9.
before I showed, that Chrysostom expounds that place far otherwise then
here Master Bishop does. Which Heb. 3.6.
confidence and rejoicing of hope, grows from that which the holy Ghost
terms Cap. 10.22.
(...), full assurance of faith, whereby setting aside the respect of our own
impeachments of our selves, we believe with Abraham Romans 4.18.
under hope even against hope, resting upon his promise who has taken upon him
to be 1. Pet. 2.25.
the shepherd and Bishop of our souls, and Ephe. 3.20.
is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according
to the power that works in us. Whereby as he has already wrought in us the
like great work as Cap. 1.20.
he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, in that he has Cap.
2.5.
raised us up, being dead in trespasses and sins, unto the life of God, so we
rest Phil. 1.6.
persuaded, that having begun this good work in us, he will perform it good
until the day of Jesus Christ. Bernard. in Cant. ser. 68. No^ est quod iam
quaeras quibus meritis speremus bona, praeserti^^ cum audias apud prophetam:
Non propter vos. etc.
Neither is it for any man to ask, says Bernard, upon what merits we hope for
this good, seeing we hear by the Prophet, Ezech. 36.22.
Not for your sakes, but for mine own sake will I do it, says the Lord. Now
Master Bishop admitting after his fashion, an uncertain Certainty of hope,
demands, What is this to the Certainty of faith, which the Protestants will
have every man to be endued with, at his first entrance into the service of
God? Where again we see how pretily Master Bishop can busy himself with a
fether: These terms of first entrance into the service of God, are but the
playing of his brain; he would feign seem to say something thereby, when
indeed he says nothing. For not only at first entrance, but in the whole
continuance of the service of God, he leaves a man as a ship in a storm, and
hanging betwixt heaven and hell, howsoever not doubting, but that God for his
part holds him fast to draw him to heaven, yet still affrighted least
himself should loose his hold and fall into hell, nay not knowing whether he
have any hold of God or God of him, because he cannot certainly know whether he
have any hope, or charity, or repentance, or prayer, which being seated in the
dark corners of the will, cannot otherwise then probably be discerned. But as
touching his question, what is Certainty of hope to Certainty of faith? I
answer him, that being truly understood, it makes much to the proving of it.
For hope goes not beyond faith, because as I have said, hope is but the
patient waiting for that, which faith believes we shall have. What faith does
not assure us we shall have, we cannot by hope expect and look for. There can
therefore be no Certainty of hope, but it must presuppose a Certainty of
faith, assuring us of obtaining what we must hope for. But, says Master
Bishop, Saint Paul insinuates, that godly men partakers of the holy Ghost,
and having tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,
yet after all this have fallen aw^y from God. But I answer him, that he says
more of them then Saint Paul did, for he calls them not godly men, though
happily for the time they seemed to be so. Men may be partakers of the temporary
gifts of the holy Ghost, and may taste of the good word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come, as Judas did while he was yet an Apostle, of whom
notwithstanding in the midst of these gifts our Savior said, that John. 6.70.
he was a devil. The like is to be said of them who shall say at that day,
Math. 7.22.
Lord have not we prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and
done many miracles? who yet in the mean while, as our Savior signifies, have
been workers of iniquity. And what less can we say of Balaam, who in the
spirit saw so much concerning the state and hope of the people of God, as made
him enamoured thereon, and to cry out, Numb. 23.10.
Let my soul die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like unto
his; Ver. 21.
he sees no iniquity in Jacob, neither does he see any transgression in
Israel; Cap. 24.5.
how goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy habitations, O Israel; who
notwithstanding bewraied himself to have a wicked heart, bewitched with
covetousness, willing for money to have cursed the people whom the Lord
directed him to bless. Men may have great gifts, and much revelation and
knowledge of the way of truth, and be touched far with the conceit of that
they know, who yet are void of true faith and regeneration of the heart, and
therefore in the end because Mat. 13.21.
they have no root, do certainly fall and slide away. Whose fall because they
never truly stood, though they seemed so to do, is not to impeach or weaken
the assurance of them to whom God has given by true faith to stand indeed. As
for that which Master Bishop says of such, that they have received faith, and
great favors of the spirit, etc. it is but his own commentary, and we
accordingly regard it. He affirms of their faith, that which the Apostle
affirms not, and though they received some favors of the spirit, yet they
never found the favor to receive him as Ephesians. 1.14.
an earnest unto them of the heavenly inheritance, or by him to be Cap. 4 30.
sealed unto the day of redemption, which if they had, they should never being
once sealed have been unsealed again, because in this respect Romans 11.29.
the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, and never subject to any
change.

CHAPTER. 4. OF JUSTIFICATION.
1. W. BISHOP.
BEcause M. Perkins sets not down well the Catholics opinion, I will help
him out, both with the preparation and Justification it self, and that taken
out of the Council of Trent. Where the very words concerning preparation are
these: Sess. 6. c. 6.
Men are prepared and disposed to this justice, when being stirred up, and
helped by Gods grace, they conceiving faith by hearing, are freely moved
toward God, believing those things to be true, which God does reveal and
promise, namely, that he of his grace does justify a sinner through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus. And when knowledging themselves to be
sinners, through the fear of Gods judgments, they turn themselves to
consider the mercy of God, are lifted up into hope, trusting that God will be
merciful unto them for Christ's sake: and beginning to love him as the
fountain of all justice, are thereby moved with hatred and detestation of all
sins. Finally, they determine to receive baptism, to begin a new life, and to
keep all Christ's commandments.

After this disposition, or preparation, follows Justification, and for that
every thing is best known by the causes of it, all the causes of Justification
are delivered by the Council in the next Chapter, which briefly are these. The
final cause of the Justification of a sinner, is the glory of God, the glory
of Christ, and man's own Justification: the efficient is God: the meritorious,
Christ Jesus Passions: the instrumental, is the Sacrament of Baptism: the
only formal cause, is inherent justice, that is, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
with the other gifts of the Holy Ghost, powered into a man's soul at that
instant of Justification. Of the Justification by faith, and the second
Justification shall be spoken in their places.

So that we agree in this point, that Justification comes of the free grace
of God, through his infinite mercies, and the merits of our Saviors Passion,
and that all sins, when a man is justified, be pardoned him.

The point of difference is this: that the Protestants hold, that Christ's
Passion and obedience imputed unto us, becomes our righteousness: (for the
words of justice and justification, they seldom use,) and not any
righteousness, which is in our selves. The Catholics affirm, that those
virtues powered into our souls (speaking of the formal cause of Justification)
is our justice, and that through that, a man is justified in Gods sight, and
accepted to life everlasting. Although as you have seen before, we hold that
God of his mere mercy through the merits of Christ Jesus our Savior, has
freely bestowed that justice on us. Note that M. Perkins comes too short in his
second rule, when he attributes the merits of Christ's sufferings to obedience;
whereas obedience if it had been without charity, would have merited nothing at
Gods hands.

R. ABBOT.
The doctrine of the Council of Trent concerning preparation to Justification,
is the very heresy of the Pelagians, as may appear by that that before has
been said thereof in the question of Sect. 5.
Free will. Out of the free will of man only stirred up and helped by grace,
Coster. Enchirid. cap 5. Haec gratia impulsus tantum and motio spiritus s.
adhuc foris degentis: liberum arbitrium auxilio Dei necdum inhabitantis sed
m^u^nus and adiunantis se praeparat ad iustificationem.
not any intrinsecall or infused, but only outwardly assisting grace, which is
no more but what Pelagius himself acknowledged, they derive faith, hope, love,
repentance, the fear of God, the hatred of sin, and purpose of new life,
whereby he prepares and disposes himself to receive in his Justification
another faith, hope, charity, and other gifts of the holy Ghost, then to be
powered into his soul. Whereby though they will not seem so to do, yet indeed
they run into the affirming of that, which if Pelagius had not denied and
condemned, he had been condemned himself, August. epist. 206
gratiam Dei secundum merita nostra dari, that the grace of God is bestowed
upon us according to our merits. In which sort Bellarmine says, that Bellarm.
de Iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 1^. Fides ^ustificat per modu^ dispositio^is and
merin: meretur remissionem peccateru^ suo quodam modo.
faith justifies by way of merit, that faith in it manner does merit
forgiveness of sins, applying thereto some spe^ches of Austine, which to
that purpose were never meant. In se^^ing down the causes of Justification out
of the Council, he commits an absurd error, in saying that the final
cause of the justification of a sinner is man's own Justification, as if it
self could be the final cause of ^^e^fe, whereas the Council names in steed
thereof eternal life, Where^^ he says, that they agree with us in this point,
that Justification (...) of the free grace of God, through his in^ (...) our
Saviors Passion, he does but sop^ (...). For if Justification be of the free
grace of God, then it is not of works, according to that of the Apostle, Romans
11.6.
If it be of grace, it is not of works, otherwise grace is no grace. But he
afterward professedly disputes, that his works of preparation are the very
cause of Justification. It were odious to refuse the name of the free grace of
God, and therefore formally he names it, but by the process of this discourse
it will appear, that he means nothing less then to make it free. That our
Justification and righteousness before God, stands not in any inward virtues
and graces powered into our souls, but in the imputation of Christ's obedience
and righteousness made ours by faith, shall be proved unto him, God willing,
by better arguments then he shall be able to disprooue. But that we are not to
expect much of him for disproouing, he himself here shows us by a silly
note, in which he tells us, that M. Perkins comes too short in his second
rule, when he attributes the merits of Christ's sufferings to obedience;
whereas obedience, says he, if it had been without charity, would have merited
nothing at Gods hand. Wherein what does he but give check to the Apostle, in
that he says; Romans 5.19.
By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. For to him he might
likewise say, that he comes too short in attributing to Christ's obedience,
that many by it are made righteous; whereas by his obedience, if it had been
without charity, many could not have been made righteous. But the man's simple
ignorance appears in this dividing of obedience from charity, whereas
charity is the very mother of obedience, neither is there any true obedience,
but what issues therefrom. And therefore M. Perkins well noted, though Master
Bishops narrow eyes beheld it not, that Christ in his obedience showed his
exceeding love both to his Father and us. But we must be content to bear with
many such idle and bootelesse notes.

2. W. BISHOP.
And whereas M. Perkins does say, that therein we raze the foundation, that is,
as he interprets it in his preface, we make Christ a Pseudochrist, we auerre,
that herein we do much more magnify Christ, then they do, for they take
Christ's merits to be so mean, that they do but even serve the turn to deface
sin, and make men worthy of the joys of heaven. Nay it does not serve the
turn, but only that God does not impute sin unto us. We contrariwise, do so
highly esteem of our Saviors inestimable merits, that we hold them well able
to purchase at Gods hands, a far inferior justice, and such merits as
mortal men are capable of, and to them do give such force and value, that they
make a man just before God, and worthy of the Kingdom of heaven, as shall be
proved. Again, they do great injury to Gods goodness, wisdom, and justice
in their Justification, for they teach, that inward justice, or sanctification,
is not necessary to Justification; Yea, their Ringleader Luther says, That
the justified can by no sins whatsoever, (except he refuse to believe) lose
their salvation. Wherein, first they make their righteous man, like (as our
Savior speaks) to sepulchers whited on the out side with an imputed justice,
but within, full of iniquity and disorder. Then the wisdom of God must either
not discover this mass of iniquity, or his goodness abide it, or his justice
either wipe it away, or punish it: But (say they) he sees it well enough, but
covers it with the mantle of Christ's righteousness. Why, can any thing be
hid from his fight? it is madness to think it. And why does he not for
Christ's sake deface it, and wipe it clean away, and adorn with his grace
that soul, whom he for his Sons sake loves, and make it worthy of his love
and kingdom? What, is it because Christ has not deserved it? So to say, were
to derogate from the infinite value of his merits. Or is it, for that God
cannot make such justice in a pure man, as may be worthy of his love and his
kingdom? And this were to deny Gods power in a matter that can be done, as we
confess that such virtue was in our first father Adam, in state of innocence.
Page 77.
And M. Perkins seems to grant, That man in this life at his last gasp may
have such righteousness. If then we had no other reason for us, but that our
Justification does more exalt the power, and goodness of God, more magnify
the value of Christ's merits, and brings greater dignity unto men: our
doctrine were much better to be liked then our adversaries, who cannot allege
one express sentence, either out of holy Scriptures, or ancient Fathers,
teaching the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us, to be our
justification as shall be seen in the reasons following, and do much abase
both Christ's merits, and Gods power, wisdom, and goodness. Now to their
reasons.

R. ABBOT.
It is truly said by Master Perkins, that the Church of Rome in teaching
Justification by works, does raze the very foundation of Christian faith, and
makes Christ but a counterfeit and false Christ, because as says the Apostle,
Gal. 2.21.
If righteousness be by the law, then Christ died in vain. Therefore
peremptorily he denounces, Cap. 5.4.
Ye are abolished from Christ; ye are fallen from grace whosoever are justified
by the law. Yet M. Bishop tells us, that they do therein much more magnify
Christ then we do. But I answer him, that they do truly magnify Christ, who
yield him that honor to say or teach nothing of him but what he has revealed
and taught of himself. They do not magnify Christ, who measure and describe
him by the foolish presumptions of their own shallow and short wits. As for
us, we do not make the effect of Christ's merits to serve only that sin is
not imputed unto us, as this sycophant cauilleth, but affirm the same to be
such, as that for his sake, and Ephesians. 1.8.
in him God blesses us with all manner of spiritual blessings in heavenly
things, and that 1. Cor. 1.30.
he is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption, that is, all in all, that he that rejoices may rejoice (only) in
the Lord. But of his magnifying Christ's merits, we may rightly say as Saint
Austin upon occasion said to the Donatists, August. cont. lit. Petil lib. 2.
ca. 84. Verba sunt hominum extollentium glorians homini. sub nomine Christi, vt
gloria minuatu^ ipsius Christi.
They are the words of men, extolling the glory of man under the name of
Christ, to the abasing of the glory of Christ himself. Christ forsooth has
purchased for them justice and merits of such force and value, as that they
make them just before God, and worthy of the kingdom of heaven. These are
gallants, that think scorn to receive the reward of heaven as a poor man
does an alms, but will needs have whereof to say, I am just, I have justly and
worthily deserved heaven. Foolish hypocrite, that affirms that of the merits
of Christ, which neither he nor any of his can show to be performed in
himself, nay which his own conscience controleth by experience of himself.
The word of God teaches us no such justice or merit: they themselves find it
not in themselves; their Jesuits and Priests, to say nothing of the rest,
which are the teachers hereof, are men in the eyes of the world notorious for
treachery, for villainy, for cosinage, for unclean and filthy life, and so one
by another discovered to be; yea and of their followers a great number that
prate of their merits, are known for extortioners, whoremongers, drunkards,
swearers, profane and vile persons, and yet must we needs believe that they
are endued with such justice and merits? Nay, we rather believe that the just
judgment of God is upon them, to deliver them up to sin, who thus wilfully
yield themselves to such palpable illusions of the man of sin. But by this
means Christ with them after baptism is no otherwise a Savior, but because
he gives such justice as whereby it is in their power by free will to save
themselves, and by their merits to purchase and deserve heaven. This is it
Master Bishop, for which we justly detest you, as wicked peruerters of the
Gospel of Christ, and subuerters of true faith. Thus in seeming to set up
Christ's merits, you pull them down, and set up your selves in steed of
Christ. But the Gospel teaches us to acknowledge Christ immediately and wholly
our righteousness and salvation, 2. Cor. 5.21.
in whom and not in our selves, we are made the righteousness of God, that is,
just in the sight of God, in that his obedience and righteousness performed
and wrought in our name, and for our behoof, is imputed unto us Romans 3.25.
by faith in his blood. But so, as that this salvation to which he entitleth us
by faith in him, consists not only in the remission of sins, or in the not
imputing thereof, but also in Cap. 6.6.
destroying the body of sin, and restoring in us the image of God, Ephe. 4.24.
in righteousness and holiness of truth, he having given himself Tit. 2.14.
to purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, and Ephe. 5.27.
to make unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any
such thing. And all this Christ will effect unto us, but he will do it
according to his own will, not according to Popish fancy. All this is now in
fieri, non in facto esse, it is begun and in doing, but it is not yet finished
and done: it shall be fully perfected at the resurrection of the dead. In the
mean time he brings us not to perfect righteousness in our selves, nor
gives unto us a full immunitie from sin, that he may take away from us all
occasion of rejoicing in our selves, that as Saint Austine notes August. de
peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 3. cap. 13. Vt dum non iustificatur in
co^spectu er^s viuens, actionem gratiarum semper in dulgenti^e ipsius debeamus,
and si^ ab illa prim^ ca^sa omniu^ v^ticrum, id est, ae tumore superb^e sancta
humilitate scruemur.
whilst no man living is found just in the sight of God, we may always owe
thanksgiving unto his mercy, and by humility may be healed from swelling
pride, and Bernard in Cant. ser. 50. Vt sc^amus in die illa quia non ex
operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos sed pro misiricerdiae sua saluos nos fecit.
that we may know, as Saint Bernard says, at that day, that not for the works
of righteousness which we have done, but of his own mercy he has saved us.
Now therefore we do no wrong to Gods goodness, wisdom, justice, in our
justification, as Master Bishop fondly charge us, because we teach
justification in the same sort as God himself has taught it us, inferring
sanctification as an immediate and necessary effect, but not containing it as
an essential part. We hold sanctification to be necessary to justification in
this sense, that the one cannot be without the other, and that no man is
justified by the righteousness of Christ, who is not also sanctified by the
spirit of Christ; but we deny sanctification to be necessary to justification
in Master Bishops meaning, as to be any cause or matter of it. As for the
place of Luther wretchedly falsified by him, the true purpose of it only is to
show the work of Gods grace to be irreuocable in them upon whom he has set
the mark of his election, and has justified them by faith in Christ, to whom
as Saint Austine says, August. Soli. loq. cap. 28. Quibus omnia cooperantur in
bonu^, etiam peccata ipsa.
even their very sins do work for good, and thereof is made as it were a
triacle and preservative against sin; so that, as Bernard says, Bernard. de
triplici cohaer. clauor. vincul. and glutin. Of Certainty of Salvation. Sect.
9.
though David be branded with the blot of horrible sins, and Peter be drowned
in a depth of denying his Master, yet there is none that can take them out of
the hand of God, who because he will preserve them, therefore preserves their
faith, and continues in them his spirit of sanctification, and though by
occasion they fall, yet they never so fall, but that 1. John 3.9.
his seed remains in them, and Psalm. 37.24.
his hand is under to lift them up again. Now because we affirm the inward
sanctifying of the heart to be always an infallible consequent of
justification, there is no place for that objection of his, that we make the
righteous man like to sepulchers whited without with an imputed Justice, but
within full of iniquity and disorder. The imputation of righteousness both
outwardly and inwardly is our justification before God, and by sanctification
the justified man both outwardly and inwardly becomes other in quality then
he was before, so that although sin in part be still remaining to lust and
rebel, yet it is brought into subjection that it reigns not, and being
checked and resisted that it may not bring forth fruit, a man is not by it
reputed full of iniquity and disorder. But of this sufficient has been said
Sect. 17.
before, by occasion of the same cavil in his epistle to the Ring. Here as he
gives further occasion, we tell him, that that remainder of sin in the
regenerate, is covered with the mantle of the righteousness of Christ, and so
S. Austine as we have seen before, calls it August. de nupt. and concup.
lib. 2. ca. 34.
peccatum tectum, sin covered or hidden. But says he, it is madness to
think that any thing can be hid from the sight of God. We answer him, that God
sees it well enough with the eye of his knowledge, but by reason of that
couerture August. in Ps. ^1. Noluit aduertire Tecta quare? vt non vide^^tur.
Quid erat Dei videre peccata a^si pu^ire peccata?
will not see it with the eye of his judgment: he sees it with a discerning,
but sees it not with a revenging eye, even as it is said, Numb. 23.21.
He sees no iniquity in Jacob, nor beholds transgression in Israel. But he
demands, Why does he not deface it and wipe it away, and adorn the soul
with grace? etc. He has his answer before: I will here quit him only with
Saint Austins words, Augus. ^^nat. C^^grat. cap. 27. riot agit Deus vt ^a^ct
on^ ^a, sed agit tu^licio suo, nec ordinem sana^di accipit ab aegreto.
God is in hand to heal all, but he does it at his own discretion, and
receives not of the sick man an order for his cure. Again he asks, Has
not Christ deserved it? We tell him, ye; Christ has deserved it, and for his
merits sake it shall be done, but we must expect the time that God has
appointed for the doing of it. Christ has deserved for us to be wholly freed
from mortality, corruption and death, as before was said, but mortality,
corruption and death yet continue still. When mortality, corruption and death
shall be abolished, then shall sin also wholly and for ever be taken away.
Last of all he demands, Is it because God cannot make such justice in a pure
man? I answer him out of Tertullian, Tertul. aduers. Praxe^in Si tam abrupte in
praesumptionibus nostris hac sente^tia vtamu^, quiduis de Deo confingere
poterimus, quasi fecerit quia facere potuerit. Potuit Deus pennis hominem ad
volandu^ instrux^sse; non tamen quia potuit statim and fecit, etc. Probare
aperte debebis ex Scriptur^s.
If we will so abruptly in our presumptions conceive opinion, we may feign what
we list of God, as if he had done it, because he could do it. He could have
made man with wings to fly, but yet he has not done it. You should prove
plainly out of the Scriptures that he would so do. As for worthiness, it is
but a matter of conceit and fancy. No creature can contend upon worth with the
Creator. If Adams worth were such as he speaks of, he had been worthy to be
preserved, and he may as sawcily dispute with God, that he did him wrong in
suffering him to fall. As for that which he alleges as out of Master Perkins,
that man in this life at his last gasp may have such righteousness, it is a
device of his own, neither does Master Perkins say any thing that should yield
him any such construction. For conclusion, he tells us, that their doctrine
is better to be liked then ours, if for no other reason, yet for that it does
more exalt the power and goodness of God, more magnify the value of Christ's
merits, and brings greater dignity unto men. Where the vain man sees not,
that by the one part of his speech he crosses the other. The thing whereto the
true doctrine of the Gospel tends, is entirely the honor and glory of God,
but their doctrine forsooth serves to bring dignity unto men. But in that it
brings dignity unto men, it detracteth from the glory of God, whose light
is most clearly seen in our darkness, 2. Cor, 12.9.
his power in our weakness, his goodness in showing mercy to us that are
evil; his Dan. 9.7.
righteousness in the confession of our shame; the worth of Christ's merits in
the true acknowledgement of our unworthiness and want of merits. God has
appointed us to be Ephesians. 1.6.
for the praise of the glory of his grace, and therefore so disposes 1. Cor.
1.29.
that no flesh shall rejoice in his presence, and Esa. 2.11.
that he only may be exalted at that day. Therefore Aug. epist 29. Cum rex
iustus sederit in throno quis gloriabitur se castum habere cor? etc.
when the just king shall sit upon his throne, who shall glory that he has a
clean heart, or rejoice that he is free from sin? Our plea then must not be
Merit and worth, but only 2. Tim. 1.18.
to find mercy with the Lord. But the thing that they seek for, as M. Bishop
tells us, is the dignity of man, as indeed it is. They labor to set up
their own righteousness against the righteousness of God. They extol their
own Merit, their own worth. The Merit of Christ only yields matter of
grace to their Free will to work upon, and thereby they work for themselves,
they Merit for themselves, they save themselves; but in seeking this glory to
themselves, they purchase their own shame. What we can allege for imputation
of Christ's righteousness unto us to be our Justification, will appear in that
that follows.

3. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins first reason is this, That which must be our Righteousness before
God, must satisfic the justice of the law which says, Do these things and thou
shall live, Gal. 5.
but there is nothing that can satisfy that justice of the law, but the
Righteousness and obedience of Christ. Ergo.

This reason is not worth a rush, for when he requires that our justice must
satisfy the justice of the law, I demand what law he means? If Moses law:
of which those words, Gal. 5. Gal. 5.
Do this and thou shall live, are spoken. Then I answer with the Apostle, That
you are euacuated, or abolished from Christ, that are justified in the law:
that is, he is a Jew and no Christian, that would have Christian Justice
answerable to Moses law.

If M. Perkins would only that men justified, must be able to fulfill Christ's
law, I then grant, that they so be, by the help of Gods grace, which will
never fail them, before they fail of their duties. But says M. Perkins: That
justice of man is imperfect, and cannot satisfy the justice which God requires
in his law, Isay 6.4.
and proves it out of Esaias, who says, All our righteousness is as a
menstruous, or defiled cloth. I answer, that the holy Prophet speaks those
words in the person of the wicked, and therefore are madly applied unto the
righteous. That he speaks of the wicked of that nation and of that time,
appears plainly by the text it self. For he says before, But lo thou have
been angry, for we have offended, and have been ever in sin, and after;
There is no man that calls upon thy name, and stands up to take hold by
thee. And although the words be general, and seems to the unskillful to
comprehend himself also, yet that is but the manner of preachers, and
specially of such as become Intercessors for others, who use to speak in the
persons of them, for whom they sue: for if he had reckoned himself in that
number, he had lied, when he said: There is none that call upon thy name,
when as he immediately calls upon him in most vehement sort for mercy,
Luther and Calvin on this place.
all which the best learned among them marking, confess that this sentence
cannot be alleged against the virtue of good works. Hence gather, how
dexterously M. Perkins handles holy Scripture. That which the Prophet spoke
of some evil men, of one place, and at one time: that he applies unto all
good men, for all times, and all places.

R. ABBOT.
This reason says M. Bishop, is not worth a rush, but I am sure that his
answer is not worth a rush, as wherein we may see the absurd blindness of
these men who take upon them to be the only masters of the world. That, says
M. Perkins, which must be our Righteousness before God, must satisfy the
justice of the law which says, Do these things and thou shall live,
inferring hereof, that because no Righteousness of ours does answer the
justice or Righteousness commanded in the law, therefore no Righteousness of
ours but only the imputed Righteousness of Christ is our Justification before
God, For answer to this M. Bishop demands what law he means, whether Moses
law or Christ's law? But we make to him a counter-demand, What he means by
Moses law, and what by Christ's law? He should more plainly have declared his
distinction if he would have made an answer of it, but that that we conceive of
it is, that by Moses law he means the ceremonies of the law, by Christ's law
the moral law of the commandments commonly so called. But had he so little
understanding of the law, as to think that of the ceremonial law it was said,
Do this and thou shall live? Surely the ceremonies of the law were but Col.
2.14.
a handwriting against us, because they were an acknowledgement of
uncleanness, and sin, and trespass against that law that faith, Do this and
thou shall live; and because an acknowledgement of sin, therefore a
conviction of guilt of death incurred thereby, and yet could yield no remedy
against death, being afterward Heb. 7.18.
disanulled because of the weakness and unprofitableness thereof; so far
should we be from thinking that of the ceremonial law it should be said, Do
this and thou shall live. The young man demands of Christ, Mat. 19.16.
What good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life? Now look of what
law our Savior answers him, as M. Bishop has cited before, Verse. 17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, of the self same law
does he answer another to the same question, upon recital of a brief of the
commandments, Luc. 10.28.
This do and thou shall live, namely of the moral law, to which it has
reference Leuit. 18.5.
where it is first spoken, as appears by that that follows for declaration
of it. Of which also it is rehearsed by Ezech. 18.11.13. etc.
Ezechiel the Prophet, and is by the Apostle Saint Paul further alleged to
show the difference betwixt Romans 10.5.
the Righteousness of the law and the Righteousness of faith. Moses, says
he, this describes the Righteousness of the law, that the man which does
these things shall live thereby. Gal. 3.12.
The law is not of faith; but he that does these things, shall live in them.
Of which law he says; Romans 3.20.
By the law comes the knowledge of sin: that it says, Cap. 7. ver.
7.16.22.
Thou shall not lust; that he consents to it that it is good, that he
delights in it as touching the inner man; that the Cap. 13. v. 9. Gal. 5.14.
sum thereof is; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, all which do
undeniably point out unto us the moral law, as both August. de spir. and lit.
ca. 14.
Saint Austine and Hieron. epist. ad Ctesiphont.
Saint Hierome out of the same and such like places have expressly affirmed. Of
the same law therefore he says, Gal. 3.10.
So many as are of the works of the law are under the curse, for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the book of the law to do them. And because no man continues in
all, he concludes hereof, Ver. 11. and cap. 2.16.
that by the law no man is justified in the sight of God; that by the works of
the law no flesh shall be justified. Now of the self same law does he say that
which M. Bishop has cited for the cutting of his own throat, Cap. 5.4.
Ye are abolished from Christ whosoever are justified by the law, thereby
teaching us to resolve, that Justification by Christ, and Justification by the
work, of the law, cannot possibly concur in one. Now whereas the Apostle for
auouching Justification only by faith in Christ, takes it for a ground, that
no man fulfilleth the Righteousness of the law, M. Bishop that he may be wholly
thwart and cross unto him, affirms, that by the help of Gods grace men are
made able to fulfill the law to be justified thereby. Against which assertion,
to prove that the Righteousness of the regenerate and faithful is not such as
that it can answer the justice and Righteousness required in the law, M.
Perkins alleges the common confession of all endited by the Prophet Esaias:
Esa. 64.6.
All our Righteousness is as a menstruous or defiled cloth. For if the
Righteousness commanded by the law be most exact and perfect, and no
righteousness is performed by us but what by our weakness and corruption is
blemished and stained, then can no righteousness of ours satisfy the
commandment of the law. But M. Bishop answers, that the Prophet speaks
these words in the person of the wicked of that nation and that time, and
therefore that they are madly applied unto the righteous. Where a man would
wonder that he should be so mad as to imagine that prayer to be uttered in the
person of wicked men, or that wicked men should make mention or any their
Righteousness unto God. And as for the time, it fitteth not the age wherein
the Prophet himself lived, but was prophetically written in respect of a time
long after succeeding. He foresaw in the spirit the desolation of Jerusalem,
and the temple, and that whole land, and thereupon puts himself into the
person of the faithful, and makes himself as one of them that should live at
that time. This is very apparent by the Prophets words Verse. 10.
Thine holy cities lie wast, Sion is a wilderness, and Jerusalem a desert; The
house of our sanctuary and of our glory, where our fathers praised thee, is
burnt up with fire, and all our pleasant things are waste. This prayer then
was to serve for a direction to the faithful that then should be, to make
their moan unto God, and to entreat mercy at his hands. And very answerable to
this prophetical prayer is the prayer of the Prophet Daniel made presently at
that time. For whereas M. Bishop to prove that the Prophet speaks in the
person of the wicked, alleges those words, Esa. 64 5.
Lo thou have been angry, for we have offended, and have ever been in sin,
the Prophet Daniel likewise says, Dan 9.5.
We have sinned, and have committed iniquity and done wickedly, Verse. 7.
O Lord Righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame: Verse. 10.
We have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his ways etc.
And whereas he alleges the other words, Esa. 64.7
There is no man that calls upon thy name and stands up to take hold of
thee, the Prophet Daniel in like sort says: Dan. 9.13.
We have not made our prayer before the Lord our God. Both of them say, We have
offended, We have sinned, We have not prayed, as showing plainly that they so
spoke of other men as that they implied themselves also. Nay says M. Bishop,
that is but the manner of Preachers, and specially of such as become
Intercessours for others, who use to speak in the persons of them for whom
they sue. Where he makes the holy Prophets and servants of God as very
hypocrites to God as he himself is, as if they took upon them to accuse
themselves to God when they intended nothing less. But to drive him out of
this hole, the Prophet Daniel says of himself, that in that prayer Dan. 9.20.
he confessed his own sins, and the sins of his people, and why should
Daniel the Prophet be said to confess his own sins, and not the Prophet
Esaias, or those just and faithful in whose person Esaias spoke? Nay both the one
and the other spoke out of the true affection of the faithful at all times,
who always find in themselves defects and defaults, whereby they find just
cause in confession of sins to join themselves with other men, even as the
Prophet Esaias elsewhere does, Esa. 6.5.
Woe is me: I am a man of polluted lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
people of polluted lips. But says M. Bishop, if he had reckoned himself in
that number, he had lied in saying, There is none that calls upon thy name,
because he immediately calls upon him in most vehement sort. As if they in
whose name the Prophet speaks, might not without a lie by words of the
present time deplore the universal neglect of calling upon God, which had
been amongst them, as Daniel acknowledges, and for the most part continued
still, though God had stirred up some of their hearts now to make supplication
unto him: or as if they that did pray might not find in themselves that
faintness and want of heart and spirit, as might cause them in this behalf to
accuse themselves unto God. We cannot doubt but that there were many faithful
and godly amongst the Jews in that time of their desolation, yet in those
faithful and godly there was that default to be found, as that God said of
them, Esa. 51.18.
There is none to guide her among all the sons that she has brought forth;
there is none that takes her by the hand of all the sons that she has
brought up. In a word, the Prophet in saying, There is no man that calls upon
thee, might note a public contempt of calling upon God, without exception
against himself, as where he says, Esa. 59.4.
No man calls for justice, no man contendeth for truth, and such like, and
yet could not say, We have sinned, we have all been as an unclean thing,
without intendment of himself. Last of all, he alleges that the best learned
among us (quoting Luther and Calvin on this place) do confess that this
sentence cannot be alleged against the virtue of good works. What Luther
says upon the place, I know not, not having the book at hand, but Assert.
artic. 31
otherwhere he does allege it against the virtue of good works. Calvin gives
his opinion, that it does not so properly serve to that purpose, but his reason
is of less weight then that it should take from us a proof in the very words
so clear and pregnant as this is. But if Luther and Calvin on our side do
deny it, let him take Pigh. controu. de fide and iustificat.
Pighius and Ferus in Mat. cap. 20.
Ferus of his own side confessing and acknowledging that this place does make
against the virtue of good works, both of them alleging it for an argument
against the perfection thereof. Or if they bear no sway with him, let him
hear them whose authority he may not well disclaim; Origin saying thus,
Orig. in Romans cap. 3. Quis vel super iustitia sua gloriabitur cum audiat Deum
per Prophetam dicentem, quia omnis iustitia vestra sicut pannus mulieris
me^struatae.
Who will glory concerning his Righteousness, seeing he hears God saying
by the Prophet, All your Righteousness is as a cloth of a menstruous woman:
Hierome thus, Hieron. in Esa. cap 64. Quicquid videmur habere iustitiae, panno
menstrua^e mulieris comparatur.
By thy mercy we shall be saved, who by our selves are unclean, and
whatsoever Righteousness we seem to have, it is compared unto a menstruous
cloth. Saint Austine alluding to the same place says: August. soliloq. cap.
28. Nos omnes quasi pannus menstruatae de massa corrupta and immunda venientes
maculam immunditiae nostrae in frontibus portamus, etc.
Whatsoever he touches that is unclean, by the law it shall be unclean.
But we all as the cloth of a menstruous woman, being come of an unclean and
corrupt mass, do carry in our foreheads the blot of our uncleanness, which
from God that sees all things we cannot hide, thereby acknowledging that blot
remaining in us which must needs stain whatsoever proceeds from us. But
Saint Bernard is most frequent both in affirming this stain of all our
Righteousness, and in applying this place to the proof thereof. Bernard. in
Fest. omn. sanct. sermon. 1. Quid potest esse omnis iustitia nostra coram Deo?
Nonne iuxta Prophetam velut pannus menstruatae reputabitur, and si destricte
iudicetur iniusta inuenietur omnis iustitia nostra and minus habens.
What can all our Righteousness be, says he, in the sight of God? shall it
not as the Prophet says be reputed as a menstruous (or defiled) cloth, and
shall not our justice, if it be strictly judged, be found unjust and scant? And
in another place: Idem de verb. Esa. sermon. 5. Nostra (siqua est) humilis
iustitia recta forsitan sed non pura; nisi forte meliores nos esse credimus
quam patres nostros, qui non minus veraciter quam humiliter atebant. Omnes
iustitiae, etc.
Our base Righteousness, if it be any, is right perhaps, but not pure,
unless happily we think our selves better then our fathers, who no less
truly then humbly said, All our Righteousness is as a defiled cloth. Again in
another place he says likewise: Jdem in dedicat. eccles. ser. 5. Ipsae
iustitiae nostrae omnes ad lumen veritatis inspectae velut pannus menstruatae
inueniuntur.
All our very Righteousnesses being looked upon by the light of truth, are
found as a menstruous cloth. Again, Idem de verb. Apost. Qui gloriatur, etc.
Perfecta and secura gloriatio est cum veremur omnia opera nostra, etc. Et cum
Es^ia Propheta omnes iustitias nostras non aliud qu^m pannum menstruatae
reputandas esse cognoscimus.
Our perfect and secure rejoicing is when we are afraid of all our works,
as holy Job witnesses of himself, and with the Prophet Esaias do know that
all our Righteousness is to be no otherwise reputed but as a defiled cloth.
Hereby then let M. Bishop now understand, that M. Perkins dealt no otherwise
but dexterously in the handling of this place, and that that which the Prophet
Esaias spoke, did so concern the faithful of that time and place whereof he
spoke, as that they have true application to the faithful of all times and in
all places, because no reason can be given why the faithful of one time
should so speak, but by the same it is enforced upon the faithful of all
times.

4. W. BISHOP.
1. Cor. 4.
But he will amend it in the next, where he proves out of Saint Paul, that a
clear conscience (which is a great part of inherent justice,) can nothing
help to our Justification: I am privy to nothing in my self, and yet I am
not justified thereby. Here is a very pretty piece of cosinage. What, does the
Apostle say that he was not justified by his clear conscience? nothing less:
but that albeit, he savv nothing in himself to hinder his Justification, yet
God who has sharper eye-fight, might epsy some iniquity in him, and
therefore durst not the Apostle affirm himself to be justified, as if he
should say, if there be no other fault in me in Gods sight, then I can find by
mine own insight, I am justified, because I am guilty of nothing, and so the
place proves rather the uncertain knowledge of our Justification, as I have
before showed.

But M. Perkins adds, that we must remember, that we shall come to
judgment, where rigor of justice shall be showed. We know it well, but
when there is no condemnation to those that by Baptism be purged from
Original sin, Page 28.
as he confesses himself the Apostle to teach in our consents, about
Original sin, what then needs any justified man greatly fear the
rigorous sentence of a just judge? And Saint Paul says himself in the person
of the just: That he had run a good race, etc. and therefore, there was a
crown of justice laid up for him, by that just judge, and not only to him,
but all them that love Christ's coming. And concerning both, Inherent justice,
and the ability of it, to fulfill the law, and what law, hear this one
sentence of S. Augustine. Sermon. 18. de verb. Apost.


He that believes in him, he has not that justice which is of the law, albeit
the law be good, but he shall fulfill the law, not by justice which he has of
himself, but which is given of God, for charity is the fulfilling of the law,
and from him is this charity powered into our hearts, not certainly by our
selves, but by the holy Ghost which is given us.

R. ABBOT.
There is none so ready to call harlot as is the harlot, none so ready to
object cosinage to another as he that is the cosiner himself. I pray thee,
gentle Reader, whether will thou rather think to be the cosiner, him that
says that the Apostle, saying, I am not thereby justified, does mean as he
says, I am not thereby justified, or him that will make thee believe that the
Apostle thereby means, I cannot tell whether I be justified or no. Indeed
cosiners commonly use colors, and labor for crafty and cleanly conueyance,
but M. Bishop is none of those that make dainty of the matter; he sticks not
in every man's sight to cut the purse: that which in every man's eyes is
expressly denied, he makes no bones at all to turn into a matter of question
and doubt. The place has been sufficiently handled in the former question
Sect. 12.
Of the Certainty of Salvation; here I will only set down what Gregory
Bishop of Rome conceived of this place. Greg. Moral. lib. 5. cap. 8 Sape ipsa
iustitia nostra ad examen diuinae iustitiae deducta iniustitia est, and sordet
in districtiene iudicis quod in aestimatione fulge^ operantis.
Often times, says he, our very Righteousness being brought to the examination
of the Righteousness of God is unrighteousness, and it is loathsome in the
severity of the judge, which in the opinion of the worker shines bright.
Whereupon Saint Paul when he said, I am guilty to my self in nothing, by and
by added, but I am not justified thereby. Who forthwith insinuating the cause
why he was not justified says, But he that judges me is the Lord. Acsi
dicat: Idcirco in eo quod nihil mihi conscius sum iustificatum me abnego, quia
ab eo quime iudicat examinari me subtilius s^to.
As if he should say, Therefore do I deny my self to be justified by my
being guilty of nothing, because I know my self to be more nearly sifted by
him that judges me, etc. Quia and ipsa nostra perfectis culpa non caret, nisi
hanc seue^us iudex in subtil^ lance examin^ misericorditer penset.
Because even our perfection is not without fault, unless the severe judge do
with mercy vvaigh it in the strict balance of his examination. Again he
says of the same place: Ibid. cap. 23. Districtionem diuinae iustitiae
contemplantes etiam de ipsis operib. iure pertimescimus quaenos fortia egisse
putabamus. Ducta namque ad internam regula^ nostra rectitudo si districtum in
dicium inuenit, multis tortitudinum suarum sinibus in intimam rectitudinem
impingit.
Beholding the strictness of Gods justice, we are justly afraid of those
very works, which we thought we did with strength. For our Righteousness
being brought to the internal rule, if it find severe judgment, by many
creekes of wryings and turnings offends against the most inward (or perfect)
Righteousness. Whence the Apostle Paul seeing himself to have the bones (that
is, even the strength) of virtues, and yet these bones of his did tremble at
strict examination, says, I am guilty to my self in nothing, yet am I not
thereby justified. Acsi diceret, Recta egisse me recolo, attamen demeritis non
praesumo; quia ad eius examen vita nostra ducitur sub quo nostrae fortitudinis
and ossa turbantur.
As if he should say, I remember I have done the things that be right, but yet
I presume not of any merit, because our life is brought to the censure of him
before whom the very bones of our strength are troubled. Thus by the
judgment of him whose judgment M. Bishop by no means may refuse, S. Paul
plainly denies himself to be justified, because though he knew nothing by
himself, yet he had to do with him who in his very best works, much more in
many secret sins, could find sufficient to condemn him. And this is the true
meaning of those words, that howsoever a man, if it be so, know nothing by
himself, yet the Lord has matter enough against every man, that he may be
justified in that which he has said, Psalm. 143.2.
that no man living shall be justified in his sight. But yet the same Apostle
who here says of himself, I know nothing by my self, namely as touching any
unfaithfulness in the stewardship that God had committed unto him, which was
the matter spoken of, yet in other respect found cause to say of himself, Romans
7.14.
I am carnal; sold under sin; Verse. 19.
I do not the good which I would, but the evil which I would not that do I.
Verse. 23.
I see another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and
leading me captive to the law of sin that is in my members. O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death. So that here is a
further fault committed by M. Bishop, in that he urges the words of the
Apostle as simply and generally true, which were meant only respectively, as
if he had absolutely said that he knew nothing at all against himself, when he
meant it as touching any default in his service and charge that Christ had
imposed upon him. Now M. Perkins to take away the opinion of our own
Righteousness, and to show that we have no other but the Righteousness of
Christ to rest safely upon, alleges, as Gregory does, the rigor and
severity of Gods judgment, which admits of nothing but what is exact and
perfect, according to the rule of justice prescribed unto us. Where M. Bishop
shows himself a very stupide and senseless man, not moved with the 2. Cor.
5.11.
terrors of the Lord, and the dread of that judgment which the very Angels
tremble at. We know it well, says he. Yea do? but what is then your refuge and
defense? Marry, seeing there is no condemnation to them that by Baptism be
purged from Original sin, as says he, M. Perkins himself confesses the
Apostle to teach, what then needs any justified man greatly fear the
rigorous sentence of a just judge? Wherein he notably abuses M. Perkins for
the hiding of his own shame. For neither the Apostle, nor M. Perkins do teach,
that by Baptism we are purged from Original sin, but only that in baptism
it is remitted and pardoned, so that though it continue still in us, yet the
faithful are not thereby holden guilty before God. So then by forgiveness of
sins through the imputation of Christ's merits and obedience, it is that there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, it is not for that there is
nothing in them for which otherwise they might justly be condemned. Surely they
that rightly know themselves, do know that in themselves there is that still
being, for which God might justly cast them away, if he should judge them in
themselves, but their comfort and hope is that for Christ's sake it is not
imputed unto them, that they shall stand before Gods judgment seat in the
veil of his innocence and most perfect Righteousness, and in him shall have
eternal life adjudged unto them. But with M. Bishop the case is far
otherwise. There is no condemnation, because there is nothing worthy of
condemnation, all justice, all innocence, no impuritie or uncleanness, no
more sin then was in Adam in the state of innocence, as he has Sect. 10
before spoken in the question of Original sin. May we not marvel that an
hypocrite should thus securely flatter himself, being occasioned to bethink
himself of that dreadful and fearful day? We are purged from Original
sin, says he: what needs then any justified man greatly to fear the
rigorous sentence of a just judge? But far otherwise thought Saint Austine
when he said, as we heard before, August. epist. 29. Cum rex iustus sederit in
throne, quis gloriabitur se castu^ habere cor, aut quis gloriab^tur se esse
immunem a peccato? Quae igitur spes est nisi superexultet miserecordia iudicium?
When the just king shall sit upon his throne, who shall glory that he has a
clean heart, or that he is free from sin? What hope then is there, says he,
unless mercy be exalted above judgment? And what? in the rest of his life
has the justified man no cause greatly to fear the rigorous sentence of a
just judge? no sin, no trespass for the rigorous sentence of a just judge to
take any hold of? We have seen before, that our best works will not endure
severity of judgment, how shall we then quail by reason of our sins? S.
Austin says very well, Aug. in Psalm. 42. Qui^unque hic vi^it. quantum libet
just viua^ vae illi sicum illo in iudicium intrauerit Deus.
Who so lives here, howsoever justly he live, woe unto him if God enter into
judgment with him. And fully answerable hereunto is that which Gregory says,
Greg. Moral. li 8. c. 21 Quantalibet iustitia polleant, nequaquam sibi ad
iust^tiam vel electi sufficient si districte in iudicio requirantur.
Not the very elect howsoever they excel in justice, shall be able to approve
themselves innocent if they be narowly sifted in judgment. But most effectual
to the purpose is that of Hierome, Hieron. in Esa. l. 6. c. 13. Quum dies
iudicij vel dormitionis aduenerit, dissolue^tur omnes manus, quia n^llum opus
dignum Dei iustitia reperietur, etc. Omne quoque cor^siue anima hominis
tabescet and pauebit conscientia peccati sui.
When the day of judgment or of death shall come, all hands shall be dissolved,
because there shall no work be found vvorthie of the justice of God, neither
shall any man living be justified in his sight. Whereupon the Prophet says, O
Lord, if thou markest iniquities, who shall endure it; every heart and soul
of man shall faint and fear by reason of the conscience of his own sin. And
will M. Bishop notwithstanding say, what needs any justified man greatly
fear the rigorous sentence of a just judge? The best is, that he leaves no
man to make use of that which he says, because he will give no man leave to
assure himself that he is justified. Yet to make his matter good, he alleges
that Sainr Paul says, that he had run a good race, etc. and therefore there
was a crown of justice laid up for him by that just judge, etc. Of which
place we would gladly have known how he makes application to his purpose. The
Apostle makes mention of a crown of justice laid up for him, and to be
rendered unto him by a just judge, but he does not say that he needs not to
fear the rigorous sentence of a just judge. God is a just judge as well when
he judges by laws of mercy, as when he judges by laws of extremity; as
well in the Romans 3.27.
law of faith, as in the law of works; but the rigorous sentence of this just
judge is only when he judges by the law of works. By the law of faith God
forgiueth and pardons, he considers with favor, and 2. Cor. 8.12.
if there be a vvilling mind it is accepted according to that a man has, not
according to that that he has not, and all this he does as a just judge,
because by law he does whatsoever he does. But in the rigor of the law which is
the law of works, he remitteth nothing but requires all to Mat. 5.26.
the uttermost farthing; nothing pleases but what is exact, and perfect, and
fully answerable to the rule. S. Paul then expected that God as a just judge
would yield unto him the crown, not by the law of works, but by the law of
faith, wherein God Psalm. 103 4.
crowns in mercy and loving kindness, because this crown is a crown of
justice, Bernard de great. and lib. arbit. sub finem. Corona iustitiae sed
iustitiae Dei non suae. Justu^ est quippe vt reddat quod debet: debet* autem
quod pollicitus est. Et haec est iustitia de quae praesumit Apostolus,
promissio Dei.
not of Paul's own justice, says S. Bernard, but of the justice of God. For it
is just with God to pay that he owes, and he owes that which he has
promised. And this is the justice, says he, upon which the Apostle presumes,
even the promise of God. Now very much does M. Bishop mistake, to think that
God rendereth by the rigorous sentence of a just judge, that which as a just
judge he rendereth by promise according to the law of faith. In a word it
touches the Apostle Paul, which Saint Austine says unto God: August. in
Psalm. 129. Si nobiscum seuerus iudex agere volueris, non miserecors pater, quis
stabit ante ocul^s tuos?
If thou vvilt deal as a rigorous judge, and not as a merciful father, who
shall stand in thy presence? The place of Austin by him cited makes nothing at
all against us, nor helps him at all. He would thereby prove Inherent
justice, and we deny it not; only we say, that in this life we are far from
the perfection of it. In this life we are August. de verb. Apost. ser. 15.
Vtatores, non habitatores, non possessores.
travelers to it, not dwellers in it, not possessors of it, as Saint Austin
speaks in the same Sermon, misquoted by M. Bishop, the eighteenth for the
fifteenth. Ibid. ser. 16. Puto hoc esse dicere, Iustus sum, quod est, peccator
non sum.
I think it is all one for a man to say, I am just, says he, as to say, I am
no sinner, and who is there living that can so say? Therefore advisedly he
says, implebit legem, he shall fulfill the law, not he does fulfill. He now
fulfilleth it in part, but shall perfectly fulfill it when charity shall be
perfect, which is Rom 1.3.10.
the fulfilling of the law, which August. epist. 29. Plenissima charitas
quamdiu hic homo viuit est in nemine.
shall be in no man so long as he lives here. Therefore in another place he
brings in the Apostle himself, saying, Idem de verb. Apost. ser. 5. Non
implet legem infirmitas mea, sed laudat legem voluntas meae.
My weakness fulfilleth not the law, but yet my will commends the law,
referring it to the commandment, Thou shall not lust. This is the state of
our Righteousness here, rather a desire to fulfill the law, then any perfect
attainment of our desire. And thus M. Bishops answer to the first argument is
indeed not worth a rush.

5. W. BISHOP.
Now to the second argument. He which knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5.
was made sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God, which
is in him: Hence M. Perkins reasons thus. As Christ was made sin for us, so
we are made the Righteousness of God in him: but Christ was made sin by
imputation of our sins, he being most holy: Therefore a sinner is made
righteous, in that Christ's Righteousness is imputed unto him. I deny both
propositions; the former, because it has a comparison in the manner of our
Justification, with the sin which Christ was made for us: for in the text of
the Apostle there is no signification of a similitude that Christ was so made
sin, as we are made just. That is then M. Perkins vain gloss, without any
likelihood in the text. The other proposition is also false, for Christ was not
made sin by imputation, for sin in that place is taken figuratively, and
signifies according to the exposition of ancient Fathers, An host or Sacrifice
for sin: Which Christ was truly made: his body being sacrificed on the
Cross for the discharge of sin, and not by imputation.

How these words of the Apostle, Justice of God, are to be understood, see S.
Augustine. Tract. 26. in Ioh. Jtem Epist. 120. ad Honorat. cap. 30. Item in
Psa. 30. Conc. 1. De spirit. and lit. c. 9.
One place I will cite for all: The justice of God (says he) through the faith
of Christ Jesus, that is by faith wherewith we believe in Christ: for as that
faith is called Christ's, not by which Christ believes, so that Justice is
called Gods, not whereby God is just, both of them, faith and justice be ours,
but therefore they are termed Gods, and Christ's, because through their
liberality they are given to us. Which interpretation may be confirmed out of
that place of S. Chrysostom, which M. Perkins cites, saying: It is called
Gods Justice, because it is not of works, but of his free gift. So that it is
not that which is in God himself, but such as he bestows upon us, and that
justice of it self is pure, and wants no virtue to work that for which it
is given, to wit, to make a man righteous. S. Anselme a right virtuous and
learned Catholic Archbishop of ours shall be answered, when the place is
quoted.

R. ABBOT.
The words of the Apostle are plain; yet M. Bishop denies that there is any
signification of a similitude that Christ was so made sin as we are made
just. M. Perkins, to approve that there is a similitude, alleged the
exposition of Anselmus: Anselm. in 2. Cor. cap. 5. Ille peccatum vt nos
iustitia, non nostra, sed Dei, non in nobis sed in illo, sicut ille peccatum,
non suu^, sed nostrum, nec in se, sed in nobis.
He was made sin that we might be made Righteousness, not our own but
Gods, not in our selves but in him, as he was made sin not his own, but
ours, not in himself but in us. M. Bishop answers, that Anselme shall be
answered when the place is quoted. He was loath of his labor to search for it,
being left vnquoted by M. Perkins, because he saw that all his wit could not
devise what to say against it. But when he will answer, he must not answer
Anselme only, but Austin also from whom Anselme borrowed that exposition, as he
used to do very much. August. Enchirid. cap. 41. Ipse ergo peccatum vt nos
iustitia, nec nostra sed Dei simus, nec in nobis sed in ipso, sicut ipse
peccatum non suum sed nostrum nec in se sed in nobis constitutum similitudine
cat^is peccati in qua crucifixus erat demonstrauit.
He then was made sin, says Austin, that we might be made Righteousness,
not our own but Gods, nor in our selves but in him, even as he by the
similitude of sinful flesh wherein he was crucified, did show forth sin,
not his own sin but ours, not being in him, but in us. In which words we see
it plainly affirmed, which M. Bishop denies, that the Apostle in those words
did intend a comparison betwixt Christ's being made sin, and our being made
Righteousness, that as Christ not being a sinner, yet was reputed as a sinner
for our sakes, and for the sin that is in us, so we not being in our selves
just and righteous, yet are reputed just and righteous for his sake, and for
the Righteousness that is in him. To this purpose the exposition of Hierome
was also brought in, and the place quoted. He omitted to answer to Anselme,
because the place was not quoted; but why did he ouerpasse the other place
cited directly to the point, but because he intends nothing but treachery
and falsehood, and wilfully shuts his eyes against apparent truth? The words
of Hierome are as clear as the sun: Hieron. in 2. Cor. cap. 5. Christus pro
peccatis nostris oblatus peccati nomen accepit, vt nos efficerem^r iustitia Dei
in ipso, non nostra, nec in nobis.
Christ being offered for our sins, took the name of sin, that we might
be made the Righteousness of God in him, not ours, nor in us. Where it is
evident, that the Righteousness whereby we are justified before God, is not
any Righteousness that is in us, but it is the Righteousness of Christ
imputed unto us, even as our sin was imputed unto him. Now then it should
seem that it was not M. Perkins his vain gloss to make this comparison, but
it was some likelihood thereof in the text, that made all these to conceive
thereof as M. Perkins did. As touching the other proposition, But Christ was
made sin by imputation of our sins, he says that it also is false, and
denies that Christ was made sin by imputation. But how then, if not by
imputation? Forsooth by being made a sacrifice for sin. But how was he made a
sacrifice for sin, if not by having sin imputed unto him. The ancient
writers well observed in the description of the sacrifices of Moses law, that
the sacrifice for sin was sometimes called by the name of sin. As where
Moses says, Leuit. 4.29,
He shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin, that is, of the sin
offering; and he shall slay the sin, that is, the sacrifice for sin. Now
because they found the name of sin to be thus given to the sacrifice for
sin, therefore where it is said of Christ that he was made sin for us, they
took the meaning to be this, that he was made a sacrifice for sin. Which
being admitted helps M. Bishop nothing, because there is yet question to be
made, why the sacrifice for sin should it self be called by the name of
sin? Surely it could be for no other cause, but because the sin of the man
for whom it was offered, was imputed to the dumb beast in figure of Christ,
and it was to die as if it had committed the sin. Therefore the man that had
sinned was appointed Leuit. 1.4.
to lay his hand upon the head of his offering, as it were there to lay his
sin. So says Theodoret, Theod in Leuit quaest. 1. Qui victimam offerebat,
imponebat super caput eius manus tanquam suas ipsius operationes pro quibus
hostiam offerebat.
He that brought the sacrifice laid his hands upon the head thereof, as to lay
upon it his own works for which he offered the sacrifice. Thus does God
himself express the meaning of that ceremony: Leui^. 16.21.
Aaron shall put his hands upon the head of the Goat, and confess over him
all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their trespasses in all
their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat: so the goat shall bear
upon him all their iniquities. Since Christ then was made a sacrifice for sin,
it follows that the sin of them for whom he was sacrificed, was laid upon
him, and imputed to him. Therefore Origin to apply that figure says, that
Origin. in Leuit. lib 1 Peccata generis humans imposuit super corpus suu^.
Christ laid the sins of mankind upon his own body. And thus the Scripture
teaches us: Esa. 53.6
All we like sheep have gone astray, etc. and the Lord has laid upon him the
iniquities of us all. 1. Pet. 2.24.
He has borne our sins in his body upon the tree. Thus Hierome brings in
our Savior Christ, saying, Hieron. in Psalm. 87. Ir^m and protellam furoru tui
qu^ in gentibus eff^surus eras super me induxisti qui peccata little suscepi
Thou have brought upon me that wrath and storm of thy fury, which thou wast
to power forth upon the nations, because I have taken upon me their sins. How
are our sins laid upon Christ, how did he bear them, how has he taken them
upon him, but by having the same imputed unto him? Therefore Saint Austin
says: August. in Psalm. 22. Delicta nostra sua delicta fecit, vt iustitiam suam
nost^an^ iustitiam faceret.
He made our sins his sins, that he might make his Righteousness our
Righteousness. God made him sin, that is says Elias Cretensis, Elias
Cretens. in Gregor. Nazianzen. Orat. 5.
He suffered him to die as a sinner because of our sin. But Chrysostom goes
yet further, not only Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. hom. 11.
he made him sin, that is, he suffered him to be condemned as a sinner, but
also Ibid. Iustum fecit peccatorem vt peccatores faceret iustos.
he made the just a sinner, says he, that he might make sinners just. All
which speeches can no otherwise be made good, but by granting the imputation
of our sins to be laid upon Jesus Christ, especially the last, which seems
very hardly spoken, but yet the Fathers doubt not thus to speak to signify
this imputation, as shall appear further hereafter in the eleventh Section.
Now as touching that which he cites out of Saint Austine to declare what Saint
Paul means by the justice or Righteousness of God, there is nothing in that
exposition that makes against us. For we also say, that the justice of God is
meant, not that whereby God himself is just, but whereby he justifies us. For
Christ needed not for himself to be made under the law, so to perform the
Righteousness thereof for his own Justification before God, being otherwise
simply and absolutely just; but what he did, he did it for our sakes, that we
thereby through faith in him should be justified in Gods sight. And this
justice or righteousness we acknowledge to be given unto us by Gods free
liberality and bounty, even as Christ himself is given unto us, and therefore
are we said therein, Romans 5.17.
to receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness. Which
cannot be understood of inherent justice, because we do not yet receive the
abundance of that gift, but only Cap. 8.23.
the first fruits, it being such, as that S. Austine says thereof so long as
we live here, that August. de ciuit. Dei, li. 19. ca. 27. Jpsa iustitia nostra
tanta est in hac vita, vt potius remissione peccatorum constet quam perfectione
virtutum.
it rather consists in forgiveness of sins then in perfection of virtues.
Which being so, albeit his exposition contain nothing material against us,
yet we hold the same not so properly applied to the thing which he there
expounds. For we do not think that the justice or righteousness of God is
so called only for that it is the gift of God, but because thereby we are
justified, thereby we are just and righteous in the sight of God. Which because
we are not by inherent justice, as S. Austine every where confesses, it
follows that the righteousness of God must be understood of another kind of
righteousness, which is that whereof the Apostle instructs us, whereby Romans
4.6.
the Lord imputes righteousness without works, according to the words of
David: Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is the man whose vnrighteosnesse is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Therefore the Greek
Scholiast expounding the righteousness of God to be that that is given of God,
further shows what that gift is, Oecumen in Rom cap. 3. Iustitia Dei est
iustificatio and absolutio seu liberatio a peccatis a quibus non potu^^ lex
li^erare
The justice or righteousness of God is justification and release, or
deliverance from sins, from which the law could not deliver us. And so
Chrysostom, though he say as M. Bishop cites, that justification is of grace,
that is, of Gods free gift, yet withal says, that Chrysostom in 2. Cor. hom.
11. De^ est ista iustitia quando non ex operibus, quando necessarium est etiam
nullam maculam inuen^^.
the righteousness of God is so called, because it is not of works, inasmuch
as it is necessary that there be no spot sound. Where he presupposes that
there cannot be found any righteousness of works, but such as is spotted and
defiled, and therefore imports that the righteousness of God which must be
without spot, can by no means be understood of the righteousness of works.
Neither does it help M. Bishop any whit, that inherent righteousness is pure
of it self as it is the gift of God, because though it be pure of it self and
in the work of God, yet it is soiled in the puddles of our corruption, and
receives a blemish by our crooked and untoward using of it, and is neither
given to that end, nor is sufficient to yield us justification in the sight of
God. Hitherto therefore the argument stands good: As Christ was made sin,
so we are made righteousness. Christ was made sin by imputation of our
sin. We are therefore made righteous by the imputation of his righteousness.

6. W. BISHOP.
Romans 5.
M. Perkins third reason. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so
by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous: mark here a comparison
between the first and second Adam, hence I reason thus; As by the obedience of
Adam men were made sinners, so by the obedience of Christ, are they made
righteous: but men are made sinners by imputation of Adams sin unto them, and
not only by propagation of natural corruption, ergo: by imputation of Christ's
justice we are made righteous.

Answer. The comparison I allow, because it is the Apostles, and deny that men
are made sinners by imputation of Adams fault; and say, that every one
descended of Adam by natural propagation, has his own personal iniquity
sticking in them, which is commonly called Original sin, and an high point
of Pelagianisme is it, to deny it. For albeit we did not taste of the forbidden
fruit in proper person, yet receive we the nature of man, polluted with that
infection really, and not by imputation. And so the comparison serves not at
all M. Perkins turn, but bears very strongly against him, it being thus
framed: As by Adams disobedience many were made sinners, even so by Christ's
obedience many shall be justified: This is his Mayor. Now to the Minor. But by
Adams disobedience they were made sinners, by drawing from him, every one his
own proper inherent iniquity, in like manner we are justified by Christ, not
by imputation of his justice, but by our inherent justice, which is powered into
our souls, when we are in Baptism borne a new in him. See what penury of
poor arguments they have, that to make some show of store, are forced to
propound such as make manifestly against them.

R. ABBOT.
This argument Master Bishop could no way avoid, but by showing himself
either impudently wilful, or absurdly ignorant: and surely if his knowledge be
no better then be here expresses, he has ill bestowed those thrice seven
years that he has before spoken of, in the study of Divinity, and were best
to set himself to school again. The case is very clear, that if we be
sinners by the imputation of Adams sin, then are we also righteous by the
imputation of the righteousness of Christ. Therefore he denies that we are
made sinners by the imputation of Adams sin. Yea, but M. Bishop, you should
then have told us how it is true, that the Apostle says, that Romans 5.19.
by Adams disobedience we are made sinners. For how should we be sinners by his
disobedience, but for that his disobedience is imputed unto us? Bellarmine
says, and he therein says truly, that Bellarm. de Amiss. great. and statu
peccati. lib. 4. ca. 10. Peccat^ Adami ita posteris omnibus imputatur, acsi
omnes idem peccatu^ patrauiss^nt.
Adams sin is imputed to all his posterity, as if all had committed the
same. He alleges to that purpose Saint Bernard, saying, that Bernard. Domin.
prima post Epiphan. ser. 1. Nostra est culpa and nobis iusto Dei iudicio
imputabatur licet occulto.
Adams sin is our sin, and by the just though secret judgment of God, is
imputed unto us. He says again in another place, that Bellar. ibid. lib. 5.
ca. 17. Communicatur per imputationem. Omnibus enim imputatur qui ex Adamo
nascuntur.
Adams sin is communicated unto us by imputation; that it is imputed to all
that are borne of Adam, and calls it the imputation of Adams disobedience. If
Adam then by disobedience were holden a sinner, and his disobedience is imputed
unto us, as if we our selves had disobeied, it must needs follow, that by the
imputation of the same disobedience, we also are sinners as well as he.
Therefore does the Apostle say, that Romans 5.12.
in him, that is in Adam, all have sinned. If in Adam all have sinned, then in
Adam all are sinners, in Adam all are guilty of sin. To which purpose Saint
Bernard says, Bernard. de aduent. Dom. ser. 1. In Adam omnes peccauimus, and
in eo sententiam damnationis accepimus omnes.
In Adam we have all sinned, and in him we have all received the sentence of
damnation. So Saint Austine also says, that August. de Trint. lib. 13. ca. 12.
Parentum priorum debito vniuersos posteros obligante.
the debt (or trespass) of our first parents, did bind all their posterity
after them. Adam then bare the person of all mankind, either standing to stand
for all, or falling to fall for all, being to beget children according to his
own image, either wherein he should continue if he did continue, or whereto he
should fall if he did fall. Therefore Ibid. vt supra.
when he sinned, we all being in his loins, as Bellarmine says, sinned in him
and by him, and his sin by imputation lies upon us all. But says M. Bishop,
every one descended of Adam by natural propagation, has his own personal
iniquity sticking in him, which is commonly called Original sin. In which
words he somewhat touches the reputation of his scholership, in that he has
not learned to put difference betwixt personal and Original sin, which
writers commonly distinguish one from another. For personal sin is that
which grows from the person whose sin it is, and is taken to be that which
we call actual sin; but original sin is that, which being actual and
personal to the first man, is derived by propagation, and thereby becomes
natural to all the rest. Thus Cyprian mentions them as diverse, when speaking
of the Patriarchs and Prophets, and other just and holy men, he says Cyprian.
de ieiunio and tentat. Christi. Nec originals nec personali caruere delicto.
they neither wanted original nor personal sin. So Bellarmine M. Bishops
good Master seuereth them, in saying, that Bellarm. vt supra. Originale
peccatum no^ minus vere and proprie peccatu^ est quam personale. In Adamo
actuale and personale, in nobis originale dicitur.
Original sin is no less truly and properly sin then personal, and that
Adams sin in him is called actual and personal, but in us original. It is
wonder that so great a man as M. Bishop should be ignorant in this point. But
now what will he make of this original sin? Marry, says he, we receive the
nature of man polluted with that infection really, and not by imputation.
Indeed we receive the nature of man polluted with infection, but does your
learning serve you no better, but to make infection the whole matter of
original sin? You should know, that original sin contains Bellarm. de
Amiss* great. and statu peccati. lib. 4. cap. 10.
reatum and maculam, first a guilt of actual transgression, and consequently a
blot of infection. For of this infection or pollution of nature S. Austine in
infinite places does rightly observe, that it is August. Retract. li. ^. ca.
15. Peccatum tale vt idem sit and paena peccati.
so a sin, as that it is also a punishment of sin. Now a punishment
presupposes a guilt of that sin whereof it is a punishment. For Idem cont.
Julian. lib. 2. Non erat iustum sine crimine transire supplicium
it is no justice, as Austine says, that the punishment should pass without
the sin. Seeing therefore the punishment of the sin of Adam is lying upon
us, it must necessarily follow, that there is lying upon us an imputation of
the sin. And so the same S. Austine says, that Idem. Retract. li. 1. cap.
15. Dicimus eos reatu eius implicatos and ob hoc poenae ^bnoxi^^ denneri.
we are holden enwrapped in the guilt thereof, and thereby are holden subject to
the punishment. M. Bishop the^ we hope will learn henceforth to see that it
arises of imputation, that we receive the nature of man polluted really with
infection. But by this means he is now become in a pitiful case, having no
way left to avoid the argument, but that it stands firm and sure, that as
from Adam we are first sinners by imputation, and consequently sinful by
corruption, so from Christ we are first justified by imputation, and
consequently renewed to inherent justice by sanctification. In moment of time
both these concur together, but in order of nature there is first
righteousness by imputation, and thereby is way made to inward regeneration.
At this argument they are all feign to hoodwinke themselves, because they
cannot truly describe the state of original sin according to their own
grounds, but they give it way ineuitably to proceed against them. They will
have it, as M. Bishop here tells us out of Bellarm de great. and lib. arb. li.
1. ca. 4.
Bellarmine, that the Apostles meaning is, that we are made sinners by inherent
corruption. But we tell them, and they can by no means avoid it, that the
condition of being sinners by inherent corruption, because it is a punishment
of sin; must presuppose us to be formerly sinners otherwise, and that is
only by imputation. As therefore we are first sinners by imputation from Adam,
so are we first justified by imputation from Christ, regeneration to inherent
righteousness following of the imputation of the righteousness of Christ,
even as inherent corruption follows of the imputation of Adams sin, as
before was said. And hereof S. Bernard speaks most notably: Bernard. epist.
190. Cur no aliunde iustitiae cum aliuna e reatus? Alius qui peccatorem
constituit, alius qui iustificat a peccato: alter in semine, alter in sanguine.
An peccatum in semine peccatoris and non iustitia in Christi sanguine? sed
iustitia, inquiet, si cuius est quid ad te? Esto, sed sit etiam culpa cuius
est; quid ad me? An iust^tia iusti super eum erit, and impietas impij no erit
super eu^? Non conueni^ filium portare iniquitatem patris and fraterna fieri
exortem iustitiae.
Why should not righteousness be of another, seeing guilt is of another? It is
another that makes me a sinner, it is another that justifies from sin: the
one in his seed, the other in his blood. Is there sin in the seed of a
sinner, and is there not righteousness in the blood of Christ? But thou will
say, If there be a righteousness of any ones, what is that to thee? Be it so:
but then let the fault also be whose it is, what is that to me? shall the
righteousness of the righteous be upon himself, and shall not the wickedness
of the wicked be upon himself. It is not meet that the son should bear the
iniquity of the Father, and be denied to be partaker of the righteousness of
his brother. In which words we see that most clearly he affirms, both the
imputation of Adams sin to condemnation, and the imputation of the
righteousness of Christ accordingly to justification. I will conclude this
point with the words of Chrysostom: Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 10. Si tibi Iudaeus
dixerit, Quo pacto vno recte agente Christo vniuersu^ orbis saluus factu^ est,
possit illi respondere, Quo pacto vno non obediente Adam vniuersus orbis
condemnatus est?
If a Jew shall say unto thee (put case he had said, If a Papist shall say unto
thee) How is all the world saved, it being only Christ that has done
righteously, thou may answer him, How was the whole world condemned, when it
was only Adam that obeyed not? The matter of our condemnation then is in the
one, and the matter of our salvation in the other, corruption of nature being
consequently drawn by generation from the one, as a part of our condemnation,
and sanctification to holiness consequently derived by faith and regeneration
from the other, as a part of our salvation. And now he may well see that our
arguments be not poor, nor make against our selves, as he pretends, but his
answers are such penurious and poor shifts, as that now they are once
discovered, we expect from him no further maintaining of them.

7. W. BISHOP.
His fourth reason. The Papists make Christ's obedience their satisfaction, but
satisfaction is equal to justice, therefore they must make it as well their
justice as satisfaction. For the Mayor he cites Bellarmin. Lib. 2. de Iustif.
cap. 7.
I have read the Chapter, and find no such words, further I say, there is a
great difference between satisfaction for mortal sins, and justification:
for satisfaction cannot be done us; for the guilt of mortal sin is infinite,
being against an infinite Majesty, and so no creature can make full
satisfaction for it: wherefore the infinite valor of Christ's satisfaction is
necessarily required, who having taken away the guilt of eternal punishment,
due to sins, leaves us his grace to satisfy for the temporal pain of it,
as shall be in his due place declared more at large.

Again, a man must needs have his sins pardoned, and grace given him,
before he can make any kind of due satisfaction, for he must be in the state
of grace before he can satisfy, wherefore he must needs fly to the benefit of
Christ satisfaction: There is nothing like in justification; for first to make
a man just in Gods sight, requires no infinite perfection, but such as a mere
man is very well capable of, as all must needs confess of Adam in the state
of Innocence, and of all the blessed Souls in heaven who be just in Gods
sight. Neither is it necessary to be infinite, for to be worthy of the joys
of heaven, which be not infinite as they are enjoyed of men or Angels, either
of whom have all things there in number, weight, and measure. Briefly, it is a
most easy thing for one man to pay the debts of another, but one man cannot
bestow his wisdom or justice on another, and not credible, that God (whose
judgment is according to truth) will repute a man for just, who is full of
iniquity: no more then a simple man will take a Black-moore for white,
although he see him clothed in a white suit of apparel.

R. ABBOT.
In true and right understanding, satisfaction is fully equivalent to
justification, and that that is our satisfaction, is also our justification
before God. For declaration whereof, it is to be observed, that sin
consists partly in commission, partly in omission: partly in doing that that
we ought not to do; partly in not doing that that we ought to do. Satisfaction
then for sin must serve to acquit both the one and the other: it must take
away what we have done, and supply what we have not done, or else it cannot be
called a satisfaction. Therefore as on the one side in the evil that we have
done, we are reputed as if it never had been done; so on the other side, in the
good that we have not done, we are reputed as if all had been done. Accordingly
S. Austine says, that August. Retract. l. 1. cap 19. Omnia mandata facta
deputa^tur, quando quicquid non sit ignoscitur.
all the commandments of God are reputed to be done, when that is pardoned
that is not done. Our satisfaction therefore is our justification with God,
because thereby we are reputed as if we had performed all the righteousness of
God. And so does Bernard make them both one, when saying, Bernard. ep. 190.
Assignata est ei aliena iustitia qui caruit sua.
There is the righteousness of another assigned to him who wanted of his own,
he adds to express the same, Satisfactio vnius omnibus imputatur, etc.
the satisfaction of one is imputed unto all, even as he alone has borne the
sins of all. But more clearly is it euicted by the words of the Apostle,
who, where David pronounces the man Psalm. 32.1.
blessed, to whom the Lord forgiueth his sins, says, that he Romans 4.6.
describes there the blessedness of that man to whom the Lord imputes
righteousness without works; giving thereby to understand, that forgiveness
of sins is the imputation of righteousness without works. If therefore in
satisfaction there be forgiveness of sins, then is there also justification,
that is, the imputation of righteousness without works. Now then since
Bellarmine confesses, that the merit and obedience of Christ is our
satisfaction, Bellarm. de Iustif. lib. 2. ca. 7. Si solum vellent nobis
imputari Christi merita, quia nobis donata sunt, and possumus ea Deo patre
offerre pro peccatis nostris, quoniam Christus suscepit super s^ onus
satisfaciendi pro peccatis nostris, nosque Deo p^tri reco^cilia^di, recta esset
eorum sententia.
he must acknowledge it also to be our justification, that is, the thing
whereby, and for which we are reputed just in the sight of God, because thereby
we are reputed, as having perfectly fulfilled all the commandments of God. I
have read the chapter in Bellarmine, says M. Bishop, and find no such words.
But he was drowsy belike when he read it, let him read it better when he is
well awake, and then he shall find that Bellarmine says, that in true meaning
it may be said, that the merits of Christ are imputed unto us, for that they
are given unto us of God, and we may offer the same to God the Father for our
sins, in respect that Christ has taken upon him the burden of satisfying for
our sins. Where what does he but acknowledge that Christ according to the
burden taken upon him, has in his merits made satisfaction for our sins? but
in his folly like M. Bishop, because he understands not himself, will not
have them imputed for our righteousness before God. His differences betwixt
salvation and justification are impertinent, because that justification which
he speaks of, is not our justification before God, as shall appear. Briefly
therefore to touch what he says, the guilt, says he, of mortal sin is
infinite, being against an infinite majesty. But therefore the guilt of all
sin is infinite, neither is there any sin but what is mortal, because all
sin is against an infinite majesty. Therefore to all sin the infinite
valor of Christ's satisfaction is required, which because it is infinite, is
absurdly by M. Bishop restrained to the taking away only of the guilt of
eternal punishment; for that that is infinite admits no restraint.
Wherefore that which he adds of our satisfaction for temporal pains, is a
mere fable; neither without nor in the state of grace can we make satisfaction
to God for any sin. Justification he says requires no infinite perfection,
and it is true indeed as he means it, but the true justification requires
an infinite perfection and worth, to purchase unto sinners forgiveness of
sins, atonement with God, regeneration of grace and everlasting life, which
none could do but only the Son of God. And whereas he says, that there is
not any infinite perfection necessary to be worthy of the joys of heaven, he
wonderfully deceives himself upon a false ground. There is no infinite
perfection necessary to come to the enjoying or possessing of the joys of
heaven, but there is an infinite perfection necessarily required to be worthy
thereof, because that that is finite can have no proportion in worth to that
that is infinite, and therefore the finite perfection of man cannot be worthy
of the infinite joys of heaven. But says M. Bishop, the joys of heaven are
not infinite, as they are enjoyed of men or of Angels, either of whom have all
things there in number, weight, and measure. Wherein he again mistaketh much,
because the joys of heaven as touching time and continuance, are infinite, and
come within no bounds or compass of number or measure, in which sort the
damned bear the infinite wrath of God, according to the guilt of sin, being
not thereof capable in any other sort. Which being so, it would be known of M.
Bishop or some of his, how it should come to pass, that the perfections of men
in the state of grace, should be of sufficient worth to purchase the infinite
joys of heaven, and the satisfactions of men in the state of grace, should not
be of the like sufficient worth to purchase deliverance from the infinite
pains of hell. But in this we shall hereafter have occasion further to appose
him. Here he goes on and tells us, that it is a most easy thing for one man
to pay the debt of another, and we willingly admit it to be true. But then what
we were in debt unto God for want of wisdom and justice, what hinders but
that Christ our surety might pay the same? If he pay for us what we want for
our selves, then his payment acquitteth us of all imputation of our want. And
surely though a man bestow not his wisdom or justice upon another yet nothing
is there to let, but that what one man by wisdom or justice does for another,
the same should stand good for him for who^ it is done. But we would gladly
know of M. Bishop, if his holy harlot mother have instructed him so far, how
it should stand with reason, that they by the Popes indulgences, should be made
partakers of the merits and good works one of another, and that it should be
against reason, that we by the ordinance of God should be partakers of the
merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ. The Abbots of the Cistercian Friars
being gratified in a request by the King of France, are said by Matthew Paris.
Math. Parisan Henrico. 3. anno 1244. Sp^ciale suorum bonorum operum ei
participium concesserunt.
to have granted unto him the special participation of their good works. The
Friars here in England made men believe, that they Out of the copy of a pardon
granted by the Carmelite Friars in London. anno 1527.
gave them participation of all the masses, prayers, fastings, watchings,
preachings, abstinences, indulgences, labors, and all good works that were
done by the brethren of their order here in England. With what face do these
wretches deny, that to the righteousness and merit of the Son of God, which
thus blasphemously and lewdly they attribute to the blind devotions, and
imagined righteousness of sinful and wicked men? Yea, but says M. Bishop, it
is not credible that God whose judgment is according to truth, will repute a
man for just who is full of iniquity, no more the^ a simple man will take a
Black-moore for white, although he see him in a white suit of apparel. And
indeed it is not credible, that God will repute him to be inherently just, who^
he has taught to acknowledge himself a sinner, but credible it is and true,
that God does accept as just for Christ's sake, and by forgiveness of sins
impute righteousness unto him, who^ he sees in himself to be unrighteous.
August. in Joan. tract. 3. Omnes qui per Christum iustificati, iusti, non in se
sed in illo Si in se interroges, Adam sunt: in illo si interroges, Christi suus.
All that are justified by Christ, says Austin, are just, not in themselves
but in him. If a man ask of them in themselves, they are Adam: if in him, they
are Christ's. It should not then seem so strange to M. Bishop, that men, though
being unjust in themselves, yet by faith should be reputed just and righteous
in Christ. And surely S. Bernard painely says, Bernar. in Ca^t. fer. 61. Et in
me quide^ operit (iustitia tua) multitudinem peccatorum; n te autem quid nisi
pietatis thesauros diuitias bo^itat^?
Thy righteousness covers in me a multitude of sins, but in thee o Lord, what
but the treasures of piety, the riches of goodness? Thus he is content to
acknowledge himself a blacke-moore, black in himself, but clothed with the
white suit of Jesus Christ. So does the Church the spouse of Christ say of her
self, Cant. 1.4.
I am black, O daughters of Jerusalem, but comely, that is, says Theodoret,
Theod in Ca^t. Ego sum Aethiopissa.
I am a Blacke-moore, not only for that she has been, but also for that she
still in part is: Ambros. de ijs qui^nit. myster. cap. 7. Nigra per
fragilitatem conditionis humanae, decora per gratiam: nigra, quia ex
peccatoribus, decora fidei sacramento
black (says Ambrose) by frailty of humane condition, comely by grace;
black because she is of sinners, comely by the sacrament of faith: Iustus in
Cant. number. 8. Nigra co^fessione peccatorum; formosa gratia sacramenti.
black (says Iustus) by confession of sins, comely by the grace of the
sacrament. This is the beauty of the Church for the time, not her being
without sin, but remission and forgiveness of sins, testified by the
sacraments of Christ, being pledges of the redemption that she has obtained in
him. And hereof Bernard well says, that Bernar. in Ca^t. ser. 25 P^test spo^sa
cum pulchritudine vtique compositionis naeuo no^ carere nigredinis, sed sane in
loco peregrinatiocus suae. Alioqum erit eum eam sibi in patria exhibebit
sponsus gloriae gloriosam, non habente^ macula^ aut rugam, aut aliquid
huiusmodi. At vero nunc si d^c^ret quia nig^^dinem non haberet, seipsa^
seduceret, etc.
in the place of her pilgrimage, with the comeliness of her feature, she
wants not her mole or spot of blackness. It shall be otherwise in her
country (says he) when the bridegroom of glory shall make her to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. But now if she
should say she has no blackness, she should deceive her self, and there were
no truth in her. And yet we see, that even now the bridegroom speaking to her,
says, Cant. 1.7.
O thou fairest among women: Cap. 4 1.
Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair. She is Ezech. 16.14.
fair by his beauty which he has set upon her, but remains yet still a
Blacke-moore by that that she has remaining of her self. Therefore he says,
O thou fairest, but yet adds, amongst women. S. Bernard tells the meaning,
Ber^ar. in Ca^t. ser 38 Ego te dico pulchram, sed inter mulieres, id est, ex
part.
I call thee fair* but amongst women, that is, in part or partly fair,
thereby giving again to understand, that partly she continues a Blacke-moore
still. And what? does M. Bishop think it amiss to confess so much of
himself? does he take it in scorn to be likened to a Blacke-moore? Let him be
well assured, that if he think scorn to confess himself a Black-moore, he
shall never be any of them that shall be clothed in white. Nay, because being a
Blacke-moore, and very black, he sets naught by the white garment of Jesus
Christ, let him know that his shame and nakedness lies open, and his
filthiness continues loathsome and hateful in the sight of God. As for his
exaggeration, I omit it, because it is but the running over of his unclean
mouth, which cease not to cry, full of iniquity, full of iniquity, of him
whom Christ has begun to purge from iniquity, and framed in conversation to
depart from iniquity, as we profess of every one that is justified by faith
in him.

8. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins last reason is taken from the consent of the ancient Church, and
yet cites (saving one two lines) nothing out of any ancient writer, nor out
of any other, but out of only S. Bernard, who lived 1000. years after Christ,
so that he signifies that there is little relief to be had in antiquity.
Which Calvin declares more plainly, for he commonly setting light by all other
in this question, rejects also S. Augustine saying: Lib. 3. Instit. cap. 11.
number. 15.
Ye^ not the sentence of Augustine himself is to be received in this matter,
who attributes our sanctification to grace, wherewith we are regenerate in
newness of life by the spirit. And Kemnitius in the first part of his
examination of the Council of Trent says, We contend not how the Fathers take
justification. And a little after: I am not ignorant that they spoke otherwise
then we do of it. Therefore M. Perkins had reason to content himself with some
few broken sentences of later writers. But was S. Bernard (trow you) in this
one point a Protestant? Nothing less. His words be these: The justice of
another is assigned unto man, who wanted his own: Epist. 190.
man was indebted, and man made payment, etc. But better let his own reason
there cited, serve for exposition of his former words: which is this: For why
may not justice be from another, as well as guiltiness is from another? Now
guiltiness from Adam is not by imputation, but every one contracts his own,
by taking flesh from him; even so justice is from Christ powered into every man
that is borne again of water and the holy Ghost. In the second place he says,
That man's justice is the mercifulness of God: that is, by Gods free grace and
mercy it is bestowed upon us. With S. Bernard in the third place we
acknowledge, that we have no justice of our own, that is from our selves, but
from the goodness of God, through the merits of our blessed Sauiors passion;
read his first sermon upon these words of the Prophet Isay: Vidi Dominu^, etc.
Ser. 1. Super Isaiam.
There you shall see him speak plainly of inherent justice, and how it is a
distinct thing from the justice of Christ. Another broken piece of a sentence,
In Psalm. 22.
there is cited out of S. Augustine: Christ made his justice our justice. That
is, by his justice, he has merited justice for us, as he expounds himself.
Tract. 27. in Joan.
What is this, the justice of God, and the justice of man? The justice of God
is here called that, not whereby God is just, but that which God gives to man,
that man may be just through God.

R. ABBOT.
S. Bernard may be sufficient to testify unto us the doctrine and consent of
the ancient Church, unless M. Bishop can charge him to have departed
therefrom, which because he dares not do, least happily he should make an
heretic of him, whom his holy Father has made a Saint, he must needs yield,
that antiquity has acknowledged the imputation of the righteousness of
Christ, because S. Bernard having so learned of antiquity, has given express
testimony and witness of it. Yea, but Master Bishop tells us, that Calvin
plainly declares, that for this there is li^^le relief to be had in
antiquity, who commonly setting light by all the rest, in this question
rejects also Saint Austine. Now he cites certain words of Calvin very
lewdly falsified, and wrested from the purpose to which they were spoken. The
thing that Calvin there speaks of, is the signification of the name of grace.
He taxes the Master of the Sentences for his misconstruction of it, who, he
says, though taking upon him to follow Austine, yet varied from him, both
obscuring and corrupting him. But the schoolmen that came after, he condemns
much more, for that they never gave over, till they were grown in a manner to
Pelagianisme. Hereupon he adds, Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. ca. 11. sect. 15. Ac
ne Augustins quidem sententia vel saltem loquendi ratio per omnia recipienda
est. Tametsi enim egregie homine^ omni iustitiae laud spoliet ac totam Dei
gratiae transcribit, gratiam tamen ad sanctificationem refert, qua in vitae
nouitatem per spir^tum regeneramur.
And indeed the sentence of Austine, or at leastwise his manner of speaking, is
not in all respects to be received. For although he do notably bereave man of
all commendation of righteousness, and do ascribe it wholly to the grace of
God, yet he refers grace to sanctification, whereby through the spirit we
are borne again to newness of life. Compare these words gentle Reader with
those that M. Bishop has cited, and consider whether thou may dare
hereafter to trust him upon his word. Calvin notes Austine, only for some
improper understanding, or using of the name of grace, as meaning thereby the
grace of sanctification, as the Scripture by grace means the free mercy of
God, accepting us freely in Christ by the forgiveness of our sins, and this
M. Bishop cites, as if Calvin had affirmed, that Austines opinion had been
wholly against him, as touching justification by the righteousness of Christ.
In like sort he abuses Chemnicius, whose words in the former place are these,
Chemn. Exam. Council. Triden. de iustific. Patribus l^cet verbum (iustificare)
accipia^t pro renouatione qua efficiuntur in nobis per spiritu^ opera
iustitiae, non mouemus litem, vbi iuxta scripturam recte and commode tradunt
doctrinam quemodo et quare persona Deo reconcilietur, etc
We contend not against the Fathers, albeit they commonly take the word
(justifying) for that renew^^g whereby the works of righteousness are wrought
in us, whereas according to the Scripture, they rightly and conveniently
deliver the doctrine, how and for what a man is reconciled unto God, receives
remission of sins, and adoption, and is accepted unto everlasting life. In
the other place he says, Patres quidem verbu^ iustificare in hac
significatione saepe vsurpare non ignoro, sed de proprietate linguarum quaestio
est.
I am not ignorant that the Fathers do often use the word (justify) in this
signification, (namely to make inherently just) but the question is of the
propriety of tongues. He confesses that the Fathers sometimes do somewhat
differ from us, as touching the signification of the word, but rightly and
truly affirms, that as touching the matter and point of doctrine they teach
the same that we do. Surely if betwixt the Papists and us there were no greater
difference, then only about the meaning of a word, we would not loose our time
nor spend our labor friuolously and idly to contend against them. But they
abuse the Fathers mistaking of a word, to the overthrowing of the doctrine
approved by the Fathers. And yet the Fathers when they place justification in
the forgiveness of sins, as many times they do, and teach that by the
righteousness that is in us being defective and imperfect, August. de Trin.
lib. 13. cap. 14. Vtique iustu^ est vt debitores quos tenebat liberi
dimitta^tur, credentes in eum quem sine vllo debito occidit: hoc est quod
iustificari dicimur in sanguine Christi.
Psalm. 143.2.
no man living shall be justified in the sight of God, as they allege out of
the Psalm, they do neither in matter of doctrine, nor meaning of the word
depart from that that is maintained by us. S. Austine says; Just it is that
the debtors (or trespassers) whom the devil held, should be let go free,
believing in him whom he slew without debt (or trespass.) This is it that we
are said to be justified in the blood of Christ. Jbid. cap. 16. Iustificati
plane in eo quod a peccatis omnibus liberati: liberati autem a peccatis omnibus
quoniam pro nobis est Dei filius qui nullum habebat occisus.
We are justified in his blood, in that we are freed from all sins, and freed
from all sins, for that the Son of God who had no sin was slain for us. So
Theodoret giving the meaning of the words of the Apostle, we are justified
freely, etc. makes it to be this, Theodoret. in Romans cap. 3. Sola fid^ allata
remissionem peccatorum consequimur.
Bringing faith only, we obtain the forgiveness of our sins. Origin makes
these words, Thy sins are forgiven thee, Origin. ad Romans cap. 3.
the pronouncing of the justification of the woman, who with her tears washed
the feet of Christ. S. Bernard says, that Bernard. in An^unciat. ser. 1. Creed
quia per ips^m tibi peccata do^antur. Sic enim arbitratur Apostolus g^atis
iustificari h^minem per fidem.
our being justified freely by faith, which the Apostle speaks of, consists
in believing that our sins are forgiven us. But most fitly to the purpose he
says in another place, Idem epist. 190 Vbi re o^^iliatio, ibi rem^ssio pec
catorum, and quid ipsa nisi iustificatio?
Where there is reconciliation, there is forgiveness of sins, and what is
that but justification? Now according to this construction of justification,
they are wont to deliver, that August. in Psa. 33. Iste est modus humanae
iustitiae, vt vita mortalis quantumlibet proficiat, quia sine delicto esse non
potest in hoc non delinquat, dum speratin cum in quo est remissio delictorum.
Jde^ de ciu. Dei. lib. 19. cap. 27. vt supra. Sect. 5.
man's justice or righteousness, is to hope or put trust in him^^^^ whom is
forgiveness of sins; that our righteousness in this life is rather
forgiveness of sins, then perfection of virtues; that Idem. cont 2. epist.
Pelag. lib 3. cap. 5. Omnium piorum, etc. Spes vn^ est quod aduocatum habemus,
etc.
the only hope of all the godly groaning under this burden of corruptible flesh
in the infirmity of this life, is this, that we have an advocate with the
Father Jesus Christ the just, and he is the propitiation for our sins, as S.
Austine speaks: that Hieron. adu. Pelag. lib. 1 Tunc iusti sumus qua^do nos
peccatores fatemur and iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito sed ex Dei
consistit misericordia.
then we are just when we confess our selves sinners, and our righteousness
consists not of our merit, but of the mercy of God, as Hierome says: that
Ambros. de Jacob. etc. Non gloriabor quia iustus sum, sed gloriabor quia
redemptus sum. Gloriabor non quia vacuus peccati sum* sed quia mihi remissa
sunt peccata. Non gloriabor quia profui aut quia profuit mihi quisquam, sed
quia pro me aduocatus apud patrem Christus est, sed quia pro me Christi sanguis
effusus est.
we are not to rejoice that we are just, but that we are redeemed; not that we
are without sin, but that our sins are forgiven us; not in the good that we
have done, or that any other man has done for us, but that Christ is our
advocate with the Father, that the blood of Christ was shed for us, as Ambrose
says; that Bernard. in Cant. ser. 22. Iustitia in absolutione peccatorum.
Christ is our righteousness in the forgiveness of our sins, and that Ibid.
ser. 23. Hominis iustitia indulgentiae Dei.
Gods forgiveness (or pardon) is man's righteousness, as S. Bernard says. Now
what do we teach otherwise then all these have taught, when we say, that we are
reputed just by the forgiveness of our sins, and that this is our
justification in the sight of God? For what are we but just in the sight of
God, when there is taken from us the imputation of all sin? Surely August. de
verb. Apost. ser. 16. Puto hoc esse dicere. Iustus sum, quod est, Peccator non
sum.
to be just is the same as not to be a sinner; and Idem in Psalm. 118. conc. 3.
Jovia fidei pro non peccantibus habentur quibus peccata non imputantur.
in the way of faith they to whom their sins are not imputed, are accounted
not sinners. Therefore it follows that they are accounted just. Yea as was
before alleged, Idem Retract. lib. 1. cap. 19. vt supra sect. 7.
all the commandments of God are reputed to be done, when that which is not
done is pardoned. But he who is reputed to have done all the commandments of
God, is reputed just. He therefore to whom God pardons, that which he has
not done is reputed just. Idem in Psalm. 118. con. 3. Siquid a deuiante
co^mittitur propter viam non imputatur, and tanquam non fuerit operatus
accipitur.
In the way of faith if any thing be committed by stepping out of the way, for
the ways sake it is not imputed, and a man is taken as if he had not done it.
Yea, Bernard. in Cant. 23. Omne quod mihi ipse non imputare decreuerit sic est
quasi non fuerit.
all that God has determined not to impute, is all one as if it had never
been. Now he that is taken as if he had never done amiss, is reputed just.
Whosoever therefore is in the way of faith, is reputed just. And thus much is
included in the sayings of the Fathers, ^heresoeuer they teach forgiveness of
sins, who thereby to express our justification learned of the Apostle
himself, who says, that we are justified Romans 3.24.
through the redemption that is in Christ, and expounds that redemption by
Ephe. 1.7. Col. 1.14.
forgiveness of sins, and in the not imputing of sin, understands Romans
4.6.7.8.
the imputing of righteousness without works, as before was said. Now
forgiveness of sins is yielded unto us by virtue of the merit and
righteousness which Christ has wrought for us, who Rom 8.32.
was given for us, and Tit. 2.14.
gave himself for us; who was Gal. 4.5.
made under the law to redeem us, and therefore is Bernard. in Cant. ser. 70.
Iustus pro hominibus.
just or righteous for us; who Luke 22.10.
shed his blood for us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.10.
died for us, Act. 3.26.
rose again for us, and whatsoever he has done, has done for us. And if for
us the Son of God have Mat. 3.15.
fulfilled all righteousness and obedience to his Father, who had no need to
undergo any such service for himself, should it not be strange that the same
should not be reckoned and imputed unto us? Very justly it is accounted ours,
whatsoever he has done for us, no less then if we our selves had performed
the same for our selves. And this is the imputation of Christ's righteousness
which we maintain, by which our sins are covered and hidden, that is,
pardoned and forgiven, and we are consequently reputed just, even by the
justice or righteousness of Christ, because in the righteousness of Christ is
the forgiveness of our sins. But why do they reject imputation of
righteousness, which, as we have seen before, the spirit of God so expressly
recommendeth unto us, and by the very phrase imports that we are not
righteous in our selves? Surely it were Origin. in Rom ca. 4 Quid videbitur
gratiae iusto reputari iustitiam ad iustitiam?
no matter of grace (or favor) as Origin well notes, that to a just or
righteous man his righteousness should be reputed for righteousness. But it
is a matter of favor and grace that God reputeth us just. It must therefore of
necessity be by other means then by the righteousness that is in us, which
can be no other but the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, that it may
be verified of him which is written, Ierem. 23.6.
This is the name whereby they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness.
Thus says Ambrose, Ambros. in Psa. 118. ser 18. Ipse iustitia est and nobis de
suo dedit sui habere consorti^m
Christ is righteousness, and of that that is his, he has given unto us to
have fellowship with him: Ide^ de Abrah. lib. 2. cap 8. vere nos tegmine
velleris sui vestiuit and in demum introducit aeternae salutis
he has indeed clothed us with the cover of his fleece, and brings us into
the house of everlasting salvation. And hereof he intimates a comparison,
which Pigh. controu. De fide and iustificatione.
Pighius himself could not but approve, that as Jacob received the blessing
and inheritance in the garments and apparel of Esau his elder brother, to whom
the same did properly belong, so we receive the blessin^ of God, and are
accepted to eternal life in the garment of the righteousness of Christ by
faith in him, whilst thereby we obtain the forgiveness of our sins.
Ambros. de Jacob etc. li. 2. cap 2. Odoratus est odorem vestimentorum. Fortasse
illud est quia non operibus iust^ficantur sed fi^e: quoniam carnalis infirmitas
operibus impedimento est; fidei autem claritas factorum ^b umbrat errorem quae
meretu^ veniam delicto^u^.
Isaac smelled the savor of Jacobs garments (namely which Rebecca his mother
had put upon him of his brother Esaus.) Happily, says he, it imports this,
that we are not justified by works but by faith, because the infirmity of
flesh is a hinderance to works, but the brightness of faith ouershadoweth the
error of our works, as which obtains the forgiveness of our sins. This
ouershadowing is our safety; this hiding and covering of our errors and
imperfections, which disgrace and blemish all our righteousness and works, and
what have we to cover and hide the same, but only the fleece of the merit of
Jesus Christ? And this point Saint Bernard, as he was most abundant in
spiritual meditation, so has most clearly and divinely set forth unto us,
and save that we know with whom we have to deal, we should hold it almost
incredible, that there should be that impudency in any man, as with so
wretched and beggarly answers, to go about to shift off so plain and manifest
proofs. Bernard. epist. ^90. vt supra. Sect. 9.
There is the righteousness of another, says Saint Bernard, assigned unto him
that wanted of his own. The righteousness then that is assigned unto us, is
another and not our own. Yea, but let his own reason, says Master Bishop,
serve for exposition of his former words. Be it so, and what is that reason?
Forsooth this, says he, For why may not justice be from another, as well as
guiltiness is from another? Indeed Saint Bernard uses these words, but how
are they fitted to Master Bishops turn, when as it is expressly said Ibid.
aliunde iustitia, aliunde reatus, righteousness is elsewhence or of another;
guilt is elsewhence or of another? For if it be of another justice that a man
is just, and of another guilt that he is guilty, then is there imputed
righteousness and imputed guilt. Nay, says he, guiltiness is not from Adam
by imputation, but every one contracts his own by taking flesh from him.
Babbling sophister, if every one contract guilt from Adam by taking flesh from
him, tell us what it is whereof every one is guilty? Is it not of Adams
sin, Romans 5.12.
in whom all have sinned? To be borne in sin is the punishment of sin, and
there can be no punishment but by former guilt, and there can be no former
guilt but of the sin of Adam. It remains therefore that our first guilt is
by the imputation of Adams sin, and consequently that our Justification is by
the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, as on both sides has been
already more largely handled in the sixth Section. I say nothing here more, but
what Austin says as touching infants newborn, August. de v^r^. D^m. ser. 3^.
(...) nihil adhuc commis^runt. sed in radics perterunt.
They have committed nothing in the branch, but in the root they are perished
and lost. To the second place cited by M. Perkins, he has somewhat to answer
by means of M. Perkins disadvantage to himself: Bernard. in Cant. ser. 2^.
Suff^cit m^i^ ad omnem iustitiam solum habere propiti^^m ^llum cui s^li peccaus.
It suffices me for all Righteousness only to have him merciful unto me to
whom only I have sinned. But what is the mercy here intended by S. Bernard?
That appears by the other words, Ibid. Non peccare Dei iustitia est; h^minis
iustitia indulge^tia Dei.
Gods pardon is man's Righteousness. The mercy of God then that suffices for
all Righteousness is in the forgiveness and pardon of our sins. But M.
Perkins translating the words, man's Righteousness is the mercifulness of God,
gave M. Bishop an advantage to say, as if Bernard had spoken of Inherent
righteousness, that by Gods free grace and mercy it is bestowed upon us. But
S. Bernard does not say that man's Inherent righteousness by the gift of God,
but Gods forgiveness of man's sins, is the Righteousness of man in the sight
of God: and if the place had been rightly translated, he had been further put
to his shifts for answer to it. In the third place he was quite grauelled, and
knew not which way to get out, and therefore mentions nothing of it, least
the Reader should plainly discern him to be a liar. But I will do him the
favor to set it down once again. Bernard. in Cant s^r. 61. Ego quoque
misere^^ri^as Dom^ni in aeternum c^nta^o. Nunquid ius^it. as meas? Domine memor
bor iustitiae tuae s^^^us. Jp^a est enim and mea, nempe factu^es tu^^^ iusti^ia
a Deo. Nunquid verendum ne non v^a ambo^us sussiciat. Non est pallium breue
qu^d s^cundum prophetam non possit operire duos. Et te pariter et me ^p^rte^
l^rgit^r l^^ga and aetern^ iustitia Et in (...) quidem operit multitudinem
peccatorum; in te quid nisi pietatis thesauros, diuitias bonitatis?
I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever, says Bernard. Shall I sing
of mine own Righteousness? Lord, I will remember (or will make mention of)
thy Righteousness only: for that is mine also. For thou art made unto me
Righteousness of God. Am I to stand in fear least one (Righteousness) be not
sufficient for us both? It is not a short cloak, such as cannot cover two.
This Righteousness being large and everlasting, shall largely cover both thee
and me. And in me verily it covers a multitude of sins, but in thee what
but the treasures of piety, the riches of goodness? Now what does Saint
Bernard here intend? Marry says M. Bishop, that we have no justice of our
own, that is, from our selves, but from the goodness of God, through the
merits of Christ's passion. Yea but what is that justice that he means, that
we have from the goodness of God? Forsooth he tells us, that it is Inherent
justice, and that Saint Bernard speaks thereof elsewhere, as a distinct thing
from the justice of Christ, What, and is that all that S. Bernard here says?
Give over, M. Bishop, give over for shame; strive no longer against your
conscience: your own heart told you here, that you played the part of a lewd
and wilful man. The Righteousness here spoken of, is but one, and only one:
it is a Righteousness sufficient both for Christ and us; it covers both
Christ and us; it covers in us a multitude of sins, and in him the riches
of mercy, and is this meant of Inherent righteousness? Is our Inherent
righteousness sufficient both for Christ and us? does it cover both Christ and
us? But why do I thus debate with a man altogether void of conscience and
shame? S. Bernard expressly testifies the one Righteousness of Christ, which
only we are to make mention of, as being sufficient both for him and us,
covering in us a multitude of sins, so as that by it we are accepted for just
in the sight of God. But to make his matter seem the better, he refers the
Reader to the first Sermon of Bernard upon the words of Esaias, Vidi Dominum,
there to see somewhat of Inherent justice, whereas in that Sermon he has
nothing at all to that purpose, so that I should have thought it mistaken, but
that the margin and the text have cited it both alike. And that it may appear
that he does but gull and abuse his Reader, it is in the fifth of those very
Sermons that S. Bernard has affirmed, that Bernard. de verb. Esa. ser. 5 Vt
supra sect. 3.
our Righteousness, if we have any, is not pure, and is by the Prophet
compared to a defiled cloth, as before was showed, whence it follows
ineuitably, that our Inherent righteousness is not that whereby we stand as
just in the sight of God. The sentence of Austin was not cited broken but
whole. August. in Psalm. 22. Delicta nostra sua delicta fecit, vt iustitiam suam
nostra^ iustitiam faceret.
He has made our sins his sins, that he might make his Righteousness our
Righteousness. M. Bishops honesty appears as it is wont to do, in leaving
out that part of the sentence which should give light to the rest; otherwise S.
Austins meaning would be plain, that as Christ has made our sins his, so he
has made his Righteousness ours, which is only by imputation. As for his
exposition it is altogether absurd, because Christ by meriting Inherent justice
or Righteousness for us, has not made his Righteousness ours, which is the
thing that S. Austin affimeth, but has given us, a Righteousness of our own.
The exposition of the justice of God which he cites out of Austin, is wholly
impertinent, because the Righteousness of Christ, of which he says that
Christ made his Righteousness our Righteousness, is the Righteousness which
Christ wrought for us in his own person, not that which God works in us for
his sake. The sin was wrought by us, the Righteousness by him: he took to
him our sin, and imparted his Righteousness unto us. And this Righteousness
imputed unto us, is truly said to be that which God gives to man, that man may
be just through God, so that therein S. Austin howsoever says nothing that is
contrary to our defense.

9. W. BISHOP.
Now let us come to the reasons of Catholics, which M. Perkins calling the
objections, proposes for them, to prove, that the justice which God bestows
upon us, is Inherent, and not imputed.

OF INHERENT JUSTICE.
FIrst object. As one man cannot be made wise, valiant, or continent by the
wisdom, valor, or continency of another, so one man cannot be made just, by
the justice of another. M. Perkins answers, That one man's justice cannot be
made another, no more then life or health, but Christ's justice may, who by
covenant of grace is made every man's own, with all his gifts.

Reply. This answer solueth not the difficulty any whit at all, for Christ's
wisdom, power, and other gifts are not imputed unto us, as it is evident. Why
then is his justice more then the rest? we confess that in a good sense all
Christ's gifts are ours, that is, they were all employed to purchase our
redemption, and we do daily offer them to God, that he will for his Sons sake
more and more wash us from our sins, and bestow his graces more plentiful
upon us: thus are all Christ's riches ours, so long as we keep our selves
members of his mystical body, but this is nothing to the point which the
argument touched, how one man may formally be made just by the justice of
another, rather then wise by the wisdom of another.

R. ABBOT.
We have Sect. 6.
before heard it confessed by Bellarmine, that the sin of Adam is imputed to
all his posterity, as if every man had committed the same himself, neither
can they truly describe the state of Original sin out of the doctrine of
their own schools, but they must confess so much. Now let them resolve us,
how one man may be reputed to have sinned in the sin of another, and we will
resolve them how we may be reputed to have wrought all Righteousness in the
Righteousness of Christ. Surely as Adam did beat the person of all mankind,
and August. de peccat mer* and remiss. lib. 3. cap. 7 Adhuc omnes ille vnus
fueru^t.
we all were that one man, as S. Austin says, and therefore what he did was as
done by all and every one, so did Christ bear the person of all the elect and
faithful, and was accounted as them all in one, Bernard. epist. 190 Non alter
qui forefecit alter qui satisfecit, quia caput and corpus vnus est Christus.
not one that made the forfeiture, and another that made the satisfaction,
because one Christ is both the head and the body, and therefore what he did,
likewise was as done by all and every one. M. Perkins therefore rightly said,
that Christ being made ours by the covenant of grace, we one with him, and he
with us, albeit the Righteousness Inherent in him cannot be inherent in us,
that we thereby should be inherently just, yet by imputation the same is
derived unto us, and we thereby and for his sake are accepted, as if we were
inherently just in most perfect and high degree. But says M. Bishop, the
wisdom and power of Christ, and his other gifts are not imputed unto us: why
then his justice more then the rest? I answer him, that that only is imputed
unto us which by the covenant of grace is to be imputed, which only has
reason of imputation. Although Christ be wholly ours, that is, for us and for
our use unto Salvation, yet by imputation he is ours only, in that which by
way of humiliation and obedience he has undertaken and performed for us. That,
I say, is imputed unto us of Christ, which Christ is merely and only for us;
what he is absolutely of himself, it is not imputed unto us, albeit his
infinite wisdom, and power, and prudence, and whatsoever he is of himself,
have concurred to the doing of that that should be imputed unto us, and do
concur to the effecting and maintaining of those benefits, which of that
imputation are to arise unto us. But the wisdom and power of Christ, as they
are in his humane nature a part of the image of God, and of that Righteousness
whereby man should be wise to know, and able to do what concerns him toward
God, are imputed unto us as a part of his Righteousness, and thereby he
acquitteth our ignorances and errors, our weaknesses and frailties, that the
same stand not against us in the sight of God. And thus one may be reputed wise
by the wisdom of another, and just by the justice of another, because where
any thing is in nature of duty and debt, it is at the discretion of him to
whom it is due, to accept one man's performance thereof for discharge of the
other. Yea, but says M. Bishop, this is nothing to the argument, how one man
may be formally just by the justice of another. And I answer him, that their
objection is a formal foolerie, grounded upon a witless supposall of that
which no man is so witless as to imagine. We say that a man may be formally
just two manner of ways. A man is one way formally just in quality, another
way formally just in law. Formally just in quality, is he in whom is found the
perfect inward form and quality of iustce and Righteousness without spot or
stain, and thus it were absurd indeed, to say that a man may be formal just
by the justice of another, because the inherent quality of one subject cannot
become the inherent quality of another. But in course of law and judgment,
the form of justice is, not to be subject to crime or accusation, and he is
formally just, against whom no action or accusation is liable by law. Now it is
true indeed that every one that is formally just in quality, is also formally
just in law, but yet a man may be formally just in law, who by inherent form
and quality is not just. For in this sort a man becomes just by pardon and
forgiveness, because pardon being obtained, the law proceeds no further, and
all imputation of the offense in law is taken away as if it had never been
committed. And this is the state of our justice and Righteousness in the sight
of God, that through the imputation of the merit and satisfaction of Jesus
Christ our sins are forgiven us, and thereby no accusation is liable against
us, either as having done what we ought not to do, or not done what we ought to
do, according to the words of the Apostle, Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? If we respect inherent
quality, there is enough to charge him with, but by forgiveness of sins the
same becomes as if it had never been. In a word therefore, we are not
formally just in quality, if God judge us thereby, being stained and defiled
in all the Righteousness that we have; but we are formally just in law, by the
imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, for that thereby a satisfaction is
interposed, and our sins are remitted and pardoned, so that there is no let
but that God mercifully for his sake accepts us unto everlasting life.

10. W. BISHOP.
2. Object. If we be righteous, or just by the Righteousness of Christ imputed
unto us, then is every just man as righteous as Christ himself, having the
same justice his, which is Christ's, but that is too too absurd, Ergo: M.
Perkins answer. Christ's Righteousness is not applied unto us in the same
measure as it is in Christ, in him it is infinite, but of it so much is applied
to this or that man, as will serve for his justification. And to help this
answer forward, I will add his marginall note, even as any star partakes the
whole light of the Sun, with the rest so far forth as the light makes it to
shine.

Reply. That which is applied of Christ's justice, to this or that man, is
either infinite, and then the man is as just as Christ: for there can be no
greater then infinite in the same kind. Or it is not infinite, but in a certain
measure as he seems to grant, and then it is no part of Christ's infinite
justice, for all the parts of an infinite thing are infinite, according unto
true Philosophy. It remains then that a certain limited portion of justice
is derived out of Christ's infinite justice, and powered into this or that man, as
in his own example, The light of every star is received from the Sun
beams: yet is not the light in the star the same which is in the Sun, for
one accident cannot be in two subjects so far distant, neither is it of like
virtue to lighten the skies, as it is evident: but is a far dimmer light,
somewhat like unto that of the Sun from whence it came. Even so in our
justification from the Son of justice Christ Jesus, certain beams of
particular justice are conveyed into this or that man's soul whereby it is both
lightened by faith, and inflamed by charity: but there is exceeding difference
between their two justices, more then there is between the light of the
Sun, and the light of a star; which Saint Augustine in express terms
delivers, saying: Lib. 12. conf. cap. 15.
How much difference there is between the light that does lighten, and that
which is lightened, that is, the Sun and the star light, so much difference
is there between the justice that does justify, and that justice which is
made by that justification: to wit, between the justice of Christ, and that
which is in every good Christian.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishops learning might here have informed him, but that his will outranne
his wit, that the Righteousness of Christ, as he is man is not infinite,
because it is the Righteousness of a finite creature, which is not capable of
that that is infinite. True divinity distinguishes the things of the manhood,
from the things of the godhead, the one finite, the other infinite, thereby to
uphold the integrity of two natures in the one person of Jesus Christ. Yea,
and the Righteousness of the manhood of Christ, as I conceive, may two ways
be considered; either absolutely as in himself, or respectively as for us. The
absolute Righteousness of Christ, though it be finite, yet is next to that
that is infinite, being above all the Righteousness of men and Angels, in that
the Ioh. 3.34.
spirit was given him without measure, and therefore his perfections were the
uttermost that a creature in any sort can be capable of. But the respective or
dispensatiue Righteousness of Christ, is that whereby he is Bernard. in Cant.
ser. 70. Iustus pro hominibus.
just for men, as S. Bernard speaks; the righteousness which he performed
for us in fulfilling the law, Gal. 4.4.
being made under the law to redeem us. According to this Righteousness
therefore it is true, that by the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ we
are as righteous as Christ, not absolutely, but as Christ was for us in
fulfilling the law. The infinite value and force of which Righteousness in
Christ arose not from any infiniteness of it self, being but the
Righteousness of the law, which is but the description of that image of God to
which man was first created, and ought to be in man, but it arose from the
infiniteness of the person of him by whom it was performed, being both God and
man, and thereby is of that large extent to justify all, and to purchase
everlasting life to all that do believe in him. Rightly the refore does M.
Perkins say, that the Righteousness of Christ is not applied to every
particular man according to the infinite value of it self, because that
infiniteness proceeded not of the nature of it self, but according to that
measure whereby it appertains to us, which is described in the law. Neither
is his comparison of the Sun and the stars further to be strained, but
only to show that every thing that receives from another, receives
according to the stint and measure of it self: he never meant that the
Righteousness of Christ which is imputed unto us, is derived to us to be
actually inherent in us, as the light of the Sun is derived from it to be
actually inherent in the stars. Yet we deny not, but that the beams of
inherent Righteousness are derived unto us by regeneration and new birth
through the spirit of Jesus Christ, but that is not the Righteousness here
spoken of, and M. Bishop might take occasion out of his own words to call it a
dim light, as indeed it is more dim and dark then that by it we can find
the way to God and everlasting life.

11. W. BISHOP.
The third reason for the Catholic party. If men be made truly and really
just by Christ's justice, imputed unto them, in like manner Christ should be
made really unjust, by the iniquity and sins of men imputed unto him. For
there is no reason to the contrary, but one may as well be made unjust by
imputation, as just; especially considering that evil is made more easily, and
more ways then good. M. Perkins answer is, that we may say Christ was a sinner
truly, not because he had sin in him, but because our sins were laid on his
shoulders. That reason is naught, for he is not truly a sinner, that pays the
debt of sin, which an innocent and most just person may perform: but he that
either has sin truly in him, or is so by imputation stricken, that the sins
are made his own really, and he in all cases to be dealt with all, as if he
sinned himself: as they hold that one justified by imputation of Christ's
justice, is really in Gods sight just, and is both loved in this life, and
shall be rewarded in the next, as if he were truly just indeed: But to avouch
our Savior Christ to be so a sinner, is to say that he was auerted from God,
the slave of the devil, and son of perdition, which is plain blasphemy.
That sentence out of the Prophet, Isa. 53.
He was counted with sinners, is expounded by the Evangelists, that he was so
taken indeed, but by a wicked Judge, and a reprobate people. And therefore if
you allow of their sentence, range your self with them, as one of their
number. S. Chrysostom by him produced, confirms the same, saying, that God
permitted him to be condemned as a sinner, not that he was one truly. Christ I
know is called sin by S. Paul, but by a figure, signifying that he was a
sacrifice for sin, as has been before declared. The same blessed Apostle
when he speaks properly, affirms in plain terms, that Christ was tempted
like unto us, Heb. 4.
in all things excepting sin.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins yields, that as we are called righteous by the Righteousness of
Christ, so Christ might be called a sinner by our sins, not by having the
blemish and corruption thereof, but only the guilt and imputation, even as he
becomes truly a debtor that undertakes another debt. M. Bishop says, that
an innocent and most just person may pay the debt of sin, and such a one do
we acknowledge the Son of God to be, who yet being just and innocent, might
by M. Bishops own confession, be termed (being rightly understood) a sinner,
because he says that he may be called truly a sinner, who is so by imputation
stricken, as that the sins are made his own really, and he in all cases to be
dealt with as if he had sinned himself. For thus was the case with Christ, who
really though not inherently, took upon him our sins, by undertaking really
as in our person the guilt thereof, and therefore being dealt with as if he
himself had committed the same. Therefore does Hierome apply these words to
Christ, Hieron. in Psalm. 87. Vt supra sect. 5.
Thou have brought upon me that wrath and storm of thy fury which thou wast
to pour out upon the nations, because I have taken upon me their sins. So
Hilarie says that Hilar. in Psa. 68. Omnis in eum terror desaeuientis in nos
^e^pestatis in cubuit.
all the terror of the tempest that raged against us, lighted (or lay) upon
him. Therefore in right meaning to say that Christ was made a sinner in the
bearing of our sins, is not to affirm that Christ was auerted from God, the
slave of the devil, and son of perdition, as M. Bishop ignorantly
collecteth, because these are consequents only of inherent corruption and
sin, whereby a man is borne in sin, according to the depraved image of him
of whom he is borne, and not every one to whom sin is imputed, but 1. Ioh.
3.8.
whosoever commits sin is of the devil. Therefore the Fathers in that
sense that here is spoken of, have not forborne to term Christ a sinner, in
respect as he took upon him the imputation of our sins. So says Oecumenius,
Oecumen. in Heb. cap. 9 Etenim Christus vehementer peccator erat, vt qui tot^^s
mundi peccata assumpserat, sibique propria fecerat, etc. Quod enim Christus
peccator fuerit, audi; Eum qui peccatum, etc.
Christ was greatly a sinner, as who did take upon him the sins of the whole
world, and make them proper to himself. For that Christ was a sinner hear the
Apostle, He made him sin for us, etc. Upon which words of the Apostle
Chrysostom also says, not only as M. Bishop cites, that God permitted him to
be condemned as a sinner, but also as M. Perkins alleges, though M. Bishop
unhonestly dissembleth it, Chrysostom. vt supra sect. 5.
He made the just a sinner, that he might make sinners just. In like sort
Hierome as in one place he says, that Hier. in Psalm. 21. Peccata nostra sua
reputat.
Christ accounts our sins his sins, so in another place he affirms,
that Jdem in Psalm. 37. Peccatorem se profi^etur qui peccata nostra portauit.
Christ did profess himself a sinner, in that he bare our sins. So says
also Saint Austin, August. in Psalm. 37. Tanqu^m peccauit in infirmitate tua
Christus. Modo enim peccata tua tanquam ex cre suo dicebat and ea dicebat suae.
Christ after a sort sinned in thy infirmity: he mentioned thy sins out of
his own mouth, and called them his sins. All this the Prophet Esaias
confirms when he says, Esa. 53.12.
He was counted with the transgressors, which was not only by a wicked judge
and a reprobate people, as M. Bishop mentions, but in that God made him
sin, God counted him with sinners, and therefore laid upon him the curse of
sinners, in that he was Gal. 3.13. Act. 5.30.
hanged on a tree, for the Deuteronomy. 21.23.
curse of God is upon him that is hanged. Therefore the Prophet in the same
place says, that Esa. 53.6.10.
the Lord did lay upon him our iniquities; the Lord would break him and make
him subject to infirmities, that we may understand that God did not only leave
him to the hands of men, but himself counted him with sinners, by the bearing
of our sins, and therefore dealt with him himself accordingly, so that he
had cause to cry out, Psalm. 88.6. Applied to Christ by Athana^. De interpret.
Psalm. by Arnob. and Hierome in Psalm. 87.
Thine indignation lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms; Verse. 14.
Lord why abhorrest thou my soul, and hidest thy face from me; Verse. 16.
Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me, and the fear of thee has undone me.
Yet as touching the person of Christ in himself, we acknowledge it as far as
M. Bishop, that he was Heb. 4.15.
excepted from sin, that he was Cap. 7.26.
holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners: and because to apply unto
Christ the name of a sinner in what sort soever is subject to misunderstanding
and offense, we wholly forbear the same, and as though a man by taking upon him
another man's debt be become a debtor, yet we call him not a debtor but a
surety, and do name what befalls him to befall him by suretiship, and not by
debt, so do we content our selves to say with safety, that Christ did bear
our sins, and suffered for our sins, or with the Apostle, was made sin
for us, but the name of sinner we do not give unto him.

12. W. BISHOP.
4. Object. If a man be righteous only by imputation, he may together be full
of iniquity, whereupon it must needs follow, that God does take for just and
good, him that is both unjust and wicked: but that is absurd, when Gods
judgment is according to truth. Here M. Perkins yields, That when God does
impute Christ's justice unto any man, he does together sanctify the party,
giving Original sin a deadly wound. And yet elsewhere he said, That
Original sin, Of Original sin. Page 31.
which remained after justification in the party, did bear such sway, that it
infected all the works of the said party, and made him miserable, etc. But it
is good hearing of amendment, if he will abide in it: Let us go on.

R. ABBOT.
It had been strange if M. Bishop could have set down this argument without
full of iniquity, for it had not otherwise sufficiently filled his mouth. But
we deny, that if a man be righteous only by imputation (speaking as we do of
perfect Righteousness in the sight of God) it must follow that he is still
full of iniquity as before, because Justification in the sight of God by the
imputation of Christ's merits is always accompanied with the sanctification of
the holy Ghost, whereby the inward quality of the man, August. de peccat. mer.
and remiss. lib. 1 cap. 27. Hominis qualitatem non totam continuo mutari, etc.
though not wholly, yet in part, is altered and changed, and is thencefoorth
further to be renewed from day to day. In part, I say, because together with
this sanctification there is still a remainder of original corruption, by the
touch and stain whereof the holiness and newness that is wrought in us is
defiled, and stands in need of mercy and favor to accept it, which made
Gregory the Bishop of Rome to say; Greg. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 11. Omnis humana
iustitia iniustitia esse conuincitur si districte iudicetur. Prece ergo post
iustitia^ indiget, vt quae succumbere discussa poterat, sola iudicis pietate
conualescat.
All the righteousness of man is proved to be unrighteousness if it be
strictly judged: therefore a man needs prayer after Righteousness, that that
which being sifted might quail, by the only mercy of the judge may stand for
good. For although it be true that Original sin have received a deadly
wound, yet it follows not thereof that it is straightwayes wholly dead. It is
dead indeed, August. cont. Julian* lib. 2. Mortuum est in eo reatu quo nos
tenebat, etc.
as touching the guilt of it, as Austine says, but it is not yet dead as
touching corruption and infection, and therefore does indeed infect the works
of the regenerate, and by lusting and rebelling gives him occasion to cry out
with the Apostle, Romans 7.24.
Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
This M. Perkins uniformly teaches: he does not here amend what he had said
before, because in the former place there was nothing to amend, and therefore
it was but M. Bishops dream, that made him imagine a contradiction there where
all things well agree and stand together.

13. W. BISHOP.
5. Object. Or fifth reason, is inuerted by M. Perkins, but may be rightly
framed thus. Christ restored us that justice which we lost by Adams fall, but
by him we lost Inherent justice, Ergo By him we are restored to Inherent
justice. Romans 5.
The Mayor is gathered out of Saint Paul, who affirms, that we receive more
by Christ then we lost by Adam: Lib. 3. cap. 20. lib. 6. de genesis 24. ^6. 26.
and is Saint Irenaeus, and Saint Augustines most express doctrine, who say,
How are we said to be renewed, if we receive not again which the first man
lost, etc. Immortality of the body we receive not, but we receive justice from
the which he fell through sin.

R. ABBOT.
This objection proves nothing that we deny, being understood according to
the meaning of Austin and Irenaeus whom he alleges. Christ came to restore to
us that which we lost in Adam. But in Adam we lost inherent justice. Therefore
Christ came to restore the same. We affirm the same, and say that what Christ
came to do, he begins to do and to bring to effect in every man that is
justified, but in no man does he perfect it so long as we continue in this
life, and therefore inherent justice is not such in any man here, as that
thereby he can be found just in the sight of God. Now therefore whereas M.
Bishop says, that Christ restored us that justice which we lost by Adams fall,
if he mean it as the Apostle does when he says, that Ephe. 2 6.
God has quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up together, and
has made us sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, that is,
August. de bapt. cont. Donatist. lib. 1. ca. ^. Nondum vn^ sed in spe.
not yet really, but in hope, as S. Austin speaks, we admit the proposition
to be true, and it is nothing against us. But if his meaning be, that Christ
has really and already in possession restored unto us what we lost in Adam,
the proposition is absurdly false, and all this discourse tends to prove the
contrary.

14. W. BISHOP.
The sixth and last reason for Catholics is, The justice, of the faithful is
eternal, dureth after this life, and is crowned in heaven, but Christ's imputed
justice cease in the end of this life. Ergo.

M. Perkins answers. First, that imputed Righteousness continues with us
for ever, and that in heaven we shall have no other. Secondly, that perhaps in
the end of this life, inward Righteousness shall be perfect, and then without
perhaps it shall be most perfect in heaven. So that one part of this answer
overthrows the other. Wherefore I need not stand upon it, but will proceed to
fortify our party, with some authorities, taken both forth of the holy
Scriptures, and ancient Fathers: The first place I take out of these words of
Saint Paul. And these things certes, were you, (Drunkerds, Covetous, 1. Cor. 6.
Fornicators, etc.) But you are Washed, you are Sanctified, you are Justified
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of our Lord: S. Chryso.
Ambr. and Theophilac. in hunc locum.
Here Justification by the best interpreters judgment is defined, to consist
in those actions of washing us from our sins, and of infusion of Gods holy
gifts by the holy Ghost in the name, and for the sake of Christ Jesus.

Tit. 3.
The like description of our Justification is in S. Paul. Of his mercy he has
saved us by the lauer of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, whom he
has powered into us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being
justified by his grace, we may be heirs in hope (and not in certainty of
faith) of life everlasting. Where the Apostle inferring that being justified by
his grace, declares that in the words before he had described the same
Justification, to consist in our new birth of Baptism, and the renewing of our
souls, by the infusion of his heavenly gifts, which God of his mercy did
bestow upon us for his Son Christ's sake. Many other places I omit for
brevity sake, and will be content to cite few Fathers, because the best
learned of our adversaries do confess that they be all against them, as I have
showed before.

De peccat merit. and remis. cap. 15. Epist 85. lib. 12. de Trinit. cap. 7.
Lib. 6. de Trinit.
First, Saint Augustine says, That this justice of ours, (which they call
Righteousness) is the grace of Christ, regenerating us by the holy Ghost; and
is a beauty of our inward man. It is the renewing of the reasonable part of
our soul. And twenty other such like, whereby he manifestly declares, our
justice to be inherent, and not the imputed justice of Christ. Let him suffice
for the Latin Fathers. And Saint Cyril for the Greeks, who of our
Justification writes thus. The Spirit is a heat, who as soon as he has
powered charity into us, and has with the fire of it, inflamed our minds, we
have even then obtained justice.

R. ABBOT.
Eccles. 19.24.
There is a subtlety that is fine, says Ecclesiasticus, but it is
unrighteous, and there is that wresteth the open and manifest law. M. Bishop is
none of those that deal finely, that will cogge by art, and will lie, and yet
not seem to lie: what he does, he will do outright, and will lie so as that
every man may see him to be a liar, that he may not be taken for other then
indeed he is. Tell us M. Bishop, where is it, that M. Perkins says, that in
heaven we shall have no other but imputed justice or Righteousness? where does
he make any show or semblance of saying so? Fie, M. Bishop, fie for shame;
leave this lying and belying of men, a good cause needs no such means for
the upholding of it; they that in apparent untruth see you thus wilful and
shameless, cannot but take you for a cosiner in all the rest. M. Perkins
says, that imputed Righteousness continues for ever, but does he say that in
heaven there shall be no other, who plainly says, that sanctification shall
be perfect in the world to come? We shall for ever enjoy eternal life, by
virtue of that whereby we are first admitted unto it, because thereby we are
admitted to it to enjoy it thereby for ever. But he who by his merit purchased
for us eternal life, purchased for us also to be made meet for the enjoying
of it, and therefore shall then make us unto himself Ephe 5.27.
a glorious Church not having spot or wrinckle or any such thing, but 1. Cor.
15.28.
God shall be all in all. Whereas he makes M. Perkins to say, that perhaps
inward Righteousness shall be perfect in the end of this life, he again
abuses him: for he asks the question only as a supposition, what if it be
so, but makes no perhaps that it is so; denying that if it were so we could be
justified thereby. The rest of this Section as touching the maine drift of it
is altogether impertinent, tending to prove Inherent justice, which we deny
not, but only the perfection thereof in this life. But whereas he seeks to
make good, that our justification consists therein, he comes much too
short, and one of his proofs directly proves the contrary. For when the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 6.11.
You are washed, you are sanctified, you are justified, undoubtedly he meant
not by justification and sanctification to import one and the same thing. But
there is no question, but that by sanctification is meant inherent justice.
Therefore inherent justice cannot be understood in justification. And this is
apparent by those very authors whom he himself cites for exposition of the
place, as namely Chrysostom, saying, Chrysan 1. Cor. cap. 6. hom. 16. Abluit
nosmunquid igitur hoc solum? Minime sed sanctificauit: neque hoc etiam* sed
iustificauit. Atqui liberari a peccatu magnu^ munus est, nunc autem te etiam
innumeris impleuit bonis.
He washed us; and what, did he so only? Nay but he also sanctified us; and
not this only, but also he justified us: very plainly putting difference
betwixt justification and sanctification, and expounding justification in the
next words to be this, liberari a peccatis, to be delivered from sins. So
does Theophylact also expressly refer justification to forgiveness of sins:
Theoph. in 1. Cor. ca. 6. Vos ille sanctificat. Quo pacto? Iustificando inquit
Cum enim prius vos abluisset and iustitia condonasset, mox and sanctimoniam
contulit.
When he had first washed you, and by justification had pardoned you, forthwith
also he bestowed sanctification. Oecumenius likewise seuereth the^ as
Chrysostom does: Oecumen* ibid. Nec id solum verum etiam sanctificauit, neque
hoc tantum sed and iustificaui^.
He has not only washed you, but also sanctified you; and not that only, but
also justified you. He cites Ambrose also, but Ambrose says not one word, to
import that Justification should be construed of inherent justice. Am^ros.
ibid. Illic omnibus peccatis a^^uitur credens, iustificatur Dei nomine, and per
spiritum Dei nostri De^ filius ad^ptatur.
In baptism all sins being done away, the believer is washed, is justified
in the name of the Lord, and by the spirit of our God is adopted to be a son
of God. Now we may see what credit is to be given to this gamester, who showing
his cards in pack, tells us he has won the game, when he has nothing at
all to help for the winning of it. As for the other place to Titus, That being
justified by his grace, etc. There is no argument to prove the contrary, but
that the Apostle may comprehend the whole work of saving us, which he before
mentions, under the name of Justification, as the maine point whereupon
depends all the rest. But more properly we may take it in the third place, as
in the former text to the Corinthians, distinguished from the sanctification
and renewing of the holy Ghost, and expressing the other special effect of the
washing of the new birth, consisting in the forgiveness of our sins. The
places of Austin and Cyrill being spoken of inherent justice begun in this
life, not denied by us, say nothing against us. How trecherously and falsely he
deals in saying, that the best learned of our side do confess that the
Fathers be all against us, has been showed before, and it shall appear God
willing throughout this whole book, that there is no cause for them so to say.

15. W. BISHOP.
The second difference about the manner of Justification.
WE all agree in general, that faith concurreth to our Justification, but
differ in three points. First, how faith is to be taken. Secondly, how it
works in our justification. Thirdly, whether it alone does justify.

Concerning the first point, Catholics hold a justifying faith, to be that
Christian faith, by which we believe the articles of our Creed, and all other
things revealed by God. The Protestants auerre it to be a particular faith,
whereby they apply to themselves the promises of righteousness, and of life
everlasting by Christ. This to be the true justifying faith, M. Perkins says
he has proved already: he should have done well, to have noted the place, for
I know not where to seek it: but he will here add a reason or twain.

1 Reason. The faith whereby we live, is the faith whereby we are justified:
but the faith whereby we live, is a particular faith, whereby we apply Christ
to our selves, as Paul says, I live, Gal. 2 ^0.
that is spiritually, by the faith of the Son of God: which faith he shows
to be a particular faith in Christ, in the words following: Who has loved me,
and given himself for me particularly.

Answer. The Mayor I admit, and deny the Minor: and say, that the proof is not
to purpose. For in the Minor he speaks of faith, whereby we apply Christ's
merits unto our selves, making them ours, in the proof Saint Paul says only,
that Christ died for him in particular. He makes no mention of his apprehending
of Christ's justice, and making of it his own, which are very distinct things.
All Catholics believe with Saint Paul, that Christ died, as for all men in
general, so for every man in particular, yea and that his love was so
exceeding great toward mankind, that he would willingly have bestowed his
life, for the redemption of one only man. But hereupon it does not follow,
that every man may lay hands upon Christ's righteousness, and apply it to
himself (or else Turks, Jews, Heretics, and evil Catholics, might make
very bold with him) but must first do those things which he requires at their
hands, to be made partakers of his inestimable merits: as to repent them
heartily of their sins, to believe and hope in him, to be baptized, and to
have a full purpose to observe all his commandments. Which M. Perkins also
confesses that all men have not only promised, Page 152.
but also vowed in Baptism. Now because we are not assured that we shall
perform all this, therefore we may not so presumptuously apply unto our
selves, Christ's righteousness, and life everlasting, although we believe that
he died for every one of us in particular. That which follows, M. Perkins,
has no color of probability: that Saint Paul in this manner of belief, that
is, in applying to himself Christ's merits, was an example unto all that are
saved. See the places, good Reader, 1 Timothy 1.16. Phil. 3.15.
and learn to beware the bold unskillfulness of sectaries. For there is not a
word sounding that way, but only how he having received mercy, was made an
example of patience.

R. ABBOT.
That the act of true faith is particularly to apply, has been handled before
in the question of the Certainty of Salvation; but yet the place so requiring,
M. Perkins thought fit here to set down some few reasons for further proof
thereof. The first whereof is grounded upon the words of S. Paul: Gal. 2.20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me, and given himself
for me. M. Bishops exception is, that S. Paul speaks not of faith, whereby we
apply Christ's merits or justice unto our selves making them ours, but says
only that Christ died for him in particular. But what? is not the death of
Christ a part, yea and a principal part of the merit of Christ? With us it is
so, and M. Bishop we suppose when he is well advised, conceiueth no otherwise.
If then the Apostle speak of faith, apprehending and applying unto us
particularly the death of Christ, he speaks of faith, apprehending and
applying unto us particularly the merit of Christ. And all parts of the merit
of Christ, are parts also with us of the righteousness of Christ. As his
obedience in Ambros. in Ps. 118. ser. 8. Baptizatus pro nobis.
being baptized for us was his Mat. 3.15.
righteousness, so his Phil. 2.8.
obedience in dying for us, was his righteousness also. Therefore faith
applying unto us particularly the death of Christ, applies unto us
particularly the righteousness of Christ. Now M. Bishop tells us, that all
Catholics believe with S. Paul, that Christ died as for all men in general,
so for every man in particular, of his exceeding great love toward mankind.
But tell us further M. Bishop, was that all that S. Paul meant, that Christ
loved him as he loved all men; he died for him as he died for all men? Was this
S. Paul's faith, Christ loved me as he loved Judas the traitor; he died for me
as he died for Simon Magus? It is written concerning Esau, Romans 9.13.
I have hated Esau, and in him a pattern of all reprobates is set forth unto
us; and might Esau say as well as Paul, Christ has loved me, and given
himself for me? Indeed as S. Austine says, ^ August. ad articul. sibi falso
imposit. art. 1 Quod ad magnitudine^ et potentia^ pretu^, and quod ad vna^*
pertinet causam generu humani, sanguis Christi redemptio est totim mundi, etc.
Redemptionis proprietas haud dubiu^ penes illos est de quibus princeps h^ius
mundi missus est for as, et ^am non membra diaboli, sed vasa sunt Christi. Cu^us
mors non impensa est humano generi vt ad redemptionem eius etiam qui regerandi
non erant pertinerent, etc.
as touching the greatness and sufficiency of the price, and one common cause
or condition of mankind, the blood of Christ is the redemption of the whole
world; but yet as he further adds, there is a propriety of this redemption on
their part from whom the Prince of this world is cast forth, and who are not
now vessels of the devil but members of Christ, neither did he bestow his
death upon mankind, that they also that were not to be regenerated, should
belong to his redemption. Christ in his death intended a price of such extent
in value and worth, as should be of power and ableness to save all, and
therefore should be offered indifferently to all; but yet in love he paid this
price only for them, to whom of love he intended fruit and benefit thereby, in
love he gave his Mat. 20.28. and 26.28.
soul or life a redemption for many, he shed his blood for many, Hiero. in
Mat. 20. No^ dixit pro omnibus, sed pro multis id est, pro his qui credere
voluerunt.
not for all, says Hierome, but for many, that is, for them that should be
willing to believe, who are Act. 13 48.
so many as are ordained unto eternal life. If he had loved Judas, he would
have loved him to the end, because Ioh. 13.1.
whom he loved, he loved to the end. If he had loved universally all, he would
have prayed for all, but now there is a world of men, of whom he says, Cap.
17.9.
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me Ver. 6.
out of the world; that we may know that there is Cap. 3.16.
a world which God loves, even August in 1. Joan. tract 1. Propitiatio
peccatorum totius mundi quem suo sanguine comparauit.
the world which Christ has gained by his blood, which is, Act. 20 28.
the Church of God, the same Church being reckoned Prosp. de voc. Gent. lib. 1.
cap 3. Populus Dei specialis quaeda^ ^ensetur vniuersitas, vt de toto mundo
totus mundus liberatus, and de omnibus hominibus omnes homines vide^ntur
assumpti.
a special kind of universality, as it were a whole world redeemed or
delivered out of the whole world; and that there is a world of which Christ
says, Ioh. 8.23.
I am not of the world, and Cap 17.9.
I pray not for the world, which therefore he cannot be understood to love. And
according to this difference, the Church of Smyrna writes, that Eusebius. hist
eccl. lib. 4 cap. 15. Pro totius seruandoru^ mundi salute passus est.
Christ suffered for the salvation of the whole world of them that are to be
saved. Properly therefore to speak of the intendment of Christ's death, he
died not generally for all, but only for them that were to be saved thereby.
Therefore S. Austine having mentioned the words of the Apostle, Romans 8 3.
Who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all, asks the question,
Aug. in Joan. trac. 4^. Sed quibus nobi? Praescitu praedestinatis,
iustificatis, glorificatis, de quibus sequitur, Quis a^cusabit. etc.
But which us? Even us, says he, whom he has foreknowne, predestined,
justified, glorified, of whom it follows, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? So S. Ambrose, Ambr. in Luc. ca. 7 Etsi Christus pro
omnibus passus est, pro nobis tamen specialiter passus est, quia pro Ecclesia
passus est.
Though Christ died for all, yet specially he suffered for us, because he
suffered for his Church. For the elect then Christ has died in peculiar and
special wise, to give unto them the benefit that should arise of his death:
for them only he has given himself in love, with purpose to make them
partakers of his love. And in this meaning it is, that the Apostle says,
Christ has loved me, and given himself for me, which because it is the voice
of faith, it follows that by faith we have particular application of Christ's
love toward our selves, and do believe, that having given himself for us, and
being given unto us, he is wholly ours; the merit and righteousness that he
has performed in giving himself to live and to die for us, is ours, to the
forgiveness of our sins and everlasting life. Now then every true believing
man, has by the Gospel this boldness ministered unto him, to make application
to himself of the death of Christ, and the benefit thereof; and yet it
follows not, that Turks, Jews, heretics, lewd Catholics may make bold
with Christ in that behalf, because they have not faith whereby to conceive
this boldness; and we cannot but wonder, that so drunken a conclusion should
proceed from him that carries the name and reputation of a learned man. They
must first, says he, do those things which he requires at their hands, to be
made partakers of his inestimable merits, as to repent heartily of their
sins, to believe and hope in him. First, says he, they must do these things,
but having so done, may they then apply unto themselves the merit and
righteousness of Christ? If so, then he says nothing against us, who teach no
faith to salvation, but according to the rule of Christ; Mar. 115.
Repent and believe the Gospel; no remission of sins, but according to the
like rule, that Luke 24.47.
repentance and remission of sins are preached in the name of Christ; and
again, Act. 2.38.
Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins. We say with Austine, August. in Psalm 41. Nemo currit ad
remissionem peccatoru^ n^si qui displicet sibi.
No man runs to the forgiveness of sins, but he that is displeasing to
himself; and again: Jdem. in Psalm. 123 Jn eccl^siae corpus nemo intrat ^isi
prius eccisus: meritur quod fuit vt sit quod non fuit.
No man enters into the body of the Church, except he be first slain; he
dies as touching that he was, that he may be that that he was not. Now if
having done these things, he may not yet apply unto himself the righteousness
and merit of Christ, then M. Bishop does but trifle and mock his Reader, in
saying, first he must do these things. And yet how does he say that a man thus
doing, is made partaker of Christ's inestimable merits, if he may not apply the
same unto himself? Marry, says he, we are not assured that we shall perform
all this; therefore we may not so presumptuously apply unto our selves Christ's
righteousness. But what if we know that we have done all this, may we then
apply unto our selves Christ's righteousness? His meaning is, that we may not;
because as we have heard, he denies wholly the imputation of the righteousness
of Christ; and therefore does but spend his wit in assigning the cause, why we
may not apply the same to be, because we are not assured of doing the things
mentioned by him. But if he be not assured of his repentance, faith, hope, etc.
no marvel if he fail of all other assurance toward God; yet let him not be
like the dog in the manger: if he can make no use of Christ himself, let him
not be snarling and biting at them that do. As for the places alleged by M.
Perkins to show that Paul is unto us an example of believing, the former of
them is plain: Phil. 3.17.
Brethren be followers of me, and look on them that walk so as ye have us for
an ensample. If in the faith and doctrine of Christ we be to follow Paul, then
by our faith we are to believe of our selves as he believed of himself, and
what he wrote in that behalf, we are to take it as written for our learning,
not as a matter particular and peculiar to himself. The other place is most
notable, where Paul first propounds it as 1. Tim. 1.15.
a true saying, and worthy by all means to be received, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners. He adds, Of whom I am chief, that is,
of which sinners whom Christ would save I was a chief, I was the foremost man,
August. in Psalm. 70 Primus non tempore, sed malignitate.
not in time but in badnesse, as S. Austine expounds it. Notwithstanding for
this cause I was received to mercy, says he, that Jesus Christ should show on
me being the chief, all long suffering, to the ensample of them that should in
time to come, believe in him unto eternal life. Now how does the place import,
that Paul should be an ensample to them that believe in Christ, but that all
that believe in Christ, may learn in him not to be dismayed at the greatness
and grieuousnesse of their sins, whereof they have seen the like in him, but
with him to receive that true saying, that Christ came into the world to save
sinners, and therefore resolve that he would save them as he had saved him,
that they should not fear to say even as he could say, Christ has loved me,
and given himself for me? August. de Temp ser. 49. Talem se peccatore^
consitetur fuisse vt omnis peccator propterea de se non despere^ quia Paulus
meruit indulgentia^*
He confesses himself such a sinner, says Austine, as that therefore no
sinner may despair of himself, because Paul obtained pardon. It was not
therefore the unskillfulness of a sectarie, but true divinity that made
Master Perkins to make that use and application of the Apostles words, but it
was M. Bishops absurdity, to say that the place imports only, that Paul was
made an example of patience, without expressing how or what patience he
means, there being no patience there spoken of, but the patience of Christ,
bearing with men long in great and fearful sins, and yet at length of his
own mercy, calling them to be partakers of his salvation.

16. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins 2. Reason. That which we must ask of God in prayer, that we must
believe shall be given us: but in prayer we must ask the merits of Christ's
righteousness to our selves. ergo.

Answer. Of the Mayor much has been said before, here I admit it, all due
circumstances of prayer being observed, and deny that we must pray, that our
Savior Christ Jesus merits may be made ours in particular, for that were
greatly to abase them: but good Christians pray, that through the infinite
value of those his merits, our sins may be forgiven, and a justice
proportionable unto our capacity, may be powered into our souls, whereby we
may lead a virtuous life, and make a blessed end. But it is goodly to behold,
how M. Perkins proves that we must pray, that Christ's righteousness may be
made our particular justice, because says he, We are taught in the Pater
noster, to pray in this manner: forgive us our debts, and to this we must say
Amen, which is as much to say, as our petition is granted. I think the poor
man's wits were gone a pilgrimage, when he wrote thus. Good Sir, cannot our
sins or debts be forgiven, without we apply Christ's righteousness to us in
particular? we say yes. Do not then so simply beg that which is in question,
nor take that for given, which will never be granted. But a word with you by
the way. Your righteous man must ouer-skip that petition of the Pater noster
(forgive us our debts) for he is well assured, that his debts be already
pardoned. For at the very first instant that he had faith, he had Christ's
righteousness applied to him, and thereby assurance both of the pardon of
sins, and of life everlasting. Wherefore he cannot without infidelity,
distrust of his former iustifica^ion, or pray for remission of his debts: but
following the famous example of that formal Pharise, in liew of demanding
pardon, Luc. 18.
may well say, O God I give thee thanks, that I am not as the rest of men,
extortioners, unjust, aduouterers, as also these Papists: Fearing the remission
of my sins, or the certainty of my salvation, but am well assured thereof,
and of Christ's own righteousness to, and so forth. But to go on with M.
Perkins discourse. Here we must note, that the Church of Rome cutteth off one
principal duty of faith, for in faith (says M. Perkins) are two things:
first, knowledge revealed in the word, touching the means of salvation:
Secondly, an applying of things known unto our selves, which some call
affiance: the first they acknowledge. So then by M. Perkins own confession,
Catholics have true knowledge of the means of salvation; (then he and his
fellows err miserable.) The second which is the substance and principal they
deny.

Answer. Catholics teach men also to have a firm hope, and a great confidence
of obtaining salvation, through the mercy of God, and merits of Christ's
Passion, so they perform their duty toward God, and their neighbor, or else
die with true repentance. But for a man at his first conversion, to assure
himself by faith of Christ's righteousness, and life everlasting, without
condition of doing those things he ought to do, that we Catholics affirm to
be, not any gift of faith, but the heinous crime of presumption, which is a
sin against the holy Ghost, not pardonable, neither in this life, nor in the
world to come. See S. Tho. 22. q. 21. art. 1.


R. ABBOT.
The Mayor proposition he grants, yet with this limitation, all due
circumstances of prayer being observed. But his circumstances as he intends
them, are but a Labyrinth to intricate and perplexe the consciences of men, and
to bereave them of all joy and comfort of their prayers. We believe that Psalm.
145, 18.
God is nigh unto all them that call upon him in truth. We know that many are
the weaknesses and imperfections of our prayers, many our distractions in that
devotion, but yet we believe that God respecting the truth, and not the measure
of our hearts, pardons the same for Christ's sake, who is our high Priest,
Exodus 28.38.
to bear the iniquity of our holy offerings, to make them acceptable before
the Lord. To the Minor proposition he answers, that we must not pray that
Christ's merits may be made ours in particular, for that were greatly to abase
them. As though the Prophet David did abase God in making him his in particular
saying, Psalm. 18.2.
The Lord is my rock and my fortress, my God and my strength, my shield, the
horn of my salvation, and my refuge, with infinite other speeches of the like
sort. As though Thomas did abase our Savior Christ in calling him, John. 20.28.
My Lord and my God. We do no injury to God to make him ours in particular,
because he has said, as to Abraham, so to every one of the seed of Abraham,
Genesis 17.7.
I will be thy God. We do no injury to men, because we do not thereby make him
our peculiar, but leave him the same to others, that he is to us, as every man
enioieth the light of the Sun to his own use, without impeachment thereof to
the use of any other man. Aug. in Psalm. 32. conc 2. Ipse sit haereditas nostra,
possessio nostra. An forte temere dicimus f^ciendo nobis Deu^ possessi^nem cum
sit Dominus, cum sit Creator? Non est ista temeritas; affectus est desideri^
and dulcedo spes. Dicat anima, omnino secura dicat; Deus meus e^ tu, qui dicit
animae nostrae, salus tua ego sum. Non faciet in^uria^ cum hoc dixerit, immo
faciet si no^ dixerit.
Let God, says Austine, be our possession, our inheritance. What, do we
unadvisedly in making God a possession to our selves, he being our Lord and
Creator? It is no rashness or unadvisedness; it is affection of desire, it is
sweetness of hope. Let the soul boldly say, Thou art my God, to him that
says to our soul, I am thy salvation. It shall do no wrong in saying so; nay
it shall do wrong in not saying so. And thus S. Bernard says, that Bernard. in
Cant. ser. 69 Anima Deu^ videns haud secut videt quam si s^la videatur a Deo.
the soul that looks upon God, does no otherwise look upon him, then as if
it self only were looked upon of God. For Chrysostom in Gene. hom. 34. Peculiare
hoc est amori, vt ex communibus propria faciat.
this is the property of love, as Chrysostom says, to make proper to a man's
self that that is common; which he speaks by occasion of the Apostles words
handled in the former section, Christ has loved me, etc, where he says, that
the Apostle Ibid. Propter amorem in eum id quod factum est omnibus mihi
proprium facto.
upon his love to Christ, does make proper to himself that that was done for
all. Accordingly S. Austine says, August. de visit i^f^^m lib. 2. cap. 2.
Tutius and iucundius loquor ad meum Iesum quam ad alique^ sanctorum spirituum
Dei.
I speak more safely and more sweetly to my Jesus then to any of the holy
Spirits or Angels of God. Now do all these speeches tend to the abasing of God,
and of his Son Jesus Christ? Did S. Austine, or whosoever was the Author of
those words, abase Christ in naming him my Jesus? If not, what abasing then is
it of the merits of Christ, that we should make them particularly ours? But to
show him his folly, S. Bernard says that Berna. in Cant. ser. 61 Nisi quod non
erat de membris C^risti nec pertinebat ad eu^ de Christi merito vt su^
praesumeret, suum diceret quod illius esset, tanqua^ rem cap^^ membrum.
but that Cain was not of the members of Christ, nor had any thing to do with
the merit of Christ, to presume the same to be his, he would have called that
his that was Christ's, as the member does that that is the heads, plainly
giving to understand, that the faithful man being a member of Christ, does call
that his that is Christ's, and presumes the merit of Christ to be particularly
his. And therefore he says in the next words, Ibid. Ego fidenter quod ex me
mihi deest vsurpo mihi ex visceribus Domini, quo^^am misericordia eff^uunt.
Whatsoever is wanting unto me of my self, I boldly take it unto me out of the
bowels of the Lord Jesus, because they run out with mercy. What should let
then but that we may pray that the merits of Christ may be made particularly
ours, and accepted as particularly a satisfaction for us to the forgiveness of
our sins? Nay, says M. Bishop, good Christians pray that through the
infinite value of Christ's merits our sins may be forgiven us, etc. But I
pray, M. Bishop, how do you think your sins particularly forgiven, but by
the particular application of his merits, his passion, death, and resurrection,
and his sitting at the right hand of God, to make intercession for us? Can a
medicine work without being applied particularly to him in whom it is to work?
How do you pray that a justice proportionable to your capacity, as you very
nicely and gingerly describe it, may be given particularly to you for Christ's
sake, that is, as we take it, in regard of that that Christ has done, as
generally for others, so particularly for you, but that you take it, that
Christ has done the same particularly for you, as well as for other
particulars? And but that your wits outrunne you, and leave you to say you know
not what, what is this but to apply the merits of Christ particularly to your
self? Otherwise it may be said unto you, what have you to do particularly with
Christ, that for his sake you ask any thing particularly for your self?
Surely we cannot ask any thing of God for Christ's sake, but by supposing a
particular relation betwixt Christ and us, depending upon that that he has
done and merited for us. But Master Perkins to show that in our prayer, we
ask the merit of Christ's righteousness to our selves, alleges the petition
of the Lords prayer, Forgive us our trespasses. For what is forgiveness of
sins, but a thing merited by the righteousness and obedience of Christ? Our
Savior says in the Gospel, that Mat. 2^.28.
his blood is shed for the forgiveness of sins. When then we beg
forgiveness of sins, what do we but beg to our selves the fruit of the
bloudshedding of Jesus Christ? The righteousness of Christ contains the
whole obedience that Christ performed to his Father, both in living and dying,
to be the satisfaction for our sins. And if there be no forgiveness of
sins, but only by his satisfaction for us, what do we when we crave
forgiveness of sins, but crave the application of Christ's righteousness
unto us, that it may be accepted for our satisfaction to the forgiveness of
our sins? Now to our prayer M. Perkins notes, that we add Amen, as a word
of confirmation unto us, that God hears our petition, and grants the same
according to the promise that he has made unto us. Which he said not only of
himself, but alleged to that purpose the saying of Austine, affirming, that
August. de Temp. ser. 182. Amen in his petitionibus significat indubita^ter a
Domino conserri quod petitur, si vltimae conditionis pactum firmiter teneatur.
Amen in these petitions signifies, that that which is craved of the Lord, is
undoubtedly granted, if we steadfastly hold fast the covenant of our last
condition or creation, which is our faith in Christ Jesus. Now if Master
Bishops wits had been at home, he would not have thought Master Perkins wits
to be gone a pilgrimage for the writing of these things, neither would he have
conceived that he had begged the thing in question, but rather proved it,
unless he will say, that there can be forgiveness of sins without the
satisfaction and merit of Christ, which what is it to us, but by being
particularly applied unto us, and accepted to our use? As for our righteous
man, as he calls him, he has no warrant to omit to pray for the forgiveness
of his sins, because he is no otherwise taught to believe it, but as he
prays for it. But in praying for it, he has assurance from Christ to believe
the obtaining of it, who says, Mar. 11.24.
Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall
be done unto you. Of this sufficient has been said before in the question of
Sect. 5. and 18.
the Certainty of Salvation, and I list not here to follow him in an idle and
impertinent vagarie. Only I marvel that his head should go so far awry, as
to apply to us the example of the Pharisee, being so far different from us.
For the Pharisee was outright a Papist, auouching inherent justice, and
presuming thereof in himself, although by the gift of God even as the Papists
do. Nay, Master Bishops righteous man goes beyond the Pharisee, saying, I
thank thee, O God, that I am just Cha. 2. sect. 10.
before thee, clean and whiter then snow, no more sin left in me then was in
Adam in the state of innocence, and therefore Cha. 4. sect. 2,
worthy of thy kingdom and of the joys of heaven, Ibid sect. 4.
not needing greatly to fear the rigorous sentence of a just judge; and if I
do not certainly know it, yet Cha. 3. sect. 3. and 14.
I hope that I am so; and not like these Protestants, whose Cha. 4. sect. 2.
righteous man is like unto sepulchers whited on the outside with an imputed
justice, but within full of iniquity and disorder. Let him here take knowledge
of his description of their righteous man out of his own words, and thereby
know himself to be some degrees above the absurdity of the Pharisee. But the
righteous man whom we teach, is such, as the ancient Fathers many times
describe out of the words of Solomon, as they did read them: Prou. 18.17.
Pustus in principio sermonis accusator est sui. Hieron. cont. Pelag. lib. 1.
The just man in the beginning of his speech, is an accuser of himself. When
he comes into the presence of God, he begins his speech with acknowledging
his own unworthiness and sin. His righteousness he knows to be such, as
leaves him still to say with David, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; for in thy sight no man
living shall be found righteous, Prou. 24.16. Vulgat.
He falls seven times a day, and daily prays for forgiveness, and so
continues till God manifest the effect of his prayer, being well assured in
the mean time upon the promise of God, that God hears him, and will make it
appear that he has not prayed in vain. But to let this go, M. Bishop takes
it for an advantage to him, that M. Perkins confesses, that the Church of Rome
acknowledges a know^edge revealed in the word touching the means of
salvation. But what does it advantage him, that the Church of Rome has that
which the devils have? They know that the means of salvation is by Christ
crucified, dying, rising again from the dead, by faith, by the sacraments, but
they have not the use of this knowledge, wherein consists the life thereof.
No more has the Church of Rome, which professing generally the means of
salvation, to be in the cross, and death, and resurrection of Christ, in
faith, and in the sacraments, does in the special use and application thereof,
wholly overthrow all, frustrateth the cross, and death, and resurrection of
Christ, peruerteth the faith, corrupts the sacraments, blendeth and mingleth
the Gospel with her own traditions, deuiseth other means of salvation, and
wickedly makes the people to trust therein. Now if it follow that we err
miserably, as he says, because they do thus know the means of salvation
revealed in the word, it must follow that they also err miserably, because all
other heretics know the means of salvation in that sort as well as they. And
indeed they do err miserably who go from the word, as touching the use and
effect of that means of salvation which they learn from thence, and contrary
to the word tie the same to other supplements, which they themselves have
borrowed of humane device. Now the firm hope and great confidence, whereof he
answers to the second point mentioned by M. Perkins, is a mere collusion. He
makes it firm on Gods behalf, but on our side most infirm and uncertain,
because by his rules a man cannot tell whether he have any true repentance, or
faith, or hope, or charity, or any thing else whereupon his hope should stand,
which he still hangs upon man's worthiness and disposition of himself, and
leaves it in the power and choice of his own free will. But true faith
believes Aug. in Psalm. 88. Non secundum merita nostra, sed secund^^ illius
miserecordiam firma est promissio.
the promise of God to be firm and sure, not upon our merits, but upon his
own mercy, and accordingly embraces the same, not with an uncertain
condition, if we do this or that, but with full assurance that God Ierem. 32 40.
according to his promise will keep us in his fear, to do that which we ought
to do, and when by frailty we fall, will in mercy look upon us as he did upon
Luke 22.61.
Peter, and will cause us to rise again. And this hope and assurance God
offers unto us, even from our first conversion for Christ's sake, and
thenceforth we accordingly expect everlasting life, not for our own sakes, but
1. John. 5.11.
in Christ, by virtue of his righteousness, obedience, and merit, and of the
purchase that he has made in our behalf. Neither is this any unlawful
presumption, but Ambros. de sacram. li. 5. cap. 4. Praesume non de operatione
tua, sed de Christi gratia. Bona praesumptio.
a good presumption, as S. Ambrose speaks, and that August. de verb. Dom.
ser. 7. Gratia mea plenus es, quia no^ de virtute tua, sed de gratia mea
praesumpsisti
because, as S. Austine says, we presume not upon our own virtue or power,
but upon the grace of God. As for his charging of us in respect hereof with
sin against the holy Ghost, it is but a escape of his ignorance, who as it
seems, understands not what is meant thereby. What his schoolmen have
written thereof, it is nothing to us, but let him learn by Hierome how to
understand it out of the text it self. Hieron. in Man ca. 12. Qui manifest
intell g^ns opera Dei, cum de virtute negare no^ possit, eadem stimulatus
inuidia calu^niatur, and Christu^ Deique verbu^ and opera Sp sancti di^et esse
Beelzebub, isti non dimittetur neque in praesenti seculo nec i^ futuro.
He, says he, who understanding manifestly the works of God, when he cannot
gainesay as touching the power, does yet of envy calumniate the same, and
affirms Christ and the word of God, and the works of the holy Ghost to be of
the devil, to him it shall not be forgiven, neither in this world nor in the
world to come. This is a dreadful sin, and let M. Bishop take heed, the
light of God so clearly shining as that it cannot but dazzle his eyes, that he
do not entangle himself in the guilt thereof, by wilful opposition against
the truth.

17. W. BISHOP.
Master Perkins third reason, is drawn from the consent of the ancient
Church, of which for fashion sake to make some show, he often speaks, but can
seldom find any one sentence in them that fits his purpose, as you may see in
this sentence of Saint Augustine, cited by him. De verbis Domini. sermon. 7.
Augustine says: I demand now, do thou believe in Christ, O sinner? thou
say I believe: what, beleeuest thou that all thy sins may freely be
pardoned by him? thou have that which thou beleeuest. See, here is neither
applying of Christ's righteousness unto us by faith, nor so much as believing
our sins to be pardoned through him, but that they may be pardoned by him. So
there is not one word for M. Perkins. But S. Bernard says plainly: That we
must believe that our sins are pardoned us. But he adds not by the imputed
righteousness of Christ. Again, he adds conditions on our party, which M.
Perkins craftily concealeth. For S. Bernard grants, that we may believe our
sins to be forgiven, if the truth of our conversion meet with the mercy of
God preventing us, for in the same place he has these words: So therefore
shall his mercy dwell in our earth, that is, the grace of God in our souls, if
mercy and truth meet together, if justice and peace embrace and kiss each
other. Which is as S. Bernard there expounds it, if we stirred up by the
grace of God, do truly bewail our sins and confess them, and afterward
follow holiness of life and peace. All which M. Perkins did wisely cut off,
because it dashed clean the vain gloss of the former words.

His last authority is out of S. Cyprian, who exhorts men, passing out of
this life, not to doubt of Gods promises, but to believe that we shall come to
Christ with joyful security.

Answer. S. Cyprian encourages good Christians dying to have a full confidence
in the promises of Christ, and so do all Catholics, and bid them be secure too
on that side, that Christ will never fail of his word and promise, but say
that the cause of fear lies on our own infirmities: And yet bids them not to
doubt, as though they were as likely to be condemned as saved, but animates
them, and puts them in the good way of hope, by twenty kinds of reason.

R. ABBOT.
The drift of Saint Austine in the place alleged, is to show, that we are Aug.
de verb. Dom. ser. 7. Eleg^ de me praesumetes, non de se. Totu^ gratiae semper
reputa. Si de tuo opere prasumis, ergo merces tibi redditur, non gratia
condonatur. Si aute^ gratia est, gratis daetur.
to presume of God only, not of our selves, and to attribute all that we are
(toward him) wholly to his grace. If thou presume of thine own work, then is
it a wages paid, not a grace given unto thee. But if it be grace, then it is
freely given. Hereupon follow the words alleged: Interrogo nunc, Credis, o
peccator, Christo? Dicis, Credo. Quid credis? Gratis vniuersa peccatae tibi per
ipsu^ posse remitti? Habes quod credidisti. O gratia gratis data.
I demand now, O sinner, do thou believe Christ? Thou say, I believe.
What do thou believe? That all thy sins may be pardoned freely by him? By
which words he would import, that the sinner is to believe, that in Christ
only there is enough to yield him forgiveness of sins, and therefore that
he is to presume only upon him. Which if he do, Saint Austine tells him,
Thou have that which thou beleeuest, and adds, O grace freely given. Now M.
Bishop should here have told us, what it is that S. Austine tells the
believing sinner that he has: what that grace is that he says is here freely
given unto him. For if it be forgiveness of sins, as indeed it is, then the
words import, that the sinner believing in Christ for the forgiveness of
sins, and relying wholly upon him, assuredly has that for which he believes,
and therefore is not to doubt thereof. And herein he alludeth to that in the
Gospel, where Christ asks the blind men; Mat. 9.28.
Believe ye that I am able to do this, to draw from them, whether they did
attribute so much to him, as to expect so great a benefit from him. When
therefore they answered, Yea, Lord, he touched their eyes, saying According to
your faith so be it unto you. So with S. Austine the word may serves to
challenge a sufficiency to Jesus Christ, and to exclude other means of
forgiveness of sins, not to question the belief of the forgiveness
thereof, which he so resolutely affirms to him that believes, and can be no
otherwise but by the applying of the righteousness, the merit, the
satisfaction of Christ, because we cannot beleeeue it but only thereby. The
place of Bernard is very impudently shifted off. First, by altering the
question, which is not here, by what we believe our sins to be forgiven, but
whether it be the property of a justifying faith, to believe particularly the
forgiveness of a man's own sins. Now S. Bernard says, that Bernard in
Annun^iat. ser. 1. Jnitium quoddam and velut fundamentum fidei.
for a man to believe that he cannot have forgiveness of sins, but by Gods
pardon is but the beginning and foundation of faith. Therefore, says he, if
thou believe that thy sins cannot be done away, but by him to whom only thou
have sinned, thou do well, Sed add adhuc vt and hoc credas quia per ipsu^
tibi peccata dona^tur. Hoc est testimonium quod perhibet in cord nostro Sp.
sanctus, dicens, Dimitiu^tur tibi peccata tua. Sic enim arbitratur. Apostelus
gratis iustificari hominem per fidem.
but go f^rther yet, to believe that by him thy sins are forgiven thee. This
is, says he, the testimony that the holy Ghost gives in our heart, saying,
Thy sins are forgiven thee. For thus does the Apostle suppose that a man is
justified freely by faith. Of imputed righteousness enough has been said
before: the point here is of particular faith, whether a man believe his own
sins to be forgiven him. S. Bernard says yea, and says it so plainly, as
that M. Bishop could not tell for his life what directly to answer to it. But
forsooth S. Bernard adds conditions on our party, says he, which M. Perkins
craftily concealeth, and here he brings words following a mile after, where
S. Bernard has broken off the point formerly in hand, which was to set forth
the condition of a true justifying and saving faith. And what I pray are the
conditions that he adds? Forsooth truth of conversion, bewailing of our
sins and confessing them, and afterward following holiness and peace. Where
we see a glosing sycophant, which will make the simple Reader believe, that he
gives an answer when indeed he gives none. For when we teach the belief of
the forgiveness of sins, do we teach a man unconverted to believe the same?
The penitent sinner confessing and bewailing his sins to God, and careful as
having felt the sting of sin, thenceforth to avoid the same, is the proper
and only true subject of this disputation of justification by faith. We deny
that faith has place in any other man, and therefore deny that any other can
have the true belief of the forgiveness of his sins. Of the converted man
then, of him that truly repents and forsakes his sin, S. Bernard says,
and we say, that the faith whereby he is justified, is a faith whereby he
particularly believes the forgiveness of his own sins. What is M. Bishop
now but a wrangling Sophister, that thus in a mist of idle discourse, seeks
to steal away, where indeed he is so fast holden that he cannot untie
himself? In like sort he deals with the other place of Cyprian, who
encouraging faithful Christians against the terror and fear of death, says;
Cyprian. de Mortal. Deus tibi de hoc mundo recidenti immortalitate^ pollicetur,
and tu dubitas and fluctuasi Hoc est Deu^ omnino non nosse: hoc est Christu^
credentium magistrum peccato incredulitatis offendere: hoc est in ecclesia
constitutum fide^ in domo fidei non habere.
God has promised immortality unto thee, when thou departest out of this
world, and do thou waver and doubt thereof? This is not to know God, this is
by the sin of unbelief, to offend Christ the master of believers; this is
for a man being in the Church, to be without faith in the house of faith. The
words are manifest. He propounds the promise of God particularly: requires
the same accordingly to be believed; not to believe it so, he affirms is to
be without faith in the house of faith. God promises to thee, and do thou
doubt? this is not to have faith. Cyprian then teaches such a confidence in
the promises of Christ, as is to be without all wavering or doubt. Yea, says
M. Bishop, we are secure on Christ's side, that he will never fail of his word
and promise, but the cause of fear lies upon our own infirmities. Thus he is
like the mother that strangleth her child so soon as she has brought it
forth. He sets up confidence with one hand, and throws it down with
another; nay, he sets it up with one hand, and throws it down with both.
What is it to us, that Christ is true of his word, if we may not believe that
his word does appertain to us? what confidence can it yield, that Christ
fails not of his promise, so long as we must fear least our infirmities
disable us of having any part therein? And would Cyprian talk so idly, to
bid men not waver or doubt, when they might answer they had cause to fear and
doubt, by reason of their own infirmities? Would he bid men not doubt to go
out of the world, because of the promise of God, when their own infirmities
might be a sufficient cause to make them fear their departure out of this
world? But Cyprian knew well that we can have nothing but fear from our
selves, and therefore teaches us to build our selves wholly upon the promise of
God, that howsoever our own infirmities do offer us occasion of distrust, yet
resting upon the truth of God, we believe with Abraham Romans 4.18.
under hope against hope, that God will perform what he has spoken, for his
own sake, as he says by the Prophet, Ezech. 36.22.
Not for your sakes, but for my holy names sake I will do it, says the Lord.
Yea, but we bid them not doubt, says Master Bishop, as if they were as likely
to be condemned as saved. But how so, when they see and know in themselves,
that for which they may be condemned, and cannot know any thing whereupon they
may rest the hope of salvation? For you say, Master Bishop, that a man cannot
tell whether he have repentance, hope, charity, prayer, whether he be
justified, and in the state of grace or not, and therefore how should he but
think himself more likely to be condemned then otherwise? You say you animate
them and put them in the good way of hope, by twenty kinds of reasons. But how
can you put them in hope when you teach them to fear? That one reason whereby
you impose fear, carries more sway in the conscience, then all those twenty
kinds of reasons, whereby you persuade hope. And when you teach that a man
cannot tell whether he have any hope or not, what can there rest but horror
and despair, at leastwise anguish, perplexity, trembling and fear, save only
in consciences that are benumbed and astonished, and have no feeling of
themselves? In a word, in death there can be no hope, but setting aside the
respect of our selves, to depend upon the promise of God, and to say with
Hilary out of the Psalm, Hilar. in Psalm. 51. Spes nostra in miserecordia
Domini in secu^um and in secu^^m seculi.
Our hope is in the mercy of God for ever and ever.

18. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins having thus confirmed his own party, why does he not after his
manner confute those reasons which the Catholics allege in favor of their
assertion? Was it because they are not wont to produce any in this matter?
Nothing less: It was then belike, because he knew not how to answer them. I
will out of their store take that one principal one, of the testimony of holy
Scripture, and by that alone sufficiently prove, that the faith required to
Justification, is that Catholic faith, whereby we believe all that to be true,
which by God is revealed, and not any other particular believing Christ's
Righteousness to be ours. How can this be better known, then if we see,
weigh, and consider well, what kind of faith that was which all they had, who
are said in Scriptures to be justified by their faith.

S. Paul says of Noe, That he was instituted heir of the justice, Heb. 11.7.
which is, by faith. What faith had he? That by Christ's Righteousness he was
assured of Salvation? No such matter, but believed, that God according to his
word and justice, would drown the world, and made an Arc to save himself and
his family, as God commanded him.

Abraham the Father of believers, and the Pattern and example of justice by
faith, as the Apostle disputes to the Romans: What faith he was justified by,
let S. Paul declare, who of him and his faith, Romans cap. 4.
has these words. He contrary to hope believes in hope, that he might be
made the father of many Nations, according to that which was said unto him: So
shall thy seed be as the stars of heaven, and the sands of the sea: and he
was not weakened in faith, neither did he consider his own body, now quite
dead, whereas he was almost an hundredth years old, nor the dead Matrice of
Sara, in the promise of God he staggered not by distrust, but was strengthened
in faith, giving glory to God, most fully knowing, that whatsoever he
promised, he was able also to do, therefore was it reputed to him to justice.
Lo, because he glorified God in believing, that old and barren persons might
have children if God said the word, and that whatsoever God promised he was
able to perform, he was justified. The Centurions faith was very pleasing
unto our Savior, who said in commendation of it, That he had not found so
great faith in Israel? What faith was that? Marry, that he could with a word
cure his servant absent: Math. 8.
Say the word only (quoth he) and my servant shall be healed.

S. Peter's faith so much magnified by the ancient Fathers, and highly rewarded
by our Savior, was it any other, Math. 16.
Then that our Savior was Christ, the Son of the living God? And briefly let
S. John that great Secretary of the holy Ghost, tell us what faith is the
final end of the whole Gospel. These things, John. 20.
(says he) are written that you may believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of
God, and that believing you may have life in his name. With the Evangelist the
Apostle S. Paul accords very well, Romans 10.
saying: This is the word of faith which we preach, for if thou confess with
thy mouth our Lord Jesus Christ, and shall believe in thy heart that God raised
him from death, 1. Cor. 15
thou shall be saved. And in another place: I make known unto you the Gospel,
which I have preached, and by which you shall be saved, unless perhaps you
have believed in vain. What was that Gospel? I have delivered unto you that
which I have received, that Christ died for our sins, according to the
Scriptures, was buried, and rose again the third day, etc. So by the verdite
of S. Paul, the belief of the articles of the Creed, is that justifying faith,
by which you must be saved. And neither in Saint Paul, nor any other place of
holy Scriptures is it once taught, that a particular faith, whereby we apply
Christ's Righteousness to our selves, and assure our selves of our salvation,
is either a justifying, or any Christian man's faith, but the very natural act
of that ugly Monster, presumption: which being laid as the very corner stone
of the Protestants irreligion, what moral and modest conversation, what
humility and devotion can they build upon it?

R. ABBOT.
What the reason was why M. Perkins here propounded no objections of the
Papists M. Bishop might have conceived, because he had Chap. 3. Of the
Certainty of Salvation.
before noted and confuted the best that are alleged by them. If he had not so
done, yet it should not be likely that he had therefore omitted them, because
he knew not how to answer them, because this which M. Bishop brings for their
principal reason, is but a very weak and simple reason. The thing that he
would prove thereby, is that justifying faith is that Catholic faith, as he
calls it, whereby we believe all that to be true which God has revealed. He
abuses the name of Catholic faith, whereby has been wont to be imported the
true and sound doctrine of the Catholic Church, comprised in books, taught in
Pulpits and schools, professed by the mouth, which a man may preach to others,
and himself be void of justifying faith. Thus Vigilius says, having
discoursed of some points of doctrine, Vigil. cont. Eutych. lib. 1. Haec est
fides and professio Catholica, quam Apostoli tradiderunt, Martyrs roborauerunt
and fideles hucusque custodiunt.
This is the Catholic faith and profession which the Apostles delivered, the
Martyrs have confirmed, and the faithful keep until this day. Justifying
faith is the private act of the heart and conscience of the man that is
justified, which though it be grounded and built upon it, yet cannot but
absurdly be termed the Catholic faith. But M. Bishop perhaps by Catholic
faith means that justifying faith, whereby he and his fellow Catholics must
hope to be justified. By which means he has matched the devil with himself
and his Catholics, and has made him a Catholic. For if it be the only faith
of a Catholic to believe all that to be true which God has revealed, what
hinders the devil to be a Catholic, seeing he believes, and to his grief
well knows, that all is true that is revealed by God? This is that which we
rightly call historical faith, the object whereof is the word of God in
general, and it is no more but credere Deo, to believe God in that which he
speaks, which is incident to devils and damned men. This historical faith is
presupposed and included in justifying faith, but the proper object of
justifying says is 2. Cor. 5.19.
God in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, or the promise of Gods
mercy to us in Christ Jesus, whereby we do not only believe the promise in
general to be true, but do trust in God, and expect good at his hands,
according to that promise for Christ's sake. This faith therefore is called Romans
3.22. Phil. 3.9.
the faith of Christ, that is, whereby we believe in Christ, and is further
expressed to be Act. 3.16.
faith in his name, Romans 3.25.
faith in his blood. Of which S. Austin says; August. in Joan. tract. 35.
Fides Christi est credere in eum qui iustificat impium: credere in mediatorem
sine quo interposito non reconciliamur De^; credere in saluatorem qui venit
quod perterat quaer^re atque saluare, etc.
The faith of Christ is to believe in him that justifies the ungodly; to
believe in the Mediator, without whose means we are not reconciled unto God;
to believe in the Savior, which came to seek and to save that which is lost;
to believe in him that says, without me ye can do nothing. This is the faith
whereby we are saved, and whereby all the faithful have been saved from the
beginning of the world. To which purpose S. Austin again says; August. de
not. and great. cap. 44. ^a fides iustes sanauit antiquos quae sanat et nos, id
est, mediatoris Dei and hominum hominis Jesus C^risti, fides sanguinis eius,
fides crucis eius, fides mortis and resurrectionis ^ius.
The same faith saved the righteous of old that now saves us, that is, the
faith of the man Jesus Christ the Mediator betwixt God and men, the faith of
his blood, the faith of his cross, the faith of his death and resurrection.
Thus by faith Abel in his lamb beheld 1. Ioh. 1.29.
the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, and thereby his
sacrifice was accepted, and in that respect is Christ called Apoc. 13.8.
the lamb that was slain from the beginning of the world. But here M. Bishop
undertakes to tell us, and therefore let us hear of him according to the
depth of his divinity, what kind of faith that was which all they had who are
said in Scriptures to be justified by their faith. And first he begins with
Noe, of whom it is said, that Heb. 11.7.
he was made heir of the righteousness which is by faith. But what faith was
that? He believed, says he, that God according to his word and justice would
drown the world, and made an Arc to save himself and his family, as God
commanded him. And what? in the drowning of the world and making of an arc to
save himself, did Noe consider nothing but the drowning of the world and the
making of an arc to save himself? S. Austin calls the Arc, Aug. cont.
Faust. Manich. lib. 19 cap. 12. Sacramentum arcae in qua Noe domus a diluuio.
liberata est.
the sacrament of the Arc, and in a sacrament or mystery did the faith of Noe
see no more but only what his eyes did see? Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 7.
Mysterium appellatur quoniam non id quod credimus inituemur, sed quod alia
videmus, alia credimus.
In sacraments, as Chrysostom says, we do not see that which we believe, but
we see one thing and believe another. Noe then in the Arc did believe that
which he did not see, which what it was, S. Peter gives us to understand, when
he makes our baptism the thing that 1. Pet. 3.21. (...)
answers the type and figure of the Arc, which, says he, saves us by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. The Arc then was to him a figure and seal of
the same, whereof Baptism is a figure and seal to us; Romans 4.11.
a seal of the righteousness of faith, of Cap. 3.22.
the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, to all and upon all
that do believe. His deliverance temporally was a figure of that spiritual
salvation, which both he and we have by the washing away and forgiveness of
our sins, by the blood, and death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and in
the belief hereof was it that he was made heir of the righteousness of
faith. In the second place Abraham is brought forth, whose faith M. Bishop
construeth to be no more but this, that he believed that old and barren persons
might have children if God said the word, and that whatsoever God promised he
was able to perform. Where if he had looked into the Apostles words with the
eyes of a doctor of divinity, he would have found the seed there spoken of to
be Gal. 3.16.
Christ, as the same Apostle elsewhere expounds it, Christ in person as the
head, and all the faithful gathered as members into one body with him,
August. in Psalm. 58. Totus Christus caput and corpus, and post; Christus est
to^um corpus Christi.
the head and the body making one whole Christ, as S. Austin speaks. God
promised unto Abraham a seed, wherein Genes. 15.2.
all the nations of the earth should be blessed. Herein God would make him Romans
4.13.
the heir of the world, and Verse. 16.17.
a father of many nations, not to that seed only which is of the law, but to
that also which is of the faith of Abraham, that we may know that a spiritual
seed is here to be understood, which should become the children of Abraham, by
Verse. 12.
walking in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham, and so should be
made partakers of the blessing with him. The performance of all this promise of
blessing to Abraham and all the nations of the earth, stood upon his having of
a son which God had promised unto him. The barrennes of Sara, and the old age
both of Abraham and her, might seem to deny all hope of having a son. But
yet Abraham rested secure in the affiance of the power of God, not doubting but
that God was able, and would give him a son of whom Christ should come, to be
unto him that blessing that God had promised. This was the thing that Abraham's
faith respected, and to which the Apostle refers it, speaking of a promise
that was to be sure, not to Abraham only, Verse. 16.
but to all the seed both of believing Jews and Gentiles; who are also called
Heb. 6.17.
heirs of the promise, to the performance whereof, to show unto them the
stablenesse of his counsel, God bound himself by an oath, that by two
immutable things, wherein it was impossible that God should lie, (his promise
and his oath) we might have strong consolation, which have our refuge to hold
fast the hope that is set before us. Of what? that old and barren persons may
have children if God say the word? O base and abject conceit of so divine and
heavenly a matter. Nay but of the blessing, which as the Apostle notes before,
God did swear unto Abraham, and unto that seed which he would multiply unto
him, by faith to be blessed together with him. Thirdly, he alleges the faith
of the Centurion, of which our Savior testifies, that Mat. 8.10.
he had not found so great faith in Israel. And what was that faith? Marry,
says he, that he could with a word cure his servant absent. Say the word only,
quoth he, and my servant shall be healed. But did he only believe that by
saying the word Christ could cure his servant? Surely he believed somewhat else
that made him to believe that: he believed somewhat else that made him to say,
Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. August. de
verb. Dom ser. 6. Neque ho^ ^ret ^um (...)*
He would not thus have said with so great faith and humility, says S.
Austin, but that he did already bear Christ in his hea^^. W^ doubt not but he
had conceived of Christ that he was the Son (...) God, the Savior of the
world, and with this faith came unto (...) The profession of his faith is here
mentioned according to the present occasion. It follows not, that because the
act of faith is no further expressed here, therefore there was nothing further
in his faith for his justification toward God. Yea we hope M. Bishop will not
say, that he could be justified without believing the remission of sins by
the blood of Jesus Christ, which yet is not expressed here; and therefore what
does he but absurdly and childishly to bring us this example to show what is
meant by justifying faith? In the other places as touching believing that Mat.
16 16. Ioh. 20.32.
Jesus is Christ the Son of God, the question is, what is meant by believing
that Jesus is Christ. If no more but an act of understanding barely to assent
unto it, then the devils profess as much, Mar. 1.24.
O Jesus of Nazaret, I know thee who thou art; even the holy one of God. But
that we may not make that belief a matter common to the devil, we must
understand it to be a compounded action, not of the understanding only, but of
the heart, of the will and affections, as appears by the third place which to
this purpose he cites; Romans 10.9.
If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved; for with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, etc. So to the Eunuch desiring to be baptized,
Philip says, Act. 8.37.
If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. I believe, says he, that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Belief therefore in these speeches imports
such a belief, as whereby Christ is to our heart that which we believe him to
be; whereby we believe to our own use and comfort that which we believe. It is
such a faith as desires, seeks, embraces, holds, ioyeth in that which it
believes, because therein it sees and apprehends peace; whereby we so
believe that Jesus is Christ, as that according to that we believe him to be,
we believe in him, and put our trust and confidence in him. This is implied in
the words that Jesus is Christ, that is, the promised Messiah and Savior, in
whom is promised unto us, and in whom we look to find blessing, peace,
immortality and everlasting life. Notably to this purpose S. Austin says;
August. in Psalm. 130. Hoc est credere in Christum diligere Christum, non
quomodo daemones cre^ebant, sed non diligeba^t Christum, and ideo quamuis
crederent, dicebant, Quid nobis and tibi est, fili Dei? Nos autem sic credamus
vt in ipsum credamus, diligentes eum and non dicamus, Quid nebis and tibi est,
sed potius di^amus, Ad te pertinemus, tu redimisti nos. Omnes qui sic credunt
tanqua^ lapides sunt viui de quibus templu^ Dei ad fi^a^um est, and tanquam
ligna imputribilia quibus ar^a illa compacta est quae in diluu^o merge non
potuit.
This is to believe in Christ, even to love Christ, not as the devils believed
and loved not, and therefore albeit they believed yet said, What have we to do
with thee, thou son of God? But let us so believe, as that we believe in him
loving him, and let us not say, What have we to do with thee, but rather let us
say, We belong to thee, thou have redeemed us. All that thus believe, are as
lively stones of which the temple of God is builded, and as those never
putrefying plankes and timber, whereof the Arc was compacted that could not be
drowned in the flood. Such a faith must M. Bishop confess to be meant in the
places by him alleged, that with Austin he may make a difference betwixt the
faith of true Christians and the faith of devils. By this the answer is plain
to the last place, which mentions only the subject and matter of the Gospel,
but of the manner of believing expresses nothing. Only in that it is said that
Christ died for our sins, there is implied a particular application of that
which by the Gospel we believe, as where the same Apostle says; Romans 4.25.
He was delivered (to death) for our sins, and rose again for our
justification, which we cannot be said truly to believe, unless we believe our
selves to be redeemed and justified from our sins by the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Now then we deny not, but that the belief
expressed in the articles of the Creed, is that justifying faith by which we
must be saved, yet not according to that historical meaning which M. Bishop
makes of them, but according to that true meaning of believing in God, which
the Scripture teaches, whereby a man can truly say, I believe in God, which M.
Bishop cannot tell whether he can say or not, and therefore we are sure that he
cannot say. But though he cannot say it, yet let him not repine at us that can,
and if he list not to have any part in that faith, whereby he should apply to
himself the righteousness and merit of Christ, to the assurance of the
forgiveness of sins and everlasting life, let him leave it unto us, and we
will joy therein, and make it indeed the corner stone of our religion, because
thereby Jesus Christ is our foundation and corner stone, of whom we presume all
things toward God, who can presume nothing of our selves. But at his
conclusion of this point I could not but smile, where mentioning this faith
laid as the corner stone of our religion (which the sycophant, as the Popes
parrot to speak what he teaches him, terms irreligion) he infers, this
being so, what moral or modest conversation, what humility and devotion can
they build upon it? It made me call to mind the moral and modest conversation
of their Popes, the humility and devotion of the most of their Cardinals and
Bishops, the sweet and cleanly life of their Votaries, both religious and
secular, and by them to consider what good fruits M. Bishops faith has brought
forth amongst them. It made me remember a story that I have heard out of
Boccace of a converted Jew, of whom he that converted him would by no means
hear that he should go to Rome, fearing that the sight of the behavior that
he should see there, would make him renounce Christianity again. It made me
think of the nobles of the Sultan of Babylon, who seeing enormous behauiours
so to abound at Rome, refused to become Christians, saying, M^t. Parisan
Henrico. 2. Quia Romae tot scaturiunt enormitates, dicebant* Quomodo ex vno
font aequa dulcis and salsa poterit emanare? Vbi Christiani fonte^ iustitiae
ha erir^ tenentu^, in^eniunt la ^c m toxicatum.
How can water both sweet and salt flow out of one fountain? Where Christians
are bound to draw at the fountain of justice, there they find a poisoned
brook? It made me call to mind the good usage and behavior of the Spaniards
in the west Indies, where by their extreme villainies and cruelties they have
made the name of Christian religion to stink amongst those poor and
unbelieving souls. It made me consider the humility, and devotion, and great
virtue that the Jesuits and Seculars bewrayed the one of the other, in the late
contentions that were amongst them. It put me in mind of the moral and modest
conversation of Weston the Jesuit and his fellows, in hunting the devil in
Sara Williams, and many pretty tricks about that matter. Surely M. Bishop if
the faith and religion which we profess, did bring forth such ugly monsters as
your Popes have been, or did nourish such execrable villainies and filtheries as
are practiced amongst you, we might justly grow suspicious of it. But thanks
be to God, that though our fruits be not such as they ought to be, yet the face
and state of our Church and common wealth is such, as that we may boldly tell
you, that it is not for a harlot to compare with an honest matrone, nor for you
to make comparison betwixt us and you.

19. W. BISHOP.
The second difference in the manner of justification, is about the formal act
of faith, which M. Perkins handles as it were by the way, cuttedly I will be
as short as he, the matter not being great. The Catholics teach, as you have
heard out of the Council of Trent, in the beginning of this question, that
many acts of faith, fear, hope, and charity do go before our justification,
preparing our soul to receive into it from God through Christ that great grace.

M. Perkins Doctor like resolves otherwise, That faith is an instrument,
created by God in the heart of man, at his conversion, whereby he apprehends
and receives Christ's righteousness, for his justification.

This ioyly description is set down without any other probation, then his own
authority that delivered it: and so, let it pass as already sufficiently
confuted. And if there needed any other disproofe of it, I might gather one
more out of his own explication of it, where he says, that the covenant of
grace is communicated unto us, by the word of God, and by the Sacraments. For
if faith created in our hearts, be the only sufficient supernatural
instrument, to apprehend that covenant of grace, then there needs no Sacraments
for that purpose, and consequently I would feign know by the way, how little
infants, that cannot for want of judgment and discretion have any such act of
faith, as to lay hold on Christ his justice, are justified? Must we without any
warrant in Gods word contrary to all experience, believe that they have this
act of faith, before they come to any understanding?

R. ABBOT.
By those acts of faith, fear, hope, charity going before justification, the
Council of Trent does expressly consort it self with Pelagius the heretic.
This faith, fear, hope, charity, we must know not to be the effects or works
of any infused grace, which before justification is none, but they are the
proper acts of man's free will only, assisted by some external or outward
grace, as they by collusion call it, which as I have showed before in the
question of Sect. 5.
Free will, Pelagius the heretic affirmed and granted as well as they. But
hereby they directly cross the rule of S. Austine, that August. de fide and
oper, cap. 14. Sequunt^r iustificatum, ^on praecedunt iustificandum.
good works follow in a man being justified, but they go not before
justification. He says they do not go before, they say they do go before,
only they are not properly meritorious. Meritorious they are also Bellarm de
iustific. lib. 1. ca 17. Fides suo quoda^ modo meretur remissione^ peccatorum.
in some sort, but not properly meritorious ex condigno, as the new faith,
hope, and charity are in the justified man. Let the Reader well observe it,
that there is one faith, hope and charity before justification; another faith,
hope and charity infused when a man is justified. But of that we shall hear
more anon. Here the special matter is as touching M. Perkins his description
of faith to be an instrument supernatural created by God in the heart of man
at his conversion, whereby he apprehends and receives Christ's righteousness
for his justification. This M. Bishop says, is set down without any proof,
and is already sufficiently confuted: but where? Surely we have seen much for
proof on M. Perkins side, but M. Bishops confutation yet we have not seen.
Yea where M. Perkins did notably demonstrate this act of faith out of the
Gospel, M. Bishop passed it over without any further answer but only to say,
Chap. 3. sect. 16
He might be ashamed to use this discourse to us, who admit no part of it to be
true, in which sort he might easily answer any thing that he list not to admit
for truth. But what is it that he would have to be proved? For that faith is an
instrument to apprehend and receive, it is plain, because it is Aug. in Joan.
tract. 50. Quomodo tenebo absentem? quomodo in coelum manu^ mittam, vt ibi
sedentem teneam? fidem mitte and tenuisti.
the hand which we stretch to heaven to take hold of Christ, and to hold him
sitting there; it is the mouth whereby we eat and drink Christ; because Ibid.
tract. 26. Qui credit manducat.
to believe is to eat: it is the stomach whereby we digest him, for Tertul. de
resur. carn. fide digerendus.
he is to be digested by faith; it is Bernard. in Cant. ser. 32. In bonis
Domini quatenus fiduciae pedem p^rrexeris eatenus possidebis
the foot whereby we enter possession of the benefits of Christ, and possess
so far as we stretch the same, it is Idem in Annunc. ser. 3. Dominus oleum
misericord^ae nisi in vase fiduciae non ponit.
the vessel whereinto God puts the oil of his mercy. Aug. de verb. Dom.
ser. 33. Fide illum accipimus.
By faith, says Austin, we receive Christ: it is Ambros. in Psalm. 43. Fidei
tactus est quo tangitur Christus.
by faith, says Ambrose, that we touch Christ, and Cyprian. lib. 2. epist. 2.
Quatum fidei capac^ afferimus, tantum gratiae inundanin haurimus.
look how much faith we bring to receive, says Cyprian, so much we draw of
the abundant grace of God. This being plain, the question then must be of the
thing that is to be received. Now the thing to be received, is the thing whereby
we are to be justified. The thing whereby we are to be justified is the
obedience of Christ, for Romans 5.15.
by the obedience of one, says the Apostle, shall many be made righteous, and
what is the obedience of Christ, but the righteousness of Christ? The
righteousness of Christ then is the thing to be apprehended and received for our
justification. And how should we be 2. Cor. 5.21.
made the righteousness of God in him, but by apprehending and receiving a
righteousness which is in him? He is called the Ierem. 23.6.
Lord our righteousness, not who makes us righteous only, but who himself is
our righteousness, and how should he be our righteousness, but by his
righteousness? Therefore in apprehending and receiving Christ by faith, we
apprehend and receive the righteousness of Christ to be our justification before
God. But I need not stand upon this; for seeing through this whole Chapter we
shall prove, that we receive no gift of inherent righteousness, whereby we can
be justified in the sight of God, it follows, as is also proved, that the
righteousness which we receive by faith for justification, is the merit and
obedience of Christ imputed unto us. Now M. Bishop tells us, that he can
gather a disproofe of all this out of M. Perkins own explication. For, says
he, if faith created in our hearts, be the only sufficient supernatural
instrument to apprehend the covenant of grace, then there needs no Sacraments
for that purpose. But such disproofes will make men think that he is run not
out of his learning only, but also out of his wits. If he will apply that
answer to M. Perkins, it must be thus, If faith be the only instrument whereby
we apprehend Christ, what need we any Sacraments to offer him unto us? And
why did he not as well say, what need there any word of God to that purpose?
for his disproofe stands as good in the one as in the other. But M. Perkins
sets both down, as means on Gods part to offer Christ unto us, not as
instruments or means on our part to apprehend and lay hold of Christ, and
notably observes, how the giving of bread and wine to the several
communicants in the Lords Supper, is a pledge and sign of Gods particular
giving of Christ's body and blood with all his merits, to every of them by
faith in him. Yea, says M. Bishop, but how then are infants justified, who
cannot have any such act of faith? I answer him, that infants dying, are
justified and saved merely by virtue of the covenant and promise of God, to
which they are entitled by the calling and faith of their parents, and in right
whereof they are baptized and entered into the body of the Church, God having
said, Genesis 17.7.
I will be thy God and the God of thy seed. For where the offer of the covenant
has no place, there the means of acceptance cannot be required, but by mere
and absolute gift righteousness and life are given, and in the Sacrament
sealed unto them, who according to the purpose of the grace of God, are by
inward regeneration made the seed of the faithful, according to the intendment
and meaning of the covenant. Yet nothing hinders, but that we may conceive,
that God calling infants from hence, does in their passage by the power of his
Spirit, give them light of understanding, and knowledge, and faith of Christ,
as an entrance to that light and life which after by Christ and with him they
enjoy for ever. Who when he will, makes babes and sucklings to praise him, and
even in young children sometimes in our sight, shows the admirable fruit of
his grace in their death, far beyond that their years are capable of. As for
infants baptized and continuing to elder years, they are not always justified
in being baptized, but God calls them, some sooner, some later; some at one
hour, some at another, according to his good will and pleasure, and then the
medicine long before applied, begins to work the effect that does
appertain unto it.

20. W. BISHOP.
But to return unto the sound doctrine of our Catholic faith, M. Perkins
finds fault with it, one that we teach faith to go before justification,
whereas by the word of God (says he) at the very instant, when any man
believes first, he is then both justified and sanctified. What word of God so
teaches? Ioh. 6.54.
Marry this: He that believes, eats and drinks the body and blood of
Christ, and is already passed from death to life. I answer, that our Savior
in that text speaks not of believing, but of eating his body in the blessed
Sacrament, which who so receives worthily, obtains thereby life everlasting,
as Christ says expressly in that place. And so this proof is vain.

Now will I prove out of the holy Scriptures, that faith goes before
justification, Romans 10.
first by that of S. Paul: Whosoever calls on the name of our Lord shall be
saved, but how shall they call upon him, in whom they do not believe, how shall
they believe without a preacher, etc. Where there is this order set down to
arrive unto justification. First, to hear the preacher, then to believe,
afterward to call upon God for mercy, and finally mercy is granted and given
in justification: so that prayer goes between faith and justification. This
Saint Augustine observed, De praedest. sanc. cap. 7. De spirit. and lit. cap.
30.
when he said: Faith is given first, by which we obtain the rest. And again:
By the Law is knowledge of sin, by faith we obtain grace, and by grace our
soul is cured. If we list to see the practice of this recorded in holy writ,
read the second of the Acts, and there you shall find, how that the people
having heard S. Peter's Sermon, were stricken to the hearts, and believed, yet
were they not straight way justified, but asked of the Apostles what they must
do, who willed them to do penance, and to be baptized in the name of Jesus, in
remission of their sins, and then lo, they were justified, so that penance
and baptism went between their faith, and their justification.

In like manner Queen Candaces Eunuch, having heard S. Philip, announcing unto
him Christ, believed that JESUS CHRIST was the Son of God (no talk in those
days of applying unto himself Christ's righteousness,) yet was he not
justified, Act. 8.
before descending out of his chariot he was baptized. And three days passed
between S. Paul's conversion and his justification, Act. 9.
as does evidently appear by the history of his conversion.

The second fault he finds with our faith, is that we take it to be nothing
else, but an illumination of the mind, stirring up the will, which being so
moved and helped by grace, causes in the heart many good spiritual motions.
But this (says M. Perkins) is as much to say, that dead men only helped, can
prepare themselves to their resurrection. Not so good Sir, but that men
spiritually dead, being quickened by Gods spirit, may have many good motions,
for as our spirit gives life unto our bodies; so the spirit of God by his
grace animateth, and gives life unto our souls. But of this it has been once
before spoken at large, in the question of Free will.

R. ABBOT.
We are so to affirm the effect of justifying faith, as may make good what the
Scripture has delivered concerning it. Which because the Church of Rome does
not, in making faith precedent in time to justification and grace, M. Perkins
justly finds fault therewith. Our Savior says, Ioh. 5.24.
He that hears my word and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life.
Our passing from death to life, is our justification. If every one that
believes be passed from death to life, then every one that believes is
justified; or if there be any that believes, and yet is not justified, the^ it
is not true of every one that believes, that he is passed from death to life.
To this place M. Perkins alluded though he quoted it not, but M. Bishop thought
it safest for him to say nothing of it. To the other place his answer is a
simple shift. He that believes eats and drinks the body and blood of
Christ. I answer, says M. Bishop, that our Savior in that text speaks not
of believing, but of eating his body in the blessed Sacrament. But we answer
him again, that if Christ speak of eating in the sacrament, then it must
follow, that whosoever is not partaker of the sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ is excluded from life, because our Savior expressly says, Ioh. 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you. But so to say is absurd and false, as in the example of the
crucified thief and many other, is apparent and plain. Again the Sacrament
was not instituted long after, and will M. Bishop exclude any faithful, that
after this time died, before that institution from that eating of the flesh of
Christ and drinking of his blood, which Christ here recommendeth for the having
of eternal life? S. Austin says, that Bed^ in 1. Cor. 10. ex August. ser. ad
infantes.
in baptism we are made partakers of the body and blood of Christ, so that
though one die before he come to the Sacrament of the Bread and the Cup, yet is
he not deprived of the participation and benefit of that Sacrament, seeing he
has found that already which that Sacrament signifies. The Apostle
testifies, that the fathers of the old Testament did 1. Cor. 10.3.4.
all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
drink, not the same one with another, as the Rhem. Annot. 1. Cor. 10.
Rhemistes for a shift expound it, but Aug. in Joan. tract. 26. spiritualem
eandem quem nos.
the same that we do. For Idem de vtilit. penitent. c. 1. Eundem non inuento
quomodo intelligam nisi eundem quem manducamus and nos.
I find not, says S. Austin, how I should understand, The same, but the same
that we eat. Therefore they also did eat the flesh of Christ and drink his
blood. But their eating and drinking was not the participation of the
Sacrament. Therefore Christ by eating his flesh and drinking his blood, does
not import any thing tied to the participation of the Sacrament. Yea the whole
course of that text gives us plainly to understand, that Christ by eating his
flesh and drinking his blood, means the same as by believing in him.
Therefore does S. Austin by the one expound the other. Aug. in Joan. tract. 25.
Creed and manducasti. Ibid. tract. 26. Hortans vt credamus in eum. Credere enim
in eum, ho^ est manducare p^nem viuum. Qui credit manducat.
Believe and thou have eaten; he exhorts us to believe in him; for to believe
in him, that is to eat the bread of life; he that believes, eats. And so
says he of the fathers eating and drinking, that this Idem de vtilit. poenit.
Fide capiebatur, non corpore hauriebatur.
spiritual meat and drink was received by faith, and not by the body. Now
if belief in Christ be imported by eating and drinking the flesh and blood of
Christ, then M. Perkins proof was not vain but M. Bishop has showed himself
a vain man, to give so vain an answer without any proof thereof at all.
Without doubt Ioh. 6.54.
whosoever eats the flesh of Christ and drinks his blood, has eternal
life. But no man has eternal life, but he that is justified and sanctified.
Whosoever therefore eats and drinks the flesh and blood of Christ, is
justified and sanctified. But our believing in Christ is our eating of his
flesh and drinking of his blood. So soon therefore as we believe in Christ, we
are justified and sanctified, that it may be true which the Apostle says, that
Romans 3.22.
the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, is to all and upon all
that do believe, which cannot be said, if any believe upon whom there yet is
not the Righteousness of God to justify him before God. The proofs that he
alleges to the contrary, are very simple and slender. First he alleges
the words of S. Paul, Romans 10.13.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, but how shall
they call upon him in whom they have not believed? etc. Where of justification
we hear not a word, nor is any thing purposely meant thereof. For the words
which the Apostle cites out of the Prophet Joel, touch not the order of
justification, but import a promise to them that are justified by faith in
Christ, and accordingly do call upon the name of the Lord, that in the
calamities and confusion of the world God will preserve them to be partakers of
everlasting salvation. Now we grant that by order of nature there is a
precedence of faith to justification, but we deny all prioritie in respect of
time. And whereas M. Bishop avouches, that prayer goes betwixt faith and
justification, beside that it is not proved by the Apostles words, it is very
untrue and false. For there can be no true prayer without Zach. 12.10. Vulgat.
the spirit of grace and of prayer, without Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6.
the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father. The spirit of adoption
and grace is the spirit of sanctification. It follows then that we pray not
but by being first sanctified, and because sanctification is consequent to
justification, it must follow also, that justification goes before prayer, so
that in praying for the forgiveness of sins, it comes to pass with us
which the Prophet says, Esa. 6^.24.
Before they call I will answer them. Let M. Bishop order the matter how he
will, yet this must always stand good, that faith in the first instant of the
being of it, gaspeth unto God by prayer, as the thirsty land, and together
therewith receives blessing of God. God tieth not himself to M. Bishops
order, but where he gives faith, in the gift thereof he begins with it the
whole effect and fruit of faith. As there is no flame without light, but in the
beginning of the flame there is jointly a beginning of light, and yet in nature
the flame is before the light; so is there no faith without justification and
sanctification, and in the first act of faith jointly we are justified and
sanctified, albeit in order of nature faith is precedent to them both. Thus are
the speeches understood that he alleges out of Austin, and thus they are
true, and make nothing at all to serve for the purpose to which he alleges
them. No more do those other examples that he brings of the baptism of the
people converted by Peter's sermon, of the Eunuch and the Apostle Paul. He
proves thereby, that there was some time betwixt their believing and their
being baptized* but proves not that there was any time betwixt their believing
and their being justified. For he must understand, that we do not tie the
justification of a man to the act or instant of his baptism, and of all these
do affirm, that they received the sacrament of baptism as Abraham did the
sacrament of circumcision. After justification, Romans 5.11.
he received the sign of circumcision as the seal of the righteousness of
faith which he had when he was uncircumcised. Even so did these receive the
sign of baptism as the seal of forgiveness of sins and of the
righteousness of faith, which they had embraced and received before they were
baptized. We read of Cornelius and his company, that Act. 10.44.47
the holy Ghost came on them, they received the holy Ghost when they were yet
unbaptized, and does M. Bishop doubt but that they were justified? Constantine
the Emperor was not baptized Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 4.
till near his death, and shall we say that till then he was never justified?
Valentinian was Ambros. de ^bitu Valentia.
not baptized at all, and yet Ambrose doubted not of his justification. Very
idly therefore and impertinently does M. Bishop bring these examples, and
gains nothing thereby to his cause. I omit his penance in steed of repentance
only, as a toy that he is in love withal. It is the plain doctrine of their
schools, Tho. Aqu. p. 3. q. 68. ar. 3. in corp Et qui baptizatur pro
quibuscunque peccatis, no^ est aliqua satisfactio iniungenda: hoc enim esset
iniuriam facere passioni and morti Christi, quasi ipsa non esset suffi^iens ad
plenariam satisfactionem pro peccatis baptizatorum.
that no penance is to be enjoined unto men in baptism, or that are to be
baptized for any sins whatsoever, because that should be a wrong to the
passion and death of Christ, as if it were not sufficient for full satisfaction
for the sins of the baptized. Seeing therefore S. Peter in the place
alleged, expressly directs his speech to them that were to be baptized, M.
Bishop and his fellows would forbear there to translate doing of penance, but
that, poor men, they are afraid they shall be all undone, unless they make
the Scripture say somewhat by right or by wrong for doing of penance. Whether
in those days there were talk of applying Christ's righteousness, appears I
hope sufficiently in this discourse. The other fault which M. Perkins here
finds with the Romish doctrine, is that they make faith nothing else but an
illumination of the mind, stirring up the will, which being so moved and helped
by grace, causes in the heart many good spiritual motions. M. Bishop puts
in (by grace) only to delude the Reader, because he understands hereby no
other grace, but the same that Pelagius did, as before has been said. But
hereof M. Perkins rightly said, that it is as much as if they should say, that
a dead man only helped, can prepare himself to his resurrection. Not so good
Sir, says M. Bishop, but that men spiritually dead being quickened by Gods
spirit, may have many good motions. I answer, you say true, good Sir, when a
man is quickened by Gods spirit, but can a man be quickened before he be
quickened? We suppose that the justifying of a man is the quickening of him, and
not we only, but you also in the five and twentieth section following, do hold
that our justification is the translating of us from death to life. Before
justification then we are not quickened, nor receive any infused or inhabitant
grace of the spirit of life, wherein spiritual life consists. Therefore to
avouch many good spiritual motions before justification, is to avouch grace
without grace, life without life, the spirit without the spirit, and a
quickening of us before we are quickened. Which because it cannot be, it is
true that M. Perkins says, that by your doctrine you make a dead man prepare
himself to his resurrection. What you have said in the question of Free will,
I hope has his answer sufficiently in that place.

21 W. BISHOP.
The third difference, says M. Perkins, concerning faith, is this. Page. 84.
The Papists say, that man is justified by faith, yet not by faith alone, but
also by other virtues, as the fear of God, hope, love, etc. The reasons which
are brought to maintain their opinion, are of no moment. Well, let us hear
some of them, that the indifdifferent Reader may judge, whether they be of any
moment or no.

FIRST REASON.
MAny sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much: Luke. 7 47.
whence they gather that the woman there spoken of, had pardon of her sins,
and was justified by love. Answer. In this text, love is not made an impulsive
cause, to move God to pardon her sins, but only a sign, to show that God
had already pardoned them.

Reply. Observe first, that Catholics do not teach, that she was pardoned for
love alone, for they use not (as Protestants do) when they find one cause of
justification, to exclude all, or any of the rest: But considering that in
sundry places of holy writ, justification is ascribed unto many several
virtues, affirm that not faith alone, but diverse other divine qualities
concur unto justification, and as mention here made of love, excludes not
faith, hope, repentance, and such like: so in other places, where faith is
only spoken of, there hope, charity, and the rest must not also be excluded.
This sinner had assured belief in Christ's power to remit sins, and great
hope in his mercy that he would forgive them great sorrow and detestation of
her sin also she had, that in such an assembly did so humbly prostrate her
self at Christ's feet, to wash them with her tears, and to wipe them with
the hairs of her head. And as she had true repentance of her former life, so
no doubt but she had also a firm purpose, to lead a new life. So that in her
conversion, all those virtues met together, which we hold to concur to
justification, and among the rest, the pre-eminence worthily is given to love,
as to the principal disposition. She loved our Savior as the fountain of all
mercies, and goodness, and therefore accounted her precious ointments best
bestowed on him; yea, and the humblest service, and most affectionate she could
offer him, to be all too little, and nothing answerable to the inward burning
charity which she bare him. Which noble affection of hers, toward her divine
Redeemer, no question, was most acceptable unto him, as by his own word is
most manifest: for he said, That many sins were forgiven her, because she
loved much. But M. Perkins says, that her love was no cause that moved Christ
to pardon her, but only a sign of pardon given before: which is so contrary
to the text, that a man not past all shame, would blush once to affirm it.
First Christ says expressly, that it was the cause of the pardon: Because she
had loved much. Secondly, that her love went before, is as plainly declared,
both by mention of the time past, Because she has loved; and by the evidence
of her fact of washing, wiping, and anointing his feet: for the which says
our Savior, then already performed: Many sins are forgiven her. So that here
can be no impediment of believing the Catholic Doctrine, so clearlie delivered
by the holy Ghost, unless one will be so blindly led by our new Masters, that
he will believe no words of Christ, be they never so plain, otherwise then it
please the Ministers to expound them. And this much of the first of those
reasons, which M. Perkins said were of no moment.

R. ABBOT.
I wished thee, gentle Reader, before to observe that which here plainly thou
see, that by the Romish doctrine there is one faith, hope, charity before
justification, which must prepare a man in justification to receive, and is the
cause for which in justification he does receive another; a faith, which is the
cause why God endueth him with faith; a hope, which is the cause for which God
endueth him with hope; a charity, which is the cause for which God bestows
upon him the gift of charity. A strange doctrine, and the same for which
Pelagius was of old condemned, August. epist. 46.
that upon our merits the grace of God is bestowed upon us. M. Bishop will say,
that they make no merits of these; yet he himself knows that their schools
do make them merits ex congruo, though not ex condigno, merits which are of
force to move God, and which it is convenient that God should respect, though
they do not fully deserve grace. And this merit Bellarm. de iustif. lib. 1.
cap. 17. Fides suo quoda^ modo meretur remissionem peccatorum: iustificat per
modu^ dispositionis ac meriti.
Bellarmine himself affirms, as before was said. But let us know why they
account them not properly merits? The reason indeed is, because they say they
are not the effects of any infused grace; for they make them intrinsecally the
acts only of man's free will, though adjoining the show of a counterfeit grace,
which does as it were put a hand under the arm to help lift it up for the
acting thereof. Yet M. Bishop at randon not knowing what he says, calls them
divine qualities, contrary to the doctrine of his own schools. For if faith,
hope, and charity before justification be divine qualities, and essentially the
works of grace, there can nothing hinder, but that they should be as properly
meritorious as those infused graces, wherein they affirm justification to
consist. But now he must understand, that the Fathers did not take merit so
strictly, as that they give him way to shift off from himself the assertion of
Pelagius. They understood it so largely, as that August. epist. 105. Si
excusatio iusta est quisquis ea vtitur, non gratia sed merito liberatur.
if a man can but plead a just excuse for his deliverance, he that uses it is
not delivered by grace but by merit; if there be but Cont. 2. epist. Pelag. lib
1. cap. 19. Pro meritis videlicet voluntatis bonae: ac sic gratia no sit
gratia, sed sit illud, etc. gratiam Dei secundum merita nostra dari.
a good will before grace, then grace is not grace, but is given upon merit.
And if he will say, that they affirm not any good will before grace, let him
remember, that Pelagius affirmed such a preventing grace as they do, but S.
Austine professes to know no grace, but justifying grace, as has been showed
Cha. 1. sect. 5.
before, so that if before justifying grace, there be any good will or good
work, then the grace of God is not freely given, but by merit, according to
the doctrine of Pelagius. Yea, Bellarmine himself confesses, that the
Bellarm. de great. and li. arbit. lib. 6. cap. 5. Gratiam secundum merita nostra
dari intelligum patres, cum aliquid sit proprijs viribus (etiamsi n^n sit
meritum de condigno) ratione cuius datur gratia.
Fathers do understand the grace of God to be given by merits, when any thing
is done by our own strength, in respect whereof grace is given, though the
same be not any merit de condigno, of condignity or worth. Such are the faith,
hope, and charity, that they teach before justification, which therefore as I
have said, are denied to be merits de condigno, because they proceed from our
own strength. Yea, say they, but not without the help of God. But so Pelagius
also said, as we have showed in the place before quoted in the question of Free
will, and therefore in that they say nothing to free themselves from saying that
which the Fathers condemned in Pelagius, that according to our merits the grace
of God is bestowed upon us. And this M. Bishop will prove by the example of the
woman, who in the Pharisees house washed the feet of Christ, of whom our
Savior says; Luke 7.47.
Many sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much. She was justified
therefore, says he, because of her love. M. Perkins answers, that that
because imports not any impulsive cause of the forgiveness of her sins,
but only a sign thereof, as if Christ had said, It is a token that much has
been forgiven her, because she loves much. But M. Bishop like to bad disposed
persons, who face the matter most boldly, where their cause is woorst, says,
that this is so contrary to the text, that a man not past all shame, would
blush once to affirm it. The text of it own accord yields this construction
and no other. The creditour forgiueth to one five hundred talents, to the other
fifty; whether of them will love him more? He, says the Pharisee, to whom he
forgave most. Here is love expressly set down, as a thankfulness following
after, in respect of a forgiveness gone before. Christ then in effect
infers thus, Thou have given me small tokens of thy love, since my entering
into thy house, but thus and thus has she showed her love. What is the cause?
August. hom. 23. O Pharisaee, ideo parum diligis quia parum tibi dimitti
suspicaris: non quia parum dimittitur, sed quia parum putas esse quod
dimi^ttiur.
O thou Pharisee, therefore thou love little, because thou think that
little is forgiven thee, not because it is little, but because thou think it
to be but little. But this woman knows that much has been forgiven her,
therefore she loves much. And this exposition is apparently confirmed by the
words which Christ adds, To whom a little is forgiven, he does love a little:
which if we will fit to the words going before, Many sins are forgiven her,
because she has loved much, we must make the meaning of these former words to
be this; But she loves much; it is a sign therefore that much has been
forgiven her. In this meaning Ambrose makes this woman a figure of the Church
of the Gentiles, Ambros de Tobia. cap. 22 Plu^ remissum est ecclesiae quia plus
debebat; sed and ipsa plus soluit. etc. Mentor gratiae eo plura soluit, qu^
plura meruiss^t.
to which there was more forgiven, because she was indebted more, but being
mindful of this grace, has paid so much the more (in love) by how much the
greater mercy she had obtained. And to the same sense does he expound it, In
Luc. cap. 7.
writing upon the place, even as Basil also does, when alluding to that place,
he says: Basil. exhort. ad baptism. Pl^s debenti plus remittitur vt
vehementius amet.
To him that owes more, more is forgiven, that he may love the more. So does
Hierome take it, saying, Hieron. adu. Iouin. lib. 2. De duobus debitoribus cui
plus dimittitur plus amat. Vnde and saluator ait, etc.
Of two debtors, to whom more is forgiven, he loves more; thereupon our
Savior says, Many sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much, which
cannot hang together, if love be taken for an effect of forgiveness in the one
speech, and a cause thereof in the other. But now we expect, that Master
Bishop so peremptorily rejecting that exposition, should give us some great
reason of the denying of it. First, says he, Christ says expressly, that it
was the cause of the pardon; because she had loved much. But his learning
should teach him, that the word because does not always note an antecedent
cause, but sometimes a succeeding effect or sign. As where our Savior Christ
says of the devil, John. 8.44.
he abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him, he did not mean
to say, that the cause of his not abiding in the truth, was because now there
is no truth in him, but that hereby as by an effect and sign, it appears
that he abode not in the truth. So where he says; Jbid. cap. 15. v. 15. (...),
etc.
I have called you friends, because all things that I have heard of the Father
I have made known unto you, he makes this imparting of all things to them not
a cause, but a token of accounting them his friends. Which being evident and
plain, M. Bishops first reason hinders nothing, but that Christ's words may
well be understood, that he names the woman's love only as a sign and token
of many sins to be forgiven unto her. And to take it otherwise as he does,
overthrows the rule that is delivered by S. Austine: August. epist. 120 cap.
30 Ex hoc incipiunt bona opera ex quo iustificamur, non quia praecesseru^t
iustificamur.
Good works begin from the time that we are justified, we are not justified for
any good works that go before. His second reason is less worth, and he shows
therein either his ignorance or his negligence. For whereas he argues out of
the Tenses, that her love is expressed by the time past, she has loved much,
and her forgiveness by the time present, Many sins are forgiven her,
importing that the former cannot be the sign, and therefore must needs be the
cause of that that follows, if he had been so careful as to look into the
Greek text, he should have found that her forgiveness of sins is expressed
also by the time past, by the Atticke preter perfect tense (...); Many sins
have been forgiven her, because she has loved much, albeit it should not have
noted necessarily a present act, but a continuation of the benefit, if it had
been expressed in the present tense. The exposition therefore alleged, being
direct, and arising simply out of the text it self, what reason has M. Bishop
to force another, which plainly thwarteth that which Christ after says, Thy
faith has saved thee? To conclude, let him take for his reproof, that which
Origin says; Origin. ad Romans cap. 3. Ex nullo legis opere sed pro sola fide
ait ad eam: Remittuntur, etc.
For no work of the law (and therefore not for her love) but for faith only
does Christ say to the woman, Thy sins are forgiven thee, and again, Thy
faith has saved thee: and let him learn to condemn his own presumption, in
that he takes upon him so rashly to define, that which he is not able, by
reason to make good. As for the Ministers, they are very simple men, if they
cannot better approve their expositions and doctrines then he has done.

22. W. BISHOP.
Gal. 5.6.
2. Reason. Neither Circumcision, nor prepuce, avails any thing, but faith
that works by charity. Hence Catholics gather, that when the Apostle
attributes justification to faith, he means not faith alone, but as it is
joined with charity, and other like virtues, as are requisite to prepare the
soul of man, to receive that co^plete grace of justification. M. Perkins
answers, that they are joined together. But it is faith alone that
apprehends Christ's righteousness, and makes it ours. It uses charity as an
instrument to perform the duties of the first and second table, but it has no
part with faith in the matter of our justification.

Reply. That it has the chiefest part, and that faith is rather the instrument
and handmayd of charity; my proof shall be out of the very text alleged,
where life and motion is given to faith by charity, as the Greek word
Energoumene being passive, does plainly show, that faith is moved, led, and
guided by charity. Which S. James does demonstrate most manifestly saying, that
Even as the body is dead without the soul, so is faith without charity: Making
charity to be the life, and as it were the soul of faith: Now no man is
ignorant, but it is the soul that uses the body, as an instrument, even so
then it is charity, that uses faith as her instrument and inferior, and not
contrariwise: which S. Paul confirms at large in a whole chapter, proving
charity to be a more excellent gift then faith, or any other, concluding with
these words: 1. Cor. 13.
Now there remains faith, hope, and charity; these three, but the greater of
these is charity. Whereupon S. Augustine resolves thus: Nothing but charity
makes faith it self auailable, Li. de Trinit. cap. 18.
for faith (says he) may be without charity, but it cannot be auailable
without it: So that first you see that charity is the mouer and commander, and
faith, as her instrument and handmayd.

Now that in the work of justification, it has the chief place, may be thus
proved, I demand whether that work of justification by faith be done, for the
love of God, and to his honor or no? If not, as it is void of charity, so it
is a wicked and sinful act, no justification, but infection, our own interest
being the principal end of it: now if it comprehend and conclude Gods glory,
and service in it, that is, if they apply Christ's righteousness to them, to
glorify God thereby, then has charity the principal part therein: for the
directing of all, to the honor and glory of God, is the proper office and
action of charity. All this reason that charity both concurreth to
justification, and that as principal, S. Augustine confirms in these words:
The house of God, ( that is, a righteous and godly soul, Sermon. 22. de v^rbis
Apostol.
) has for his foundation faith; hope is the walls of it; but charity is the
roof and perfection of it.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop was loath to trouble himself too much with M. Perkins answer,
who truly observes the difference betwixt faith and charity, that the proper
act of faith is to take and receive to us; the proper act of love, to give our
selves forth to others. Seeing the^ that justification is a thing to be
received, the same must needs be performed properly by faith, but not by
charity, because charity is no instrument to receive. But yet faith receiving
all of God, uses charity, as the means to make return of it self to God
again, and by charity, as a working hand performs all the duties commanded
of God, to the honor and glory of God. This therefore the Apostle intends in
the place alleged, that faith having alone justified us by receiving the gift
of righteousness, which is by the merit of Jesus Christ, does not stay there,
but goes forth by charity, to serve God, to serve one another, and to show our
selves thankful unto God. And wonder it were, that the Apostle having before
professedly disputed the matter of justification, and referring the same wholly
to faith, should here cross all that he has before said, and tell us, that
not only faith, but love also must concur to make up our justification
before God. Mark it well, gentle Reader, that where the Apostle purposely
speaks of the means of justification, M. Bishop can find nothing to prove,
that we are justified by love, nothing pleaded but only faith; but here where
the Apostle describes only the condition of the faith by which we are
justified, here he will find somewhat whereby to plead against the Apostles
former doctrine, yea, and will prove, that love has not only a part, but the
chiefest part in our justification, and that faith is rather the instrument or
handmaid of charity. How much is he beholding to his Master Bellarmine, that
has taught him such a trick, and furnished him with a device, which never any
Father Greek or Latin, never any translatour could light upon, till his
admirable wit had found it out? We may well think that such a head could not
but deserve a Cardinals hat. Forsooth the text proves, that life and motion is
given to faith by charity. But how so? Bellarm. de iustific. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Marry the Greek word, (...) being passive, does plainly show, that faith is
moved, led, and guided by charity. But what? must we, M. Bishop, upon
Bellarmines word and yours take this, without any further authority or warrant
so to do? Indeed it is true, that the Greek word sometimes is taken
passiuely, but by the Apostle is more often used in the active signification,
and in this place was never before by any Father Greek or Latin taken
otherwise. Yea, the spite is, that the vulgar Latin interpreter to whom they
are tied by the Council of Trent, crosses this device, for he reads as we
do, Fides quae per charitatem operatur, faith which works by love. But there
is a trick to salve that to; for, says Bellarmine, Jllud (operatur) passive
accipiendum est, non a^^iue.
the word (operatur) must be taken passiuely, not actiuely. Now what blockheads
were the Divines of Rhemes, that could not see so much, or would omit so
material a proof against the heretics? for they have translated as we do,
faith which works by love. But they were bashful; they thought Bellarmine
could carry out the matter with his name and countenance, but it would be
condemned for a great fault in them. Better it is for some man to steal a
horse, then for another to look over the hedge. They knew well, that every
child would cry out upon them for lewd men, if they had translated operatur
passiuely, in as much as neither their own interpreter in any other place, nor
any other Latin author has ever used it in that sort. Again, they saw that a
very gross and palpable absurdity would thereupon have ensued, which on their
own part cannot be denied. For if they had translated faith which is wrought
by love, then it would have followed, that love by which faith is wrought, must
needs be before faith, whereas they all acknowledge, that faith has the first
being, according to that which M. Bishop a little Sect. 20. Ex August. de
praedest. sanct. ca. 7.
before alleged out of Austine, faith is given first, by which we obtain the
rest. Which being a principle in divinity, and accorded on both sides, they
could not tell how to make good, if they should have said that faith is wrought
by love. Now M. Bishop, though for the rest he would adventure upon his
Masters credit, yet durst not follow him so far, as to translate operatur
passiuely, but only beats about the bush, and tells us, that the Greek
shows, that faith is moved, led, and guided by charity. Wherein he does wrong
to the Rhemists his countrymen, to whom for countries sake he should have done
that honor, to stand to their translation. Yea, and he abuses his Reader, in
that he does not directly translate the place, which if he had done, he durst
not translate it, to give that meaning that now he makes of it. Which meaning
of his cannot in any sort be true, because it is faith which first hears, and
believes, and receives the words of God, and thereby prescribes unto charity
the way that it is to go, and the duty that it is to perform, without which
what is charity, but a wild and a wandering affection, easily swaruing and
carried away from the due respect and love of God, so that by faith it is that
charity pleases God, and Heb. 11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God. Now seeing with God we cannot
think, that the greater is accepted for the less, but rather the less for
the greater, not the mistress (so to speak) for the handmaides sake, but
rather the handmaid for the mistress sake, we must needs make faith not the
handmaide, as M. Bishop does, but the mistress, because by faith it is that
charity is acceptable unto God. But he tells us, that S. James does
demonstrate charity to be the life, and as it were the soul of faith, when he
says, Even as the body is dead without the soul, so is faith without
charity. But he wrongeth his Reader, in citing thus falsely the words of S.
James. For S. James says not, so is faith without charity, but so is faith
without works. Now charity cannot be without works, but if there might not be
works without charity, S. Paul would not have said, 1. Cor. 13.3.
Though I feed the poor with all my goods, and though I give my body to be
burned and have not love, it profits me nothing. Charity is inwardly the
affection of the heart, seen only to God: but works are outwardly visible
and apparent to men, and therefore there is a difference to be made betwixt
charity and works, which wholly overthrows all that M. Bishop here goes
about to prove. For the faith whereof we here dispute, is inward in the heart,
because with Romans 10.10.
the heart man believes unto righteousness. But that which is without, cannot
be the life or soul of that which is within, nay it self has from within all
the life that it has, and if it receive not life from within, it is altogether
dead. Works therefore being outward, and issuing from within, if they be true,
can by no means be said to be the life of faith that is within. But that which
S. James says, he says it of works. He says nothing therefore, to prove
that charity is the life and soul of faith. But how then, will he say, does
Saint James make works, as it were the life and soul of faith? Very well,
according to that meaning of faith which he there intends. For he speaks of
faith, as it is outwardly professed to men. Iam. 2.14.18.
Thou say thou have faith, show me thy faith: I will show thee my faith. Now
in this respect, works are rightly said to be the lif^ of faith; not charity,
but works, because charity cannot be discerned by the eyes of men, but works
of behavior and conversation are discerned. Yea, there may be a profession of
the faith and works thereunto correspondent outwardly, when yet there is
neither faith nor charity within. Yet where it is so, men outwardly to men and
to the Church, go for no other but living m^m^^^s of the Church, until such
time as the wind of temptation blows them away, and discovers them to have
been but chafe, when in semblance they seemed to be good corn. But where
there is outward profession of faith, and there is not conversation thereunto
agreeing, a man is accounted but a dead branch fit to be cut off; his
profession wants that that should give it life and grace; he is every man's by
word and reproach, his hypocrisy is detested of all men, and therefore is much
more loathsome unto God. In a word, S. Paul speaks of faith in one meaning, as
it is inward in the heart to God: S. James speaks of faith in another
meaning, as it is outward in the face to men. If we understand it according to
Saint Paul, it is faith that gives life to all the rest, as afterward shall
further appear. If we understand it according to Saint James, works are the
life of faith, and give it name and being, because a man is not accounted
faithful for his words, unless there be also works agreeable to his words.
Now therefore Master Bishops comparison, whereby he would make charity as the
life and soul, and faith as the body, cannot be made good out of this place,
nay indeed it cannot be made good at all. For that which must be as the life
and soul, must be the internal and essential form of the thing. But
Bellarm. de iustificat. lib. 2. cap. 4. Forma fidei extrinseca, no^ intrinseca,
and quae dei illi non vt sit sed vt moueatur^ sit res actuosa and operans.
charity is to faith a form only extrinsecall and outward, not an inward
form, says Bellarmine, not giving it his being, but only his moving,
actiuitie, and working. Charity therefore cannot be called the life and soul
of faith. Now because it is but an outward and accidental form, the moving
and working that it gives unto faith, is but outward and accidental For the
proper and natural act and motion of a thing, cannot proceed from an
accidental form. Faith therefore has it own inward and essential form,
whereby it has life and being within it self, and whence proceeds a motion
and working that is proper to it self. And thus does the Apostle set it down
distinctly, as a virtue absolute in it self, when he says, 1. Cor. 13.13.
Now abide these three, faith, hope, and love. Where to say that faith is as
the body, and love as the soul, is to make the Apostle to speak absurdly, as
if a man for two should recko^ a body and a soul. According to this
distinction does the scripture still set forth faith in the nature of faith, to
be the instrument of our justification before God, eue^ according to that life
and soul that is that proper and essential form, whereby it has the being
of faith, which yet in justifying us, receives charity as an accidental form
to be unto it an instrument for moving and stirring abroad, in the performance
of all duties recommended unto us both to God and men. Thus Bellarmine perforce
wresteth from M. Bishop, yea and from himself also, this assertion of faith
being likened to the body, and charity to the soul. Yet M. Bishop once again
will assay to prove it by S. Paul, making charity a more excellent gift then
faith, reckoning faith, hope, and charity, and concluding, the greatest of
these is charity. But this testimony avails him nothing at all; for it
follows not, that because the eye is a more excellent member then the ear,
therefore the eye is as the life and soul to the ear, or the ear the
instrument of the eye. No more does it follow, that because charity is a more
excellent gift then faith, therefore it should be the form and life of faith,
or faith the instrument of charity. It follows not, that because the eye is
more excellent then the ear, therefore for the use of hearing, it should be
more excellent then the ear. No more does it follow, that because charity is
more excellent then faith, therefore for the use of justification it must
excel faith. Faith and charity respectively have the preferment each of
other. If we respect latitude of use, charity is more excellent then faith, as
which is extended every way to God, to Angels, to men, and by which all the
gifts of God which he bestows upon us, are made profitable to other men, so
as that Aug. de verb. Do^. ser. 18. Vniuersa inutiliter habet, qui vnum illud
qu^ vniuersis vtatur non habet.
unprofitably he has all, says Austine, who wants that one whereby he
should use all. Chrysostom. hom. de fide, spe and charit. Nullum charismae sine
charitate perfectam est; nullum donu^ sine charitate aptu^. Quicquid enim
charismatis aut doni quisque meruerit, desertu^ charitate non stabit. Omnia
enim quae Sp. sanctus deuotis aut impertit aut donat aut charitate
perficiu^tur, aut sine charitate effectu^ nullu^ sortiuntur.
No gift, says Chrysostom, is perfect or convenient without charity.
Whatsoever grace or gift a man has obtained, being destitute of charity, it
will not stand; because whatsoever God imparteth or gives, either is perfected
by charity, or without charity, it comes to no effect or use. But if we
consider a man privately in himself, and for his own use, faith is more
excellent then charity, as wherein originally stands our communion and
fellowship with God; Ephe. 3.17.
by which Christ dwells in our hearts; into which as a hand God puts all
the riches of his grace for our salvation; and by which whatsoever else is in
us, is commended unto God. We have nothing in us pure, nothing clean, nothing
but what is corrupted and defiled, but faith salueth all, heals all, sets
Christ betwixt God and us, that for his sake he may be merciful unto us.
Again if we respect latitude of time and continuance, charity is to be
preferred before faith. For faith is but for a time, and when the promise of
God, which is the matter or subject of it, shall be fully accomplished, the use
of it shall cease. But charity and love abides for ever, and shall continue
betwixt God and us an everlasting bond. Therefore Origin says, Origin. in
Numer. hom 14. Sola charitas nunqua^ excidit, ideo super prophetia^, super
fide^. super scientiam super ipsum etia^ martyrium charitas habenda est.
Only love it is that never fails; therefore it is more excellent then
prophecy, then faith, then knowledge, then martyrdom. Chrysostom. hom. de fide,
spe and charit. Sola charitas aeterna est, quia cum Deo in sancti^ est: ideo
mayor est.
Only charity is eternal, says Chrysostom, because with God it is in the
Saints; for that cause it is the greater. The same reason S. Austine also
gives, August. de doct. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 39. Quia cum quisque ad aeterna
peruenerit, duobus istis decedentibus charitas auctior and certior permanebit.
because, says he, when a man is come to things eternal, those two (faith and
hope) failing, charity shall remain more increased, and better assured. In few
words to resolve M. Bishop in this behalf, we say that Aristot. Topic.
the end is more excellent, then those things which pertain to the end. The
end of our faith and justification is charity, that is, the full restoring of
us to the image of God, the very sum and effect whereof is love. Absolutely
therefore to speak it is true, that love is greater and more excellent then
faith. But when we speak of the means of justification and attainment of that
salvation, whereto perfect charity and righteousness does belong, then faith
must be preferred as the greater and more excellent, faith only bears sway
therein, and this slender and weak charity which here we have, is of no effect
or moment thereunto. To save a man, I say, faith is the greater; in man being
saved charity is the greater. Till faith have finished our salvation, love must
yield to faith; When faith has fully saved us, it shall have an end, but love
which simply is the greater, shall abide for ever. Now as touching the place of
Austine, he speaks there of faith according to vulgar understanding, in like
sort as S. James does. He speaks of a faith that may be without charity,
which true faith cannot be. August. epist. 85. Pia fides sine spe and charitate
esse non vult.
Godly faith, says the same Austine, will not be without hope and charity. For
Idem de verb. Dom. ser. 61. Si fidem habet sine spe and delectione, Christum
esse credit, non in Christum credit.
if a man have faith without hope and love, says he, he believes Christ to
be, but he believes not in Christ. But that only is the true justifying
faith, whereby a man believes in Christ, which takes not his life and force
of love, but incorporating us into Christ, receives of him 2. Tim. 1.7.
the spirit of love, and by Christ gives life and force to all the fruits and
works thereof. Faith then as it is professed to men, may be without charity,
but being without charity, it profits nothing, nor can stand us in any steed
with God: but true faith is never divided from charity, nor can be, and
therefore of it Saint Austine speaks not. That which he would seem to
infer, is without any premises, and apparently false by the very words here
questioned. For if faith works by love, then faith is the worker, that is,
the mouer and commander, and love the instrument by which it works, and as
absurd it must needs be, to say, that charity or love is the commander, and
faith the instrument, as to say, the axe is the commander of the Carpenter
that heweth with it, or the Carpenter the instrument of the axe. For conclusion
of this section, Master Bishop will give us a reason to prove, that in the
work of justification charity has the chiefest place. First he asks full
wisely, whether that work of justification by faith, be done for the love of
God, and to his own honor or no? Justification is the work of God, who is
Romans 3.26.
the iustifier of him that is of the faith of Jesus. His question is this,
whether God do justify us for the love of God? But I answer him, that the
final end of our justification, is the honor and glory of God, who has Ephe.
1.5.6.
predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, to the
praise of the glory of his grace. And what of that? Marry then has charity
the principal part therein, says he, for the directing of all to the honor
and glory of God, is the proper office and action of charity. But therein he
deceives himself, for the Apostle has expressed it as the very proper office
and act of faith, Romans 4.20.
to give glory unto God, and therefore Moses and Aaron at the waters of strife,
are said Number. 20 12.
not to have sanctified the Lord, that is to say, not to have given him glory,
because they believed him not. For 1. John. 5.10.
not to believe God, is to make him a liar, which is the reproach and dishonor
of God, but to believe God, is to ascribe unto him, truth, and power, and
wisdom, and justice, and mercy, and whatsoever else belongs unto him.
Therefore Arnobius says, that Arno in Psalm. 129, Been facere ad gloriam
hominis, been credere ad gloriam Dei pertinet.
to do well belongs to the glory of man, but to believe well, concerns the
glory of God. Chrysostom. ad Romans hom. 8. Qui mandata illius implet obedit ei:
hic autem (qui credit) conueniente^ de eo opinione^ accipit, cumque glorificat
atque admi^atur nu^lo magis quam operu^ demonstratio. Jlla ergo gloriatio eius
est qui rect^ factu^ aliquod prae^titeri^: haec autem Deum ipsum glorificat ac
qu^^ta est tota ipsius est Gloriatur enim ob hoc quod magna quaedam de eo
concipiat quae ad gloriam eius redundant.
By works, says Chrysostom, we obey God, but faith entertaineth a meet
opinion concerning God, and glorifieth, and admireth him much more then the
showing forth of works. Works commend the doer, but faith commends God
only, and what it is, it is wholly his. For it rejoices in this, that it
conceiueth of him great things, which do redound to his glory. And whereas our
Savior in the Gospel teaches us, that our good works do glorify God,
saying, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works
and glorify your Father which is in heaven, he says, that it is of faith that
our good works do glorify God. Jbid Ecce hoc fidei esse apparuit.
Behold, says he, it appears that this comes of faith. M. Bishops argument
therefore makes against himself, and proves that we are justified rather by
faith then by charity, because it is faith principally that yields honor
unto God. The last place alleged out of Austine, is nothing against us; for
although we defend that a man is justified by faith alone, yet we say, that
both faith, hope, and charity must concur, to accomplish the perfection of a
Christian man, whereof anon we shall see further.

23 W. BISHOP.
The third of these trifling reasons, is peruersly propounded by M. Perkins
thus. Faith is never alone, therefore it does not justify alone: That this
argument is fondly framed, appears plainly, in that that Catholics do not
deny, but affirm, that faith may be without charity, as it is in all sinful
Catholics, we then form the reason thus. If faith alone be the whole cause of
justification, then if both hope and charity were removed from faith (at least
by thought, and in conceit,) faith would nevertheless justify. But faith
considered without hope and charity, will not justify: ergo, it is not the
whole cause of justification. The first proposition cannot be denied of them,
who know the nature and propriety of causes, for the entire and total cause of
any thing, being (as the Philosophers say) in act, the effect must needs
follow, and very sense teaches the simple, that if any thing be set to work,
and if it do not act that which it is set too, then there wanted some thing
requisite. And consequently that was not the whole cause of that work.

Now to the second proposition. But their imagined faith cannot apply to
themselves Christ's righteousness, without the presence of hope and charity.
For else he might be justified without any hope of heaven, and without any love
toward God, and estimation of his honor, which are things most absurd in
themselves: but yet very well fitting the Protestants justification, which is
nothing else but the plain vice of presumption, as has been before declared:
Yet to avoid this inconvenience which is so great, M. Perkins grants, that
both hope and charity must needs be present at the justification, but do
nothing in it, but faith does all, as the head is present to the eye, when it
sees, yet it is the eye alone that sees. Here is a worthy piece of
Philosophy, that the eye alone does see, whereas in truth it is but the
instrument of seeing, the soul being the principal cause of sight, as it is
of all other actions of life, sense, and reason: and it is not to purpose here,
where we require the presence of the whole cause, and not only of the
isntrumental cause. And to return your similitude upon your self, as the eye
cannot see without the head, because it receives influence from it, before it
can see, so cannot faith justify without charity, because it necessarily
receives spirit of life from it, before it can do any thing acceptable in Gods
sight.

R. ABBOT.
He may indeed very justly call them trifling reasons, if at least trifles may
carry the name of reasons. As for this reason it is not peruersely propounded
by Master Perkins, but in such sort, as some of Master Bishops part have
propounded it upon supposall of our assertion, that faith can never be alone.
But as he propounds it himself, the terms of his argument being declared,
the answer will be plain, and he shall be found a Sophister only, and no
sound disputer. It is therefore to be understood, that removing or separating
of things one from the other, is either real in the subject, or mental in the
understanding. Real separation of faith and charity we wholly deny, so as that
true faith can no where be found, but it has charity infallibly conjoined
with it. Separation mental in understanding and consideration, is either
negative or privative. Negative when in the understanding there is an affirming
of one, and denying of another, and the one is considered as to be without the
other; which understanding in things that cannot be really and indeed separated
in the subject, is false understanding, and not to be admitted. Separation
privative in understanding is, when of things that cannot be separated indeed,
yet a man understands the one, and omitteth to understand the other;
considers the one, and considers not the other. Thus though light and heat
cannot be separated in the fire, yet a man may consider the light, and not
consider the heat: though in the reasonable soul, understanding, reason,
memory, and will, and in the sensitive part the faculties of seeing, hearing,
smelling, etc. cannot be removed or separated one from the other, yet a man may
conceive, or mind one of these, without having consideration of the rest. Now
if M. Bishop by negative separation, do remove hope and charity from faith, so
as that his meaning is, that if faith alone do justify the^, though there be
neither hope nor charity, yet faith will nevertheless justify, his mayor
proposition is false. For though it be true, that the total cause of any thing
being in act, the effect must needs follow, yet from the total cause can we
not separate those things, together with which it has in nature his existe^ce
and being, and without which it cannot be in act for the producing of the
effect, though they confer nothing thereto; because that is to deny the
being of it, and the destroying of the cause. But if his meaning be, that if
faith alone do justify, then though we consider not hope and charity as
concurring therewith, yet it self does justify, we grant his mayor
proposition for true, but his minor is not true. We say, that faith considered
without hope and charity (that is, hope and charity not considered with it)
does justify. Then says he, a man may be justified without any hope of
heaven, and without any love toward God, or estimation of his honor. True
say I, if his meaning be, that the hope of heaven, or love of God, and
estimation of his honor be excepted only priuatiuely, and only not considered
with faith as causes of justification. But if his meaning be, as it is, that a
man then is justified without having any hope of heaven, or love toward God,
or estimation of his honor, he plays the part only of a brabler, inferring
a real separation of those things in the subject, which the argument supposes
only respectively separated in the understanding. Here is then no presumption
in the Protestants justification, but M. Bishop is much to be condemned of
presumption, that having left his head at Rome, and broken his brains in
contending against the Jesuits, he would notwithstanding take upon him to be a
writer, and do it so vainly and idly as he has done. According to that that
has been said, M. Perkins answers, that though faith be never subsisting
without hope and love and other graces of God, yet in regard of the act of
justification, it is alone without them all, even as the eye in regard of
substance and being is never alone, yet in respect of seeing it is alone: for
it is the eye only that does see. Here is (says M. Bishop) a worthy piece of
Philosophy, that the eye alone does see. Why I pray, what is the default?
Marry the eye is but the instrument of seeing, says he, the soul being the
principal cause of sight, as it is of all other actions of life, sense and
reason. But did not your sense and reason serve you to understand that M.
Perkins meant accordingly, that the eye alone does see, that is, that the eye
alone of all the members and parts, is the instrument of seeing, and
proportionably that faith alone of all the virtues and graces of the soul, is
the instrument of justification? As the soul then sees only by the eye, so
the soul spiritually receives justification by faith alone. If his head had
stood the right way, he might very easily have conceived, that M. Perkins in
saying that the eye alone does see, did not mean to exclude the soul that
sees by the eye, but only all other parts of the body from being consorted
with the eye in the souls employment and service for that use. And that that
M. Perkins says therein, is directly to the purpose, because the question is
not here of the whole cause of justification, but only of the isntrumental
cause. Of the efficient and final cause of justification there is no question,
which is, God in Jesus Christ, for our salvation and the glory of his name.
The material cause we say and have proved to be the merit and obedience of
Christ. The formal cause is Gods imputation, apprehended and received by us.
The instrument of this apprehension we say is faith alone, which is the very
point here disputed of. But here he will return the similitude upon us; the
eye cannot see without the head, because it receives influence from the head
before it can see. Be it so: no more can faith justify without Christ, without
God whose ordinance and gift it is, of whom it has it force and power, being
by him as peculiarly appointed to justify, as the eye is to see. The eye is a
natural instrument, receiving his influence from the head, whereof it is
naturally a member and part: but faith is an instrument supernatural; not any
natural part or power and faculty of the soul, but the instinct and work of
God, and therefore receives all the force and influence that it has, from the
spirit of Jesus Christ. But he makes other application hereof. So cannot faith
justify without charity, because it necessarily receives spirit of life from
it, before it can do any thing acceptable in Gods sight. So then charity is
the head, and faith the eye, and we must needs take it so, because M. Bishop
has told us that it is so. But if it be so, then it should be as strange a
matter to see faith without charity, as it is to see an eye without a head; as
strange that charity being extinguished and gone, there should remain a faith
whereby to believe; as that the head being dead, there should remain an eye
whereby to see. But that that gives influence and life to another thing, must
needs have a prioritie to that that receives it. Charity has no prioritie to
faith, but charity it self is obtained by faith. For Eccles. 25 13.
faith is the beginning to be joined unto God. Aug. de praedest. sanct. cap. 7.
Fides prima daetur, ex qua impetrentur caetera.
Faith is first given, by which the rest is obtained; Prosp. de voc. gent. lib.
1. cap. 9. Cum fides data fuerit non petitae ipsius tam petitionibus bona
caetera consequuntur.
which being first given unrequested, at the request thereof all other
benefits or good things do ensue and follow. Aug. in Psalm. 31. Laudo
superaedificatione^ boni operis, sed agnosco fidei fundamentum: fidei radicem.
Nec bona illa (opera) appellauerim qua^diu non de radice bona procedant.
Faith is the root and foundation of good works; from which unless they grow,
they are not to be called good; even Origin. in To. cap. 4. Fides tanquam radix
imbre suscepto haeret in animae solo vt surgantromi qui fructus operu^ ferant:
illa scil. radix iustitiae qua Deus accepto fert iustitiam sine operibus.
that root of righteousness whereby the Lord imputes righteousness without works,
which receiving the deaw or shower sticks in the ground that thence the
branches may spring which bring forth the fruits of good works. Faith is Aug.
in Psa. 83 Fides nidus est pullorum tuoru^: in hoc nido operare opera tua.
the nest wherein we are to lay our works, that we may hatch them unto God.
Faith is Prosp. de voc. genesis l. 1 c. 8. Fides bonae voluntatis and iustae
actionis est genitrix.
the mother of a good will, and just and righteous conversation. Our faith in
Christ is Aug. in Ps. 120 Christus in cord vestro fides est.
Christ in us, and Ambr. in Luc. l. 1. c. 21. Mihi sol ille caelestis mea fide
vel minuttur vel augetur
that heavenly Sun is either impaired or increased unto me, says Ambrose,
according to my faith. In a word, S. Austin tells us, that Aug. in Joan.
tract. 49. Vnde mors in anima? Quia fides no^ est. Ergo animae tuae anima fides
est.
faith is the soul of our soul, and what is that to say, but the life of all
our life? It is faith then and not charity, that gives influence to all the
rest, even to charity it self; as faith increases, so other graces are
increased; as faith decreaseth, so other graces decrease; the life of faith is
our life; the strength of faith is our Cyprian. ad Quirinum, lib. 3. cap. 43.
Tantum possumus, quantum credimus.
strength: if our faith be weak, there is nothing else whereby we can be
strong. Therefore M. Bishop goes much awry (yet no otherwise then he is wont to
do) in assigning to charity to give the spirit of life and influence to faith,
when as it is by faith that we Galath. 3.14.
receive the spirit which is the author of all spiritual life and grace, and on
which all our state depends toward God.

24. W. BISHOP.
The fourth reason, if faith alone do justify, then faith alone will save, but
it will not save, ergo. M. Perkins first denies the proposition, and says,
That it may justify, and yet not save: because more is required to salvation
then to justification. Which is false: for put the case that an innocent babe
die shortly after his baptism wherein he was justified shall he not be saved
for want of any thing? I hope you will say yes: even so any man that is
justified, if he depart in that state, no man makes doubt of his salvation,
therefore this first shift was very frivolous. Which M. Perkins perceiving flies
to a second, that for faith alone we shall also be saved, and that good works
shall not be regarded at the day of our judgment. Then must those words of the
holy Ghost so often repeated in the Scriptures, be razed out of the text. God
at that time will render unto every man according to his works. But of this more
amply in the question of merits.

R. ABBOT.
Tertullian rightly says, Tertul. de poenit. Horum bonorum vnus est ^itulus
sal^s hominis criminum pristinorum abolitione praemissa.
the salvation of man is the one title of all the benefits of God,
forgiveness of sins being put in the first place. If salvation be the whole,
and justification but a part, then more is required to salvation then to
justification, because more is required to the whole then to a part. Under
salvation we comprehend both justification and sanctification in this world,
and life and bliss eternal in the world to come. The first act of our
salvation is our justification; but God having by justification reconciled us
unto him, goes forward by sanctification Col. 1 12.
to make us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. To
justification belongs only faith; to sanctification all other virtues and
graces, wherein consists that Heb. 12.14.
holiness without which no man shall see the Lord. His exception as touching
infants dying after baptism, is very idle. They are not only justified by
forgiveness of sins, but also sanctified by the spirit of grace; neither is
there any man justified to the title of eternal life, but the same is together
also sanctified to the possession thereof, and therefore has more to salvation
then only justification. But as touching the very point, his minor
proposition is false. We say, that we are saved also by faith only, according
to that that before I alleged out of Origin, that Origin. in To. cap. 3 sup.
sect. 21
for faith only Christ said to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee. Has saved
thee, says he, as a thing already done, according to the usual phrase of the
Scripture in that behalf. For so it is said of Zacheus, Luke 19.9.
This day salvation is come to this house. So says the Apostle, 2. Tim. 1.9.
He has saved us, and called us with a holy calling; Tit. 3.5.
of his own mercy he has saved us. The reason whereof is, because in
justification, as I have said, our salvation is begun, and in that we are
justified we are saved, Christ therein being given us, and in him the interest
and title of eternal life thenceforth by that right only to be continued and
performed unto us. Being then justified by faith alone, we are saved by faith
alone, the gift of sanctification to holiness and good works being necessarily
co^sequent, not as by virtue whereof we are to be saved, whom the Scripture
pronounces to be already saved, but as the process of Gods work, for
accomplishment of that salvation, whereto in justification we are begotten, and
in way of inheritance entitled by faith alone. We are saved by faith alone,
says M. Perkins, because faith alone is the instrument whereby we apprehend
Christ, who only is our salvation. Where observe, gentle Reader, what M.
Bishop makes of that speech, that for faith alone we are saved, and that good
works shall not be regarded at the day of our judgment. Os impudens. Where
does M. Perkins say, that good works shall not be regarded at the day of our
judgment? What? a Doctor of divinity to lie? wilfully to lie? What is this
but mere varletrie, to abuse his Reader, not being careful happily to look
into M. Perkins book, but taking it upon his word. But if thou have M. Perkins
book, I pray thee to look to the objections and answers set down in the end
of this question of Justification, which M. Bishop has unhonestly left out;
and there in the answer to the sixth Objection, thou shall find these words, In
equity the last judgment is to proceed by works, because they are the
fittest means to make trial of every man's cause, and serve fitly to declare
whom God has justified in this life. By which words thou may esteem how
little faith or credit is to be yielded to this wretched man, who doubts not
here with manifest falsehood, to affime that M. Perkins says, that good works
shall not be regarded at the day of our judgment. And by the same words the
solution is plain to the words which he alleges; for God shall render to the
faithful Math. 16.27.
according to their works, because good works are the proper marks whereby
God will take knowledge of them that are justified and saved only by faith in
Christ. For whom God has justified and saved, upon them he sets the seal
and mark of his Spirit, working in them another nature, and Ephesians. 2.10.
creating them in Christ Jesus unto good works, whereby he will thenceforth
know them to belong to him, and thereby at that day will put difference betwixt
them and other men. So that to speak of salvation in that sort as we commonly
understand it, for the final bliss and salvation that we expect in heaven,
faith alone in it self is not sufficient to salvation, because though we be
interested to it only by faith, yet somewhat else is required to prepare us
and fit us to be partakers thereof. And to speak of salvation in gross, faith
alone excludes not sanctification and good works, but includes them, as a
part of that salvation whereof we are made partakers by faith alone, so that
rightly are we said to be saved by faith alone, because nothing else does give
us any title, and it self alone does give unto us all other things that are
necessary to salvation.

25. W. BISHOP.
5. Reason. There be many other virtues, unto which justification and salvation
are ascribed in Gods word: therefore faith alone suffices not. Ecclesiast. 1.
Romans 8. Luke 13. 1. Ioh. 3.
The Antecedent is proved, first of fear it is said: He that is without fear,
cannot be justified. We are saved by hope. Unless you do penance, you shall
all in like sort perish. We are translated from death to life, (that is,
justified) because we love the brethren. Again of Baptism: Unless you be
borne again of water and the holy Ghost, you cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Lastly we must have a resolute purpose to amend our evil lives: Romans 6.
For we are buried together with Christ by baptism into death, that as Christ
is risen from the dead etc. so we may also walk in newness of life. To all
these and many such like places of holy Scripture, it pleased M. Perkins to
make answer in that one: Romans 8.
You are saved by hope: to wit, that Paul's meaning is only, that we have not
as yet salvation in possession, but must wait patiently for it, until the time
of our full deliverance; this is all. Now whether that patient expectation,
which is not hope, but issues out of hope, of eternal salvation, or hope it
self be any cause of salvation, he says neither yea nor nay, and leaves you
to think as it seems best unto your self. S. Paul then affirming it to be a
cause of salvation, it is best to believe him: and so neither to exclude hope
or charity, or any of the foresaid virtues from the work of justification,
having so good warrant as the word of God, for the confirmation of it.

R. ABBOT.
Justification before God is no where in all the Scripture ascribed to any
other virtue save only faith: the promise of salvation is sometimes adjoined
to other virtues, as fruits and marks of them whom God has saved, but never as
causes thereof, as in the question of merits shall appear. We may well think
that M. Bishop was here shrewdly put to his shifts, that in all the Scripture
could find no plainer proofs to serve his turn. M. Perkins propounded but one
place for them; he thought himself to lay on load, and yet cannot bring us
any thing whereby it is said that we are justified, but only faith. His first
place is taken out of an Apocryphal Scripture, and yet such as it is it says
nothing for him. First his translation is false; for the words as their own
Arias Montanus translateth them, are these, Eccles. 1.27. (...). Non poterit
^racundus vir iustificari.
A man given to much anger cannot be justified; that is, cannot be acquitted of
doing amiss, cannot be cleared of committing offense, because as S. James
says, Iam. 1 20.
the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God, even in like
sort as the same Ecclesiasticus after says, Eccles. 23.11.
he that swears vainly shall not be justified, and again, Cap. 26.30.
a victualler shall not be justified of sin. For so is the Scripture wont
continually to use the word of justifying for acquitting, clearing,
discharging, holding or pronouncing guiltless and innocent, approving,
allowing, acknowledging for just, and such like, as where it is said, Esa. 5.23.
which justify the wicked for reward; Mich. 6.11.
shall I justify the false balance? Luke 10.29.
he willing to justify himself, etc. Secondly therefore if the words be taken
as he translateth them, he that is without fear cannot be justified, he is as
far off from his purpose. For the words import to the same effect, that he
that is without fear shall not be found innocent, he shall not be found free
from great sin, because the want of fear makes a man bold to run into all
sin: but a very senseless man is he that would go about hereby to prove,
that a man is justified by fear. Again he brings the words of Christ, Luke
13.3.
Unless ye repent (do penance, says he, according to their foolerie) ye shall
all likewise perish. And what of this? Ergo forsooth a man must be justified
by doing of penance. Yea? and is doing of penance a matter of justification
now? But Ambrose says, that the Apostle calls them l the blessed, of whom
God has decreed, Ambros. in To cap. 4. Beatos dicit de quibus hoc sanxit Deus,
vt sine labor and aliqua obseruatione sola fide iustificentur apud Deum. Et
paulo post: Nulla ab his requisita poenitentiae opera, nisi tantum vt credant.
that without labor or any obseru^tion they are justified with God only by
faith: there being required of them no labor of penance, but only to believe.
Why then does Master Bishop tell us, that we are justified by doing of
penance? Our Savior spoke nothing there in their behalf, and very absurdly
do they apply that that was meant of inward conversion and repentance, to
outward and ceremonial observation of doing penance. As for repentance, it
sets forth the subject capable of justification by faith, but is it self
only an acknowledgement of sin, no healing of our wound. The feeling of
pain and sickness, causes a man to seek for remedy, but it is no remedy
it self. Hunger and thirst make a man to desire and seek for food, but a man
is not fed by being hungry. By repentance we know our selves, we feel our
sickness, we hunger and thirst after grace, but the hand which we stretch
forth to receive it, is faith only, without which repentance is nothing but
darkness and despair. As for us, we hold it a very mad conclusion to say;
Except ye repent ye shall perish, therefore we are justified by repentance. We
rather see by repentance, that we have nothing in our selves whereby to be
justified, and therefore learn to rely wholly upon Christ, that we may be
justified by faith in him. The next place that he alleges is a most notable
falsification. We are translated, says he, from death to life, because we love
the brethren, whereas the words of S. John are; 1. Ioh. 3.14.
We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love the
brethren, making our love of the brethren a sign whereby we know that we are
translated from death to life, not the cause for which we are translated from
death to life. And in this sort does S. Austin expound it; Aug. in epist. 1
Joan. tract. 5. Nos scimus. Quid nos scimus? Quia tra^siuimus de mo^te ad
vitam. Vnde scimus? Quiae d^ligimus fratres.
We know. What do we know? That we have passed from death to life? Whereby do
we know it? Because we love the brethren. Which is very plain also by
comparing the te^ses in which the Apostle expresses the one and the other. For
he names our translating from death to life in the (...), etc.
preterperfect tense, as a thing before done, but our love toward the
brethren in the (...).
present tense, as a thing which now we do. We know that we have passed, or God
has translated us from death to life, because we love the brethren. But our
loving the brethren now cannot be the cause of that that God has done before.
It is therefore a token only whereby we are to know what God has done; and to
take it as M. Bishop does, is the doctrine of Pelagius, that the grace of God
is given unto us according to our merits, as before is showed. The next place
is of Baptism, as he says, Ioh. 3.5.
Except a man be borne again of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. But we can hardly yield that this place is precisely to be
understood of baptism, because it is not true, that except a man be baptized,
he shall not enter into the kingdom of God, but it is infallibly true which
Christ says, that except a man be borne again of water and of the holy Ghost,
he shall not enter into the kingdom of God. Very well is it observed by Bernard,
that our Savior says, Bernard. epist. 77. Vide ne forte ob hoc saluator cum
diceret, Qui credi^erit and baptiz^tus fuerit, salu^s erit, caute and
vig^^anter no^ repet^erit, Qui vero baptiz^tus non fuerit, sed tantum, qui vero
inquit, non crediderit c^ndemnabitur.
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but does not say, he that
is not baptized, but only, he that believes not shall be damned. The thief
was not baptized upon the cross, but yet Christ says, Luke 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in paradise. Valentinian the Emperor was not
baptized, and yet Ambrose says, Ambr. de ^bit. Valentin. Certe quia popos^it
accepit.
because he desired it, he received it. S. Austin acknowledges as touching
them that are of elder years and do believe, Aug. de bapt. cont. Donat. lib 4
cap. 22. Tunc impletur inuisibiliter cum mysteriu^ baptismi non contemptus
religionis sed articulu^ necessitatis excludit.
that baptism is inuisibly fulfilled in them, when not any contempt of
religion, but a point of necessity excludes the mystery of it. Which
dispensation we cannot conceive what warrant he had to give to elder years
that should not make the same good to infants also, when the faith of the
parents by which they are interested to baptism, craves the same for them,
and only by prevention invincible they are deprived of their desire, it being
deemed a thing Bernard. epist. 77. Dignum est et ad Dei spectat benignitatem,
vt quibus fide^ ae^as denegat propria^, gratia prodesse concedat aliena^.
belonging to the mercifulnes of God, that grace should yield, that the faith
of others should be auailable for them to whom years yet do not yield to
believe themselves. But hereby it appears, that that speech of Christ is not
simply to be understood of baptism, because then baptism should be simply
necessary to salvation both in old and young. Yet admitting it to be meant of
baptism, we say his argument is very vain, and to say, baptism is
necessary to salvation, therefore we are not justified by faith alone, is all
one as if he should say, It is necessary to salvation to be justified by faith
alone, therefore we are not justified by faith alone. For baptism as I said
before, is Romans 4 11.
the seal of the righteousness of faith, wherein God sets before us, and
by which he gives and seals and assures unto us the washing away of our
sins, and the accepting of us for just and righteous by the merit and
bloudshedding of Jesus Christ, only by faith in him. It is not then 1. Pet.
3.21.
the washing away of the filth of the flesh, that is, the outward ceremony,
for which baptism is necessary to salvation, but the spiritual grace, which
is justification by faith alone. This God offers in baptism, and we by faith
receive the same, but we shall do amiss to put baptism it self in place of
that that is offered thereby. We eat the meat out of the dishes and vessels
wherein it is set before us, but it is absurd thereupon to say, that we are fed
by the dishes also and not only by the meat. It is Christ only who in the
word and Sacraments is set forth unto us to be our righteousness, and by faith
only we therein receive him to be our righteousness and everlasting life, but
absurd it is hereupon to say, that the Sacraments themselves are things wherein
our righteousness does consist. Now therefore except a man in baptism be
borne again, becoming a member of Christ and the child of God through
forgiveness of sins only by faith in him, by virtue thereof receiving the
spirit of adoption, and being thereby quickened to newness of life to walk
therein, he cannot as Christ says, enter into the kingdom of God. And hereby
it appears, that his other place as touching walking in newness of life is
impertinently alleged, the words importing no more then what we teach, that
newness of life is always and necessarily a consequent fruit of
justification, though never any precedent cause thereof. But the place of
greatest moment for their part, was that that M. Perkins propounded for his
objection, We are saved by hope. As touching this place M. Bishop says, that
M. Perkins says neither yea nor nay, but leaves the reader to think as it
seems best unto himself, whether hope be any cause of salvation, and yet M.
Perkins words are plainly these, We are not saved by hope because it is any
cause of our salvation. The meaning of S. Paul as he declares is this, We are
saved by hope; that is, we have our salvation in hope, but not yet in act: we
enjoy it in expectation, but not yet in possession. In which sort he says in
another place, that Tit. 3.7.
being justified by the grace of God we are made heirs as touching hope of
eternal life. We have not yet the fruition of eternal life, but yet in hope we
are inheritors thereof. And hence did S. Austin take the ground of that
exception which many times he uses by distinction of that that we are in hope,
and that that we are indeed or in real being. Whereof he speaks directly to
declare the meaning of these words of the Apostle, Aug. de pec. mer. and remis.
l. 2 c. 8. Primittat sp. nunc habemus vnde ia^ filij Dei reipsa facta sumas: in
cateris vero spe sicut salui sicut innouati, ita and filij Dei* re autem ipsa
quia n^ndum salus, ideo non^um plene innouati, nondum etiam filij Dei sed filij
seculi.
We have now the first fruits of the spirit, whence we are (reipsa) indeed the
sons of God, but for the rest, as (spe) in hope we are saved, as in hope we
are renewed, so are we also the sons of God: but because (reipsa) indeed we
are not yet saved, therefore we are not yet fully renewed; we are not yet the
sons of God, but the children of this world. Again he says, Ibid cap. 10.
Homo totus in spe iam, et iam in re ex part in regeneratione spirituali
renouatus
A man wholly in hope, and partly also in act or in deed is renewed in
spiritual regeneration. Of the Church being without spot or wrinkle; Epist.
57. Tunc perficietur in re, quo nunc proficiendo ambulatur in spe.
Then shall that be performed indeed, to which now by profiting we walk in
hope. Thus of Gods raising us up together with Christ, and setting us together
with him in heavenly places, De bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 1. c 4. Nondum in re
sed in spe.
He has not yet done it really, but in hope. In Psalm. 37. Re sumus adhuc filij
irae, spe non sumus.
Really we are yet the children of wrath, says he, but in hope we are not so.
Jbid. Gaude te redemptum corpore, sed nondum re* spe securus esto.
Rejoice that in body thou art redeemed, not yet in deed or in real effect,
but in hope we are out of doubt. By all which it is plain, that the Apostle
named not hope as a cause of the salvation that we hope for, but only to
signify the not having as yet really of the thing whereof the hope we have
embraced. And it has no sense, that hope should be made a cause of the thing
hoped for, because the very name of hope imports some former ground or cause
from whence we conceive our hope, and by virtue whereof we expect that which we
hope for, and do not therefore hope to obtain it, because we hope. Thus M.
Bishop has neither S. Paul nor any other testimony of Scripture, whereby to
give warrant, that either hope or any other virtue, has any part in the work
of justification, but only faith. As touching the nature of hope f before has
been spoken, and it has been showed, Cap. 3. sec^. 20.
that as the Scripture understands it, it is nothing else but a patient and
constant expectation of that which we by faith in the promise of God do
assuredly believe shall come unto us.

26. W. BISHOP.
To these authorities and reasons, taken out of the holy Scripture, let us
join here some testimonies out of the ancient Church, reserving the rest unto
that place, wherein Master Perkins cites some for him. the most ancient and
most valiant Martyr Saint Ignatius, of our justification writes thus: The
beginning of life is faith, Epist. ad Philip.
but the end of it is charity, but both united and joined together, do make
the man of God perfect.

Clement Patriarch of Alexandria says. Faith goes before, Lib. 2. Strom.
but fear does build, and charity brings to perfection.

Saint John Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople, has these words: Hom. 70.
in Mat.
Least the faithful should trust that by faith alone they might be saved, he
disputes of the punishment of evil men, and so does he both exhort the
Infidels to faith, and the faithful to live well.

S. Augustine cries out as it were to our Protestants, and says: Lib. 3.
Hypognos.
Hear o foolish heretic, and enemy to the true faith. Good works, which (that
they may be done, are by grace prepared, and not of the merits of free will) we
condemn not: because by them, or such like, men of God have been justified,
are justified, and shall be justified. And, De side and oper. cap. 14.
Now let us see that which is to be shaken out of the hearts of the faithful:
Least by evil security they lose their salvation, if they shall think faith
alone to be sufficient to obtain it.

Now the doctrine which M. Perkins teaches is clean contrary. For (says he)
A sinner is justified by faith alone, that is, nothing that man can do by
nature or grace, concurreth thereto as any kind of cause, but faith alone.
Farther he says, That faith it self is no principal, but rather an
isntrumental cause, whereby we apprehend and apply Christ and his
righteousness for our justification. So that in fine we have, that faith so
much by the^ magnified, and called the only and whole cause of our
justification, is in the end become no true cause at all, Cenditio sine qua non.
but a bare condition, without which we cannot be justified. If it be an
isntrumental cause, let him then declare what is the principal cause, whose
instrument faith is? and choose whether he had leifer to have charity, or the
soul of man without any help of grace.

R. ABBOT.
Of his five proofs there is but only one that makes any mention of
justification by works. The two first were surely put in but only to fill up a
room; for there is not so much as any show of any thing against us. For
although we defend, that a man is justified by faith only, yet do we not make
faith only the full perfection of a justified man. In the natural body the
heart only is the seat and fountain of life, and yet a man consists not
only of a heart, nor is a perfect man by having a heart, but many other
members and parts are required, some for substance, some for ornament, which
make up the perfection of a man, whereof if any be wanting, it is an
imperfection, so that Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 11. ca. 22 Si vnum radatur
supercilium, quam propemo du^ nihil corpori and quam multu^ detrahitur
pulchritudini?
if but one ey-brow be shaven, as S. Austine says, though in a manner nothing
be taken from the body, yet it causes a great blemish unto it. Even so is it
in the justified man; faith only is the seat and fountain of spiritual life,
because as the quickening faculty and power of the living soul dwells in
the heart, so Christ who is our life dwells in our faith, or in our hearts by
faith, but yet we consist not spiritually of faith only, but many other
virtues and graces are required to make up the perfection of a Christian man,
to which as to the other members from the heart, so from faith life is imparted
and communicated, that in them we may be alive to God. Thus then Ignatius says
not purposely of justification, but by occasion of commending faith and love,
that Ignat. epist ad Ephesians. for which M. Bishop following his master
Bellarmine, misquoteth, Ep. ad Philipp^nses.
faith is the beginning of life, etc. Which makes for us altogether against
him. For if faith be the beginning of life, then by faith we first live. By
faith therefore we are justified; for to be justified, as M. Bishop confessed in
the former section, is to be translated from death. Now as natural birth
draws not only guilt but also corruption, as has been before showed, so
faith wherein is our new birth, gives not only forgiveness of sins to
justification, but also sanctification to holiness and newness of life, the
sum whereof is charity, because charity is the epitome and brief of the
whole law, and herein further is accomplished our perfection toward God; so as
that faith and love united and joined together, do make perfect the man of God.
The place of Clemens Alexandrinus is the same, and needs no further answer.
With Chrysostom we say, that faith alone suffices not absolutely, though
faith alone suffice to justification. Charity and good works are necessary
to the perfection of a justified man, but he is not by them made a justified
man. Therefore the same Chrysostom says of Abraham, Chrysostom. ad Romans hom. 8.
Fide saluarieum qui opera non habet, nihil fortasse fue rit insolentiae; e^
vero qui recte factis se conspicuum secerit, non ex ipsis sed ex fide iustum
fieri, hoc scilicet admirabile est and quod maxim fidei potentiam manifestat.
That a man that is without works should he saved by faith, it should be no
strange matter, but that he that has made himself renowned by his good works
should yet not be justified thereby but by faith, this is wonderful, and does
greatly set forth the power of faith. S. Austin in the place by him alleged,
if it were S. Austin, avouches good works to justify the^ that are
justified, that is, to approve them just; but condemns the auouching of any
works whereby to obtain justification, and purposely in that place disputes
against it. August. Hypognost. lib. 3. Ex operibus no^ iustificabitur omnis
caro coram illoc quia iustitia Dei praeuentu misericordiae per fidem Jesus
apparuit super omnes qui crediderunt. Ideo and subiungens, inquit, Iustificate
gratu per gratia^ Dei. Noli ^i praeponere opera propria, ne^ ex^^^e^ gloriari*
qu^ ex operibus non, etc.
By works no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God, because the
righteousness of God by his preventing mercy, through the faith of Jesus
Christ, is apparent upon all that do believe. Therefore the Apostle says, we
are justified freely by the grace of God. Put not thine own works before it,
nor glory thereof, because by works no flesh shall be justified before him.
If no works go before justification, then M. Bishops cause, as too weak, must
go to the walls, because then we cannot be said to be justified by works; for
being justified before, we cannot be said properly to be justified by works
that follow after, and if neither by works before nor after, then not at all.
It follows therefore, that when S. Austine says in that place, that men of
God are justified by good works, he must needs mean as Thomas Aquinas says
S. James does, Thom. Aquin. in Gal. cap. 3. lect. 4.
quantum ad manifestationem iustitiae, by way of manifesting and declaring that
a man is justified, so as that contrary to M. Bishops assertion, they are only
signs and tokens of a justified man, not any causes of justification.
Therefore S. Austin says again anon after, Aug. vt supr. Iustificatio per
fide^ Jesus Christi data est, datur, dabitur cr^dent^bus.
Justification has been given, is given, and shall be given to them that
believe, by the faith of Jesus Christ. Now that which he says in the words
cited by M. Bishop, he says it not as to the Protestant, but to the Pelagian
heretic the brother of the Papist, for affirming good works of man's free will
before the justifying grace of God, for which the justifying grace of God is
bestowed upon him. Which opinion S. Austin having confuted, brings in the
heretic obiecting thus, Ibid. Ergo inquies damnas opera liberi arbitrij bona,
quia dicis iustitiam ex operibus non deberi? etc.
Thou will say, Do thou then condemn the good works of free will, in that
thou say that righteousness is not due by works? If so, why then does the
Apostle command us to abound in good works? To which he answers: Audi
haeretice stulte and inimice fidei veritatis. Operae liberi arbitrij bona quae
vt fiant praepara^tur per gratiae prae^entum nullo lib. arbitrij merito et ipso
faciente, gubernante and perficiente vt abundent in libero arbitrio non damna
m^^, quia ex his homines Dei iustificati sunt, iustificantur and
iustifi^abuntur in Christo. Damnamus vero authoritate diuina opera liberi
arbitrij quae gratiae praeponuntur, and ex his tanqu^m meritis in Christo
iustificari extolluntur.
Hearken thou foolish heretic and enemy of the true faith. We condemn not the
good works of free will, which that they may be done, are prepared by the
preventing of grace upon no merit of free will, and the same preventing grace
causing, directing and effecting that they do abound in free will, because by
such, men of God have bin, are, and shall be justified in Christ. But by divine
authority we condemn the works of free will which are put before grace, and
are extolled for us by these as it were merits to be justified in Christ. Where
very plainly by the name of the works of free will, he excludes all works
before the grace of justification, from being any causes thereof, and only in
men of God, who are first justified that they may be me^ of God, affirms a
justification by works in that sense as S. James speaks thereof, which as I
have said, is nothing else but a declaration and testimony of their being
formerly justified by the faith of Jesus Christ. In what sense he speaks of
free will, it has been showed before in the question of that matter, and that
he acknowledges no free will to righteousness, but only that that we do,
which is made free by the grace of God. To the last place of S. Austin we
willingly subscribe, condemning them De fide and oper. cap. 14. Si ad eam
(salutem) obtinen dam sufficere solam fidem putanerint; been aute^ viuere and
bonis operibus v^a^ Dei tenere neglexerint.
who think that only faith is sufficient to obtain salvation, and do neglect
to live well, and by good works to keep the way of God; which last words
serving plainly to open S. Austins meaning* M. Bishop very honestly has left
out. We teach no such faith as S. Austin there speaks of. We teach only such
a faith as justifies it self alone, but is never found alone in the justified
man, never but accompanied with holiness and care of godly life, and therefore
condemn those as spirits of Satan, which teach a faith sufficient to obtain
salvation without any regard of living well. The sum of our doctrine S.
Austin himself sets down in the very same Chapter, that good works Ibid.
Sequ^tur iustificatum; non praecedunt iust^f^candum.
follow a man being justified, but are not precedent to justification. Now
therefore in all these speeches there is hitherto nothing to cross that which
M. Perkins has affirmed, that nothing that man can do either by nature or
grace concurreth to the act of justification as any cause, but faith alone. Of
works of nature there is less question, but of works of grace, of works of
believers the Apostle specially determines the question, that we are not
justified thereby, as shall appear. M. Perkins further says, that faith is but
the isntrumental cause of justification, as whereby we apprehend Christ to be
our righteousness, and never does any of us make faith the only and whole
cause of justification in any other sense. We make not the very act of faith
any part of our righteousness, but only the merit and obedience of Christ,
apprehended and received by faith. But by this means M. Bishop says, that
faith is become no true cause at all, but a bare condition without which we
cannot be justified. But that is but his shallow and idle conceit; for the
necessary instrument, especially the lively instrument, is amongst the number
of true causes, not being causa sine qua non, a cause without which the thing
is not done, but a cause whereby it is done. Causa sine qua non is termed causa
stolida and otiosa, a foolish and idle cause, because it is only present in
the action, and does nothing therein. It is not so with faith, but as the eye
is an active instrument for seeing, and the ear for hearing, etc. so is faith
also for justifying; and M. Bishops head was scant wise, to make a principal
instrument a foolish and idle cause. But he asks then, whose instrument faith
is? and makes his division, that either it must be charity, or the soul of
man without any help of grace. We answer him, that it is the instrument of the
soul wrought therein by grace, being Ephesians. 2.8.
the gift of God, and August. de praedest. sanct. cap. 7.
the first gift, as before we have heard out of Austin, whereby we obtain the
rest, and therefore whereby we obtain charity also, so that his division
goes lame, and neither is faith the instrument of charity, nor yet of the
soul without grace, but of the soul therein and thereby endued with the grace
of God.

R. ABBOT.
But to come to his reasons. The first is taken out of these words: As Moses
lift up the serpent in the desert, so must the son of man be lift up, that
whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have life everlasting. True,
if he live accordingly, and as his faith teaches him: but what is this to
justification by only faith? Marry M. Perkins draws it in after this
fashion. As nothing was required of them who were stong by serpents, but that
they should look upon the brazen serpent: so nothing is required of a sinner,
to deliver him from sin, but that he cast his eyes of faith upon Christ's
righteousness, and apply that to himself in particular. But this application
of the similitude is only man's foolish invention, without any ground in the
text. Similitudes be not in all points alike, neither must be stretched beyond
the very point wherein the similitude lies, which in this matter is, that
like as the Israelites in the wilderness stong with serpents, were cured by
looking upon the brazen serpent: so men infected with sin, have no other
remedy, then to embrace the faith of Christ Jesus: All this we confess, but to
say that nothing else is necessary, that is quite besides the text, and as
easily rejected by us, as it is by him obtruded without any authority or
probability.

R. ABBOT.
Similitudes M. Bishop says, must not be stretched beyond the very point
wherein the similitude lies, but Christ himself here directs us to conceive
wherein the similitude lies. Christ himself expresses, that in their looking
upon the Serpent was figured our believing in him. What shall we then conceive,
but as they only by looking were cured of the sting, so we only by believing
are cured of sin. So S. Austin says; Aug. in Joan. tract. 12. Quomodo qui
intuebantur serpe^tem illum sanabantur a mo^sibus serpe^tum, si^ qui intue^tur
fide morte^ Christi sanatur a morsibus peccato rum. Attenditur serpe^s vt nihil
v^leat serpens; attenditur mors vt nihil valcat mors
As they that beheld that Serpent, were healed of the stinging of the Serpents,
so they who by faith behold the death of Christ, are healed of the sting of
sin. And again, A Serpent is looked unto that a Serpent may not prevail,
and a death is looked unto that death may not prevail. In like sort does
Chrysostom express the similitude: Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 26. Illi^ corporeis
oculis suscipientes corporis s^lutem: hic incorporeis peccatorum omnium
remissionem consecuti sunt.
There by bodily eyes men received the health of the body; here by spiritual
eyes they obtain forgiveness of all their sins. So says Cyril, Cyril. id
Joan. lib. 2. cap. 20. Respicientibus in eu^ fide sincera aeternae salutis
largitor ostenditur.
He is showed (hereby) to be the giver of eternal salvation to them that by
true faith do look unto him. Theophyl. in Joan. cap. 3. Multo magis ad
crucifixum respicientes and credentes animae morte^ effugituros.
He teaches (says Theophylact) that since the Jews beholding the image of the
brazen Serpent did escape death, much more we looking unto him crucified and
believing, shall escape the death of the soul. Thus they simply took the
words of Christ, and made the cure to consist as on the one side in looking, so
on the other side in believing. M. Bishop says, that the meaning is, that men
infected with sin, have no other remedy then to embrace the faith of Christ
Jesus. Well then: if no other remedy, then that is the only remedy. If that be
the only remedy, then for remedy there is nothing necessary, but only that.
And if any thing else be necessary, then the cure is not performed by that, not
to be ascribed unto it; for a cure cannot be said to be done by one thing, when
that does not cure without another. But as the^e to looking, so here the cure
is ascribed to believing. It is therefore to be ascribed, to nothing but faith
only. As for that which he further requires by his corrections and
exceptions, it is but a part of the cure which is performed by faith only. For
whatsoever is necessary in us to eternal life, follows of true and lively
faith, and is ministered unto us in Christ Jesus, when by faith we have embraced
him. Acts. 15.9.
Our hearts are purified by faith; Gal. 3.14.
by faith we receive the promise of the spirit, and Romans 8.2.
the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus delivers us from the
law of sin and of death, that it may neither prevail against us to
condemnation, nor any further reign over us in conversation, which being the
gift of God, is not to be alleged to impeach the free bestowing of the grace
of God.

28. W. BISHOP.
His 2. reason is collected of exclusive speeches (as he speaks) used in
Scriptures. As we are justified freely, not of the law, not by the law, Gal.
2.16. Luke 8.50.
not of works, not of our selves, not of the works of the law, but by faith:
all boasting excluded: only believe. These distinctions, whereby works and the
law, are excluded in the work of justification, include thus much, that faith
alone does justify.

It does not so: for these exclusive speeches do not exclude fear, hope, and
charity, more then they exclude faith it self. Which may be called a work of
the law, as well as any other virtue, being as much required by the law as any
other. But S. Paul's meaning in those places is, to exclude all such works, as
either Jew or Gentile did, or could brag of, as done of themselves, and so
thought that by them, they deserved to be made Christians. For he truly says,
that all were concluded in sin, and needed the grace of God, which they were
to receive of his free mercy, through the merits of Christ, and not of any
desert of their own: And that to obtain this grace through Christ, it was not
needful, nay rather hurtful to observe the ceremonies of Moses law, as
Circumcision, the observation of any of their feasts, or fasts, nor any such
like work of the law, which the Jews reputed so necessary. Again, that all
moral works of the Gentiles could not deserve this grace, which works not
proceeding from charity, were nothing worth in Gods sight. And so all works,
both of Jew and Gentile, are excluded from being any meritorious cause of
justification, and consequently, all their boasting of their own forces, their
first justification being freely bestowed upon them. Yet all this
notwithstanding, a certain virtuous disposition is required in the Jew and
Gentile, whereby his soul is prepared to receive that great grace of
justification: that say we, is faith, fear, hope, love, and repentance, that
(say the Protestants) is faith only. Wherefore say we, as the excluding of
works, and boasting exclude not faith, no more do they exclude the rest, faith
being as well our work, and a work of the law as any of the rest, and all the
rest being of grace, as well as faith, and as far from boasting of, as faith
it self. Now that out of S. Luke, believe only, is nothing to the purpose.
For he was bid believe the raising of his daughter to life, and not that
Christ's righteousness was his: and faith alone may be a sufficient disposition
to obtain a miracle, but not to obtain justification, of which the question
only is.

Consider now good Reader, whether of our interpretations agree better with the
circumstance of the text, and the judgment of the ancient Fathers. The texts
see thou in the Testament. Take for a taste, of the Fathers judgment, S.
Augustines exposition of those places of S. Paul, of one of the chiefest of
which, De gra. and lib. arb. cap. 7.
thus he speaks: Men not understanding that which the Apostle says, We
esteem a man to be justified without the law, thought him to say, that faith
sufficed a man although he lived evil, and had no good works: which God
forbid, that the vessel of election should think. And again.

De praedest. sanct. cap. 7.
Therefore the Apostle says, that a man is justified by faith, and not of
works, because faith is first given, and by it the rest (which are properly
called works, and in which we live justly) are by petition obtained.

By which it is manifest, that S. Paul excluding the works of the law, and the
works done by our own only forces, does not mean to exclude good works,
which proceed from the help of Gods grace.

R. ABBOT.
If justification be affirmed of faith, and denied to all other things, it
should seem likely that the meaning of the Scripture is, that by faith only
we are justified. M. Bishop answers, that those exclusive speeches of the
law, and works of the law, do no more exclude fear, hope, charity, then they
exclude faith it self, because it is a work of the law as well as any other
virtue. But yet the Apostle teaches us, that the promise is Romans 4.16.
therefore of faith, that it may be of grace, and Cap. 11.6.
if it be of grace, it is not of works, and therefore expressly seuereth faith
from works, as elsewhere he makes a distinction betwixt Cap. 3.27.
the law of works, and the law of faith, so that M. Bishop in confounding
faith with the works of the law, speaks flatly contrary to the Apostle. For
the faith of Christ, though it be accidentally reduced to the law, yet is not
originally intended in the law, because Christ who is the object of our faith,
is in order of nature consequent to the law. For life is first propounded in
the law; which when it cannot be obtained there, Christ is consequently given
and offered unto us, that we may have life in him. But we further tell him as
before, that we attribute not our justification to faith for it self, or as it
is an act or work, as if it were any part of our justice or righteousness,
but as the heart gives life to the body, not by the substance of it self,
which is but flesh as the rest of the body is, but by the vital and quickening
power of the soul that is seated therein, and as the hand feeds the body,
not as being it self the food of the body, but by receiving and ministering
unto it the meat wherewith it is sustained, even so faith justifies and gives
life, by receiving Christ to be our righteousness and life, in him Act. 26.18.
receiving forgiveness of sins, and inheritance amongst them that are
sanctified unto eternal life. But M. Bishop tells us, that the Apostles
meaning in those places is, to exclude all such works as either Jew or Gentile
did or could brag of, as done of themselves, and so thought, that by the^
they had deserved to be made Christians. A goodly toy. Forsooth after they had
been Christians a long time, they began to dispute and reason the matter,
whether it were for the works that before they had don, that they were made
Christians? whether they had deserved by their works to be made Christians,
when Ephe. 2.3.
they had their conversation in the lusts of the flesh, in fulfilling the will
of the flesh, and of the mind, walking according to the course of this world,
and after the Prince that rules in the air, the spirit that works in the
children of disobedience, as the Apostle describes the condition both of Jews
and Gentiles, before they were partakers of the grace of Christ. Were the
Christians then of so slender understanding as that they should make question
of their deserts in that estate. Was that the thing so much labored by the
false Apostles, to persuade men that for their former deserts they were become
Christians, and had the Apostle so much business to weane them, and withhold
them from the conceit and opinion of such deserts? What should a man spend
time and labor to refute so ridiculous, so senseless and absurd devices? Who
would think that M. Bishop, a Doctor of Divinity by title, should be so
simple a man, as that his Master Bellarmine could gull him, and gudgeon him
with so vain a tale? The matter is plain. After that men had accepted the
faith of Christ, and were become Act. 15.1.10.
brethren and disciples, there came unto them the false Apostles, and preached
unto them, Ver. 2.
Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. They
sought to persuade men, that to the faith of Christ they must add the
observation of Moses law. Here was no question, whether by any deserts they
were become Christians, but being now Christians, what it was wherein they
should repose themselves for justification and salvation. The Galathians were
amongst others entangled by those false Apostles, and having before Gal 1.9.
received the Gospel, Cap. 4.27.
having been baptized into Christ, Cap. 3.2.
having received the spirit, yea and Ibid. Ver. 4.
having suffered many things for the Gospel, yet were brought to the adioining
of circumcision and the law to the faith of Jesus Christ, to be justified
thereby. This the Apostle inueyeth against, and reducing the state of the
question from the ceremonies of the law to the whole law, determines not
concerning the Popish first justification, but concerning justification wholly,
concerning men believing already, and in the state of grace, that they must be
To. 3.20.28. Gal. 3.11.
justified by faith, and not by the works of the law, yea without the works of
the law; yea, and says, Gal. 2.16.
we have believed in Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ,
and not by the works of the law. The Papist says, we believe in Christ, that
we may be justified by the works of the law; but the Apostle says, we believed
in Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus Christ, and not by
the works of the law, and gives a reason, why we that believe in Christ cannot
be justified by the works of the law, Jbid.
because by the works of the law, no flesh shall be justified. And whereas the
Papist again says, that by Christ and by his grace we are enabled to fulfill
the law to be justified thereby, the Apostle peremptorily denounces, Cap. 5.4.
Ye are abolished from Christ; ye are fallen from grace whosoever are justified
by the law. And that we may understand what law he means, S. Hierome having
mentioned those words, that by the works of the law, no flesh shall be
justified, says thereof, Hieron. ad Ctesiphont Quod ne de lege Moys^ tantum
dictum pu^es, and non de omnibus mandatis quae vno legis nomine ontinentur,
ide^ Apostolus scribit, dicens, co^sentio legi, etc.
Which that thou may not think to be spoken only of the law of Moses (that
is, the ceremonial law) but of all the commandments which are contained
under the one name of the law, the same Apostle writes, saying, I consent to
the law (or delight in the law) of God, as touching the inner man. But of that
before in the third section. Hereby then it appears, that being members of
Christ, and baptized into him, our justification still consists not in
works, but only in the faith of Jesus Christ. But M. Bishop by a new
qualification, tells us, that all works both of Jew and Gentile, are excluded
from being any meritorious cause of justification. Not then from being any
cause, but only from being any meritorious cause. For he has Sect. 21.
before told us, that that virtuous disposition of which he here speaks, is
the cause of justification. But if they be causes, how then is it true that he
says here, that the first justification is freely bestowed. For Rhem. Testam.
explication of words in the end. Gratis.
freely, as the Rhemists tell us, is as much to say, as for nothing; and if it
be bestowed for this virtuous dispositions sake, then it is not bestowed for
nothing, but for hope, for charity, etc. Thus they turn and wind this way and
that way, and can find nothing whereupon to stand. Saint Austine gives it for
a rule, that August cont. Pelag. and Celest. li. 2. ca. 24. Non enim gratia Dei
gratia erit vllo modo nisi fueri^ gratuita omnimodo.
the grace of God shall not be grace in any sort, except it be free in every
respect. And how is it free in every respect, if our works of preparation or
disposition be properly the causes for which it is bestowed upon us? And what
is it but a mockery, to say that the Apostle so often absolutely determining
against justification by works, should mean notwithstanding that works are
the very causes of justification, only that they are not meritorious causes.
Yet we have heard, how Bellarmine makes them De iustificat. lib. 2. cap. 17.
quodam modo, in some sort meritorious also, and that their Schools have
commonly received them so to be, so that in this respect also, they do but
dally with the Apostle. But tell us M. Bishop, are those virtuous dispositions
of yours the works of grace, or only of free will? If they be of grace, as
you commonly foist in the name of grace in speaking of them, what hinders
them from being meritorious, seeing it is grace you say that adds merit unto
works? If they be of free will, then all works of our own forces be not
excluded from justification, which before you say the Apostle intends. If he
say that free will is helped by grace, let him tell us, what he means therein
by grace, and we shall find him a mere Pelagian heretic, as before is said.
He goes on further, and says, that as the excluding of works and boasting
excludes not faith, no more does it exclude the rest. How so? Marry faith is
as well our work, and a work of the law as any of the rest. But that is false
as we have already seen; and again, faith with us does not justify as a
work, as both faith, hope, and charity do with them, but only as the
instrument of our justification to be apprehended and applied thereby. All the
rest, says he, are of grace as well as faith. But being before justification,
how should they be of grace, seeing before justification there is no infused
grace; and why are they not meritorious, as has been said? Again, he says,
that the rest are as far from boasting of as faith. But therein he flatly
contradicts the Apostle, who affirms, that Romans 3.27.
boasting is not excluded by the law of works, but by the law of faith. And
the thing is plain; for he has somewhat to boast of, who does any thing, for
which the grace of God is bestowed upon him, but in faith there is nothing to
boast of, because the act of faith is, to believe that God does all through
Christ only for his mercies sake; it is it self wholly the gift of God, and
attributes nothing to it self or to us, but all wholly unto God. But M. Bishop
cannot be said to exclude boasting, in as much as he must confess, as has
been before said, that his works of preparation are intrinsecally the works
only of free will, and does make the free will of man in all the work of
justification concurrent with the grace of God, yea so far as that man has
to glory, that by his free will the grace of God takes his due effect, it
being in his power either to accept, or to refuse the same. Whereas he
excepteth against the place of S. Luke, Luke 8.50.
only believe, as nothing to the purpose, he shows that he has not learned
rightly to conceive thereof. Let S. Austine teach him, that Aug. de verb. Dom.
ser. 18. Nouerimus omnia miracula quae corporaliter fecit valere ad
admonitionem nostram vt percipiamus ab eo quod no^ est transituru^ neque in
fine abituru^: and post. Per ista te^poralia quae videbantur aedificauit fidem
ad illa quae non videbantur.
all the miracles which Christ did corporally, do serve for our instruction,
that we may receive of him that that shall not pass away, nor go from us in
the end: that by these temporal things which were seen, he edified and
builded faith to the things which were not seen. Christ therefore yielding here
to faith only a miracle for the recovery of bodily life, does instruct us,
that to faith only he also yields the work of his power, for the raising of
us up to the spiritual life of grace. The man indeed was bid, as M. Bishop
says, to believe the raising of his daughter to life, but therein he was bid
also to believe, that it is Christ by whom we are spiritually raised up from
death to life, in being reconciled unto God by the not imputing of our sins,
through the righteousness and merit of the same Jesus Christ imputed unto us.
He says, that faith might be sufficient to obtain a miracle, but I answer
him, that that miracle was a benefit importing a further benefit, and all the
benefits of Christ are obtained in like sort, so that our Savior Christ still
referring them that seek unto him to faith, for the obtaining of bodily
health, does also refer us to faith, for the obtaining of souls health. Now
how his interpretation here delivered agrees with the text of Scripture, the
Reader I hope can well consider by that that has been said. As for the places
of Austin, if his sight had not failed him, I suppose he would not have
alleged them, the one of them being nothing at all against us, and the other
directly against himself. We say, August. de great. and lib. ^^bit. cap. 3.
God forbid that the Apostle should think, that faith suffices a man although
he live evil, and have no good works. Nay, we say further, God forbid that he
should think that there is any true faith in them that live evil, and have no
good works. We have often enough said, that a true justifying faith is never
separated from godly life, and that faith that is without good works, is
only called faith with men, but indeed and with God it is not so. In the
other place Saint Austine brings in the Apostle, saying, De praedest. sanct.
cap. 7.
that a man is justified by faith, and not of works. But how accords this
with that that Master Bishop says, that a man is justified by his works, as
well as by his faith. By faith and not by works, says Saint Austine out of the
Apostle, both by faith and works, says M. Bishop out of his own brains. S.
Austine gives the reason, Ibid. Quia ipsa prima datur ex qua impetre^tur
caetera qua proprie opera nu^ cupantur in quibus just viuitur.
Because faith is first given by which the rest are obtained, which are
properly called works, in which a man lives righteously. Whereby he imports
that faith is first given, that thereby we may be justified, and thence follow
good works, in which we live well; according to his rules before delivered; De
fide et operib. cap. 14. Sequntur iustificatum, non praec^dunt iustificandum.
They follow a man being justified, they go not before to justification: Epist.
120. cap. 30. Ex hoc incipiunt bona opera ex quo iustifica mur, no^ quia
praecesserunt iustificamur.
then they begin when we are justified, we are not justified for them going
before. Then plainly it appears by S. Austines judgment, that justification
is the beginning of good works; and if justification be the beginning of good
works, then by no means can it be said, that good works are any cause of
justification. He excludes not then good works, which proceed from Gods
grace, as M. Bishop says, but he denies that there are any good works before
justification, because he knows no grace but justifying grace, and therefore
directly crosses Master Bishops assertion of good works before
justification, which are the causes for which we are justified.

29. W. BISHOP.
Master Perkins third argument. Very reason may teach us thus much: that no
gift in man is apt as a spiritual hand, to receive and apply Christ and his
righteousness unto a sinner, saving faith love, hope, fear, repentance, have
their several uses, but none of them serve for this end of apprehending, but
faith only.

Answer. Man's reason is but a blind mistress in matters of faith, and he that
has no better an instructor in such high mysteries, must needs know little.
But what if that also fail you in this point? then every man cannot but see
how naked you are of all kind of probability. I say then, that reason rather
teaches the contrary. For in common sense, no man apprehends and enters
into the possession of any thing, by believing that he has it. For if a man
should believe that he is rich, of honor, wise, or virtuous: does he thereby
become presently such a one? nothing less. His faith and persuasion is no fit
instrument to apply and draw these things to himself, as all the world sees.
How then does reason teach me, that by believing Christ's righteousness to be
mine own, I lay hand on it, and make it mine? Again Christ's righteousness
(according to their own opinion) is not received into us at all, but is ours
only by Gods imputation: what need we then faith, as a spiritual hand to
receive it? If they say (as M. Perkins does) that faith is as it were a
condition required in us, which when God sees in us, he presently imputes
Christ's righteousness to us, and makes it ours, then will I be bold to say,
that any other virtue is as proper as faith, to have Christ applied unto us:
there being no other aptness requisite in the condition it self, but only
the will and ordinance of God: then every thing that it shall please him to
appoint, is alike apt: and so M. Perkins had small reason to say, that faith
was the only apt instrument to apply to us Christ's righteousness.

Moreover, true divine reason teaches me, that both hope and charity, do much
more apply unto Christians all Christ's merits, and make them ours, the^ faith:
For what faith assures me of in general, that hope applies unto me in
particular: by faith I believe Christ to be the Savior of all mankind: by hope
I trust to be made partaker of that salvation in him. But charity does yet give
me a greater confidence of salvation: for by the rule of true charity, as I
dedicate and employ my life, labors, and all that I have to the service of
God, so all that God has is made mine, so far forth as it can be made mine,
according unto that sacred law of friendship: A micorum omnia sunt communia.
And therefore in true reason, neither by faith, nor any other virtues, we take
such hold on Christ's merits, nor have such interest in his inestimable
treasures, as by charity: which S. Augustine understood well, when he made it
the model, and measure of justification: saying, De not. and gra. cap. vlt.
That Charity beginning, was Justice beginning: Charity increased, was Justice
increased: great Charity, was great Justice: and perfect Charity, was perfect
Justice.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins alleges, that very reason may teach us, that faith only
justifies, because there is no gift in man that has the property of
apprehending and receiving, but faith only. To this M. Bishop answers, that
man's reason is a blind mistress in matters of faith. Wherein he says truly,
and indeed is the cause why he himself writes so blindly as he does, and
measures high mysteries by carnal and base conceits. And surely it seems
that his reason was very blind, who gave so blind a reason against that which
Master Perkins says, being spoken not out of the reason of man, but as the
reason of a faithful man, may esteem by direction of the word of God. No man
enters into the possession of any thing, says he, by believing that he has
it; for if a man believe that he is rich, does he thereby become rich? I answer
him, no: but though a man by believing himself to be rich, do not become rich,
yet if to a poor beggar a great man say, If thou will take my word, and
refer thy self to me, and depend upon my favor and good will, I will make
thee rich; does he not by giving credit to his word commit himself to him,
entertain his favor, accept his offer, and become owner of that that is
promised unto him? What is it whereby we accept of promise, but only belief?
Now all that our question is of, consists of promise, and in all the benefits
of God we are Gal. 4.28.
the children of promise, Cap. 3 29.
heirs by promise; Heb. 6.17.
heirs of promise, expecting all things by the gracious promise of God; 2.
Pet. 1.4.
by promise to be partakers of the divine nature, Gal. 3.14.16.
the blessing by promise, Ephe 1 13.
the spirit by promise, Gal. 3.18.
the inheritance by promise, Tit. 1.2.
life eternal by promise, 2. Pet. 3.13.
by promise a new heaven and a new earth, wherein righteousness dwells, all
which 2. Cor. 1.20.
promises in Christ are, yea and in him Amen, for his sake first made, and for
his sake to be performed also. Now seeing God has taught us, that Heb. 11.33.
by faith we obtain the promises, that Gal. 3.14.
we receive the promise of the spirit through faith; that Ibid. ver. 22.
the promise (of blessing) is given by the faith of Jesus Christ to them that
believe, that Mat. 8.13.
as we believe, so it shall be unto us, that Mat. 11.24.
whatsoever we desire when we pray, if we believe that we shall have it, it
shall be accordingly unto us, why is it strange to M. Bishop, that in believing
according to the word and promise of God, to be partakers of those things which
he has promised, we should be said to become partakers thereof? In those mad
presumptions fondly alleged by him, there is no believing, because there is no
ground whereupon to believe, but when God promises, and tieth the effect of
his promise to the believing of it, not to believe that in the believing of it
we are partakers of that which we believe, is to make God a liar, and to
frustrate that which he has promised. Since then God has promised Christ unto
us, to be Ierem. 23.6.
our righteousness, and that Romans 3.22.
by the faith of Jesus Christ, that is, by believing him to be that unto us
which God has promised, surely in believing him to be our righteousness he is
our righteousness, and 2. Cor. 5.21.
we are made the righteousness of God in him. And this is indeed not by
receiving Christ's righteousness really into us, but by having righteousness
imputed unto us for his sake. For we receive the righteousness of Christ even
as we receive himself, who so becomes ours, as that John. 6.56.
we abide in him and he in us; Ephe. 5.30.
we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, we are really and
truly by the power of his spirit, one with him and he with us, and yet he is
not personally and bodily brought unto us. Faith seeks Christ, and finds
him, and holds him in the virgins womb, in the maunger, in the garden, upon
the cross, in the grave, in his resurrection and ascension unto heaven, and in
his now sitting at the right hand of God to make intercession for us. Every
where faith imbraceth him, and in every of these sees him to be ours, as
having undertaken and achieved all these things for our sakes. Even so the
righteousness and merit of Christ is spiritually, but really ours within and
without, in spirit and soul and body, to cleanse and sanctify us unto God.
But, says he, if it be ours by Gods imputation, what need we then faith as a
spiritual hand to receive it? A foolish and idle question; as if he should
say, If I give food to a hungry man, what need has he either of a hand to
take it, or a mouth to eat it? He himself saw that the answer is ready, even
the same that Ambrose delivers; Ambros. in Rom ca. 4. Sic decretum a Deo: hoc
sa^xit Deus. Et in 1. Cor. cap. 1. Hoc constitutu^ est, etc.
God has so decreed: it is thus appointed of God; God requires faith, to
which he will impute the righteousness of Christ. Where we may wonder at the
absurd boldness of this blind baiard, who tells us hereupon, that he will be
bold to say, that any other virtue is as proper as faith, to have Christ
applied unto us. What M. Bishop, will you be bold to say, that any other virtue
is as proper to apply Christ unto us, as that which God himself has appointed
for that use? Is not the will and ordinance of God sufficient to restrain your
presumption and boldness, and to shut your mouth from running over in this
sort? He says, that there is no other aptness requisite in the condition it
self, but only the will and ordinance of God. But shall we be so impious, as to
think that the will and ordinance of God without cause appoints one condition,
when as well it might appoint another, or appoints anything to be don, which
is not more fitly done that way that he appoints, then any other way? The
Apostle tells us, Romans 4.16.
Therefore it is by faith, that it may be of grace, importing that faith is
appointed as the fittest means, whereby to set forth the grace of God. Again,
he adds for another reason, Ibid.
That the promise might be sure to all the seed. For no otherwise can we rest
assured of the promise of God, but as it is of grace, who in our works can find
nothing whereupon to assure our selves. By faith therefore we believe it to be
of grace, that with comfortable assurance we may firmly expect the blessing
which God has promised unto us. Another reason with S. Paul, why faith is
specially appointed, is Cap. 3.27.
to exclude boasting. So says Ambrose; Ambros. in Psalm. 43. Maluit Deus vt
salus homini fide potius quam operib. quaereretur, nequis gloriaretur in suis
factis.
God has made choice that salvation should be gotten rather by faith then by
works, that no man should glory in his own doings. It is therefore for the
special aptness of faith, that God has appointed it to be the instrument for
applying unto us the whole benefit of Christ. Yet M. Bishop tells us, that
true divine reason teaches him, that both hope and charity do much more apply
Christ's merits unto us then faith does. But it is indeed a dreaming and
unreasonable fancy, and not any true divine reason that has taught him so.
For whereas he says, that hope applies in particular what faith believes in
general, it has been before showed, that the office of true faith, is to make
this particular application. And indeed there can be no true hope in any man,
where there is not first a faith to apply the benefit of Christ particularly to
himself. For though I believe that Jesus is a Savior, yet what ground have I
thereby to hope for salvation, unless I believe that he has saved me; that
Gal. 2.20.
he has loved me and given himself for me? Surely unless I believe for my
self, I cannot hope for any thing for my self, save only at uncertain
adventure, and without ground. Now M. Bishops hope being no other, how can he
be said thereby to apply that to himself, whereof he is still to stand in
fear, whether it be his or not? But to come nearer to the point, the question
here is of applying the merits of Christ unto us. Now the merit of Christ is
that that Christ has already done for us. But hope respects that only that
is futurely to be done. Hope therefore can in no sort be the instrument to
apply unto us the merit of Christ. Neither can charity serve us for that use,
because I cannot presume of that that is another, upon any conscience of my
love toward him, but upon confidence only of his love toward me. Howsoever I
seem to employ my self to the service of God, yet it gives me nothing
whereof to presume with him, unless I believe that of his love he does accept
my service, and will reward the same. Be it as Master Bishop says, that all
things are common amongst friends, but before we can build thereupon, we must
have it resolved unto us, that God takes us for his friends, which can be no
otherwise but by faith only, Romans 3.25.
God having set forth Christ to be an atonement (to make us friends with God)
through faith in his blood. Faith then must first apply unto us the merit of
the blood of Christ, before there can be any friendship betwixt God and as.
And although being now in friendship with Christ, our love may give us
encouragement and comfort, to make use to our selves of that that is his, yet
it is not by our love, that we take it to make use thereof. For the art of love
is done only extramittendo, by issue and passage from us to Christ, and
therefore it must be somewhat else whereby we receive and apply from Christ to
us. To be short, we wonder what application M. Bishop can make by charity, who
Chap. 3. Sect. 6. and 11.
plainly professes that he cannot tell whether he love God or God love him;
who says that hope and charity are seated in the dark corners of the will,
and a man has but only conjectures, and a probable opinion of the being
thereof in himself. What shall he then make bold of in name of friendship with
Christ, who knows not whether he be a friend to Christ, or Christ to him? As
for the saying of Austine, why he alleges it I know not; unless it be that
he were only desirous to say somewhat out of Austine. S. Austine notes, that
inherent justice consists in charity, which is the sum of the law, which is
the rule of justice. According therefore to the measure of our charity greater
or less, so is the measure of our righteousness. We say the same, but what is
this to show that charity is the fittest instrument to apply unto us the merit
of Christ? But that he may not dream of justification before God, by any
perfection of charity here, let him remember what Saint Austine has said
thereof, that August. epist. 29. Supra. cap. 2. sect. 8.
perfect charity is in no man so long as he lives here; that the lesnesse
thereof to that that it ought to be, is by reason of a default or corruption in
us, by reason whereof, no man living shall be justified in the sight of God.

30 W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins fourth Reason is taken from the judgment of the ancient Church:
They are blessed, Ambros. in Romans 4.
to whom without any labor or work done, iniquities are remitted. So no
works or repentance is required of them, but only that they believe. To these
and such like words, I answer.

First, that it is very uncertain, whether these Commentaries be Saint
Ambroses.

Secondly, that that Author excludes not repentance, but only the works of
Moses law, which the Jews held to be necessary: as circumcision, and such
like, see the place, and confer with it that which he has written in the
same work, upon the fourth to the Hebrews, where he has these words: Faith
is a great thing, and without it, it is not possible to be saved, but faith
alone does not suffice: but it is necessary, that faith work by charity, and
converse worthy of God.

De verb. Ap. ser. 40.
M. Perkins next authority is gathered out of S. Augustine. There is one
propitiation for all sinners, to believe in Christ; True, but where is it, that
we need nothing else, but to believe?

Leuit. li. 1. ca. 2.
3. Hesichius says, Grace which is of mercy, is apprehended by faith alone, and
not of works: that is, we do not merit by our works done before grace, any
thing at Gods hand, but of his mercy receive both faith and justification.

Sup. Ca^t. ser. 22.
4. Bernard has: Whosoever thirsts after righteousness, let him believe in
thee: that being justified by faith alone, he may have peace with God.

Answer. By faith alone, he excludes all other means, that either Jew or
Gentile required, but not charity, which his very words include: for how can we
abhor sin, and thirst after justice, without charity? and in the same work
he declares plainly, Sermon. 24.
that he comprehends always charity, when he speaks of a justifying faith:
saying, A right faith does not make a man righteous, if it work not by
charity. And again: Neither works without faith, nor faith without works is
sufficient to make the soul righteous.

Gal. 3.
5. Chrysostom, they said, he who rested on faith alone, was accursed: but Paul
shows, that he is blessed who rested on faith alone. Answer. He speaks of
the Jews who held Christians accursed, because resting on the faith in Christ,
would not observe withal Moses law: Gal. 5.
the Apostle contrariwise denounces them accursed, who would join the
ceremonies of Moses law with Christian religion, and so faith alone there
excludes only the old law, not the works of charity: so he mangleth
pitifully a sentence of S. Basils saying: De Humil.
Let man acknowledge himself to want true justice, and that he is justified
only by faith in Christ: If a man know himself justified by faith in Christ,
how can he acknowledge that he wants true justice? His words truly repeated are
these: Let man acknowledge that he is unworthy of true justice: and that his
justification comes not of his desert, but of the mere mercy of God through
Christ. So that by faith alone Saint Basil treating of humility, excludes all
merit of our own, but no necessary good disposition, as you may see in his
Sermon de Fide, where he proves by many texts of holy Scripture, that charity
is as necessary as faith.

M. Perkins last testimony is out of Origin: Romans 3.
Who proves (as M. Perkins said) that only believing without works
justifies, by the example of the Thief on the Cross, of whose good works
there is no mention.

Answer. Origin excludes no good disposition in us to justification, but
says, that a man may be saved, without doing outwardly any good works, if he
want time and place: as the Thief did, who presently upon his conversion was
put to death, which is good Catholic doctrine: but that you may perceive how
necessary the good dispositions before mentioned, be to justification, you
shall find if you consider well all circumstances, not one of them to have
been wanting in that good Theefes conversion. First, that he stood in fear of
Gods just judgment, appears by these his words, to his fellow, Do thou not
fear God, etc. He had hope to be saved by Christ, out of which he said: O Lord
remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom: By both which speeches is
showed also his faith both in God, that he is the governor and just judge of
the world, and in Christ, that he was the Redeemer of mankind. His repentance
and confession of his fault, is laid down in this: And we truly suffer
worthily: His charity toward God and his neigbour, in reprehending his
fellows blasphemy, in defending Christ's innocence: and in the midst of his
greatest disgraces, and raging enemies, to confess him to be King of the world
to come: out of all which we may gather also, that he had a full purpose to
amend his life, and to have taken such order for his recovery, as it should
please Christ his Savior to appoint. So that he lacked not any one of those
dispositions, which the Catholic Church requires to justification. Now that,
that great Doctor Origin meant not to exclude any of these good qualities out
of the company of faith; is apparent: by that which he has written on the
next Chapter: where he says: That faith cannot be imputed to justice, Romans 4.
to such as believe in Christ, unless they do withal put off the old man, and
a little before more plainly saying: I think that faith is the first beginning
of salvation, hope is proceeding in the building, but the top and perfection of
the whole work is charity.

R. ABBOT.
To set down the places alleged out of Ambrose, is sufficient to discover the
bad and evil conscience of M. Bishop in the answering of them, and to show
what a one he is indeed in all the rest of his answers. First, Ambros. in Romans
ca. 3. Iustificati sunt gratis quia nihil opera^tes neque vicem reddentes sola
fide iustificati sunt dono Dei.
they are justified freely, says he, because working nothing, nor making any
requital, they are justified by faith alone through the gift of God. The
second is this; Jbid cap. 4 Manifest beati sunt quibus sine labor vel opere
aliquo remittuntur iniquitates and peccata tegu^tur, nulla ab h^ requisita
poenitentiae opera nisi tantum vt credant.
They are blessed to whom without any labor or work their iniquities are
forgiven and sins covered, no work of penitencie being required of them, but
only to believe. Thirdly, he says, Idem. in 1. Cor. cap. 1. Hoc constitutu^
est a Deo vt qui credit in Christum saluus sit sine opere, sola fide gratu
accipiens remissione^ peccatorum.
This is appointed of God, that he that believes in Christ, shall be saved
without works freely, by faith alone, receiving forgiveness of sins. I pray
thee now gentle Reader to mark well his answer to these allegations: First, he
says, that it is very uncertain whether these Commentaries be Ambroses. It is
true indeed, that some make question of the Prefaces that are inserted to the
several Epistles, but of the Commentaries themselves, save only upon the
epistle to the Hebrews, I know no man that doubts. Their Sixth. Senens.
biblioth. sanct. lib 4.
Sixtus Senensis reckons them for the works of Ambrose for their part, and
our Cent^r. Magdeburg. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Centuristes for our part, and on both sides they are always cited in his
name. There is no doubt but they are the works of a very ancient writer, if
they were not his, and therefore that can make little to acquit Master Bishop
of crossing the ancient Church, unless he can give us a better answer. But
that we shall have, namely that that Author excludes not repentance, but only
the works of Moses law, which the Jews held to be necessary, as circumcision
and such like. Short and sweet: this he has told us, and if we will fare
better, we must take the pains to go further. But let him remember that the
point in question is of being justified by faith alone, which Saint Ambrose
there directly and fully affirms, by faith only, by faith only, it is
required only to believe. Now though the ceremonial works of Moses law be
excluded from justification* yet if we be justified by any other works, we are
not justified by faith only or alone. He excludes not repentance, says he,
but let us request him to turn us these words into English: Nulla ab his
requisita paenitentiae opera nisi tantum vt credant. We take it to be this,
there being required of the^ no labor or work of penitency or repentance, but
only to believe. He means indeed by penitencie, that which publicly was
don, and for which men were called poenitentes, penitents as afterward
appears, but by excluding such works of penitencie, it appears that it was
not his meaning to exclude only circumcision and such other ceremonies of Moses
law, and therefore that M. Bishops answer is a very absurd and broken shift.
Mark the words gentle Reader, Working nothing, not making any requital,
without any labor or work, no work of penitencie required, without works,
and freely, and by faith alone, all sounding that Ambros. in Psalm. 43. Non
facta sua vnumquenque iustificant, sed fides prompta.
a man's works do not justify him, but his prompt faith, as the same S. Ambrose
speaks in another place. As for the words which he brings to cross the
other, they are no way contrary to us. We say as he says, that faith alone
suffices not, and yet we say as he also says, that faith suffices to
justification. For it is one thing to say what suffices to justification,
another thing to say what suffices to the perfection of a Christian and
justified man. The place alleged out of Austin infers our assertion, though
it express it not. If it be our propitiation, that is, our justification to
believe in Christ, then only to believe in Christ does justify. If not, then
it cannot be said to be our justification to believe in Christ. For where the
effect belongs to many causes alike, there it cannot be singularly attributed
to any one. His answer to the words of Hesychius is impertinent; for Hesychius
beside that he says, that grace is not merited because it is of mercy,
tells us also what it is whereby the same is apprehended, and that he says
is faith alone. Hesych. in Leuit. lib. 4 cap. 14. Gratia ex misericordia and
compassione probatur, and fide comprehendiur sola, non ex operibus.
Grace which is of mercy is apprehended by faith alone and not of works. If
grace be not apprehended by works as Hesychius says, why does M. Bishop tell us
that it is apprehended by works? If it be apprehended by faith alone, why does
he tell us that it is not apprehended by faith alone? Be it that our works
before grace do not merit our justification, yet if by works we be justified
as well as by faith, then it is not true which this Father says, that the
grace of justification is apprehended by faith, and not by works. The words of
Saint Bernard are plainly spoken of the imputed righteousness of Jesus Christ,
by occasion of the Apostles words, that Christ is 1. Cor. 1 30.
made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption.
Bernard. in Cant. ser. 22. Iustitia in absolutione peccatoru^.
Righteousness, says he, by forgiveness of sins, and for prosecuting thereof
says of Christ, Iustitiae tuae tanta vbique fragra^tia spargitur, vt non solum
iustus sed and ipsa dicaris iustitia, et iustitia iustificans. Ta^ validus
denique es ad iustificandum, qua^ multus ad ignos^endu^. Quamobrem quisquis pro
peccatis compunctus esurit et sitit iustitia^ credat in te qui iustificas
impium, and solam iustificatus per fidem pacem habebit ad Deum.
so sweet a savor of thy righteousness is every where spread abroad, as that
thou art not only called righteous, but also righteousness it self, and a
justifying righteousness. As strong thou art to justify, as thou art ready
to forgive. Whosoever therefore being pricked with his sins hungreth and
thirsts after righteousness, let him believe in thee who iustifiest the
ungodly, and being justified by faith only he shall have peace with God. M.
Bishop tells us, that S. Bernard by faith alone excluded all other means
that either Jew or Gentile required, but not charity. Vain man, what had S.
Bernard here to do either with Jews or Gentiles? He spoke to Christian and
faithful brethren, to whom he had no occasion to give any caveat either
against Jews or Gentiles, but instructs them what to do being pricked and
grieved with sin, even to hunger and thirst after righteousness, not meaning
by righteousness inherent righteousness, as M. Bishop does, but that
righteousness which consists as he had before expounded it, in the
forgiveness of sins. Therefore he teaches to believe in Christ, who is our
righteousness, Justitia dona^s delecta. sub fine^.
a righteousness as he speaks again, that forgiueth sins; the form of
which righteousness he expresses thus; Delicta iuue^tutu meae and ignorantias
meas ne memineris and ^^stus sum.
Remember not the offenses of my youth and my ignorances, and I am righteous or
just. Thus S. Bernard says, that a man is justified by faith alone, and shall
we be so mad as to think, that in saying a man is justified by faith alone,
his meaning was as M. Bishop affirms, that a man is justified by faith and
charity, that is to say, not justified by faith alone? And did S. Bernard
think that a man has charity before he have charity? For seeing as M.
Bishop tells us, the gift of charity is infused and powered into us in
justification, surely to say that by charity a man is justified, is to say,
that by charity the gift of charity is powered into him. Which if it be
absurd, then let him be content that S. Bernards meaning be, as indeed it is,
that a man is justified by faith alone, and let him take charity for a gift of
the justified, and not for any fore-running cause of justification. Now that
the righteousness there spoken of is not meant of inherent righteousness it is
very plain, in that S. Bernard in the words following treats severally
thereof under the name of sanctification. His counter-places are impertinent.
What S. Bernard therein says we say: In Cant. ser. 24 Non facit hominem rectum
fides etiam rectae quae no^ ^peratur ex dilectione.
A man's believing aright, except it work by love, does not set him right or
straight; and again, Nec fides fine operibus nec opera sine fide sufficient ad
animi rectitudinem.
Neither faith without works, nor works without faith, do suffice to the
rectitude or straightness of the mind. True it is, as I have often said, that
to the full rectifying and perfecting of a man, belongs not only
justification by the forgiveness of sins, but also sanctification to
charity and good works, but what does this hinder, but that notwithstanding
both the work of justification and the obtaining also of sanctification, may
be performed by faith alone? Chrysostomes words are, Chrysostom. ad Gal. ca. 3.
Illi dicebant, qui sola fide nititur execrabilis est: hic contra demonstrat qui
sola fide nititur eum benedictum esse.
They said, he who rested on faith alone is accursed, but Paul says, that he
is blessed that rests upon faith alone. M. Bishops answer, that faith alone
there excludes only the ceromonies of Moses law, is already showed to be
vain. But here it further appears, in that Chrysostom notes, that the
Apostle makes special choice of Abraham, who was so long before the Law, for
an example of being justified without works, and that Ibid. Abraham producit
in medium declarans hunc quoque sic fuisse justification. Quod si is ante
gratiam ex fide iustificatus est, idque quum and operibus bonis floreret, multo
magis vos. Et in Ep. ad Romans hom. 8. supra sect. 26.
when as he abounded in good works. For if he in that case were not justified
by his works but by his faith, then it is manifest that not only the
ceremonial works of Moses law, but all other works are excepted from that
justification that is described to be by faith alone. We are to be justified as
Abraham was. Abraham though he abounded in good works, yet was not justified
thereby. Therefore we also though we have good works, yet are not justified
thereby, but by faith alone. The sentence of Basil he says is pitifully
mangled by M. Perkins, when as by himself it is altogether marred. His words,
says he, truly repeated are these, Let no man acknowledge, etc. putting in a
sentence of his own making under the name of Basils words truly repeated.
What a shameless man is he, thus to mock his Reader, thus grossly and palpably
to forge a matter, and yet to pretend truth? Basil having mentioned the words
of S. Paul, that 1. Cor. 1.30.
Christ is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption, says hereupon thus: Basil. ser. de humilit. (...) Latin apud
Bellarm. de Iustif. lib. 1. c. 25 Haec est perfecta and integra gloriatio in
Deo. quando neque ob iustitiam suam quis se iactat, sed nouit quidem seipsum
verae iustitiae indigum, sola autem fide in Christum iustif^catum.
for that is perfect and full of rejoicing in God, when a man is not lifted up
because of his own righteousness, but knows that he himself is destitute of
true righteousness, and is justified by faith only which is in Christ. Thus he
spoke to a Christian auditorie, and instructed them to acknowledge themselves
to be void, wanting, destitute of true righteousness, and to be justified only
by faith in Christ. M. Bishop says that he excludes all merits of our own,
but no necessary good disposition; but he should remember I say, that Basil
spoke to them that were past dispositions and preparations, it being a Sermon,
not ad Catechumenos, such as were yet to be baptized, but ad fideles, to the
faithful, as they were termed after Baptism, and them does he teach to
acknowledge themselves to be justified by faith alone. But whosoever they had
been, how crossely does M. Bishops bad disposition carry him to Basils words.
Basil says: Let a man acknowledge himself destitute of true righteousness,
and to be justified only by faith in Christ. M. Bishop says, a man is not
destitute of true righteousness, but has virtuous good dispositions and
preparations, by which he is to be justified, and not by faith alone. But no
marvel that they cross others, who are so tangled with the truth, as that
they know not how to speak, but to cross themselves, still blowing both hot
and cold; freely, and yet for works; for nothing, and yet for something; no
merit, and yet in some sort merit; of mere mercy, and yet somewhat to move
God beside his mercy. But to give some color to that that he says, he
tells us, that Basil in his Sermon de Fide, proves by many texts of
Scripture, that charity is as necessary as faith. Be it so, yet he does not
say, that we are justified by charity. We say, as he there says, that Basil.
ser. de fide Character and insigne Christianorum.
love is the badge and cognizance of Christian men; much commended unto us by
our Savior, as a mark whereby he will have us to be known to be his
disciples. We say further, that it is as necessary as faith, to the full
perfection of a Christian man, and yet we say it has nothing to do in the act
of justification. To his question as touching the words alleged, If a man know
himself justified by faith in Christ, how can he acknowledge, that he wants
true justice? I answer him, that a man acknowledges himself to want in
himself true inherent justice, confessing himself to be sinful and corrupt,
when yet he wants not that justice or righteousness of which S. Paul says:
Romans 4.5.
To him that works not (that is, Oecumen. in Romans 4. Ei qui ab operibus
fiducia^ non habet.
who has no confidence by works) but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is reputed for righteousness, and so as Basil says, he is
justified by faith alone, Bern. in Cant. ser. 23. Charitas patris ipsoru^
cooperit multitudinem peccatorum. Et ser. 61. Iustitia tua in me operit
multitudinem peccatorum.
the love of the Father, and the righteousness of Christ the Son covering
the multitude of his sins: so that they are as if they had never bin, and he
as if he had offended nothing, as before has been declared. Origens testimony
which is the last of all, declares plainly the same that Basils does, that
Orig. in Romans cap. 3. Dicit sufficere solius fidei iustificationem, ita vt
crede^s tan tummodo quis iustificetur etia^si nihil ab eo operis fueri^
expletum.
the justification of faith alone is sufficient, so that a man only believing
is justified, though there have been no good work performed by him. For
example hereof he alleges the Thief on the cross, Pro sola fide a^ ei
Jesus, Ame^ d^cot t^bi, etc.
to whom for faith alone Christ said, This day shall thou be with me in
paradise. M. Bishop answers again, that Origin excludes no good disposition
in us to justification. A strange matter, that these Fathers should have so
little discretion still to be urging faith alone, faith alone, and yet should
mean to leave a place to M. Bishops good dispositions, whereby faith alone is
overthrown. But he adds out of his master Bellarmine, that faith is opposed
to outward works, so that Origens meaning is, that a man may be saved without
doing outwardly any good works, if he want time and place. And what are those
outward works? Forsooth Bellarmine names to fast, and to give alms. Absurd
Friar, as if there were no outward good works to be done, but only fasting
and giving of alms. M. Bishop here under the name of dispositions, sets
forth unto us many good works of the thief in that short time of his being
upon the cross, the fear of God, hope, faith, repentance, confession of
sins, love toward God and his neighbor, in reprehending his fellows
blasphemy, and defending Christ's innocence, and yet of him Origin affirms
the same that Chrysostom did before of Abraham, that not for any works, but
he was justified by faith alone. Super hoc non requisiuit Dominus quid prius
oporatus esset, nec expectauit quid operis cum credidisset, explesset, sed sola
confessione iustificatum comitem sibi Paradisum in gressurus assumpsit.
Christ did not enquire concerning him, says he, what he had wrought before
nor did look what work he performed when he had believed: but being to go
into Paradise, took him to accompany him, being justified only by his
confession, that is, by his faith which he uttered and showed by his confession
of Christ. The other example there alleged by Origin, makes the matter as
plain, which is of the woman in the Gospel, that washed Christ's feet with her
tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, whose good works M. Bishop
has noted also Sect. 21.
before: to whom notwithstanding Origin. ibid. Ex nullo legis opere, sed pro
sola fide.
not for any work of the law, but for faith only, says Origin, Jesus said,
Thy sins are forgiven thee: and again, Thy faith has saved thee. Yea but
Origin faith, Idem in ca. 4.
that faith cannot be imputed to justice, to such as believe in Christ, unless
they do withal put off the old man. And we say no less, that justification
cannot be separated from sanctification; but where the one is, there is the
other also: and yet it is distinctly to be considered what belongs to the
one, and what belongs to the other. He corrects the opinion of them, who
think profession of faith to be faith, and thereupon says as we do, that to
such their faith, because indeed it is no true faith, cannot be reputed for
righteousness. Therefore of faith he said before: Jbid Ne putes quod si quis
habeat talem fidem ex qua iustificatus habeat gloria^ apud Deum, possit simul
cum ea habere and iniustitiam: si enim qu^ credit quod Jesus est Christus ex
Deo natus est, and qui natus est ex Deo non peccat, manifestu^ est, quia qui
credit Jesu Christo non peccat: quod si peccat, certum est quia non creditet,
etc Certum est eum qui vere credit, opus fidei and iustitiae operari and totius
bonitatis.
Do not think, that he that has such a faith, as whereby being justified, he
has to rejoice with God, can together therewith have unrighteousness. For if
he that believes that Jesus is Christ, be borne of God; and he that is borne
of God sins not, it is manifest, that he that believes in Jesus Christ,
sins not; and if he do sin, (that is, give himself to sin) it is
certain that he believes not. Certain it is, that he that truly believes,
does work the work of faith and righteousness, and of all goodness. Thus he
says as we do, that true faith cannot be separated from godly life: so that a
man cannot have fellowship with Christ by justification, who by sanctification
also has not fellowship with him. But the root of all is faith, by which
alone we are justified, and so the bar of sin is taken away, that divided
before betwixt God and us, that so the sanctifying spirit of God may have
access unto us, to work in us the good work of God, and so to prepare us to
that inheritance, to the hope whereof he has called us. As for the other place
that he cites, it is the same in effect with that of Ignatius Sect. 26.
before alleged, and contains nothing but what we also teach, as has been
declared there.

31. W. BISHOP.
The third Difference of Justification, is how far forth good works are
required thereto.

Page 91.
Master Perkins says, That after the doctrine of the Church of Rome there be
two kinds of Justification: the first, when of a sinner one is made just: the
which is of the mere mercy of God through Christ, without any merit of man,
only some certain good devotions of the soul, (as the acts of Faith, Fear,
Hope, Charity, Repentance,) go before, to prepare (as it were) the way, and to
make it more fit to receive that high grace of Justification.

The second Justification is, when a just man by the exercise of virtues, is
made more just: as a child newborn, does by nouriture grow day by day bigger:
of this increase of grace, Catholics hold good works to be the meritorious
cause.

M. Perkins first grants, that good works do please God, and have a
temporal reward.

2. That they are necessary to salvation, not as the cause thereof, but either
as marks in a way to direct us toward salvation: or as fruits and signs of
righteousness, to declare one to be just before men: all which he shuffleth in,
rather to delude our arguments, then for that they esteem much of good works,
which they hold to be no better then deadly sins.

The maine difference then between us consists in this: whether good works
be the true cause indeed of the increase of our righteousness, which we call the
second justification: or whether they be only fruits, signs or marks of it.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop, it seems, did not well like that M. Perkins should do the
Church of Rome that wrong, to make her better then indeed she is: for whereas
he had said, that they exclude all works from the first justification, and
confess it to be wholly of grace, M. Bishop reformeth his error by adding,
that certain good devotions of the soul, (as the acts of faith, fear, hope,
charity, repentance,) go before to prepare the way to justification, all which
it has been his drift hitherto to prove to be properly and truly the causes
thereof. Now as touching the point in hand M. Perkins observes three things
accorded unto by us, in the recital whereof M. Bishop uses his wonted guise
of deceit and fraud. First, we grant, that good works do please God, and are
approved of him, and therefore have reward: which we intend both temporal and
eternal, but he mentions it as if we affirmed no other, but only temporal
reward. Secondly, we say that they are necessary to salvation, not as causes
either conseruant, adiuuant, or procreant, but either as consequent fruits of
that faith which is necessary to salvation, or as marks in a way, or rather
the way it self leading to salvation. Thirdly we say, that the righteous man
is in some sort justified by works, as S. James says that Abraham was
justified by works, that is, declared and made manifest to be just. And this
he acknowledges to be in some sort also before God, for that it pleases God
by our works to take the sight and knowledge of our faith; albeit we forbear
so to speak, both for avoiding confusion in this disputation of justification,
properly understood in the sight of God, and also for that the same phrase in
the Apostles writing of that point, sounds another way. This last M. Bishop
here co^cealeth, fearing lest it should prevent him of some of his cauils, but
that which he does allege, he says is shuffled in rather to delude their
arguments, then that we esteem much of good works, which (he says) we hold
to be no better then deadly sins. Thus the glozing sycophant still plays
his part, still perverting sometimes our saying, sometimes our meaning. Where
he cannot oppugn that which we teach, he will make his Reader believe, that we
mean not as we say. We see no such difference betwixt them and us, betwixt
their lives and ours, but that we may well be thought to esteem good works,
as much as they do. We would be ashamed to be such as their stories have
described their Popes, and Cardinals, and Bishops, nay, as M. Bishop and his
fellows have described the Jesuits to be. Whereas he says, that we account
good works no better then deadly sins, he very impudently falsifieth that
which we say. We affirm the good works of the faithful to be glorious and
acceptable in Gods sight for Christ's sake, being done in his name, and offered
upon the altar of faith in him. The imperfection thereof is accidental, and
takes not away the nature of a good work, but only makes it an imperfect
good work: which imperfection notwithstanding were sufficient to cause the
work to be rejected, if in rigor and extremity God should weigh the same;
which he does not, but mercifully pardons it for Christ's sake. Seeing then
the blemish set aside, we acknowledge it to remain entirely a good work,
being the work of the grace of God, to be accepted and rewarded of God, with
what conscience does this brabler say, that of good works we make no better
then deadly sins? As touching the question propounded by him, it consists
of two parts: the one, of the increase of righteousness: the other, of the
cause of that increase. We say, that the righteousness whereby we are to be
justified before God, admits no increase, because it must be perfect
righteousness: for perfect righteousness consists in indiuisibili, if any
thing be taken from it, it is not perfect; and if it be not perfect, it cannot
justify before God. Now by M. Bishop it appears, that the inherent
righteousness which they say is infused into a man in his first justification,
is imperfect, because it remains afterward to be increased. Of the same
inherent justice we also make no question, but that there is an increase
thereof to be expected and labored for, and that we are therein to thrive and
grow from day to day: but hence we argue, that it is not that that can make a
man just in the sight of God: for the defect that is thereof, is not by a mere
privation, but by admixtion of the contrary: August. Epist. 29.
ex vitio est, it is by reason of some corruption, as S. Austin says. Yea,
Idem de perf. iustit. Peccatum est cum non est charitas quae esse debet, vel
minor est quam debet.
there is sin, as he again says, when charity (that is inhernt justice) is
less then it ought to be. But where sin is, a man cannot be said to be just
in the sight of God. Therefore by the Popish imagined first justification, a
man cannot be justified in the sight of God: no, nor by their second
justification, because it never grows to that, but that it is still capable
of increase. It remains therefore, that we are just in the sight of God only
by the righteousness of Christ, which is without increase, being fully absolute
and perfect, according to the prescript form of the law, the same being
undertaken for our sakes, and performed in our name. But whereas we acknowledge
the increase of inherent righteousness, there grows a question of the cause
of this increase. The Romish doctrine is, that the grace of God is Coster.
Enchir. cap. 5. Est haec gratia in arbitrio voluntatis, quemadmodum baculus in
manu conualescentis, cuius auxilio si velit vtetur; si^ minus poterit eam
remouere.
like unto a staff put into a man's hand to stay him, and that it is left to
his free will either to use this staff to keep him up, or to leave it and so
to fall. Free will then (say they) using well the grace that it has received,
deserves thereby an increase of justice and righteousness. Thus they still
hang all upon the merit and free will of man: they think scorn to have any
thing of gift, but one way or other will deserve all. But the doctrine of truth
teaches us to conceive all to be of grace, both the first gift of
sanctification, and all the succeeding increase thereof. For although it be
true, that God to the thankful receiving and using of his gifts, does add
greater measure thereof, according to that of our Savior: Mat. 25.29.
To him that has shall be given, that is, says S. Austin, Aug. de doct.
Christ. lib. 1. ca. 1. Dabitur habentibus, id est, cum benignitate vtentibus eo
quod acceper^^it.
To them that use well that which they have received, yet that which is added,
is but Joh. 1.16.
grace for grace, and Fulgent. ad Monim. lib. 1. Dona sua donis suis reddit.
the rendering of one gift to another gift, God himself giving himself
occasion by one gift, of the bestowing of another. As he gives faith, and to
faith gives that for which we believe: as he gives us to pray, and to our
prayer gives that for which we pray: so in all the rest he gives grace, and
gives to use well the grace that he has given; and to the well using thereof
gives also further measure and increase of grace, that both in the gift and in
the increase all praise and glory may redound to him. The means in us whereby
this increase is wrought unto us, is our faith; which, as it first receives
the spirit, so receives also the increase of it, whilst by the growth thereof
we grow more into Christ, and thereby are more and more partakers of his life.
Ambros. in Luc. ca 11 li. 10. Mihi fide mea Sol ille coelestis, vel minuttur
vel ^ugetur.
That heavenly Sun, says Ambrose, is increased or diminished unto me
according to my faith. Now the^ to determine the point whereupon we are here to
insist, it is not, whether inherent righteousness may be increased, for that
we deny not; nor whether good works be meritorious causes of the increase of
it, for that beo^geth properly to the question of merits: but the question is,
whether in the increase of righteousness, which they term second
justification, we grow to any such perfection, as that thereby we may be found
perfectly just in the sight of God, by virtue and force thereof to be accepted
unto everlasting life.

32. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins pretends to prove, that they are no cause of the increase of our
justice: and yet frames not one argument directly to that purpose, but repeates
those objections, and proposes them now at large, which we made before against
the first justification: the which although impertinent to this place, yet I
will solue them first, and then set down our own.

We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.

Answer. The Apostle there speaks of the justification of a sinner: for he
says before, that he has proved, both Jew and Greek, to be under sin; and
that all have sinned, and need the glory of God: wherefore this place
appertains not unto the second justification, and excludes only either works
of the law, as not necessary unto the first justification of a sinner: against
the Jews who thought and taught them to be necessary, or else against the
Gentiles any work of ours, from being any meritorious cause of that first
justification: for we acknowledge very willingly (as you have heard often
before) that every sinner is justified freely of the mere grace of God,
through the merit of Christ only, and without any merit of the sinner
himself: and yet is not a sinner (being of years of discretion) merely passive
in that his justification, as M. Perkins very absurdly says: for in their own
opinion he must believe (which is an action,) and in ours not only believe, but
also Hope, Love, and Repent: and this kind of justification excludes all
boasting in our souls as well as theirs. For as they must grant, that they
may not brag of their faith, although it be an act of theirs so necessarily
required at their justification, that without it they could not be justified:
even so let them think of the rest of those good preparations, which we hold
to be necessary, that we cannot truly boast of them,, as though they came of
our selves: but we confess all these good inspirations, as all other good, to
descend from the bounteous liberality of the Father of lights: and for the
yielding of our consent to them, we can no more vaunt, then of consenting unto
faith: all which is no more, then if a man be mired in a lake, and unable of
himself to get out, would be content that another of his goodness should
help him out of it. Yet observe by the way, that S. Paul forbids not all
glorying or boasting: Romans 5.
For he glories in the hope of glory of the Son of God, 2. Cor. 10.
and in his tribulations. Again: He defines that we may glory in measure,
and that he might glory in his power, 2. Cor. 12.
and that he was constrained to glory in his visions and revelations. So that a
good Christian may glory in our Lord, and in his heavenly gifts, so it be in
measure and due season, acknowledging them from whence they come. But to boast
and say, that either God needed us, or that our good parts were cause that God
called us first to his service, is both false and utterly unlawful. Ephesians. 2.


So that by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it is
the gift of God: not of works lest any man should boast himself, is nothing
against our doctrine of justification, Lib. 83 q. 76.
but too too ignorantly or maliciously cited against it: and not also with S.
Augustine, that faith is there mentioned, to exclude all merits of our works,
which went before and might seem to the simple to have been some cause, why
God bestowed his first grace upon us: but no virtuous dispositions requisite
for the better preparation to the same grace: and therefore very fondly does M.
Perkins infer, that in that sentence S. Paul speaks of works of grace,
because in the text following he mentioned good works. Whereas the Apostle
puts an evident distinction between those two kind of works, signifying
the first, to be of our selves: the second, to proceed from us as Gods
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, and the first, he calls Works simply:
the second, Good works, prepared of God for us to walk in after our first
justification. What gross ignorance then was it, to take these two so distinct
manner of works for the same, and to ground himself so boldly upon it?

R. ABBOT.
The question intended by M. Perkins is expressly propounded, how far forth
good works are required to justification: namely, before God, which he
determines thus, that they are required, not as causes for which we are
justified, either in the beginning of grace, or in the proceeding thereof, but
only as effects and fruits of justification. Which although it be employed in
that that before has been said, of being justified by faith alone, yet neither
as touching first nor second justification, is directly handled by M. Perkins,
but only in this place. Here therefore he disputes wholly as touching
justification before God, that good works concur not as any causes thereof,
and brings his arguments directly to that point. First, the Apostle says,
Romans 3.28.
We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law. M.
Bishop excepteth against this place, as meant of the first justification of a
sinner, not appertaining to the second justification. But we find but one
justification spoken of by S. Paul, both beginning and continuing in faith:
for being still sinners, so long as here we live it must needs be, that that
which the Apostle says of the justification of a sinner must still appertain
unto us, and therefore that both firstly and lastly we are justified by faith
without the works of the law And if there were any second justification, that
which the Apostle says must necessarily be taken to belong to it. For he
writes these things to the Romans, to the Galathians, which long before had
believed and been baptized, and yet now still informs them, that their
justification is by faith without the works of the law: still he says, Gal.
2.21.
If righteousness be by the law, Christ dyed in vain: yea he proves by the
Prophets words, not that the sinner only, but Cap. 3.11.
the just shall live by faith, as Hierome mentioning out of the vulgar Latin
translation of the Psalms these words: Psalm. 55.7. vulg. Lat. Pro nihilo
saluos faciet eos.
He will save them for nothing, adds, Hieron. aduer. Pelag. lib 2. Haud
dubium quin iustos qui non proprio merito, sed Dei sal^a^tur clementia.
No doubt but he means the just, who are not saved by their own merit, but
by the mercy of God. But it is further to be noted, that he brings in
Abraham for an example of this justification, even then when he had long been
the servant of God, and showed singular devotion and obedience unto him. He
brings for another example the Prophet David, a man according to Gods own
heart, who from his childhood had been called of God, yet now still
acknowledging his blessedness to consist in the Romans 4.6.
Lords imputing of righteousness without works. It is evident therefore that
M. Bishops exception is insufficient, and that not only at a man's first
entrance into the state of grace, which he calls the first justification, but
afterward also a man is justified by faith without the works of the law, and
therefore works can be no meritorious cause of any second justification. His
acknowledgement, that a sinner is justified freely of the mere grace of God,
through the merit of Christ only, without any merit of the sinner himself, is
a mere collusion and mockery. For if a man be justified by works, then it is
not by mere grace. He says Sect. 21.
before of the woman that washed the feet of Christ, that her love and other
virtuous dispositions were causes why she was justified, and determines still,
that hope, fear, repentance, charity, concur as causes thereof. Yea but
(says he) they are no meritorious causes; there is the merit of Christ only,
and no merit of the sinner himself. So then justification is by works, but
not by merits. But we see the Apostle resolves against works, of merits he
says nothing: he speaks of that that is, not of that that cannot be; works
there may be, but merit there can be none, as is afterward to be declared. See
then the madness of these men: the Apostle says, Gal. 2.16. Ephesians. 2.9.
Not by works; yes, say they, it is by works, but it is not by merits: the
Apostle says, Romans 11.6.
If it be of grace, it is not of works; yes, say they, it is both by grace and
by works, but it is not by merits. Thus impudently they confront the Apostle,
and seek to tie upon him a flat contradiction to that he says. They will seem
to uphold grace, by excluding merit, when as the Apostle testifies, they
plainly overthrow it by affirming works, because (as has been before
alleged out of Austin) grace is not grace in any respect, except it be free in
every respect. Yea neither do they wholly exclude merit, but affirm the same
Bellar. de just. lib. 1. cap. 17.
in some sort, even in their first justification, as I have before diverse times
observed out of Bellarmine. Thus they play fast and loose, and would feign say,
but cannot well tell what to say. With Pelagius they are ashamed to omit the
grace of God, and yet they so teach it, as that they make it of no effect. Now
because our justification is merely by the gift of God, therefore M. Perkins
says, that the sinner in his justification is merely passive, meaning, that
we do nothing at all, wherein consists any part of our righteousness with
God. M. Bishop says, that this is absurd, because a man must believe, and to
believe is an action. But it is absurd only to an absurd and ignorant man, who
understands not what he reads. To believe is an action, but he has had
occasion enough to know and understand, if ignorance had not blinded him, that
we place no part of righteousness in the very act of faith, but in the thing
received thereby. Christ only is our righteousness, and him we receive by
faith. God justifies, we are justified. God imputes righteousness, to us it
is imputed: God then is the agent, we the subject whereon he works, patients,
receivers, and no way workers of that which is our righteousness before God.
And to this his understanding should lead him in that justification which they
maintain. For although they say that by faith, hope, charity, repentance,
which are actions, they obtain justification, yet the very habit of justice
is with them a thing merely infused of God, and not the act of man himself.
Therefore as touching the very habit of justice a man must be only passive,
not active, in the same sense as M. Perkins speaks, only a receiver, and not
at all a worker thereof. But now he tells us, that the justification which
they so teach, wrought and procured by hope, fear, love, etc. excludes all
boasting as well as ours. But that cannot be: for the Apostle tells us, that
Romans 3.27.
boasting or rejoicing is not excluded by the law of works, but by the law of
faith. So long as any thing is attributed to our works in this behalf, we
have somewhat to glory in, as that by our works, and for our works sake we
have obtained that which we have. The Apostle says, that Romans 4.2.
if Abraham were justified by works, he had whereof to glory or rejoice, and
therefore it is not true, that justification being attributed to works, we
have nothing whereof to rejoice or boast our selves. Neither does M. Bishops
explanation help the matter at all, that we cannot boast of those
preparations, as though they came of our selves: because we see the Pharisee in
the Gospel to glory of that, which notwithstanding he confesses to be the
gift of God: Luc. 18.11. August. in Psalm. 31. Cum dicebat gratias tibi*
fatebatur ab illo se ^^cepisse quod habebat. Hieron. aduer. Pelag li. 3 Jlle
gratias agit Deo, quia ipsius misericordia non sit, sicut caeteri homines, etc.
O God I thank thee, says he, that I am not as other men are. But by his
words of these good inspirations descending from the Father of lights he does
but abuse his Reader, dealing only colourably, as Pelagius the heretic was
wont to do. For they make God the occasion only, and not the true cause of
them. They make him externally an assistant to them, but the internal
producing and proper original of them, is of the Free will of man, which is
the cause why they affirm these works that go before justification not to be
meritorious, as they say those are that follow after. For if they made them
essentially the works of grace, they could have no color to attribute merit
to the one, and to deny it to the other. Yea M. Bishop himself apparently
excludes them from being the works of grace, in that presently after he
calls the grace of justification, the first grace, as being ignorant of the
language of their own schools, whereas these works are said to go before, to
prepare us for the receiving of justifying grace. In these works of preparation
therefore there is apparently somewhat attributed to man, whereof he has to
glory in himself: for that howsoever being helped of God, yet he does
somewhat himself, for which God bestows upon him the gift of justification.
Yea M. Bishop plainly ascribes to him somewhat whereof to rejoice, in that he
ascribes it to him to consent to the grace of God. Yea but a man, says he,
can no more vaunt of consent to these works, then of consent to faith: true,
and therefore if either way he have any thing of himself, he has somewhat
whereof to boast. M. Bishop therefore builds up his own glory in both, so
acknowledging the grace of God both in faith and works, as that all is
nothing, but by the free will of man. Now we on the other side, together with
the ancient Church, Fulgen. ad Monim. lib. 1. Nullatenus sinimus, immo
sal^briter prohibemus tam in nostra fide quam in nostr^ opere tanquam nostrum
nobis aliquid vindicare.
suffer not, nay, we utterly forbid, that either in our faith, or in our work,
we challenge to our selves any thing as our own. But in the justification of
faith boasting or rejoicing is excluded, not only for that faith and all
consent of faith is wholly the gift of God, but also for that to faith nothing
at all is ascribed for it self, but only to Christ who is received thereby,
and is it self a mere acknowledgement, that we have all that we have of the
sovereign bounty and mercy of God, only for his own sake, and not for any
thing that is in us. Now therefore we hence argue against M. Bishops
justification, that that is the only true doctrine of justification, by which
man's boasting or rejoicing is excluded. By the doctrine of justification by
works, man's boasting is not excluded. Therefore the doctrine of justification
by works, is not the true doctrine of justification. As for his comparison of a
man mired in a lake, and content that another should help him out, it
sauoureth very strongly of the stink of the Pelagians, leaving in a man both
will and power for the helping of himself, whereas the Scripture affirming us
to be Ephe. 2.1.
dead in trespasses and sins, bereaueth us altogether of all, either will or
power, whereby we should yield any furtherance to the saving of our selves. But
the same is also otherwise unfit, because the conversion of a man is an
acceptance of a service and an entrance into it, wherein he is to bestow his
labor and pains to deserve well, as M. Bishop says, at his hands whose
servant he is, and by covenant to merit heaven. Hereto he works partly by
grace, as he says, and partly by free will, and therefore having merited and
deserved, he has somewhat in respect of himself wherein to glory and
rejoice: whereas the course that God takes is, Bernard Cant. Ser. 50. Vt
s^iam^^ in d^e illa, quia non ex operibus iustitiae quae fe^imus nos, sed pro
misericordia sua saluos nos fecit.
that we may know at that day, as S. Bernard says, that not for the works of
righteousness which we have done, but of his own mercy he has saved us. For
this cause albeit he could have perfected us at once, and even at the first
have reformed us to full and unspotted righteousness to serve him accordingly,
yet has he thought good to leave us groaning under a burden of sin, and under
many infirmities and imperfections in the service that we do unto him, that the
sight of our foul feet may still pull down our Peacockes tail, and we may
always fully know, that we are to give all the honor and glory of our
salvation to God alone. But M. Bishop tells us, that all glorying and
boasting is not forbidden, and we acknowledge the same, for else the Apostle
would not have said, 1. Cor. 1.31.
He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. Our glorying or rejoicing must
be with the acknowledgement of his goodness, and to the magnifying of him, and
not of our selves. He that exalts himself as the Pharisee did, in that which
he confesses to be the gift of God, rejoices against God. But M. Bishop
offends both ways: he attributes not all unto God, but somewhat at least to
the free will of man. Again, it is not entirely the glory of God that he
respects, but Sest. 2.
the bringing of dignity unto men, as he has before expressed. Therefore albeit
he will not have a man boast and say, that his good parts were the cause that
God called him first to his service, yet he makes no exception, but that a man
may boast of the good works that he has performed in serving him, and may
glory that his good parts therein are the cause why God adiudgeth heaven unto
him as justly deserved, which is that against which the Scripture wholly
drives, teaching us to confess that which Austin does, that Aug Hypog. lib 3.
Intell^ge, in miseratione and misericordiae, non in factione meritorum animam
coronari.
not for performance of merits, but in mercy and loving kindness the soul of
man is crowned: and to say with Hilary, Hilar in Psalm. 135. Quod sumus qui non
fuimus, quod erimus quod non sumus, causam ^^am non habet, nisi misericordiae
Dei.
That we are what we were not; that we shall be, what we are not, it has no
other cause at all, but only the mercy of God. Again, he will not have us
boast and say, that God needed us for our selves, but we must needs say with
Tertullian: Tertul. aduer. Hermog. Nemo non eget eo de cuius vtitur.
There is none but needs him, of whose he uses any thing. Their doctrine of
free will makes God to stand in need of us, because by it God brings not
the work of our salvation to pass, but at our will. It is in the power of our
free will, either to help it or hinder it, either by admitting or rejecting
the grace of God. For the performance therefore of his purpose and promise, God
must stand in need of our will, to consent to his work, or else it succeeds
not. For the avoiding of which absurdity, we must confess, that God uses
nothing in us, for the effecting of our salvation, but what he himself
graciously works in us. Our consenting, our believing, our willing, our
working, all is of God, and nothing is there therein that we can call ours. Now
therefore it is plain, that M. Perkins did not ignorantly and maliciously as
this ignorant wrangler speaks, but iudiciously and truly apply against them
the place to the Ephesians, Ephe. 2.8.
By grace ye are saved through faith; not of your selves, it is the gift of
God; not of works, least any man should boast. Where the Apostle ascribing all
to grace through faith in Christ, takes exception generally against works, and
gives to understand, that they are effects, not causes of salvation, because
God having first by faith put us in the state of salvation, does consequently
create us anew in Christ Jesus, unto good works. M. Bishops exception is, that
the Apostle there excludes only the works that be of our selves, before we
be justified. But that his exception is very vain, appears plainly by that
the Apostle for reason of that that he says, Not of works, least any man
should boast, adds in the next words, For we are his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has prepared for us to walk in.
Where one way to understand works in the one sentence which is to be proved,
and another way to understand good works in the other sentence which is the
proof, is to make the Apostle to utter as reasonlesse reasons as M. Bishops
idle head is wont to do. For what sense were it to say, we are not saved by
works that are of our selves before we be justified, because we are Gods
creation and workmanship in the good works that we do after our justification?
But the Apostles meaning is very evident, we are not saved by any good works
that we do; for our good works are none of ours, but they are his workmanship
in us, by whom we are saved, who having by his calling entitled us to
salvation, has prepared good works as the way for us to walk in, to the same
salvation. It was not then M. Perkins ignorance, to take two distinct manner of
works for the same, but M. Bishops absurd shifting, to make a distinction of
works there where the sequel of the text plainly conuinceth, that there is no
difference at all. But we would gladly know of him, to which manner of works
he refers his virtuous dispositions? To the latter he cannot, because they
proceed from us as Gods workmanship created in Christ Jesus, which we are not
till we be justified, and they are for us to walk in after our justification.
If to the former, then we see they are by the Apostle excluded from
justification. So in neither place does he say any thing of them, and because
he knew them not, he has wholly left them out. He was undoubtedly to blame, to
conceive so little virtue in Master Bishops virtuous dispositions, as not to
think them worth the speaking of. But it is worth the noting, to what fashion
he by this device has hewed the words of the Apostle: Not by works, least any
man should boast; that is, not by works that are of our selves, but yet by
virtuous good dispositions and works of preparation, which are partly of God,
and partly of our selves; and yet as I have before said, they make the
essential production of these works of preparation, to be only of our
selves, because as yet there is Coster. Enchirid. ca. 5. Hominis liberum
arbitriu^ auxilio Dei necdum inhabitantis, sed moue^tis and adiuuantis se
praparas ad iustificationem, no^ solum patiendo sed operando and agendo.
no infused or inhabitant grace, whence they should proceed, and therefore out
of their own grounds it must follow, that the same works of preparation are
here excluded by the Apostle. But see the singular impudency of this man, who
makes S. Austin a witness of his virtuous dispositions, who has not in the
place alleged by him, so much as any se^blance or show for proof thereof.
Note with S. Austin, says he, that faith excludes all merits of our works,
but no virtuous dispositions for preparation to grace. Lewd Sophister, where is
that note found in S. Austine? in what words is it set down? What? still lie,
and nothing but lie? S. Austine forsooth makes the Apostle to exclude all
merits of our works which went before, and might seem to the simple to have
been some cause why God bestowed his first grace upon us, but not all works;
for there are works of preparation, which Doctor Bishop, no simple man I
warrant you, defends to be the cause why God bestows upon us his first
grace. Will he make S. Austine the author of so absurd and impious a gloss? S.
Austine under the name of merits wholly excludes works, understanding by
merits any thing going before justification, that should be unto God a motive
or cause to bestow his grace upon us, as I have showed Sect. 21.
before. Therefore he does not direct the words of S. Paul, only against
merits, but simply against works, that he affirms August. li. 83. quaest. 76.
Vt nemo meritu priorum bonoru^ operu^ arbitrotur se ad donum iustificationis
peruenisse. Dicit posse homine^ sine operibus praecedentibus iustificari per
fide^ Dicit de operibus quae fidem praecedunt.
a man to be justified without works precedent or going before, that he
teaches that not for any good work past, a man attaineth to the justification
of faith; that a man is not justified by works that go before faith, meaning
by faith not a faith which is before justification, but the faith in which our
justification is begun, as appears very plainly by that that he says in
another place, Jdem de verb. Apost. ser. 16. Si iustitiae nihil habemus, nec
fidem habemus. Si fide^ habemus iam aliquid habemus iustitiae.
If we have no righteousness, we have no faith: but if we have faith, we have
also some part of righteousness already. And thus perpetually he excludes
all works going before justification, from being any causes thereof, and still
makes justification the beginning of all good works, so as that Idem epist.
46. Sine illa cogitare aliquid vel agere secundu^. Deum vlla ratione omnino no^
possumus.
without the grace of God (which with him is no other but the grace Epist. 105.
Istam gratiam commendat Apostolus qua iustificati sumus vt homines iusti
essemus.
whereby we are justified) we can in no sort think or do any thing according
unto God. Of M. Bishops virtuous dispositions before justification, he never
speaks word, nor ever gives intimation of any such, nay he condemns the
Pelagians for affirming the same, as we have seen in the question of Sect. 5.
Free will.

33. W. BISHOP.
Now to his second reason. If you be circumcised, Gal. 5.
you are bound to the whole law. Hence thus he argues: If a m^n will be
justified by works, he is bound to fulfill the whole law, according to the
rigor of it. That is Paul's ground: But no man can fulfill the law, according
unto the rigor of it: ergo. No man can be justified by works. He that can
apply the text prefixed unto any part of the argument, Erit mihi magnus Apollo:
Saint Paul only says in these words: That if you be circumcised, ye are
bound to keep the whole law of Moses. Master Perkins, That if a man will be
justified by works, he must fulfill the rigor of the law: Which are as just
as Germains lips, as they say: But M. Perkins says, that it is Saint Paul's
ground: but he is much deceived, for the Apostles ground is this: That
circumcision is as it were a profession of Iudaisme, and therefore he that
would be circumcized, did make himself subject unto the whole law of the
Jews. Of the possibilities of fulfilling the law, because M. Perkins touches
so often that string, shall be treated in a distinct question, as soon as I
have dispatched this.

R. ABBOT.
The force of the sentence alleged, that Gal. 5.3.
he that is circumcised is bound to keep the whole law, depends upon the
verse going before, and that that follows after. He says before, Ver. 2.
If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, by one particular
giving to understand what was to be conceived of the rest, that August. cont.
Faust Man. lib. 19. cap. 17. Certa pernicies si in huiusmodi legis operibus
putare^t suam spem salutemque continer^.
it was certain destruction for them to think, that their hope and salvation
was contained in such works of the law, because thereby they were secluded
from having any benefit in Christ. Which as he has namely spoken of
circumcision, as being a special matter then spoken of, so he says it in the
verse after of the whole law; Ver. 4.
Ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the law, ye are
fallen from grace. If then in any part of the law a man seek to be justified,
he is thereby voided of the grace of Christ. Being abandoned from Christ and
his grace, he has no means of justification and salvation, but by the law. He
cannot be justified by the law, but by perfect observing of it, because it is
said, Cap. 3.10.
Cursed is every man that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the law to do them. What then is said of circumcision, belongs to
all the works of the law. He that seeks to be justified by the works of the
law, he is bound fully and perfectly to observe the same, and if he be any
where a trespasser, he cannot be justified by the law. And rightly does M.
Perkins say, that this is the ground of that which the Apostle says of
circumcision, as he shall well perceive, that observes how through the whole
Epistle he disputes generally against justification by the law, to disprooue
the doctrine of the false Apostles, urging for justification circumcision and
other ceremonies of the law. Therefore in the words alleged, this argument is
implied; He that will be justified by the law, is bound to fulfill the whole
law: He that seeks to be justified by circumcision, seeks to be justified
by the law: he is therefore bound to the perfect observation of the whole law.
As for that which M. Bishop says, that circumcision is as it were a profession
of Iudaisme, it is a very idle and sleeuelesse answer. For what is Iudaisme,
but a profession of justification by the law, the Jews Romans 932.
seeking righteousness not by faith, but as it were by the works of the l^w.
Circumcision therefore is a profession of justification by the law; against
which the Apostles ground is, as has been said, that he that professes to be
justified by the law, does tie himself to observe it without any breach, being
by the law guilty of death, if he be found to transgress in any sort. Now that
there is no ableness in us to fulfill the law, so as to be justified thereby,
it shall appear God willing, in the place where Master Bishop promises to
treat thereof.

34. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins third argument. Election to salvation is of grace without works:
wherefore the justification of a sinner is of grace alone without works:
because election is the cause of justification.

Answer. That election is of grace without works, done of our own simple
forces, or without the works of Moses law: but not without provision of good
works issuing out of faith, and the help of Gods grace, as shall be handled
more largely in the question of merits.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop, to answer the argument, avouches a plain point of
Pelagianisme, that Gods election is upon foresight of our good works, directly
contrary to that which the Apostle defines in the example of Jacob; Romans 9.11.
Before the children were borne, and when they had done neither good nor evil,
that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not by works, but by
him that calls, it was said, the elder shall serve the younger, as it is
written, I have loved Jacob, and have hated Esau. August. Ench. cap. 98. Qua in
re si futura opera vel bona huius vel mala illius, quae Deus vtique praesciebat
vellet intelligi, nequaquam diceret, non ex operibus, sed di^^ret ex futuris
operibus, eoque modo istam solueret quastionem, etc.
Where, says S. Austine, if the Apostle would that either the good works of
the one, or the evil works of the other that were to come should be
understood, he would not have said, Not of works, but would have said, for the
works that were to come, and so would have put the matter out of question.
Ide^ epist. 105. Ideo, inquiunt Pelagiani, nondum natorum alium oderat, alium
diligebat quia futura eorum opera praetudebat. Quit istum a^utissimum sensum
Apostolo defuisse non miretur?
The Pelagians said, as he observes, that of them being not yet borne, God
therefore hated the one, and loved the other, because he did foresee their
works to come. Who would not wonder, says he, that this witty conceit
should be wanting to the Apostle? But his resolution every where is, that Gods
election is the cause of our good works, not the foresight of our good works
the cause why God elected us. To that purpose he alleges the words of the
Apostle, Ephe. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him before the foundations of the world, that we should
be holy, and without blame before him through love; De praedest. sanct. ca. 8.
Non quia futuri eramu^ sed vt essemus. Et cap. 19. Non quia futures tales nos
esse praesciuit, sed vt essemus tales per ipsam electionem gratiae, etc.
not says he, because we would be, but that we should be; not because he
foreknew that we would be so, but that we might be so by his election of grace.
The like he observes of the same Apostles words concerning himself, 1. Cor.
7.25. Aug. epist. 105.
I have obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, not for that the Lord did
foresee that he would be faithful, but by his mercy made him so to be. It were
too long to allege all that might be alleged out of Austine as touching this
point, but Master Bishop having very nicely touched it, deferreth the rest to
the question of merits, where he says nothing directly to it. It seems he
was ielous of the matter, and therefore was loath to wade too far, least it
should too plainly appear, that Pelagius and he are both fallen into one pit.

35. W. BISHOP.
The fourth argument. A man must be fully justified, before he can do a good
work: and therefore good works cannot go before justification. True, not
before the first justification of a sinner. But good Sir, you having made in
the beginning of this last Article, a distinction between the first and second
justification; and having before discussed the first, and the second now
remaining, and expecting you, why did you not say one word of it, the matter
being ample and well worthy the handling? Albeit you will not willingly
confess any second justification as you say: yet had it been your part at
least to have disprooued such arguments, as we bring to prove a second
justification: Ye acknowledge that there be degrees of sanctification; but
these degrees must be made downward of evil, worser and worst: for if all our
sanctification and best works be like unto defiled cloutes, and no better then
deadly sins as you hold, Page 76.
elsewhere, let any wise man judge what degrees of goodness can be lodged in
it. Again, how absurd is that position, that there is but one justification,
whereby they take fast hold on Christ's righteousness, which can never after be
either loosed or increased. Why then do you with your brother Iouinian
maintain, that all men are equally righteous? If it so be, let him that
desires to see you well coursed, read S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S.
Gregory. Lib. 2. con. Iouin. Epist. 81. Epist. 57. Hom. 15. in Ezech.
At least we must needs uphold, that a man is as just and righteous at his
first conversion, as at his death, how godly a life soever he lead: against
which I will put down these reasons following.

R. ABBOT.
If there can be no good works before the first justification of a sinner,
what shall we think of M. Bishops virtuous dispositions and works of
preparation? What? are they virtuous, and yet are they not good? Nay, he has
called them Sect. 30. and 32.
before good qualities, good dispositions, good preparations, and what? were
they good then, and now are they not good? Tell us, M. Bishop, your mind: are
your works of preparation good works, or are they not good? If they be not
good, then you have spoken untruly before in calling them good. If they be
good, then it is untruth that you say here, that no good works go before the
first justification of a sinner. Either in the one or in the other you must
needs confess, that you have said amiss. Now here he quarelleth with Master
Perkins, as if he had said nothing to the matter in hand, which is as he says
of the second justification, whereas Master Perkins, though noting their
distinction of first and second justification, yet has in hand wholly to
exclude works from justification, whence it must follow, that they have no
place in any second justification. And the argument here propounded, directly
overthrows his second justification, though he would not see so much. For if
a man can do no perfect good works till he be fully justified, the^ can he do
no perfect good works till the second justification be fulfilled. For a man is
not fully and perfectly justified, till he have attained to full and perfect
justice. Justice is not full and perfect, so long as any thing remains to be
added unto it. There is still something to be added in their second
justification, till it come to his full term. Therefore till then a man is not
fully justified. Now the justice that is not perfect, if it be respected in it
self, cannot be pleasing unto God. It can therefore bring forth no good works
to merit at Gods hands. There can therefore be no good works, whereby a man
should merit their second justification. M. Bishop after his manner briefly
recites the argument, and having so done, very scholerlike answers to the
conclusion, granting it in one sort, when the premises infer it in another,
and yet braueth and faceth, as if the matter were wholly clear for him.
Justification, as M. Perkins says, we make but one, but yet we make degrees of
sanctification, not evil, worse and worst, as this cauiller fondly dreameth,
but good, and better and best, according to the measure of Gods spirit bestowed
upon us, but yet so, as that to the good, and better, and best that is in this
life, there cleaves a blemish and stain, which would cause the work to be
condemned, but that it is graciously accepted, and the imperfection thereof
mercifully pardoned for Christ's sake, as shall appear in the handling of that
matter. He calls the affirming of one justification perfect at first, and not
after to be lost, an absurd position; but it is not absurd, but to absurd men,
to whom the truth it self is absurd. There is in the sight of God but one
justification only by faith in Christ, under the couerture whereof we stand
thenceforth acceptable unto God, both in our persons, and in our works of
obedience unto everlasting life. In that sense as to present us just before
God, there is no other justification. That that is further, is but declaratiua,
a justification so called, whereby we are justified and declared to be
justified men. The true justification properly so called, cannot be lost,
because Romans 8.30.
whom God justifies he also glorifieth, nor increased, because the
righteousness of Christ is always uniform and alike. By this righteousness
being the same to all, all are equally righteous, but by the different grace of
sanctification in inherent righteousness, some are more righteous and some
less, and if Iouinian maintained the contrary, he erred, and therefore those
Fathers whom M. Bishop cites, do not course us at all, but say the same that
we do, and we that they, neither is it any other but his gross ignorance, so
absurdly to mistake one thing for another. We say, that there is equality of
righteousness in one respect* and he brings the Fathers affirming against
Iouinian what we confess, that there is difference of righteousness in
another respect, According to that former righteousness by imputation of the
merit and obedience of Christ, a man is as righteous the first day of his
conversion, as he is in the end of his life, howsoever as touching
sanctification and inherent righteousness, he grow much, and therein be renewed
from day to day.

36. W. BISHOP.
First, that of the Revelations: Let him that is just be yet justified: or as
your text has it: He that is righteous, Cap. 22.
let him be more righteous: and that of, fear not to be justified even until
death: Eccles. 18.
do convince, that there are more iustifications then one, and that a man may
increase in justification and righteousness until death. Which is confirmed
where it is said: That the path of a just man proceeds, Prou. 4.
as the light does until it be perfect day: which is degrees more and more.
And S. Paul teaches the same, where he says to men that give alms
plentifully: That God will multiply their seed, 2. Cor. 9.
and augment the increases of the fruits of their justice. Further, S. James
does most effectually prove this increase of righteousness, and the second
justification, in these words: Abraham our father, was he not justified by
works, Cap. 2.
offering Isaac his son upon the altar. That he speaks of the second
justification is evident: for Abraham was justified before Isaac was borne, as
it is most manifest by the Scripture it self: and by that heroical act, of
not sparing his only and entirely beloved Son, his justice was much
augmented. Genesis 15. Romans 4.
And the Apostle himself seems to have foreseen all our adversaries
cauillation, and to have so long before prevented them. First, that common
shift of theirs (that this work was a sign, or the fruit only of his faith,
and no companion of it, in the matter of justification) is formally confuted:
for the holy Ghost speaking distinctly of both his faith and work, and joining
them both in this act of justification, attributes the better part of it unto
his work, thus: See thou that faith did work with his works; and by the
works the faith was consummate and made perfect. Which he does after fitly
declare by a similitude, comparing faith to the body, and good works to the
soul: which give life and luster to faith, otherwise faith is of little value
and estimation with God. Which S. Paul also teaches at large, among other
speeches including this: That if he should have all faith, 1. Cor. 13.
and wanted charity, he were nothing. And comparing faith and charity
together, defines expressly, that charity is the greater virtue, which
charity is the fountain of all good works. And so by this preferring these
works of charity before faith, he does stop the other starting hole of the
Protestants, that Abraham forsooth was justified before God, by only faith:
but was declared just before men by his works: For if God esteem more of
charity, then of our faith, a man is more justified before God by charity, then
by faith. Again, in the very place where this noble fact is recorded, to show
how acceptable it was to God himself, it is said in the person of God: Genesis 22.
Now I know that thou love me: and to convince all obstinate cauilling, is it
not said that his faith did in this very fact cooperate with his works, and
that the work made his faith perfect: which conjunction of both of them
together, does demonstrate that he speaks of his justification before God:
adding also, That he was therefore called the friend of God: which could not
have been, if thereby he had been only declared just before men: and thus does
S. Augustine reconcile the two places of the Apostles, S. Paul and S. James,
which seem contrary. S. Paul saying that a man is justified by faith without
works, and S. James, that a man is justified by works and not by faith only.
That S. Paul speaks of works which go before faith, such as we of our own
forces, without the help of grace are able to do: and such he says not to
deserve our first justification. But S. James disputes of works, which follow
faith, and issue out of our souls, now garnished will grace, and such he
holds us to be justified by, Lib. 83. Quest. q. 76. Ser. 16. de verb. Apost.
that is, made more and more just: See the place. He says directly, that we
are justified, and that this justice does increase, whiles it does proceed and
profit.

R. ABBOT.
The exhortation of S. John is, that he that has walked in righteousness and
innocence, and thereby approved his profession of the faith of Christ, should
still continue his course, and go forward to justify and approve himself to
the consciences of all men, by the same virtuous and godly life. The words have
their reference to outward conversation, and justification is to be understood
of the same that S. James speaks of, and that is before men, and in example
of outward life. To inward holiness and purity the other part of the sentence
is to be referred, He that is holy, let him be sanctified still, that is, let
him add to his sanctification, let him be more and more renewed, let him still
be Ephe. 4.22.24.
putting off the old man, and putting on the new; let him still 2. Cor. 7.1.
cleanse himself from all defilement of the flesh and of the spirit, and finish
(or perfect) his sanctification in the fear of God. S. John would not by both
those speeches import one thing, and therefore seeing the latter without doubt
imports inward righteousness, the other must needs be applied to outward
works. As for that of Ecclesiasticus it is nothing to us, who admit no
canonical authority of that book; yet it proves nothing for M. Bishop nor
against us, the words truly translated being these: Eccles. 18.21.
defer not till death to be justified; that is, put not off till death to
repent and to seek forgiveness of thy sins, according to that which in the
former verse he has said; Ver. 20.
Humble thy self before thou be sick, and whilst thou may yet sin, show
thy conversion. Here is nothing at all to prove two iustifications in that
sense that we here speak of, as whereby a man being first just, becomes more
just before the judgment seat of God. Increase and growth of inherent
righteousness we ackowledge and require in all faithful Christians, and his
pains is idly bestowed in the proof thereof. We know what our Savior
says, John. 15.2.
Every one that bears fruit in me the Father purges, that he may bring forth
more fruit; what S. Peter exhorts, 2. Per. 3.18.
to grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We
teach men to say with S. Paul: Phil. 3.12.
Not as though I had already attained or were already perfect, but one thing I
do; I forget that which is behind, and endeavor my self to that which is
before, and follow hard toward the mark. etc. We teach with S. Bernard;
Bernard. in Purif. ser. 3. In viae vitae non progredi est regredi.
In the way of life not to go forward, is to go backward, and again, Epist.
123. Nolle proficere est deficere.
not to increase is to decrease; Epist. 91. Vbi incipis no^e fieri melior.
(...) eti^m d^sinis esse i^^us.
where a man begins not to care to be better, there he gives over being
good at all. He need not therefore to prove this matter unto us, who teach it
much more faithfully and carefully then they do. The place of James proves no
other justification but what we confess, that is an approouing and declaring
of his faith and justification. His works are a testimony that the Scripture
has truly and rightly said of him, Iam. 2.23.
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. Now M.
Bishop should have told us in what other meaning it can be taken, that S. James
says, that in his works the Scripture was fulfilled, that says, Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. For if his works
were but the fulfilling of that Scripture, how absurdly does Master Bishop go
about to prove in his works an augmentation of that which by that Scripture
is imported formerly to be done? If his works were but the fulfilling of that
that was said of his justification before, how does he thereby seek to prove a
second justification? Now the former testimony of his justification is to be
considered, which was long after Gods first calling of him, Genesis 12. and seq.
when he had showed his singular faith and obedience unto God, in going out of
his own country at the word of God, when he had long called upon the name of
the Lord, built many altars unto him, done him much service: when he had long
traveled from place to place under his protection. For after all this, yet was
he not justified by his works, but only of his Genesis 15.6.
believing the Lord, it is testified, that it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. We would have M. Bishop to tell us, whether Abraham before the
time that this testimony was given him, were a justified man or not? he cannot
deny it, because Abraham had done many good works: and he has before said,
that there can be no good works before the first justification. If he were
justified before, then it appears, that to a man already justified, not his
works, but his faith is counted for righteousness* and because it cannot be
thought that by one means he was justified before, and by another now, it must
needs be, that as before to be justified, so now still being justified, his
faith is counted to him for righteousness, according as it is written: Hab.
2.4.
The just shall live by faith. Now if after he were justified, he did continue
still to be justified by faith, then to speak properly as we do of
justification in the sight of God, there is one only justification whereby a
man's Romans 4 5.
faith is imputed to him for righteousness, as the Apostle speaks. It must
needs therefore follow that S. James speaks of justification in some other
meaning then the Apostle S. Paul does: what that meaning is let him learn,
not of us, but of the ancient Church: Phot. apud Oecum. in Romans cap. 4. Non
habuit Abrah^m opera? absit. Opera siquidem habuit, vt si cum hominibus qui
simul cum eo versabantur fuisset in iudicio constitutus facile iustificatus
fuisset, illisque antepositus: verum vt coram Deo ex suis operibus
iustificaretur tanquam dignus and aequalis sese praebens dignitatis cum ea quae
inde praebebatur beneficentia and dono, nequaquam fuisset illam assecutus Vnde
ergo b^ dignus est habitu^ ex sola fide, etc. Solutio patet ex bu quomodo hi^
quidem (Paulus) ex fide ait iustificatum fuisse Abraham, diuus autem Ia^obus ex
operibus.
Had Abraham no works? (says Photius) God forbid. Verily he had works, so as
that if he had been brought in judgment with the men with whom he lived, he
had easily been justified, and preferred before them: but that by his works he
should be justified before God, as worthy of the dignity, kindness, and gift
that was yielded unto him, he would never have attained to it, but he had it by
faith only. Hereby, says he, the resolution is manifest, how Saint Paul
says, that Abraham was justified by faith, and Saint James, that he was
justified by works. Here is a plain distinction and difference delivered,
that Saint Paul says, that by faith only a man is justified before God: but
that it is before men, and with men that S. James means a man is justified by
works. And this distinction is very plainly intimated by S. Paul, when he
says, Romans 4.2.
If Abraham were justified by works, he had to rejoice but not with God. He
denies not but Abraham was justified by works, and that he had wherein to
glory, and to stand upon his justification, but yet not with God. He might do
it in respect of men, but with God he could not do it. So says Origin upon
those words, having first put difference betwixt justification by faith seen
only to God, and justification by works which may be approved of men: Origin.
in Romans ca. 4. Abraham si ex operibus iustificatus est, habet quidem gloriam ex
operibus venientem, sed non illam quae apud Deum est.
If Abraham were justified by works, he has the glory which comes by works,
but not that which is with God. And this distinction is apparent also by S.
Austine, who speaking as touching inherent justice and righteousness of
works, says, Aug. de Temp. ser. 49. Quamdiu viuitur in hac vita nemo
iustificatus est, sed, In conspectu Dei. No^ frustrae addidit, In conspectu
tuo: nisi quia potest esse iustificatus in co^spectu hominu^. Referet in
conspectu Dei: Non iustificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis viuens.
So long as we live in this life, no man is justified; but in the sight of God.
Not without cause was it that David added, In thy sight: For it may be that a
man may be justified in the sight of men; but let him speak as touching Gods
sight, and no man living shall be justified in thy sight. Where since S. Austine
as touching justification by works, denies that any man in this life is
justified in the sight of God, it must necessarily follow that that
justification which is by works, must not be understood in the sight of God,
but only in the sight of men. Now then to speak of justification before men,
as S. James does, it is true that both faith and works do concur and join
in the act of justification. The faith that inwardly in the heart justifies to
God, and is outwardly professed with the mouth to men, is not sufficient to
approve a man outwardly to men, and to the Church of God, to the sight and
conscience whereof, every faithful man is bound to acquit and clear himself,
unless it be accompanied and adorned with virtuous and upright conversation.
In this respect therefore it may be said, that the better part in some sort is
attributed to works, that faith is made perfect by works; that faith is as
the body and good works as the soul, and that faith without works is dead,
even as the body is dead without the soul. Men specially have an eye to
works, and thereto attribute more then to words. He is taken for a halting and
half Christian, that makes show of faith, and lives not accordingly. Men
account him as a carrion, a dead carcass, loathsome, and detestable; he is every
man's byword, as I said before, and his name continually carries reproach with
it. Hereby it appears also, that faith though happily it be in the heart, yet
is here respected only as it is professed to men. For it cannot be that the
work of the hand should give life to the faith of the heart, but rather
receives life from it. Yea, M. Bishop himself tells us, that charity within
is the life of faith within, and therefore works which are without cannot be
said to be the life of faith, but as faith it self also is without. There may
be works whereby a man outwardly may Luke 16.15.
justify himself to men, as the Pharisees did, which yet are dead works,
because there is neither faith nor charity to give them life from the heart.
Now S. James must so be understood, as that not charity which is habitually and
inuisibly within, but works which are outward and apparent, must be the life of
faith. He speaks therefore of faith, as it is outwardly professed, which has
it life, and grace, and honor amongst men by the outward fruits of good
works correspondent to it self. Very guilefully therefore does M. Bishop
turn his speech from works whereof S. James speaks, to charity, there being
here so different a consideration to be had of the one and of the other; yea,
he himself naming charity the fountain of good works, and thereby importing
that charity as the fountain differs from the good works that issue
therefrom. The place that he alleges to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 13.2.
Though I have all faith. etc. is nothing to this purpose, because we speak
here of a faith that is common to all the faithful, but the Apostle there
speaks of a faith that is peculiar only to some, whereof he has said the
chapter going before, Cap. 12.9.10.
To one is given the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to
another is given faith, meaning the faith whereby miracles are wrought, as he
himself adds, Though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
etc. His purpose is to teach men not to be proud of special gifts of the
spirit, but to respect the end and use thereof, which is performed by love,
without which they are only idle shows. As touching the comparison of faith
and charity, there has been enough said Sect. 22.
before. For our present state faith has the preferment, and all in all
hangs upon our faith, which is the heart and life of whatsoever else is in us
toward God. It is faith that gives God his glory, that acknowledges him to
be that that he is; that so sets him before us, as to draw all our
affections unto him, our love, our fear our hope, our delight, our selves
wholly both body and soul. The promises of God in special manner are made to
them that believe and trust in him. Therefore that God esteems more of our
charity then of our faith, is not the Apostles assertion, but M. Bishops fond
collection, and that which the whole course of Scripture does gainsay. But
supposing it to be so, the consequence that M. Bishop draws therefrom is very
ridiculous: If God esteem more of charity then of our faith, a man is more
justified by charity, then by faith. As if he should say, A man esteems more
of his eyes then of his ears, therefore he hears better with his eyes then
with his ears. A thing may simply and absolutely be preferred before another,
and yet the other in some respect and use may be preferred before it. Thus may
it very well be said as touching this comparison of faith with charity as
before is said. Further he alleges, that God to show how acceptable Abraham's
fact was to him says, Now I know that thou love me. The true text is, Genesis
22.12.
Now I know that thou fear me, but thus M. Bishop shufleth and shifteth the
best he can, to gain somewhat to charity against faith. But this is nothing to
his purpose howsoever. It pleases God who knows the heart and whatsoever is
within us, yet to take upon him the knowledge of our love, faith, fear, etc.
by the fruits thereof. Hereby he will try us, he will approve us, and give
testimony and witness unto us, and so shall he do at the last day. But what
will Bishop infer hereof? If that that he would prove be that that he says,
that it was acceptable unto God, we will easily grant him so much, and so send
him back again as wise as he came. If he would prove hereby that Abraham was
justified before God by his works, let him consider his argument well, God
took knowledge of Abraham's fearing him by his works; therefore Abraham was
justified by works in the sight of God. But if we follow the construction that
S. Austin often makes of those words, this collection will appear much more
absurd. August. co^^ Maximin. lib. 3. cap. 19.
God, as he says, knows all things before they come to pass. It was not now
that God first knew that Abraham feared him. Therefore as Gemere dicitur
spiritus qu^ nos gemere facit, sicut dixit Deus, Nunc cognoui, quando
cognoscere hominem fecit.
the spirit is said to pray and groan, because he makes us to pray and
groan, so he says, that God is said to know, when as he makes us to know.
Jbid. lib. 1. Nunc cognovi id est, nunc cognoscere te feci. and de Genes. ad
lit. lib 4. cap. 9. feci vt cognosceretur.
Now I know then is as much as if he had said, Now I have made thee to know, or
I have made it to be known that thou fear me. M. Bishops argument then is
come to this, God made Abraham to know by his work in offering his son
Isaac, that he was one indeed that feared God; therefore Abraham was justified
by his works in the sight of God. But he will now convince all obstinate
cauilling, and to that end says, that it is said, that Abraham's faith in this
fact did cooperate with his works, and that the work made his faith perfect.
And what of that? This conjunction of them both together, does demonstrate that
he speaks of his justification before God. This is as he said before, just as
Germans lips, nine mile asunder. He ioineth faith and works together,
therefore he speaks of justification before God. The argument much better
serves us; If he had spoken of justification before God, as S. Paul does, he
would have spoken of faith only as he does: but because he ioineth faith and
works together, it plainly appears, that he speaks not of the same
justification, whereof S. Paul speaks, and therefore must be understood of
justification before men. Well, his friends are beholding to him for his good
will, but he is able to stand them in little steed. Yet to help the matter,
it is added, says he, and he was called the friend of God. But why did he not
allege the whole text, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness, and he was called the friend of God, and so conclude thereof,
therefore he was justified by his works in the sight of God? He might as well
infer it of the one as of the other; and if the one part of the sentence be
against his purpose, what sense was there in him to seek for it in the other?
The meaning is evident and plain, that it appeared by Abraham's obedience and
works, that it was not without cause said of him, Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed to him for righteousness, and that he was called the friend of
God. Mat. 12.33.
The tree is known by his fruits, and Abraham by his fruits is justified,
and proved to be a good tree. Now it is not hereby only declared, that he was
just before men, as this wrangler cauilleth, but it is hereby declared unto
men, that he truly believed, and by his faith was justified before God. To be
short, in the text there is not so much as one word, or piece of word, whereby
Master Bishop can make it good, that Saint James speaks of justification in
the sight of God. But because the text will not, Saint Austine is brought to
prove it, who speaks never a word to that effect. M. Bishop very lewdly
falsifieth his words, and makes him to say that which he does not say, nor
ever meant to say. He speaks the idle dreams of his own head, and
propounds them to his Reader under Saint Austines name. The very words of
Austin are these: August. lib. 83. quaest. 76. Non sunt sibi contrariae duorum
Apostolorum sententiae Pauli and Iacobi, cum dicit vnus iustificari hominem per
fidem absque operibus; and alius dicit manem esse fidem sine operibus, quia
ille dicit de operibus quae fidem praecedunt, hic de ijs quae fide^ sequuntur.
The sentences of the two Apostles Paul and James, are not contrary one to
the other, when the one says, that a man is justified by faith without works,
and the other says, that faith without works is vain, because the one
speaks of works that go before faith, the other of works which follow
faith. Here is no mention of first or second justification, not so much as the
name of justification by works, much less any expounding of the meaning of
it; not a syllable in all that Chapter, whence he should derive that meaning of
justification, which he sets down for Austins, to be made more and more
just. Nay, I remember not in my reading, that Austin any where in any meaning
affirms justification by works, but only in his Hypognosticon, the words
whereof are before handled: which work though we commonly cite under Austins
name, yet there is no man much conversant in Austin, but will easily conceive
by the phrase and style, that it is none of his, to say nothing, that in his
Retractations he makes no mention of it. The words that here he speaks out
of S. James are, that faith is vain without works, hereby willing it to be
understood, that though faith do justify without any works going before, yet
where it justifies, it has always good works thencefoorh accompanying it,
and that that faith which is not thus accompanied with good works, is not
August. de fide and oper. cap. 14. Salubris illa plancque Euangelica.
that healthful or saving health which the Gospel commends, nor does
justify him in whom it is: Lib. 83. quaest. vt supra. Nam iustificatus per
fidem non potest, nisi just deinceps operari, quamuis nihil antea operatus
just ad iustificationem peruenerit.
For he that is justified by faith, says he, cannot but thencefoorth work
righteously, though he attain to justification without having wrought any
thing righteously before. The intent that S. James had alleging the example
Abraham, he notes to be this, Fidem eius bonae opera consecuta esse demonstrat.
to show that good works ensued or followed his faith. The drift of his speech
is against them, who Qui sic acceperunt dictum (per fidem sine operibus) vt
putarent, cum semel in Christum credi dissent, etiamsi male operarentur and
flagitiose ac facinorose viuerent saluos se esse posse per fidem.
so took it to be said, (by faith without works) as that they thought, that
when once they had believed in Christ, albeit they wrought evil, and lived
wickedly and leudly, yet they might be saved by faith. The error of these men
he reformeth thus: Non ita intelligendum est vt accepta fide, si vixerit,
dicamus eum iustum etiamsi wale vixerit.
It is not so to be understood, (that a man is justified by faith without
works) as that having received the faith, if he live, we should call him just,
although he live amiss. By which phrase of receiving the faith it appears,
that there is only that faith here meant which consists in outward
profession and receiving of baptism, which is far from that faith to which
the holy Scripture attributes justification and salvation. In all which speech
S. Austin says nothing against us, nothing which we avouch not as well as he,
but only that under the name of justification, he contains not only
forgiveness of sins, wherein justification properly consists, but that also
which we distinctly call sanctification, consisting in the inward renewing of
us to holiness and righteousness, which the Scripture plainly distinguishes as
we do. In the other place alleged, he notably oppugneth that which M. Bishop
would feign maintain. He touches three things appertaining to our salvation,
which toward it, we have already attained; Predestination, vocation,
justification. Of this last he says, Aug. de ver. Apost. Ser 16. Quid est,
iustificari? Audemus dicere, ^am hoc tertium habere nos? Et erit quisquaem
nostrum qui audeat dicere, Iustus sum? Puto enim hoc esse, Justus sum, quod
est, Peccator non sum, si audes hoc dicere, occurrit tibi Ioannes, si
dixerimus, etc. Quid ergo? Nihil habemus de iustitia, an habemus? sed non totum
habemus. Hoc ergo quaramus, etc.
What is meant by being justified? Dare we say, that we have this third thing
already? And is there any man that dares say, I am just? for I think it to be
all one to say, I am just, as to say, I am no sinner. If thou be bold so to
say, S. John meets with thee, saying, If we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, etc. What then? have we nothing of righteousness, or have we? But
yet we have not all. Let us then seek after this: for if we have some part,
and some part we have not, let that increase which we have, and that shall be
supplied which we have not. He plainly confesses, that by that justification
which he speaks of, we have but somewhat of inherent righteousness, and that
we have still somewhat of sin, and therefore that we are not as yet so just
by that justification, as that thereby we may stand for just in the sight of
God, because we cannot stand for just in his sight before whom perforce we must
confess our selves to be sinners. But M. Bishop teaches far otherwise, as
we have seen before, that a man by baptism is made as void of sin as Adam
was in the state of innocence, and therefore has no need greatly to fear the
rigorous sentence of a just judge. Now of that righteousness that we have, S.
Austin says, that it is to grow and increase, that we Ibid. Grati simus ex eo
quod habemus, vt addatur quod non habemus*
are to be thankful for that we have, that that may be added which we have
not, etc. We teach in the like sort, but yet withal we teach as he does, that
it never so far increases in this life, but that it leaves us still to
confess our selves sinners, and therefore that it never brings us to that,
as that we can thereby be justified in the sight of God. This is the point.
Increase of inward and inherent righteousness we say there ought to be, and
is: no man doubts, no man makes question of it, but we deny that we merit
any justification by our works, or grow by our own righteousness, to be
reputed just before the judgment seat of God, neither does Saint Austine ever
affirm the same.

37 W. BISHOP.
Nothing then is more certain and clear, then that our justification may
daily be augmented: and it seems to me, that this also be granted in their
opinion. For they holding faith to be the only instrument of justification,
cannot deny, but that there are many degrees of faith, it is so plainly taught
in the word: O ye of little faith! Mat. 8. Luc. 19.
And then a little after, I have not found so great faith in Israel: and, O Lord
increase our faith, and many such like, where many different degrees of faith
are mentioned. How then can the justification which depends upon that faith not
be correspondent unto that diversity of faith, but all one? Again, Master
Perkins delivers plainly, Page 54.
That men at the first are not so well assured of their salvation, as they are
afterward: if then in the certainty of their salvation, which is the prime
effect of their justification, they put degrees, they must perforce allow them
in the justification it self. And thus much of this question. The objections
which Master Perkins makes for us in this Article, Page 201.
do belong either to the question of merits, or of the possibility of
fulfilling the law, or to the perfection of our justice: and therefore I remit
them to those places: and will handle the two latter points, before I come to
that of merits.

R. ABBOT.
That inherent righteousness may be increased we confess, but we deny that
our justification before God consists therein, but only in the merit and
obedience of Christ, which needs no increase, because it is fully absolute
and perfect in every respect in it self. But Master Bishop according to his
opinion, muffled in the mists of ignorance, tells us, that there must needs
be diverse degrees of justification in our meaning, because there are diverse
degrees of faith, and diverse degrees of assurance of salvation. But we answer
him, that that necessarily follows not, because although the instrument
whereby we receive, is in some stronger, and in some weaker, yet the thing
received is one and the same to both. The price of redemption in the shedding
of the blood of Christ, is one and alike to all and every faithful man, but
yet it is not alike apprehended by every one. There is perfect righteousness
required of us, and the same is yielded unto us in Christ. There may be a
difference in us, but Christ cannot be divided, neither is there in him any
difference from himself. Where he goes, he goes whole; and therefore what he
is to the strong, the same is he to the faint and feeble soul. There is
greater assurance and less assurance, but the matter whereof each does take
assurance, is the whole mercy of God in Christ.

38. W. BISHOP.
Whether it be possible for a man in grace, to fulfill Gods law.

Page 95.
MAster Perkins argues, that it is impossible: first, for that Paul took it
for his ground, that the law could not be fulfilled. Admit it were so. Gal. 5.
I then would answer, that he meant, that a man helped only with the knowledge
of the law, cannot fulfill the law: but by the aid of Gods grace, Romans 8.
he might be able to do it. Which I gather out of S. Paul, where he says,
that that which was impossible to the law, is made by the grace of Christ
possible.

2 Object. The lives and works of most righteous men, are imperfect and
stained with sin; ergo quid? Of this, there shall be a several Article.

3 Object. Our knowledge is imperfect, and therefore our faith, repentance, and
sanctification is answerable. I would to God all our works were answerable to
our knowledge, then would they be much more perfect then they are, but this
argument is also impertinent, and does rather prove it possible to fulfill the
law, because it is possible to know all the law. Then if our works be
answerable to our knowledge, we may also fulfill it.

4 Object. A man regenerate, is partly flesh, and partly spirit, and therefore
his best works are partly from the flesh. Romans 8.13.
Not so, if we mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, as the Apostle
exhorts.

R. ABBOT.
The denial of the possibility of keeping Gods commandment, or of fulfilling
the law is not absolutely meant. God forbid, that we should say, that God has
commanded any thing impossible to be done. We believe that Adam was created in
state to fulfill all the righteousness of the law. We believe that Christ in
our nature has fulfilled the same for us, and that we by Christ in the end
shall fully be restored to the perfection thereof. In the mean time also we
keep the commandments of God, and frame our lives according to the line and
rule thereof, and herein we labor and travel to grow and increase from day to
day: but we attain not to perfection here; that which we do is more in will
then in work; more in desire then in deed. In the midst of our righteousness
we condemn our selves of sin; we carry our uncleanness in our hands, and
thereby do yield confession thereof to the Lord: if we will say that we fulfill
the law, our own mouth shall condemn us, who accordingly as we are taught do
daily ask forgiveness for our transgressions of the law. There is no man so
long as he lives, but must confess, that he is too weak to the bearing of
that burden, and comes much short every manner of way of that, that is
required by the law. And this S. Paul took indeed for the ground of his whole
disputation against justification by the law. For rightly he says: Gal. 3.21.
If there had been a law given which could have given life, then righteousness
should have been by the law. He takes it for granted, that the law could not
give life, not because it was defective in it self, but because by our defect
we were not capable of the life that was offered thereby; even as the Sun
cannot give light to the blind, not for any want that is in it, but because the
blind has not means to make benefit and use of the light that most clearly
shines from the Sun. Which reason the Apostle more plainly declares
otherwhere, when he says, that Romans 8.3.
it was impossible for the law (namely, to justify and save us) because it was
weakened by the flesh. Whereby he signifies, that the default rests upon our
weakness and the corruption of our sinful flesh, whereby we are unable in any
sort to attain to that righteousness, and perfect integrity and innocence
that the law requires of us. Now if flesh do hinder the law from being able to
justify us, then so long as flesh continues, there must needs be still a
weakness of the law in that behalf. But so long as here we live there is
still Gal. 5.17.
the flesh lusting against the spirit, and Romans 7.23.
rebelling against the law of the mind. We can never therefore whilst we live
attain to the fulfilling of the law to be justified thereby. This remainder of
flesh does argue, that we have yet received the grace of God, but only in
part. It has begun to heal us, but a great part of our disease and weakness
continues still. We are therefore as yet but in part only enabled thereby to
fulfill the law, and if we keep it but in part, we keep it not so as to be
justified by the law, because by the sentence of the law, ^al. 3.10.
cursed is every man that continues not in all things that are written therein.
This meaning the Apostle plainly delivers, neither does M. Bishop gather any
other meaning from him, but by the corrupting of his words; alleging him, as
if he had said: That that was impossible to the law, is made by the grace of
Christ possible. But why does he put in that under the Apostles name, which the
Apostle does not say? he neither says, nor meant to say, that to fulfill the
law, is made possible by the grace of Christ, but rather that in Christ, that
justification is supplied unto us, which it is impossible should be yielded
unto us by the law. And how could he gather that meaning from him, when he
could not but know, that notwithstanding the grace of Christ, he affirms
still in part a remainder of that impediment by which it was impossible before
to fulfill the law. But of this text there will be further occasion to speak
in the three and fortieth section. The second reason alleged by M. Perkins
against the opinion of fulfilling the law, is that the lives and works of the
most righteous men are imperfect and stained with sin. M. Bishop very
quipperly demands, Ergo quid? he knew the ergo well enough, Ergo no man can
fulfill the law. For if the most righteous fail in that behalf, then it
follows, that generally all are excluded from that power. If all must
confess themselves to be imperfect, if all must acknowledge themselves to be
sinners, then all must confess, as I said before, that they fail of the
performance of the law. The connection would have been considered here, but M.
Bishop pretily passes it over under pretense of a several article, for the
handling of the proposition: what he says of that we shall see anon. M.
Perkins third reason is taken from the imperfection of our knowledge: for it
cannot be but our faith, our love, our repentance, our sanctification must be
imperfect, so long as we have but imperfect knowledge to direct us in all these
things. M. Bishops answer to this consists of two parts: the one whereof is
an acknowledgement against himself, the other, an assertion of apparent and
manifest untruth. I would to God, (says he) our works were answerable to our
knowledge, then would they be much more perfect then they be. He confesses
then, that our works are not perfect, according to that that we do know; and
if they be imperfect to that knowledge that we have, and our knowledge come
far short of that concerns us by the law, then must our works be very
far from perfection, and we far from being truly said to fulfill the law.
But M. Bishop according to his skill denies in the second part of his answer,
that our knowledge is imperfect, expressly contrary to that which the Apostle
says: 1. Cor 13.9.12
We know in part, we prophecy in part, we see through a glass darkely. We
find it and know it, that there are many ignorances and errors in the best.
August. de spir. and lit. ca. 36. In multis offendimus omnes, du^ putamus Deo
quem diligimus pl^e^re vel non displicere quod facimus, and postea cum
didicerimus, quod non placeat poenitendo deprecamur vt ignoscat.
We all (says S. Austine) offend in many things, whilst we think that that
which we do either pleases God, or does not displease him, when as afterward
we learn, that it is not pleasing unto him, and do repent thereof. Idem
soliloq. cap. 1. Quisquic cognoscit te, amat te plusqua^ se, relinquit se and
venit ad te, vt gaudeat de te. Hinc est, Domine, quod non tantum diligo quantum
debeo, quia non plene cognosco te. Quia parum cognosco, parum diligo, and quia
parum te diligo. parum gaudeo in te.
He that knows thee, (says he in another place) loves thee more then
himself, and leaves himself to come unto thee, that he may rejoice in thee.
Hence is it, Lord, that I love thee not so much as I ought to do, because I do
not fully know thee: because I know thee but a little I love thee but a little,
and therefore do but a little rejoice in thee. There is no man in this life
that knows himself, but knows well that he has cause to pray still with
the Prophet David: Psalm. 119.12.
Teach me thy statutes; Ver. 33.
teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes: Ver. 73.
give me understanding that I may learn thy commandments: Ver. 127.
grant me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies. If so great a Prophet
were still to be taught, were still to learn, were still begging of God the
understanding and knowledge of his commandments, how vain a man is M. Bishop
to make it so possible a matter for a man being yet covered in part with the
veil of flesh, to attain to the full and perfect knowledge of the law. Of
this argument he says, that it is impe^tinent, but gives no reason why he so
says. Saint Austine against the assertion of perfection in this life August.
de spir. and lit. cap. 36.
produces imperfection of knowledge, as an impediment thereof: and Hierome
says, Hier. ad Pela. lib 1. Nullus sanctorum in isto corpus^ulo cunctas potest
habere virtutes, quia ex part cognoscimus, etc.
that no man in this body can have all virtues, because we know but in part,
and prophecy but in part, and if imperfection of knowledge do hinder virtue,
and the perfect fulfilling of the law, how does he make it an argument
impertinent to say, Our knowledge is yet imperfect, therefore we are yet
imperfect to the fulfilling of the law. But we must pardon his imperfect
knowledge, which if it had bin according to his will, undoubtedly we should
have seen some more skill in his answers then now we do. M. Perkins fourth and
last reason is taken from that that before has bin said, that the regenerate
man in this life is still partly flesh, and not wholly spiritual, and
therefore his best works savor partly of the flesh. Not so, says M. Bishop,
if we mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit. But I answer him, Yes
even so, because though by the spirit we mortify the deeds of the flesh, yet
we do not thereby put off the flesh, nor so subdue it, but that it Gal. 5.17.
lusts against the spirit, so as that we cannot do the things that we would,
and therefore cannot fulfill the law. Now if we attain not to that that we
would, our will also being yet imperfect, so that we will not so perfectly as
we should, how far must we needs think our selves to be from that
integrity and uprightness, which we should perform according to the perfect
rule of righteousness that is laid before us in the law? But of this further
when we come to the point as touching the perfection, and purity of our works.

39. W. BISHOP.
But these trifling arguments belong rather unto the next question. I will
help M. Perkins to some better, that the matter may be more thoroughly
examined. Act. 1.15.
Why go ye about to put a yoke upon the Disciples necks, which neither we, nor
our Fathers were able to bear? these words were spoken of the law of Moses,
therefore we were not able to fulfill it.

I answer first, that that law could not be fulfilled by the only help of the
same law, without the further aid of Gods grace.

Secondly, that it was so burdensome and cumberous, by reason of the multitude
of their sacrifices, sacraments, and ceremonies, that it could hardly be kept
with the help of ordinary grace: and in that sense, it is said to be such a
yoke, as we were not able to bear. Because things very hard to be done, Ios.
11. 3. Reg. 14. Act. 13. 4. Reg. 23. Luke 1.
are now and then called impossible. Now that Iosue, David, Josias, Zachary,
Elizabeth, and many others, did fulfill all the law, is recorded in holy
Scripture: wherefore it is most manifest, that it might be kept.

R. ABBOT.
A more trifler then M. Bishop I think is seldom to be found. If M. Perkins
arguments were as trifling as he has given them answers, he might have done
well to have spared his labor bestowed in the writing of that book. Before he
have given any one good answer to the reasons only by the way alleged by M.
Perkins, he takes upon him to bring other of his own indeed out of our books,
that he may show himself as wise in answering the one, as he has done
already in the other. We are wont to allege the words of S. Peter, that Act.
15.10.
the law was a yoke which (says he) neither we nor our fathers were able to
bear. Whence even by the very words it must needs follow, that we are not able
to fulfill the law. M. Bishops answer is, that that law could not be fulfilled
by the only help of the same law, without further aid of Gods grace. As
though they had not the grace of God, who notwithstanding complained of the
law, as of a yoke too heavy for them to bear even in that state of grace.
Therefore we will say to M. Bishop, as Orosius did to the Pelagian heretic:
Oros. Apolog. de arbit. libert. Samuel, Elias, etc. Patres sine dubio nostri
sunt e^^neminem Patrum Petrus affirmat, sed neque semel ipsos, hoc est,
Apostolos cu^ essent Judaei ^nus legis far potuisse, sed fide Christi
secundum spem gratiae fuisse saluatos. An forte secundum te omnes isti sansti
Patres Dei adiutorium non habebant?
Samuel, Elias, Elizeus, Esaias, Jeremy, Daniel, Zachary, all those holy ones
either Judges or Kings, or Prophets were undoubtedly our Fathers, and Peter
affirms, that none of the Fathers, no nor themselves, that is, the Apostles
being Jews, could bear the burden of the law, but were saved by the faith of
Christ according to the help of grace. What, had not all these holy Fathers
think thou the hope of grace? Having then the help of the grace of God, yet
they still acknowledged the law to be a heavier burden, then that they were
able to stand under the weight thereof. To this purpose he urges the heretic
with that which is written in the law: Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. Oros. ibid.
Responde, non mihi sed Deo; non v^co sed conscientia, si ita ex toto cord Deum
diligis, vt nullam un quam in eo cogitationem quae absque timore and dilectione
Dei intelligi possit admittas: ita in tota anima sequeris, vt suscepta semel
cruce in nullam penitus oblectationem habita ad tempus i^cunditatu succedas,
etc.
Answer, says he, not to me but to God, not with thy voice, but with thy
conscience, whether thou so love God with all thy heart, as that thou never
admit any thought therein, that may be conceived to be without the fear and
love of God: whether thou so follow him with all thy soul, as that having once
undertaken the cross, thou be never carried for the time to fall into any
delight or contentment of pleasure, etc. Where as he shows how far it is
beyond our power to keep our selves within the lists and bounds of this
commandment: so he takes away M. Bishops second exception, that the law was
thus called a yoke, etc. in respect of the sacrifices, sacraments, and
ceremonies by the multitude, whereof he says, that it was so burdensome and
comberous, as that it could hardly be kept by the help of ordinary grace. For
if the law be there understood? which says, Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
etc. as Orosius declares, then it is false which M. Bishop says, that that
speech is to be referred to the ceremonies of the law. But the reader is well
to observe the manner of his speech: It could hardly be kept. It could then or
might be kept, though hardly be kept. No question then but some did keep it if
it might be kept. But the yoke of which S. Peter speaks, is such as none was
able to bear. It is not then to be understood of the ceremonies of the law.
And indeed there is no doubt, but that the ceremonial law, by ordinary grace
of God, as touching the outward practice thereof, might exactly be performed.
The multitude of those observations is equalled in the Romish Church, and yet
they have nimble fellows that can attain to all. But out of M. Bishops words
we will argue a minori ad maius; if the law of ceremonies were so heavy a
yoke, which consisted only in outward observations, how much heavier is that
that gives law to the whole man, to all his thoughts, and words, and deeds,
taking exception against any thing either inwardly or outwardly, whereby we
step aside from the rule thereof? And yet he as a man void of sense and
conscience, says of the ceremonies, that they could very hardly be observed:
but of the rest of the commandments, that they are very possible and easy to
be kept, as we shall see anon. In the mean time to prove it, he brings
example of diverse, who he says did fulfill all the law: but he is prevented
and bereaved of those examples by Cyprian, who says of all those excellent men
and Priests, and Prophets before Christ, that Cyprian. de Ieiun. and tent.
Christi Fuerant and ante Christum viri insignes, Prophetae, Sacerdotes, sed in
peccatis concepti and nati, nec originali nec personali caruere delicto, and
inuenta est in omnibus vel ignorantia vel insufficientia, in quibus erronei
peccauerunt and egu erunt misericor dia Dei. per qua^ edocti and restituti
gratias egeru^t Deo, and ad plenitudinem iustitiae multum sibi de esse confessi
sunt, and sperantes in Deo nullam sibi soliditatem attri buere praesumpserunt.
being conceived and borne in sins, they were neither without original nor
personal, fault, and there was found in them all either ignorance or
insufficiency, by which going astray they sinned and stood in need of the
mercy of God, by which being instructed and restored, they gave thanks to God,
and confessed that much was wanting unto them to perfection of righteousness,
and trusting in God presumed not to attribute any soundness to themselves. As
touching them all, we must answer the same that Saint Austine answered the
Pelagian heretics: August. de pec. mer. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. 14.
Scripturarum testimonijs quibus de illorum laudibus credimus, hoc etiam
credimus, non iustificari in conspectu Dei omnem vinentem, and ideo rogari ne
inire^ in iudicium cum seruis suis.
By the testimonies of the Scripture which we believe as touching their
commendations, we believe this also, that no man living shall be found just in
the sight of God, and that therefore he is requested not to enter into
judgment with his servants. Whereby what we mean when we request it, the same
S. Austin shows: Jdem de Tem. Ser 49. Nestes micum in iudicio exigendo a me
omnia quae praece pisti, and omnia quae iussisi^. Na^ me inuenies reu^, si in
iudicium iniraueris mecu^, etc.
Stand not with me in judgment, by exacting of me all that thou have
commanded, and all that thou have charged us. For thou shall find me guilty if
thou enter into judgment with me. This S. Austine makes the common confession
of all the servants of God, that they do not fulfill all, and M. Bishop says of
them whom he names, that they did fulfill all. The Pelagians alleged amongst
others, Zachary and Elizabeth, as M. Bishop does, because it is said of the^:
Luke 1.6.
Both were just before God, and walked in all the commandments and ordinances
of the Lord without reproof. S. Austin answers them, Aug. contra Pelag. and
Celest. lib. 1. cap 48. Dictum est quantu^ mihi videtur secundum quanda^ inter
homines conuersationem probabilem atque laudabilem, qua^ nullus hominum just
posset in accusationis and criminationis querelam vocare. Quam propterea in
conspectu Dei habu^sse referuntur, quia in ea homines nulla dissimulatione
fallebant, sed vt apparebant homi nibus, ita noti erant oculis Dei.
It is spoken as seems to me, as touching a commendable and prayseworthy
conversation amongst men, which no man could justly ca^ into quarrel of
accusation or crime. Which therefore they are said to have had before God,
because they therein did not deceive men by any dissimulation, but as they
appeared to men, so they were known to the eyes of God. Therefore he makes of
that which was said of them, no more but that which the Apostle says of
himself, Phil. 3.6
As touching the righteousness of the law I was vnrebukable, when as yet he
was not called to the grace of Christ. Aug. de pecca. mer. and remiss. lib. 2.
cap. 13. Quid de illis laudabile dictu^ est, quod non in eo comprehendatur quod
de se Apostolus cum in Christum non dum credidisset professus est, etc.
What commendable thing is spoken of the^, says he, which is not comprehended
in that which the Apostle professed of himself, when as yet he had not
believed in Christ, that according to the righteousness that is in the law, he
was without reproof. Oros. Apolog. de arbit. libert. Sine crimine dici
quenquam and sine querela non est perfectionis testimonium, sed conuersationis
ezemplum.
In being said in the Scripture to be without crime or reproof, says Orosius,
is not imported a testimony of perfection, but an example of conversation. It
is manifest therefore, that that which is written concerning them, is not to be
drawn to the auouching of that fulfilling of the law which M. Bishop here
defends for justification before God. Yea, and it is further to be noted,
that Zachary was a Priest, and the Priests manner was, Heb. 7.27.
first to offer sacrifice for his own sins, and then for the peoples.
Zachary therefore offered sacrifice for his own sins. But 1. Ioh. 3.4.
sin is the transgression of the law: if Zachary then were a transgressor of
the law, it is false that Master Bishop says, that he fulfilled the whole
law. Still therefore it stands good against all subuerters of truth, as
touching the moral law, that in respect of justification it is a yoke which
neither Iosue, nor David, nor Josias, nor Zachary and Elizabeth, nor any of
those others whom M. Bishop means have been able to bear, and therefore we
have nothing to rest upon, but only the faith of Jesus Christ to be justified
in him.

40. W. BISHOP.
Romans 7.
To will is in me, but I find not how to perform: If S. Paul could not
perform that which he would, how can others?

Answer. He speaks there of avoiding all evil motions and temptations, which
he would willingly have done, but he could not: marry he could well by the
assistance of Gods grace, subdue those prouocations to sin, and make them
occasions of virtue: and consequently keep all the commandments, not
suffering those passions to lead him to the breach of any one of them. The
like answer we make unto that objection, that one of the ten commandments
forbids us to covet our neighbors goods* his wife, or servants, which (as they
say) is impossible: but we hold, that it may be well done, understanding the
commandment rightly, which prohibiteth not to have ill motions of
covetousness and lechery, but to yield our consent unto them. Now it is so
possible for a man by Gods grace to refrain his consent from such wicked
temptations, that S. Augustine thinks it may be done of a mortified virtuous
man, Lib. 10. conf. cap. 7.
even when he is asleep: and testifies of himself, that waking he performed
it.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop has a good facility in propounding our arguments, but he has very
ill hap in answering of them. S. Paul would willingly have avoided all evil
motions, says he, but he could not. Therefore say we, he could not fulfill the
law. He could subdue those prouocations to sin, says he, and not suffer
them to lead him to the breach of any of the commandments. For what is it
whereof the Apostle says, as is alleged, Romans 7 18.
To will is present with me, but I find not how to perform that that is good?
It is even the commandment, whereof he has said before, Ver. 12.
The commandment is holy, and just, and good: for instance whereof and clearer
evidence, he sets down the commandment Ver. 7.
Thou shall no lust, which he still prosecuteth under the name of good. Paul
then confesses, that though he had a will to keep and fulfill the law, and
namely, the commandment, Thou shall not lust, yet he could not find means to
attain to that perfection, and why then does M. Bishop attribute to him, the
keeping of all the commandments, so as not to be led to the breach of any one
of them. August. de nupt. and concup. lib. 1. cap. 27. Lex non vult vt
concupiscam quae dicit, Non concupisces, and ego nolo co^cupiscere.
Concupiscere nolebat, and tamen concupiscebat.
The law would have him not to lust in that it says: Thou shall not lust; and
he was willing not to lust, but yet he did lust: how then should we say, that
he did fulfill the law? If the law forbid evil motions and prouocations, and it
is not possible for us to avoid them, or to free our selves from them, it must
follow, that it is not possible for us to fulfill the law. But we forsooth do
not understand the commandment rightly, which M. Bishop tells us, does not
prohibit evil motions of covetousness and lechery, but only consent unto
them. So then the law says, Thou shall not lust, but M. Bishop says, Yes,
thou may lust without any sin, but thou may not consent unto thy lust.
But far otherwise S. Austin says, that Idem Epist. 200. In iustitia nondum
consummata perseueranter proficientes ad eius consummationem quandoque veniemus
vbi peccati concupiscentia non cohibenda atque fraenanda, sed nulla sit. Hoc
enim posuit lex dicendo, Non co^cupisces.
the law in saying, Thou shall not lust, does set down that there shall be no
concupiscence to be restrained and bridled. Therefore he says: De Temp. Ser.
45. Plenitudo est virtutis, quod lex dixit, Ne concupiscas. Hoc modo impleri
non potest.
The perfection of virtue is that which the law says, Thou shall not lust:
this now (in this life) cannot be fulfilled. And again, Ibid. Ser. 49. Hoc
dicit legem implere, hoc est, non concupiscere. Quis ergo hoc, qui viuit potest?
To fulfill the law, is not to just: and who is there living that can so do? It
is manifest then by S. Austin, that that commandment requires a perfection,
which in this world we never are able to attain unto, because it does not
only forbid consent, but even the very having of any evil motions or
affections contrary to the law. And by those motions we do not only break
the commandment, Thou shall not lust, but we fail of yielding love to God
with all our heart, with all our soul, etc. because evil motions and lusts do
occupy some part of the heart and soul, and withhold the same from God.
Therefore S. Austin says again, Aug. de perf. just. Cum est aliquid
concupisce^tiae carnalis, quod vel continendo fraenetur, non omnimodo ex tota
anima diligitur Deus. Neque enim caro sine anima concupiscit, quamuis caro
concupiscere dicatur, quia carnaliter anima concupiscit.
so long as there is any part of carnal concupiscence by continency to be
bridled, God is not perfectly loved with all the soul: for the flesh lusts
not without the soul, although the flesh be said to lust, because the soul
lusts according to the flesh. Now therefore albeit it be true, that a man may
resist such evil motions, and deny consent unto them, yet is he not thereby
freed from transgression of the law. But yet M. Bishop falsely alleges S.
Austin to that purpose, who in the place August. Confess. lib. 10 cap. 30.
Saepe etiam in somnis resistimus, etc. Potens est manus tua abundantiore gratia
tua lasciuos motus etiam mei sopotu extinguere* etc Lugens in eo quod
incomsummatus sum, and sperans perfecturum te in me misericordias tuas vsque ad
pacem plenariam quam habebunt tecum interiora and exteriora meacum absorpta
fuerit mors in victoriam.
cited, not the seventh as he quoteth, but the thirtieth Chapter, affirms
indeed that sometimes men resist those concupiscences even in their sleep, that
it is in Gods power to make him always so to do. He signifies his longing
desire after that purity and perfection, but his expectation of it only then,
when death shall be swallowed into victory, howsoever God be able, if so it
were his pleasure, to give it even now also in the mean time. And indeed there
is no man living to whom can be attributed that perfection, to be altogether
and wholly free from consent of sinful lust. There is no man that fights so
warily, but that sometimes, yea many times he receives grievous wounds, and
finds cause to cry mournfully unto God for the cure thereof. A man resists
in one thing, and is overtaken in another; at one time he checketh those
corrupt desires, with which as nets he is strongly entangled at another. This
is the state of all flesh, and of this we have cause to complain, so long as
we live here.

41 W. BISHOP.
Iac. 3.2. 1. Joan. 1.
We do offend in many things: and if we say, we have no sin, we deceive our
selves. But if we could observe all the law, we should offend in nothing, nor
have any sin, ergo.

Answer. I grant that we offend in many things: not because it is not possible
to keep them, but for that we are frail, and easily led by the craft of the
devil into many offenses which we might avoid, if we were so wary and
watchful as we ought to be: again, although we cannot keep our selves from
venial offenses, yet may we fulfill the law, which is not transgressed and
broken, unless we commit some mortal sins. For venial sins, either for
the smalnesse of the matter, or want of consideration, are not so opposite to
the law, as that they violate the reason, and purport of it, although they be
somewhat disagreeing with it. But of this matter more fully in some other place.

R. ABBOT.
There is no doubt, but if all impediments were taken away, whereby we are
hindered from keeping the commandments of God, it should be possible enough
perfectly to fulfill the same. It is true which S. Austine says, that August.
de sp^ and lit, cap. 19. Non vitio suo non implebatur lex, sed vitio prudentiae
carnis.
it is not by any default of the law that we fulfill it not, but by default of
the wisdom of the flesh, which as the Apostle says, is Romans 8.7.
enmity against God, and is not subject unto the law of God, nor indeed can
be. We are by our frailty led into many offenses, (says M. Bishop) and we
might avoid the same, if we were so wary and watchful as we ought to be. But
so long as this frailty hangs upon us, and by the weakness and corruption
of flesh, we are not so wary and watchful as we ought to be, why does he
attribute unto us a power and ableness to fulfill the law? And what is that
that he says, but even the device of the Pelagian Heretics, who affirming,
Hieron. Epist. ad Ctesiphont. Hominem posse esse sine peccato, si velit, etc.
Cum ab eis quaerimus, qui sint quos absque pe^cato putent noua stropha eludere
cupiunt veritatem se non eos dicere qui sint vel fuerint, sed qui esse possint.
that a man may be without sin if he will, and being demanded who they were
whom they took to be without sin, by a wily shift answered, that they said
not what men are, or what they have been, but what they may be. Even thus M.
Bishop being urged by the confession of the Apostles themselves, that in many
things we all offend and sin, that is, do trespass and break the
commandments of God, confesses it to be true, but yet notwithstanding says*
that it is impossible to keep them. But as Hierome answered the Pelagia^s, so
we answer him, Jbid. Qua est argumentatio ista posse esse quod nunquam fuerit?
Posse fieri quod nullum fecisse testeris? dare nescio cui quod in Patriarchis
and Prophetis, and Apostolis fuisse nequeas approbare?
What a reason is this, that that is possible to be which never was, and may be
done, which thou bear witness that never any man did, and to give to every
man that which in the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, thou art not able
to make good? To be short, as it is not possible for a man being feeble, and
weak, and sick, to bear a burden, which notwithstanding being recovered and
fully cured, he can bear with ease: so it is not possible for us, so long as
we are compassed about with corruption and frailty, to observe and keep the
law and righteousness thereof, which yet being delivered from all bondage of
corruption and sin, we shall easily attain unto. His second shift is as
absurd as the former, that though we cannot keep our selves from venial
offenses, yet we may fulfill the law, because it is not broken but by mortal
sins. But the law it self says, Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the law to do them. Therefore concerning all sins the sentence of
the Apostle must stand good, that Romans 6.23.
the wages of sin is death. So our Savior Christ testifies, Mat. 5.19.
He that breaks one of the least of these commandments, and teaches men so,
he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, that is, says S.
Austin, August. in Joan. tract. 122. Consequens est, vt qui minimus est in
regno coel^rum, non intr^t in regnum coel^rum.
he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. But we will demand of M.
Bishop, are those venial sins forbidden by the law or not? If they be not
forbidden, then they are no sins: for Romans 4 15.
where there is no law, there is no trespass, and Aug. de piece. mer. and rem.
lib. 2 cap. 16. Neque peccatum erit si quid erit, si non diuiuitus ^ubeatur vt
non sit.
sin shall be no sin, if God do not forbid the being of it. But if they be
forbidden, how does he say, that to do them is no transgression of the law? for
what is it but a transgression of the law to do that which the law forbids
to be done? The Apostle says, that Romans 3.20.
by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Venial sins then by the law are
known to be sins: how are they known to be sins by the law, but that they
violate the reason and purport of the law. But let S. John here stop M. Bishops
mouth: 1. Ioh. 3.4.
Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the law; for sin is the
transgression of the law. Venial sin (as he terms it) is sin; therefore
venial sin is the transgression of the law: he therefore that commits
only those which he calls venial sins, cannot be said to fulfill the law.

42. W. BISHOP.
Lastly, it may be objected, that the way to heaven is straight, and the gate
narrow: which is so true, that it seems impossible to be kept by flesh and
blood: but that which is impossible to men of themselves, is made possible and
easy too, by the grace of God: which made Saint Paul to say: Phil. 4. Psalm.
118.
I can do all things in him, that strengthens and comfort me: and the
Prophet David, After thou (O Lord) had dilated my heart (and with thy grace
set it at liberty) I did run the ways of thy commandments: that is, I did
readily and willingly perform them. Of the loving of God with all our heart,
etc. shall be treated in the question of the perfection of justice.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop makes the commandments of God, not only possible, but
possible and easy too. But I answer him again, as Hierome did the Pelagian
heretic: Hier. ad Ctefiphont. Facilia dicis Dei esse mandata, and tamen
nullum proferre potes qui vniuersa compleuerit. Responde mihi, facilia sunt, an
difficilia? si facilia, profer quis impleuerit, and cur Dominus in Euangelio,
Intrate, inquit, per angustam portam? sin autem difficilia, cur ausus es
dicere, facilia esse Dei mandata quae nullus impleuerit?
Thou say, the commandments of God are easy, but yet thou bring forth
no man that has fulfilled them all. Tell me, says he, are they easy, or are
they hard to be done? If they be easy, show us who has fulfilled them, and
why our Savior says in the Gospel, Enter in at the strait gate? But if they
be hard, why do thou dare to say that the commandments of God are easy
which no man has fulfilled? Thus Hierome plainly excepteth against his answer
to those words of Christ; for they to whom Christ speaks those words, were
and are men endued with the grace of God, and yet he gives them to understand,
that the gate of life shall be strait and narrow unto them. Therefore S.
Austine says, that Aug. de praedest. and great. ca. 9 Arduum est virtutis iter,
and quanqua^ adiuua^te gratia Dei non sine labor gradiendum.
the way of virtue is hard, and though the grace of God do help, yet is not to
be traueled without labor and pains. Now if it be so hard a matter, and so
full of travail and pains, to compass that Jdem cont. 2. epist. Pelag lib.
3. ca. 7. Ista parua iustitia. Et epist. 200. Iustitia nondum co^summata.
small and imperfect righteousness which here we have, is it an easy matter
with M. Bishop, to atchieue that absolute and perfect righteousness that is
described in the law? Some help he thinks to have in that the Apostle says;
Phil. 4.13.
I am able to do all things in Christ, or by the help of Christ that
strengthens me. But the Apostle himself excludes him from that help, in
that he so plainly testifies of himself, that he could not find how to
perform the good that he would, as we have seen before, yea and tells us,
that though the spirit be in us lusting against the flesh, yet by reason of the
Gal. 5.17.
flesh lusting against the spirit, we cannot do the things that we would. He
that could do all things, yet could not repel the 2. Cor. 12.7.
buffeting Angel of Satan, by whom he was grievously afflicted, nor was
thought able to withstand the temptations of pride and vain glory, upon the
abundance of his revelations, as appears in that, this sting of Satan was
occasioned to bridle him therefrom. The place it self plainly shows the
meaning of it self, that he was enabled to all things, that is, to the
enduring of all things that co^cerned him in the service that he had in hand,
that neither abounding nor wanting neither fullness nor hunger should hinder
him from going on therein for the preaching and testifying of the Gospel, and
for enlarging and co^firming of the Church of Christ, accordingly as elsewhere
he says, 2. Tim. 2.10.
I suffer all things for the elects sake. But the restraint that Bernard uses
is not to be omitted. Bernard. de dilig. Deo. In illo omma potest quae tamen
poss^ prosit.
He is able to do all things, that is, all which it is behoouefull that he be
able to do. Now what is behoouefull, it is not for M. Bishop to presume, but
for God himself to determine, who has not thought fit to bring us to
perfection in this life, that he may have the whole glory of our salvation in
the life to come. The words of David are as little helpful unto him, Psalm. 119.
I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou have set my heart at
liberty. So far as we are at liberty, so far we run, and so fast we
run. But we attain not to that liberty yet, but that being Romans 7.23.
holden captive to the law of sin which is in our members, we have still
cause to cry, 24.
Who shall deliver us (or set us at liberty) from this body of death? 2. Cor.
3.17.
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. We have received as yet
only Romans 8.23.
the first fruits of the spirit. We have yet therefore but the first fruits
of liberty, and there is still remaining somewhat Heb. 12.1.
that presses down, and sin hanging fast on, so that we cannot run
without much hinderance and many falls, and the Mat. 26.41.
willingness of the spirit finds always a let by the infirmity and
weakness of the flesh.

43. W. BISHOP.
Having now confuted all that is commonly proposed to prove the impossibility
of keeping Gods commandments, let us now see what we can say in proof of the
possibility of it: First, S. Paul is very plainly for it, saying: That which
was impossible to the law, in that is weakened by the flesh, God sending his
Son in the similitude of flesh, of sin, damned sin in the flesh, that the
justification of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to
the flesh, but according unto the spirit. See how formally he teaches, that
Christ dying to redeem us from sin, purchased us grace to fulfill the law,
which before was impossible unto our weak flesh. Again, how far S. John was
from that opinion, of thinking Gods commandments to be impossible, Cap. 5.
may appear by that Epistle: And his commandments be not heavy. Which is
taken out of our Saviors own words: My yoke is sweet, Math. 11.
and my burden is light. The reason of this is, that although to our corrupt
frailty, they be very heavy: yet when the virtue of charity is powered into our
hearts by the holy Ghost, then lo, do we with delight fulfill them. For as the
Apostle witnesses: Charity is the fullness of the law. Romans 13.
And, He that does love his neighbor, has fulfilled the law: Math. 22.
Which Christ himself, teaches, when he affirms, That the whole law and
Prophets depend upon these two commandments, of loving God, and our
neighbor. Now both according unto our opinion and the Protestants, a man
regenerate and in the state of grace, has in him the virtue of Charity: we
hold it to be the principal part of inherent justice: they say that their
justifying faith can never be separated from it: so that a righteous man, being
also endued with charity, is able thereby to fulfill the whole law. Let us
adioyne unto these Authorities of holy write, the testimony of one ancient
Father or two; S. Basil affirms: That it is impious and ungodly, Sermon. in
illud. Attend tibi.
to say that the commandments of the spirit be impossible.

S. Augustine defines, That we must believe firmly, De not. and gra. cap. 69.
that God being just and good, could not command things that be impossible for
us to fulfill: The reason may be, that it is the part of a tyrant, and no true
lawmaker, to comma^^d his subjects to do that under pain of death, which he
knows them no way able to perform: for those were not to be called laws,
(which are to direct men, to that which is just) but snares to catch the most
diligent in, and to bind them up to most assured perdition. Wherefore it was
afterward decreed in an approved Council of Aransican, as an article of
faith, in these words: 2. Can. vlt.
This also we believe according to the Catholic faith, that all men baptized
by grace there received, with the help and cooperation of Christ, can, and
ought to keep and fulfill those things which belong to salvation. The
principal whereof are after our Saviors own determination, to keep the
commandments: If thou will enter into life, Math. 1^.
keep the commandments.

This by the way concerning the possibility of fulfilling the law.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop has a good opinion of that that he has done, and if his fellows
do not accept it accordingly, no doubt but he will think they do him great
wrong. As for us we may by his leave think that that we see, that he has
babled much, and said as good as nothing, and that he is far from being a man
to take upon him the confuting of any thing that is defended on our part. But
now leaving his confutation, he goes in hand with proof of a possibility in
us to fulfill the law. And first he alleges to that purpose the words of S.
Paul in some part handled before, Romans 8.3.
That that was impossible to the law, inasmuch as it was weak because of the
flesh, God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the justification or righteousness of
the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit. Now of this place he says, that it formally teaches that Christ dying
to redeem us from sin, did purchase us grace to fulfill the law which before
was impossible to our weak flesh. But he is still so full of formality, that
we can find little matter in any thing that he says. How has Christ
purchased grace for us to fulfill the law in that sense as here we speak of
fulfilling the law, when as the grace of Christ does still leave, remaining in
us a weakness of flesh, to which the Apostle says, it is a thing impossible
to fulfill the law. All M. Bishops teeth cannot untie this knot. If weakness
of flesh hinder the fulfilling of the law, then so long as we live here the
grace of Christ never puts us in state to fulfill the law, because it never
takes from us the weakness of the flesh. His commentary therefore is
nothing worth, and because it is but his own, we make very small account or
reckoning of it. The cause of our not fulfilling the law continues still, and
therefore we must refer the benefit here expressed to some other thing, then
our fulfilling of the law. That the Apostle notes first in saying, that Christ
condemned sin, comparing it thereby to a prisoner, a robber or murderer
brought to the bar, and there receiving sentence of condemnation and death,
that thenceforth it should be bereaved of all action or accusation, of all plea
or power against us. This Christ has done for us by purchasing for us the
forgiveness of sins, whereby Romans 4.6.
the Lord imputes righteousness without works, because as S. Austine says,
Aug. Retra^t. lib. 1. ca. 19. Omnia Dei manda^a facta deputa^tur quando
quicquid non fit ignoscitur.
All the commandments of God are reputed to be done, when that that is not
done is pardoned. Now when all the commandments of God are reputed to be
done, the justification of the law is fulfilled in us. For what is the
justification of the law, but the justification which the law might seem to
intend and propound unto it self, that we might be acquitted of sin, and
accepted unto life. Thus the ancient Fathers expound it for Theophylact. in
Romans ca. 8. Iustificatio laegis, id est, exitus ipse and destinatio.
the scope, the end, the thing destinated by the law, which when the law could
not attain unto, Christ performed it unto us by the forgiveness of our
sins. Theodoret. ibid. Nostrum debitum exoluit and legis scopum perfecit.
He paid our debt, says Theodoret, and performed that which was the scope of
the law. Oecumen. ibid. Quis est finis legu? Vt non essemu^ maledictio^^
obnoxij. Per Christum quide^ in effectu^ deductus est in nobis legis scopus.
What was the end of the law, says Oecumius? That we should not be subject to
the curse. By Christ then that which was the scope of the law, was brought to
effect in us. So Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ibid. hom. 13. Quae legis erat
^ustificacio non esse execrationi obnoxium, id tibi perfecit Christus.
That which was the justification of the law, not to be subject to the curse,
Christ has effected unto us. Last of all Ambrose says, Ambros. ibid. Quomodo
impletur in nobis iustificatio nisi cu^ datur remissio omnium peccatorum?
How is the justification of the law fulfilled in us, but when there is given
unto us forgiveness of all our sins? The Apostle therefore by the
justification of the law, understands not inherent righteousness, but
signifies that that justification which the law intended, but through our
default could not make good unto us, by inherent righteousness Christ has
performed, in purchasing for us forgiveness of sins, by which we are reputed
just and blameless in Gods sight, and accepted to be inheritours of
everlasting life. Now S. Ambrose to the former words adds, Ibid. Vt sublatis
peccatis iustificatus appareat mente seruiens legi De^.
That a man being justified by the taking away of his sins, may appear in
his mind serving the law of God, whereby he notes that to justification by
forgiveness of sins, is adioined regeneration to inherent righteousness,
which he calls afterward Ibid. Signu^ iustification^ hoc est in homine, vt
per id quod inhabitat in eo, iustificatus appareat esse filius Dei.
a sign of justification. And this we deny not, but do always most
religiously teach the same; only we deny that this is that, wherein
consists our justification before God, but it is a sequel and sign thereof,
and we never attain to the perfection of it whilst we live here. And if we
will either directly or indirectly understand it in these words, we must take
thereof that which S. Austine says, that Aug. de sp and lit ca. 36. Sic
operatur iustificationem in sanctis suis in huius vita tentatione laborantibus
vt tame^ sit and quod pete^tibus largiter ad^ciat et quod co^fitentibus
cleme^ter ignoscat.
God so works in his Saints, laboring in the temptation of this life, as
that there is yet for him largely to add unto them asking or craving of him,
and mercifully to pardon them when they confess it unto him; yea, so as the
same S. Austine elsewhere says, Idem de ciu. Dei. li. 19. cap. 27. Ipsa
iustitia nostra tanta est in hac vita vt potius remissione peccatorum constet
quam perfectione virtutum.
as that our righteousness in this life rather consists in forgiveness of
sins, then in perfection of virtues. Now therefore though the place be
understood of inherent righteousness, yet it makes not for M. Bishops turn,
because it proves only, that Christ shall restore us to the perfect
righteousness of the law, which we affirm, that he begins in this life, and
shall fully accomplish in the life to come; but it proves not that which he
desires, that in this life we are enabled by the grace of Christ, to the
perfect fulfilling of the righteousness of the law. To the other places that
he alleges, that the commandments of God are not heavy; that the yoke of
Christ is easy, and his burden light, he himself in effect sets down the
answer. To our corrupt frailty, says he, they be very heavy. True; and
therefore so long and so far as this corrupt frailty continues, so long and
so far the commandments of God are still heavy unto us, which must needs
be till that which 1. Cor. 15.42* 43.
shall be sowed in corruption and weakness, shall be raised again in
incorruption and power. When the virtue of charity, says he, is powered into
our souls, then we do with delight fulfill them. True, so far forth as
charity is powered into our souls. But so long as there is carnal
concupiscence, there cannot be perfect charity to take full delight in the law
of God, because Aug. cont. Iuli^n. lib 4. cap. 2. Inqua^ ^m inest nocet a^
minuendam spirituale^ dele^^ationem sanctaru^ m^ntium, illam scilicet de qua
dicit Apostolus: Condelector legi Dei, etc.
carnal concupiscence even by very being in us, as S. Austine says, does
abridge or diminish that spiritual delight of holy minds, of which the Apostle
says, I delight in the law of God, as touching the inner man. Jdem de perfect.
iustit. Rat. 8. Tunc erit plena iustitia, qua^do plena sanitas: tunc plena
saenitas quendo plena charitas; tunc plena charitas quando videbi mus sicuti
est.
Then shall be perfect righteousness, says he again, that is perfect keeping
of the commandments of God, when there shall be perfect health; then perfect
health, when perfect charity: then perfect charity, when we shall see him as he
is. In the mean time love keeps the commandments of God, but yet
imperfectly, because it self is but imperfect, even as a lame man goes, but
yet halteth ^n his going. To be short, the same S. Austine well observes, that
Ide^ de not. and great. cap. 69. Co^sideret no^ potuisse diuinitus dici, grauia
non sunt nisi quia potest esse cordis affectus cui grauiae non sunt.
God could not have said that his commandments are not heavy, but that there
may be an affection of heart to which they are not heavy. Therefore Ibid.
Conuersus quisque ad Dominum Deu^ suum ex toto cord suo et ex tota anima suae
mandatum Dei non haebebit grave.
when a man shall be converted unto God with all his heart, and with all his
soul, he shall find the commandment of God not heavy unto him. But that
affection, that conversion is yet but begun. So long as concupiscence
possesses any part of the soul, all the soul is not yet converted unto God.
Very vainly therefore does M. Bishop deal, when from that which we have yet
but in part for the fulfilling of the law, he infers the fulfilling of the
whole law. But to make up the matter, he brings some authorities of the
ancient Church, as much to his purpose as that that he has said already. That
that Basil says, Basil. in illud, Attend t^bi. Jmpiu^ est dicere spiritus
praecepta seruari no^ posse.
that it is impious to say, that the commandments of the spirit cannot be
observed (for so the words are) is spoken of those things, which by no means
can be done. As where the spirit says, Look to thy self, if a man will
expound it of bodily looking and viewing of himself, it is that that cannot be
done. For the eye as he says cannot see it self, it cannot see the head, nor
the back, nor the face, nor into the bowels. Now it were wickedness, as he
says, to say that the spirit commands any thing in this sort. But we say
not so of the commandments of God; for we teach that by the grace of Christ
we fulfill them in part already, and shall do it perfectly when the impediment
which is the remainder of original corruption shall be done away. But so long
as the Gal. 5.17.
flesh lusts against the spirit, so that we cannot do the things that we
would, so long it is impossible for us to observe the righteousness of the
law, according to the full measure and perfection thereof. Hereby the answer is
plain to the place that he alleges out of Austine. For we believe that God
has not commanded any thing impossible, meaning as he does, absolutely and
wholly impossible. We say as he says, Aug. de sp. and lit. cap. 35. Sieve
exemplo est in hominibus perfecta iustitia and tamen impossibilis non est.
Fi^ret enim, si tanta voluntas adhiberetur quanta sufficit tantae res. Effet
autem tanta si and nihil eorum quae pertinent ad iustitia^ nos lateret, and ea
sic delectarent animu^, vt quicquid aliud sieve voluptas sieve dolor impedit
delectatio illa superaret. Quod vt non sit non ad impossibilitatem sed ad
iudicium Dei pertinet.
There is no example of perfect righteousness amongst men, and yet it is not
impossible. For it might be performed if there were so great will put to it as
is sufficient for so great a matter. And there should be so great will, if on
the one side nothing were hidden from us of those things which belong to
righteousness, and on the other side the same did so delight the mind, as that
that delight did overcome all other impediments of pleasure or pain. Which
that it is not so, is not to be referred to any impossibility of the thing, but
to the judgment of God. Ibid. cap. 36. Nullo modo dicendum est Deo deesse
possibilitatem, qua voluntas sic adiunetur humana vt iustitia omni ex part
modo perficiatur in homine. Quando quidem si nunc velit in qucqua^, etiam hoc
corruptibile induere incorruptionem, atque hic inter homines morituros eum
iubere viuere minime morituram, vt tota penit^^ vetustate consumpta nulla lex
in membris eius repugnet legi mentis deumque vbique praesentem ita cognoscat.
sicut eum sancti postea cognituri sunt, quis demens audeat affirmar^ non posse?
Sed quare non faciat, etc. est aliquid in abdito and profundo iuditiorum Dei,
vt etiam iustorum omne os obstruatur in laud sua, and non aperiatur nisi in
laudem Dei.
For God, as he says afterward, wants not power so to assist the will of
man, as that even now righteousness may in every sort be made perfect in him.
And if it were the will of God that even now this corruptible in any man should
put on incorruption, and he would appoint that he should live here immortal
amongst mortal men, so as that all oldnesse being utterly consumed, there
should be no longer any law in the members to rebel against the law of the
mind, and that he should so know God as the Saints hereafter shall know him,
who would be so mad as to affirm that God cannot do it? But why he does it
not, somewhat there is in the secrecy and depth of his judgment, that every
mouth even of the just may be stopped in their own praise, and not be opened
but to the praise of God. Thus therefore the commandments of God are not
impossible to be done, because God can make us able perfectly to fulfill the
same. Yea, it is in his power even in this life to bring us to this perfection,
if it were his will and pleasure so to do. But in his wisdom he has thought
good to give us in this life only some taste and beginnings thereof, whereby we
very well see and understand, that there is no impossibility in the rest. The
reason why he does so is, because he will have us, yea even the most just and
righteous of us, fully to understand by our defects, that our salvation is not
of our merits or works, but only of his mercy. But in his due time he will
give us fully to be satisfied with that righteousness, with the taste only
whereof he now provoke rather then asswageth our hunger and thirst. Even
Ibid. Primum praeceptu^ iustitiae quo iutemur diligere Deum ex toto cord, etc.
in illa vita complebimus cum videbimus faecie ad faciem. Sed ideo nobis hoc
etiam nunc praeceptum est vt admoneremur quid fide exposcere, quo spe^
praemittere, et obliuiscendo quae retro sunt, in quae anteriora extendere
debeamus.
that great commandment of righteousness to love the Lord our God with all
our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, whereto is consequent that
other of loving our neighbor as our self, we shall fulfill in that life when
we shall see face to face. But therefore even now is that commanded unto us,
that we should thereby be advertised what to ask and pray for in faith, to
what to send our hope before us, and to what to follow hard forward, forgetting
that that is behind. Now therefore as it is most easy for a man that has
sound and perfect eyes to discern the light, which yet is impossible for him
that is blind, so long as he continues so; so when God shall perfectly
restore us to our spiritual health and strength, it shall be easy and
delightful unto us, to keep all the righteousness which God has commanded,
but so long as we continue in this weakness and frailety, we can by no means
be said to attain to the perfection of the law. But here M. Bishop vnstringeth
his tongue against God, and faith that it is the part of a tyrant, not of a
true lawmaker to command his subjects to do that upon pain of death, which he
knows them no way able to perform. A silly foolish man, that by his
brainsicke fancies measures the wisdom and righteousness of God, and takes
upon him presumptuously, to give law unto God in what sort he shall make laws
for men. But God is able in this behalf to acquit himself, Romans 3.4.
that he may be justified in his sayings, and found clear when he is judged.
For the just God was not in making of laws, to regard man's ableness but his
own righteousness, and therefore to forbid all sin, that he might not seem
to approve any, and to command all righteousness, that he might not seem to
neglect any. It should not have been known to be sin which he had not
regarded to forbid, nor taken for righteousness which he had not vouchsafed to
command. Was it fit that the rule of righteousness should have been abridged
in favor of man's sin, when the want of power to fulfill the law, was not by
Gods default in creating man, but by man's disabling himself in turning away
from God? But M. Bishops folly and ignorance appears herein very plainly, for
that the Scripture teaches us that the use of the law, we not being able to
fulfill it, was to be Gal. 3.24.
our Schoolemaister to train us unto Christ. God had not any opinion in giving
the law of our performance thereof, but he intended it to be as a glass for us
to see our selves, and to conceive thereby our own estate, that finding our
selves to be miserable and utterly lost in our selves, we might the more
readily accept of the salvation that is freely offered unto us by Jesus Christ.
Thus says the Apostle again, Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes.
Therefore S. Austine says, that Aug. de not. and great. cap. 12. Haec est
intentio legis arguentu vt propter ea quae perperam fiu^t confugiatur ad
gratiam Domini misera^tis, etc. vbi et remittantur quae male fiunt and eade^
gratia iuuante no^ fiant.
the intent of the law reproouing us is this, to make us for our misdoings to
fly to the grace of the merciful God, where what we do amiss may be
pardoned, and by the help of the same grace may not be done. To some part
whereof we are come already by repentance and amendment of life, and
mortification of fleshly lusts, but yet not so, but that still we do many
things amiss, and stand in need of pardon. The law in the mean time serves
us for a pattern of true righteousness, teaching us what we are to strive
unto, what the purity is whereunto God has called us, that though in the
prison of corruptible flesh, we cannot fully answer the same, yet we may still
be laboring toward it, sighing and groaning at that infirmity and disease
that hinders us from it, praying instantly unto God to bring us to it, that
his grace and mercy may in the end make us partakers of our desire, and
thenceforth we may never do amiss. Jdem de perfect. iustit. Rat. 17. Cur non
praeciperetur homini ista perfectio quamuis eam in hac vita nemo habeat? No^
enim recte curritur si quo currendum est nesciatur. Quomodo aute^ sciretur si
nullis praeceptis ostenderetur?
Why should not this perfection be commanded to man, says Austine, although
no man have it in this life? For we cannot run aright, if we know not to what
to run. And how should we know if by no commandments it were declared unto
us? Again he says: De great. and lib. arbit. cap. 16. Magnu^ aliquid Pelagians
se scire putant qua^d^ dicunt, Non iuberet Deu^ quod sciret ab homine non posse
fieri.
The Pelagians (he might have said the Papists) think they know some great
matter when they say, God would not command that which he knew could not be
done by man. Let M. Bishop take knowledge of his objection used of old by the
Pelagian heretics. S. Austine answers, Quis hoc nesciat? sed ideo iubet
aliqua quae non possumus vt sciamus quid ab illo petere debeamus. Ipsa est
fides quae orando impetrat quod lex imperat.
Who knows not so much? But therefore does he command some things which we
cannot do, that we may know what we are to ask of him. It is faith which by
prayer obtains that which the law commands. The commandments of God then
are not impossible; for if they were impossible, we could never hope to attain
to the keeping of them. But now we pray unto God that he will, and according to
his promise we believe that he will bring us to that state of innocence and
perfection, wherein we shall fully answer the image of perfect righteousness,
which is set before us in the law. In the mean time there is a let that
hinders us, and holds us back, that it is not possible for us so long as
it continues, to do those things which yet are possible to be done. The
Arausican Council says nothing of fulfilling the law, but speaks generally
of doing those things which belong to salvation. Now to our salvation it
belongs to know and confess, that Romans 3.20.
by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God. To
our salvation belongs an humble acknowledgement of our unableness to
satisfy the law, true repentance of our sins, the faith of Jesus Christ,
that by him and in him we may have supply of that wherein we are found
defective by the law. In a word, it is the way to exclude us from salvation, to
place our affiance and trust of obtaining the same in our fulfilling of the
law, the Apostle telling us, that Gal. 3.10.
so many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse, because it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the book of the law to do them, whereas Eccles. 7.22.
there is not a man just upon earth that does good, and sins not. The words
of Christ, Mat. 19.17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, were spoken to the
young man, to the same end to which the law generally was given, to give him
occasion to measure and know himself by the commandments, that so he might
seek the way of salvation in Christ, which in the law being a transgressour
thereof, he could not find. But of these words enough has been said before in
the question of Cha. 3. Sect. 3.
the Certainty of Salvation. For conclusion of this point, to quit M. Bishop,
I will allege the words of S. Bernard; Bernard in Cant. ser. 50. Non latuit
praeceptore^ praecepti pondu^ humanas excedere vi^es, sed iudicauit vtile ex
hoc ipso suae ipsos insufficientiae admoneri, et vt scirent sane ad que^
iustitiae fine^ niti pro virib^s oporteret. Ergo mandando impossibilia non
praeuaricatores fecit sed humiles, vt omne os obstruatur and subditus fiat to
tus mundus Deo. Accipie^tes quippe mand^tum and sentientes defectum clamabimus
in coelum and miserebitur nostri Deus, and s^temus in die illa quia non ex
operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos sed secundum miserecordiam suam saluos nos
fecit.
It was not unknown to the commander, that the weight of the commandment
does exceed the strength of man; but he held it expedient, that hereby men
should be aduertized of their own insufficiency, and that they should know to
what end of righteousness they should labor to their vtte^most. Therefore by
commanding things impossible to us, he has not made us trespassers, but
humbled us, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may be made
subject to God. For receiving the commandment, and feeling our own defect
and want, we shall cry to heaven, and God will have mercy upon us, and we shall
know at that day, that not for the works of righteousness which we have done,
but of his own mercy he has saved us. In which words he gives us to
understand, that God had reason sufficient to give the law, though he knew it
impossible for us in this state of mortality and weakness, perfectly to
fulfill the law.

44. W. BISHOP.
Now that just men's works be not sins: which I prove first, That good works
be not stained with sin.
by some works of that pattern of patience, Job: Of whom it is written, that
notwithstanding all the devils power and craft in tempting of him, He continued
still a single hearted and an upright man, Cap. 2.
departing from evil, and preserving his innocence. If he continued an
innocent, he sinned not: Again, if in all these instigations to impatience, he
remained patient: these his works were perfect. For S. James says, Esteem it
my brethren all joy, Cap. 1.
when you shall fall into diverse temptations: knowing that the probation of your
faith works patience: And let patience have a perfect work, that you may be
perfect and entire, failing in nothing.

2. King David thus by the inspiration of the holy Ghost speaks of himself,
Thou have (O Lord) proved my heart, Psalm. 16.
thou have visited me in the night, thou have tried me in fire, and there was
no iniquity found in me. It must needs then be granted, that some of his
works at least were free from all sin and iniquity. And that the most of
them were such, if you hear the holy Ghost testifying it, I hope you will
believe it: read then where it is of record, 3. Reg. 15.
That David did that which was right in the sight of our Lord (and not only in
the sight of men) and turned from nothing that he commanded him, all the
days of his life, except only the matter of Vrias the Hethite.

3. The Apostle affirms, 1. Cor. 3.
That some men do build upon the only foundation Christ Jesus, gold, silver,
and precious stones: that is, being choice members of Christ's Catholic
Church, do many perfect good works, such as being tried in the furnace of
Gods judgment, will suffer no loss or detriment, as he there says expressly:
Wherefore they must needs be pure, and free from all dross of sin,
otherwise having been so proved in fire, it would have been found out.

4. Many works of righteous men please God: Romans 12. 1. Pet. 2.
Make your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God: the same
offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God. Phil. 4.
And S. Paul calls alms bestowed on him in prison, an acceptable sacrifice
of sweet savor, and pleasing God. But nothing infected with sin (all which
he hates deadly) can please God, and be acceptable in his sight: God of his
mercy through Christ does pardon sin, or as the Protestants speak, not impute
it to the person: but to say that a sinful work is of sweet savor before
him, and a grateful sacrifice to him, were blasphemy: wherefore we must needs
confess, that such works which so well pleased him, were not defiled with any
kind of sin.

Mat. 5. 1 Timothy 6. Ephesians. 2.
Finally, many works in holy writ be called good, as, That they may see your
good works: To be rich in good works: We are created in Christ Jesus to good
works: but they could not truly be called good works, if they were infected
with sin. For according to the judgment of all learned Divines, it can be no
good work, that fails either in substance, or circumstance, that has any
one fault in it: for bonum ex integra causa malum, ex quolibet defectu.
Wherefore we must either say, that the holy Ghost calls evil good, which
were blasphemy, or else acknowledge, that there be many good works free from
all infection of sin.

R. ABBOT.
The wise man having prefixed this title, That good works be not stained with
sin, which we say they be, takes upon him in his text to prove, that just
men's works be no sins, which no man says they be. We must bear with him,
because his understanding does not serve him to take that for gold, wherein
there is any dross: for if it did, he would easily conceive that the stain of
man's sin does not destroy or take away the nature of the good work which in
man and by man is wrought by the grace of God. But leaving that piece of his
folly, let us examine his proofs, that good works be stained with sin. And
first, he will prove it by the example of Job, because it is said of him, that
Job. 2.3.
he continued still a single hearted and an upright man, departing from evil,
and preserving his innocence. But it were very hard to say, how M. Bishops
purpose should be made good out of these words. We find here a relation of Jobs
goodness, but we find nothing to prove, that that goodness of his was no way
touched or stained with sin. Now the reader is to understand, that this
commendation of Job set down in the 1. Chapter, and after repeated in the 2.
chapter to show his constancy therein, was of old urged by the Pelagian
heretics, as now by M. Bishop to prove the perfection of the righteousness
of man. But S. Austine well waighing the circumstance of the text, how it is
withal said, There is none like him in the earth; and considering what Job
elsewhere says; Cap. 9.2.
How should a man be just before God? answers him in this sort; Aug. de
peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 2. ca. 10. Secundu^ modu^ co^uersationis
humanae perhibet ei Deus tam magnu^ iustiae testimoniu^. Ipse aute^ se metuens
ex regula illa iustitiae quam sicut potest conspicit apud Deum, in veritate
scit quia ita est quia non erit homo iustus ante Deum.
According to a measure of humane conversation, God gives him this so great
testimony of righteousness, but he himself being afraid of himself,
according to that rule of righteousness, which as he can he sees with God,
knows in truth that so it is, that there shall not a man be found just before
God. Thus he says again, that Ibid. ca. 12. Ex hominum qui in terra sunt
co^paratione laudatur.
he was commended in comparison of men living upon earth. Hereby then it
appears that there is nothing in these words of Jobs commendation, that
avails M. Bishop any whit at all. Which that it may the better appear, Job
says of himself as the vulgar Latin translateth, Job. 9.28. Verebat omnia
opera mea.
I was afraid of all my works. Whereof what we are to conceive, we may esteem
by that that Gregory Bishop of Rome speaks by occasion of other words of the
same Job, that Grego. Moral. lib. 9. ca. 1. Sanctus vir quia omne virtutis
nostrae meritum vitiu^ esse co^spexit si ab interno arbitro districte
iudicetur, recte subiungit, si voluero, etc.
the holy man because he saw all the merit of our virtue to be faulty, if it be
strictly judged by him that judges within, says rightly, If I will contend
with him, I shall not be able to answer him one for a thousand. To which
purpose he says afterward again, that Ibid. cap. 8. Interrogationi illius
homo respondere non sufficit, quia si remota tunc pietate discutitur in illo
examine etia^ iustorum vita succumbit.
man is not able to answer to God, questioning or reasoning with him, because
if he be sifted without favor, the life even of the just quaileth in that
examination. This made Job afterward to say of himself again: Job. 39.37.
Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth.
Whereupon Hierome says against the Pelagians: Hieron. cont. Pelag. lib. 2.
Ecce Job noster immaculatus and sine querela quali iustitiae fine coronatur vt
miserecordia Dei indigeat.
Behold our Job so innocent and without reproof, with what end of
righteousness he is crowned, that he stands in need of mercy at Gods hands.
By all which it may appear, how impertinently M. Bishop alleges the words of
James, to affirm the perfection of Jobs works. Yea, what a mad connection does
he make, S. James says, Iam. 1.4.
Let patience have a perfect work that you may be perfect and entire, failing
in nothing. Therefore if Job remained patient, then his works were perfect. He
should understand that a man may remain patient, and yet his patience not
altogether perfect, being resisted and interrupted by the weakness and
rebellion of the flesh; even as came to pass in holy Job, as may appear by
many of his own speeches, and by the reproof that God used to him in the end;
Job. 39.35.
Is this to learn, to strive with the almighty? he that reprooueth God, let
him answer to it. Therefore the remaining of patience does not prove it self
to be perfect; much less proves it the perfection of other works. The
perfect work of patience intended by Saint James is perseverance, whereby we
continue and grow forward to that perfection which our Savior Christ sets
as a mark for us to aim at, Man. 5.48.
Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, but yet still find cause so
long as we live here, to say with the Apostle, Phil. 3.10.
Not as though I were already perfect. If Master Bishop think that here we
can be perfect and encier lacking nothing, let him remember what Saint Hierome
says; Hieron cont. Pelag lib 1 Omni^ habere and nullo indigere virtutis est
eius qui peccatum no^ fecit nec inuentus est in ore eius dolus.
To have all things and to want nothing is a matter of his virtue who did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. Let him not therefore dream of
it, Ephe 4.13.
till we all meet together unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age
of the fullness of Christ. But as touching perfection more hereafter.

That which he alleges spoken by David concerning himself, is absurdly forced
to his purpose, whilst he urges it as simply and generally spoken, which was
spoken only in a special respect. Psalm. 17.3.
There was no iniquity found in him as touching any imagination or practice
against Saul, whereof he was unjustly and wrongfully accused, but otherwise
simply speaking of himself, he says, Psalm. 38.4.
Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and as a weighty burden they are too
heavy for me. 130.3.
O Lord if thou be extreme to mark iniquities, who shall abide it? 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight no man
living shall be justified. Hereby therefore it is plain also that that which
is said of David, that 1. King. 15.5.
he turned from nothing that the Lord commanded him all the days of his life,
but only the matter of V^ias the Hittite, is to be understood according to
the occasion whereof it is spoken, the text setting down before the
wickedness of Abi^am in his reign and government over the Kingdom of Judah,
sinning himself by public idolatry, and causing the people also to sin
with him. To him his Father David is opposed, as touching laws and public
government, and direction of his people, that he turned not aside from the
commandments of the Lord, nor caused any public scandal or offense, but
only in commanding the death of O ij ^h the Hittite, for coloring the
adultery committed (...) ^ith his wife.

As touching the third proof that he brings out of Saint Paul's words to
the Corinthians, it is apparent by the place it self, that it is very absurdly
wrested. For Saint Paul speaks there of building by the preaching of the
Gospel, as is clear by the words immediately going before; 1. Cor. 3.10.
According to the grace of God given unto me, as a skillful Master builder I
have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon; but let every one take
heed how he builds upon it. Then signifying the foundation whereupon the
building is to stand to be Jesus Christ, ^e prosecuteth that caveat, giving to
understand, that there shall be a trial of the work of every builder, whereby
loss shall grow to them who are not careful to build such matter as is
proportionable to the foundation. He therefore that builds gold, and silver,
and precious stones, that is, true faith and doctrine according to Christ, his
work shall abide the trial of the word of truth, and his labor shall have
reward. But if any man build upon Christ timber, hay, and stubble, that is, the
trash of humane traditions and superstitions, the fire, that is, Chrysostom. de
panitent. hom. 8. Igne examinemus; verbo scilicet doctrina.
the word of Doctrine, as Chrysostom expounds it, shall consume it; by the
word of the Gospel that which he has builded shall be reproved and rejected,
and he shall lose both his labor and reward. This is the very direct and
plain meaning of the Apostles words, fully agreeing with the circumstance of
the text. But Master Bishop perforce and against the hair, draws the text
to be construed of works, and like to a sorry husband, who for a penny present
gain neglects a shilling profit another way, for the gaining of a present
small advantage, is content to bereave himself of that that should steed him
much more in another cause. For whereas they are wont generally to allege
this place, and to expound the fire here spoken of, for the maintenance of
Purgatory fire, he for a shift here turns Purgatory fire into the furnace
of Gods judgment, and so strikes down a maine pillar of the Popes Kitchen,
and endaungereth Act. 17.25.
the craft whereby he and his fellows have their goods. Surely if Purgatory
fire do not burn here, it is hard to say how they will get it a chimney
wherein to burn any otherwhere. But to the point, it has been already
showed, that there is no gold or silver of our works, wherein there is not
found some dross if trial be made thereof in the furnace of Gods judgment;
no stones so precious wherein the Ieweller of heaven does not find speckes and
flawes, if he precisely take view of them, so that Aug Confess. lib. 9. ca. 13.
Va etiam laudabili vitae hominum si remota miserecordia discutias ^am.
woe to the commendable life of man, says S. Austine, if God set mercy aside
in the judging of it, and therefore all pray that God will not enter into
judgment with them. The gold notwithstanding, and silver, and precious stones
which we build in our good works through Gods mercy, shall abide and have
their glory; the dross thereof the fire of repentance shall consume, whilst
we ask and obtain of him pardon and forgiveness of all our imperfections and
wants, of all that timber, and hay, and stubble of carnal and earthly
affections, with the dust whereof our feet have been soiled, and berayed in
walking the path of the faith of Christ. Yea he that Mat. 3.11.
baptizeth his with the holy Ghost and with fire, will by this fire purge from
us and our works this dross and corruption more and more, till he bring us out
of the furnace as the pure and perfect gold to be glorious before him for ever
and ever. To be short, the fire of Gods judgment mitigated and assuaged with
the water and dew of his mercy, shall at that day give approbation and
testimony of righteousness to the good works of his servants, so as that
because they are true gold which that fire consumes not, they shall not for
some dross receive any loss or detriment therein, but fully receive that
reward in the hope and expectation whereof they have labored in the Lord.
Therefore though we would understand these words of the works of holy men, as
without forcing them we cannot, yet is there nothing whence M. Bishop can
infer that which he intends, that good works are wholly free from all
dross and stain of sin. As little has he for his purpose in his next
argument. Many works of righteous men please God, says he, but nothing
infected with sin can please God. Nothing indeed if it be considered as
infected with sin; and therefore good works being touched and infected with
the contagion of sin, before they can please God, must have some means to
take away the guilt and imputation of the sin. There was Exodus 28.38.
iniquity in the holy offerings of the children of Israel, but the high Priest
did bear the iniquity to make the offerings acceptable before the Lord. There
is iniquity in our holy offerings, our spiritual sacrifices, but Christ our
High Priest has borne the iniquity, and they are 1. Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to GOD by Jesus Christ. Not by themselves, or by their own
perfection, but by Jesus Christ, being perfumed with the sweet incense of his
obedience, who Ephesians. 5.2.
for us (to make us acceptable both in our selves and in our works) has given
himself an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God.
Therefore by the pardoning and not imputing of sin, through the redemption of
Christ, both the person and the work are pleasing in Gods sight, neither is
the same to be called a sinful work, as M. Bishop terms it, because it is
in substance a good work, and the fruit of the good spirit of God, and the
default and imperfection is only an accident to the work. Briefly we are to
lay up in our hearts that which the Prophet says: Psalm. 103.13.
As a father pitieth his children, so is the Lord merciful unto them that
fear him: for he knows whereof we be made, and remembers that we are but
dust. And therefore as a father accepts the readiness and obedience of his
child to that that he commands, though he do the thing perhaps but rawly and
rudely: so is God pleased through Christ with the good intendment and endeavor
of his children, for the doing of that that he requires, though by the
weakness of the flesh, much halting and lamenesse, and imperfection appear in
that which they do.

By this appears the vanity of his argument taken from the name of good
works, which he says could not be truly called good, if they were infected
with sin. For as the offerings were truly called holy offerings, in which
notwithstanding there was some blot of iniquity: so are the works of the
faithful truly called good works, in which notwithstanding there is a stain
of the same iniquity and sin. They are good in the substance of the deed
good in the original of the grace and spirit of God from whence they proceed,
good in the will and endeavor of the person by whom they are done, good in the
acceptance of God, in whose name and service they are done: but yet they have
a blemish of evil, Ambros. apud August. contra Julian. lib. 2. Labes corporeae
concretionis.
by reason of the blot of bodily corruption growing fast too, as Ambrose
speaks, Hilar. ibid. Corpora nostra vitiorum omniu^ materia, pro qua polluti
and sordidi nihil in nobis mundum, nihil innocens obtin^mus.
whereby being polluted and filthy (says Hilary) we have nothing in us
innocent, nothing clean. They are good then, but yet not perfectly good, yea
if God should strictly and narrowly deal with us, he should have just cause of
rejecting us in the doing thereof, for that we by our corruption do disgrace
that which proceeds holy, and pure, and good from him. Now therefore whereas
he says, that it can be no good work wherein is any defect, he says untruly,
because good and evil have their latitude and degrees: and accordingly as
contraries expel each other, the one always growing by the impairing of the
other, accordingly as S. Austine says: August. de verb. Dom ser. 11. Non n^bis
inf^rt bona sua nisi auferat mala nostra: and in tantu^ illa crescunt,
inquantum ista mi nuuntur: nec illa perficientur nisi ista finiantur.
God does not bring his good gifts into us, except he take away our evils; and
so far do the good things increase, as the evil are diminished: neither shall
the one be perfected, till the other be fully ended. Now in this mixture of
contraries, that gives the name that prevails most: so that Hier ad
Ctesiphont. Iusti non quod omni vitio careant, sed quod maiori virtutum part
commend^ntur.
men are called just, as Hierome says, not for that they are without all vice,
but in that they are commended for the greater part of virtues. That therefore
may rightly and truly be called a good work in some measure and degree of
goodness, which yet entirely, and perfectly, and wholly cannot be called good.
But that we may see how vainly and idly he talks, his conclusion is
diligently to be observed, that there may be many good works free from all
infection of sin. There be many such, but all good works then it seems be
not free from all infection of sin. And if all be not so, then let him tell
us how those good works which be not free from all infection of sin, be
called good works, as he imports, seeing no work can be called good, as he
has told us before, that fails either in substance or in circumstance, or
has any fault or defect in it. Let him answer us for those some, and his
answer shall serve us for all the rest.

45 W. BISHOP.
In lieu of the manifold testimony of Antiquity, which does nothing more then
recommend good works, and paint out the excellency of them, I will set down
one passage of S. August. wherein this very controversy is distinctly declared
and determined: Lib. 3. contra duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 7.
thus he begins: The justice (through which the just man lives by faith)
because it is given to man by the spirit of grace, is true justice: the which,
although it be worthily called in some men perfect, according to the capacity
of this life, yet it is but small in comparison of that greater, which man made
equal to Angels shall receive. Which (heavenly justice) he that had not as yet
said himself to be perfect, in regard of that justice that was in him: and
also imperfect, if it be compared to that which he wanted. But certainly this
lesser justice, or righteousness, breeds and brings forth merits, and
that greater, is the reward thereof. Wherefore he that pursues not this, shall
not obtain that. Hitherto S. Augustine. Note first, that he defines the
justice which we have in this life, to be true justice, which is pure from al
injustice and iniquity: then, that it is also perfect, not failing in any duty
which we be bound to perform. Lastly, that it brings forth good works,
such as merit life everlasting. True it is also, that this justice although
perfect in it self, so far as man's capacity in this life does permit: yet
being compared unto the state of justice which is in heaven, it may be called
imperfect, not that this is not sufficient to defend us from all formal
transgression of Gods law: but because it keeps not us sometimes from venial
sin, and has not such a high degree of perfection as that has. S. Augustine
has the like discourse, where he says directly, De spir. and lit. vlt. cap.
that it appertains to the lesser justice of this life, not to sin. So that
we have out of this oracle of Antiquity: that many works of a just man are
without sin.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop notably abuses S. Austin, and makes him in stead of all
antiquity, a witness of that which he oppugneth even in that very Chapter
whence he cites the words here set down. Which that we may the better
discern, let us examine particularly the collections that he makes from the
words. First, that the justice that we have in this life is true justice. We
acknowledge the same, even as it is true gold wherein notwithstanding there is
found dross; even as it is a true pearl which notwithstanding with handling
has a spot or stain. It is true righteousness, Bernard. de verb. Esa Ser 5.
Humilis iustitia sed non pura.
but not pure, says S. Bernard: Idem in fest. sanct. Ser. 1. Si districte
iudicet^r iniusta inuenietur omnis iustitia nostra and ^^nus habens.
it will be found unrighteousness and scant, if it be strictly judged.
Therefore M. Bishops exposition of true justice is false, where he makes the
same to be pure from all injustice and iniquity. Secondly, he makes S. Austin
to say, that our righteousness in this life is perfect, not failing in any
duty which we are bound to perform. But how lewdly does he therein deal with
S. Austin, who plainly teaches, that Aug. de Ciu. Dei. lib. 19 ca. 27 Magis
remissione peccatorum constat, quam perfectione virtutum.
our righteousness in this life stands rather in forgiveness of sins,
then in perfection of virtues. Yea in the Chapter cited by him, he says: Idem
contra 2. Epist. Pelag. li. 3. cap 7. Virtus quae nunc est in homi ne iusto
hactenus perfecta nomina tur, vt ad eius perfectione^ pertineat, etiam ipsius
imperfectionis, and in veritate cognitio, and in humilitate confessio. Tunc
enim est secundum hanc infirmitatem perfecta ista p^rua iustitia, quando etiam
quid sibi desit intelligit. Ideoque Apostolus and imperfectum and perfectum
sedicit; imperfectum, cogitando quantum illi ad iustitiam desit, cuius
plenitudinem adhu^ esurit and siti^. Perfectum autem quod and suam
imperfectionem confitori non erubescit, and vt peruentat been procedit.
The virtue which is now in the just man is thus farforth called perfect, as
that to the perfection thereof belongs both the knowledge in truth, and in
humility the confession of the imperfection of it. For then is this small
righteousness for the model (or little measure) of it perfect, according to
this infirmity, when it knows what there is wanting unto it. Therefore the
Apostle calls himself imperfect and perfect; imperfect, in bethinking how
much he wants to righteousness, the fullness whereof he yet hungreth and
thirsts after: perfect, both for that he is not ashamed to confess his
imperfection, and for that he goes well forward to come to perfection. Now how
should we here acknowledge imperfection, if we be perfect according to the
uttermost of that perfection that is required of us here? How can we take upon
us to know, that there is somewhat wanting to our righteousness, when we must
believe it to be such, as fails not in any duty which we are bound to
perform? How did the Apostle think that he wanted much to righteousness, when
his righteousness wanted nothing that it ought to have? How is it said, that
he was not ashamed to confess his imperfection, when yet there was no
imperfection for him to confess? Nay, how is it that M. Bishop is not ashamed
to seek by Austin to avouch such a Paradoxe, so contrary to sense, so
contrary to conscience, so contrary to the confessions of all the faithful
crying with one voice, August. in Psalm. 142. Quare hoc dicitis? etc. Quoniam
non iustificabitur, etc.
Forgive us our trespasses, and that for this very cause, as S. Austin says,
because no man living shall be justified in the sight of God. The same S.
Austin tells us, that De spir. and lit. cap. 35. Sine exe^plo est in
hominibus perfecta iustitia.
there is no example of perfect righteousness amongst men: that De Temp. ser.
49. Ipsa est perfectio hominum inuenisse se non esse perfectum.
this is the perfection of man, to find himself not to be perfect: De spir.
and lit. ca. 36. In ea quae perficienda est iustitia multum in hac vita, ille
profecit, qui qua^ long sit a perfectione iustitiae proficiendo cognouit.
that he has much profited in righteousness, who by profiting knows how
far he is from perfection of righteousness: that S. Paul was De peccat mer.
and remiss lib. 1. cap. 13. Perfectus viator etsi nondum erat itineris
perfectione peruentor.
perfect as a travelers. (to perfect righteousness,) not as one that was come
unto it, because De not. and great cap 12 Been proficientes dicuntur perfecti
viatores.
they that go well forward, or profit well, are called perfect travelers.
These speeches are evident and plain, and will M. Bishop tell us, that S.
Austin affirms, in this life a perfect righteousness, not failing in any
duty which we are bound to perform? To the same purpose S. Hierome also
says: that Hieron. contra Pelag li. 1. Haec est hominis vera sapientia
imperfectum esse se nosse, atque vt ita loquar, cunctorum in carne iustorum
imperfecta perfectio est.
it is man's true wisdom to know himself to be imperfect, and that there is
but an imperfect perfection of all that are righteous in this life. And again,
that Ibid. lib. 3. Vera and absque omni sorde perfectio in coelestibus
reseruatur, quando sponsus loquetur ad sponsam, Tota pulchra es amica mea, and
macula non est in te.
true perfection which is without all filth or uncleanness, is reserved unto
heaven, when the bridegroom shall say to the bride, Thou art all fair, my
love, and there is not a spot in thee. So says Fulgentius, that Fulgent. ad
Monim. lib. 1. Diuinoru^ munerum nondum est perfecta perfectio vtpote vbi omnis
perfectus perfectionis est indigus.
there is yet no perfect perfection of the gifts of God, as where every perfect
man is yet wanting of perfection. And this made Origin to say, that Origin. ad
To. cap. 6. Jn praesenti vita puto quod forma^ atque vmbram virtutu^ tenere
possimus, ipsas vero virtutes tunc cum venerint illa quae perfecta sunt: and
ideo iustus magis vt mihi videtur in vmbra virtutum quam in ipsis virtutibus
viuit.
in this life we may have the image and shadow of virtues, but the virtues
themselves when the things that are perfect shall come: and therefore that the
just man lives rather, as he thinks, in the shadow of virtues, then in the
virtues themselves. To which words accords that of Hierome, alluding to that
of the Apostle whereto Origin alludeth, that 1. Cor. 13.9.10.12.
we know in part, and we see through a glass in a dark speaking; and when
that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away. Hier.
contra Pelag. li. 3. Mu^dum cor quod postea sit visurum Deum and vitae
immaculatae beatitudine^ in vmbra possidemus and imagine. Quamuis Patriarcha
sit aliquis, quamuis Propheta, quamuis Apostolus dicitur eis a Domino
Saluatore, si vos cum sitis mali, etc.
We have (says he) but in a shadow and an image the clean heart, that shall
after see God, and the happiness of unspotted life. Though a man be a
Patriarch, though a Prophet, though an Apostle, yet is it said to them by our
Savior, If ye being evil, etc. Where is he now that tells us of such a
perfect righteousness in this life, as fails not of any duty that we are
bound to perform, when as there is here none but imperfect perfection, no man
but that wants of perfection: when as we have here but the image and shadow
of virtues, no perfection without some filth or uncleanness, none but which
leaves us still in case to be called evil? Whereby appears again the
absurdity of his third collection, that our perfection yields such good
works as merit everlasting life. It is true that S. Austin uses the name of
merit, but that by the name of merits he means simply good works, to which
God has promised reward, and not any merit properly so called, shall hereafter
appear in the question of merits. In the mean time how far he was from that
opinion of meriting, which M. Bishop here would fasten upon him, may appear by
the words cited by him out of Hilary against the Pelagian heretics: Aug.
contra Julian. lib. 2. ex Hilar. in Psalm. 51. Spes in misericordia Dei in
seculum, and in seculum seculi. Non enim illa ipsa iustitiae opera ad perfectae
beatitudinis sufficient meritum, nisi misericordia Dei etiam in hac iustitiae
voluntate humanarum demutationum and motuum non reputet vitia.
Our hope is in the mercy of God for ever and ever: for the very works of
righteousness are not sufficient to the meriting of perfect bliss, unless
the mercy of God even in this will of righteousness, do forbear to impute the
vices or defaults of humane passions and affections. Whereupon he himself
says. Ibid. Confitetur etiam peccata iustorum magis eos asserens in Dei
misericordia spem ponere quam de iustitia sua fidere.
He confesses the sins even of just men, affirming that they rather trust to
the mercy of God, then have any confidence of their own righteousness. It is
not therefore the merit of righteousness, that we can rest upon, but only the
pardon of Gods mercy, by which as we have obtained the gift of righteousness:
so we expect also the reward and crown thereof, that it may be verified which
the Prophet says: Psalm. 103 4.
He crowns thee in mercy and compassion: and that of the Apostle, that
eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Now to these
collections M. Bishop adds a caveat, that this justice though perfect in it
self, so far as man's capacity in this life does permit, yet in comparison
of the state of justice in heaven may be called imperfect. Which is as much as
if he should say, that it is perfect in it self, so far as it may be perfect
there where it cannot be perfect. For there is not in this life any capacity
of perfect righteousness, as wherein we continue still with the Apostle Romans
7.14.19.
carnal, sold under sin, not doing the good that we would, by reason of Gal.
5.17.
the flesh lusting against the spirit, Romans 7.23.
rebelling against the law of the mind, leading us captive to the law of sin
which is in our members, so as that to avoid the entisements of the world, and
to keep our selves in our course entierly to God, is as S. Ambrose says,
Ambros. de suga seculi. cap. 1. Res voti magis quam effectus.
a matter that we do more wish and desire then we can effect and do, and when
we have labored much for it, cannot but condemn our selves for being so far
from it. But against this device of his, we must note what has been said, that
our perfection here is not without some filth, and that it leaves us still
evil, and therefore is not perfect in it self. Yea, and S. Hierome again
against the Pelagians distinguishing Hieron. adis. Pelag lib. 1. Perspicuum est
duas in scripturis sanctis esse perfectiones, duasque iustitias: Primam
perfectionem, and incomparabilem veritatem, perfectamque iustitiam Dei
virtutibus coaptandam: secundam autem quae competit nostrae fragilitati: ^uxta
illud quod dicitur, Non iustificabitur, etc. ad eam iustitiam quae non
comparatione sed Dei sceintia dicitur esse perfecta.
two sorts of perfection and righteousness, the one to be compared to the
righteousness of God; the other belonging to the frailty of man, denies our
perfection in this latter kind, and says, that in this sort it is true, that
no man living shall be justified in Gods sight, which he affirms to be spoken
as touching a righteousness called perfect not by comparison, but in respect
of the knowledge of God. The knowledge of God then which knows all things
according to truth, yet knows no justice or perfection in us, whereby we are
able to stand just and perfect before him. Therefore Gregory says, that Grego.
Moral lib. 5. cap. 8. Ipsa nostra perfectio culpa non caret nisi ha^c seuerus
iudex in subtili lince examinis misericorditer pe^set.
our very perfection is not without fault, unless the severe Judge do with
mercy weigh it in the precise balance of his examination. Neither is it to be
omitted which S. Austine says, that Aug. de Temp. ser. 49. In co^paratione
resurrectionis illius stercus est tota ista vita qu^m gerimus. Vnusquisque
metiatur se quid est modo and quid erit tunc and inueniet in comparatione
illius ista damna esse and stercora.
all the life which we live here, that is, all the righteousness of this life,
is but dung in comparison of the resurrection, that if a man measure himself
what he is now and what he shall be then, he shall find that that which now
is, is but loss and doung in comparison of that. Which how can it be true, if
that that is in this life be perfect in it self, so perfect as that it fails
not in any duty which we are bound to perform; yea, as that it meriteth and
deserves the righteousness of heaven? Can that that in comparison is but
dross and doung, be truly said to deserve the righteousness of heaven? But
concerning the same, he adds further, that it is sufficient to keep us from
all formal transgression of Gods law. So then thereby a man shall be free from
all formal sin; and shall have no formal trespass for which to say,
forgive us our trespasses; and of formal transgression it shall not be true
which S. John says, 1. John. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, or which S. James says,
Iam. 3 2.
In many things we offend all. Is not this a formal foolery of a man that
would be taken to be wise? These are drunken fancies, fit for no other but
drunken men, that neither know themselves nor others, and therefore we can take
M. Bishop for no other but a vile hypocrite, who contrary to his own
conscience and knowledge, pleads in this sort for the perfection of the
righteousness of man. But to fill up the measure of his lewd dealing, he
falsifieth another place of Austine, making him to say, that it belongs to
the lesser justice, that is, the justice of this life, not to sin. Wherein he
goes about to make S. Austine a promoter and vpholder of that heresy, which
with all his might he oppugned in the Pelagians, who defended as M. Bishop here
does a righteousness in this life, whereby a man may be free from sin. And
indeed the words which M. Bishop alleges out of Austine, are the adversaries
objection, not the assertion of Austine himself. He brings them in by way of
supposition what may be said, namely that Aug de sp. and lit. ca. 36 Sed dici
potest quadam iustitia minor huic vitae competens qua iustus ex fide viuit, etc
Non absurd dicitur etiam ad istam pertinere ne peccet.
there is a lesser righteousness belonging to this life, wherein the just lives
by faith, to which righteousness it pertains not to sin. Which objection
having prosecuted more at large, and alleged what may be said for the
maintenance thereof, he at length sets down answer, whereof a part is
contained in these words: Ibid. Tales iusti ex fide viuentes non opus habent
Deo dicere, Dimitte nobis, etc. Falsumque esse conuincunt quod s^riptu^ est,
Non iustificabitur, etc. Sed quia haec falsa esse non possunt illud esse
consequens video vt qu^lemlibes vel quantamlibet in hac vita potuerimus
definire iustitiam nullus in ea sit hominum qui nullum habeat omnino peccatum.
Such just men living by faith have no need to say, forgive us our trespasses,
and do convince it to be false which is written, No man living shall be
justified in the sight of God, and that, If we say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves: and that there is not a man that sins not: and that, There is
not a man just upon the earth that does good and sins not. But because these
sayings cannot be false, it follows, that whatsoever, or how great soever we
can define righteousness in this life, there is not a man therein that is
without sin. Where very plainly he disclaimeth the assertion of any
righteousness in this life, in which that may be found that M. Bishop speaks
of: namely, not to sin. And surely had not this man a face of brass, and an
iron conscience, he would not in these days of light affirm a thing, or seem
to affirm it, so contrary to the perpetual doctrine and confession of the
Church. As for his distinction of venial sins, I have before showed it to be
frivolous and vain, and the same (God willing) shall appear further in the
Section next save one.

46. W. BISHOP.
To these reasons taken partly out of the Scriptures, and partly out of the
record of Antiquity, let us join one or two drawn from the absurdity of our
adversaries doctrine, which teaches every good work of the righteous man to
be infected with mortal sin: which being granted, it would follow
necessarily, that no good work in the world, were to be done under pain of
damnation, Romans 7.
thus: No mortal sin is to be done under pain of damnation: for the wages
of sin is death: but all good works are stained with mortal sin, ergo, no
good work is to be done under pain of damnation. It follows secondly, that
every man is bound to sin deadly: for all men are bound to perform the
duties of the first and second table: but every performance of any duty is
necessarily linked with some mortal sin, therefore every man is bound to
commit many mortal sins, and consequently to be damned. These are holy and
comfortable conclusions, yet inseparable companions, if not sworn brethren of
the Protestants doctrine. Now let us hear what arguments they bring against
this Catholic verity.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop has learned from his fellow M. Wright to strike the matter
dead at one blow. Albeit, it is more likely, that these arguments going so
current amongst them, were agreed upon at Wisbich or some other like place, in
some solemn assembly and consultation, where the grave and reverend company
of the Seculars laid their wits together, to give the Protestants some
inevitable and deadly blow. It is hard to think, that one or two men's wits
should serve to contriue such a matter as here is against us. Now if some young
Sophister of the University had stood by, and smiling at them had said, that
it was pity that they good old men, should be troubled with making of
Syllogisms, who had forgotten of how many terms a Syllogism does consist,
would they not (think you) have startled at the hearing of it, and thought
themselves exceedingly disgraced by a boy? Surely the arguments here set down
are such, as that if a boy in our Universities should make the like in earnest,
he should be thought justly to deserve the rod, and yet these are they who take
upon them, as if we were to say unto them: Job. 12.2.
Because you only are men, wisdom must dye with you. He will prove by our
doctrine, that no good work is to be done under pain of damnation. And how?
forsooth no mortal sin is to be done under pain of damnation: but all good
works are stained with mortal sin, ergo, etc. Did not his head serve him to
know, that it is an error in arguing, when a Syllogism consists ex quatuor
terminis. We have mortal sin in the Mayor proposition and in the Minor,
stained with mortal sin. If he would have kept the course of argument, he
must have said thus: No mortal sin is to be done under pain of damnation;
but all good works are mortal sins, ergo, etc. Which if he had said, the
absurdity of his minor proposition had easily appeared, because every man
could have discerned, that good works, though they have some aspersion or
touch of our corruption, yet do not thereby become sins, no more then gold by
his dross becomes earth or iron; no more then white linen for some spot or
stain, is to be accounted black haire-cloth; no more then the day is to be
called night, because it has but ouercast and darksome light. S. Hierome
tells us, that Hier. aduers. Pelag. lib. 2. Quando dicit nullas tenebras in
Dei lumine reperiri, ostendit omnia aliorum lumina sorde aliqua maculari.
Denique and Apostoli appellantur lux mundi, sed non est scriptum quod in
Apostolorum luce nullae sint tenebrae.
When S. John says, that there is no darkness found in the light of God, he
shows, that all others lights are blotted with some uncleanness. The
Apostles (says he) are called the light of the world, but it is not written
that there was no darkness in the Apostles light. And what? will M. Bishop
conclude, that because there was some darkness in the Apostles light, therefore
their light was darkness and not light? If he will not so conclude, then let
him say, that it follows not that good works are sins, albeit in our doing
of them they receive some blemish and stain of sin. But to show us somewhat
more of the sweat and superfluity of his learning, he has added another
argument of the like feature, to prove that by our doctrine every man is bound
to sin deadly. And why so? because all men are bound to perform the duties
of the first and second Table, and every performance thereof is necessarily
linked with mortal sin. Which is as if a man should reason thus: A lame man
is bound by law to come to the Church; but he cannot come to the Church but he
must halt, therefore he is bound by law to halt. M. Bishop is bound to pay a
man twenty pounds, but he cannot tell the money without soyling his fingers:
therefore he is bound to soil his fingers. He can no way infer his
conclusion, but by a sophistical cauillation, which the Logicians call
fallaciam accidentis, whereby in the conclusion he infers that of the
accident, which in the premises is referred only to the subject, his argument
by that means wholly without form, and offending in the like sort as the
other did. Bring it into his due fashion, and every child then shall see, that
his proof is most ridiculous and absurd. For to bring in his conclusion, his
argument must be this: Whosoever is bound to do the duties of the first and
second Table, is bound to sin. But every man is bound to do the duties of the
first and second Table; therefore every man is bound to sin. His
Prosyllogisme for the proof of his mayor proposition out of his own words
must arise thus: Whosoever necessarily sins in doing the duties of the first
and second Table, is bound to sin: but whosoever is bound to do the duties of
the first and second Table, necessarily sins in the doing thereof: therefore
whosoever is bound to do the duties of the first and second Table is bound to
sin. Here his mayor proposition is apparently absurd: for though a man by
reason of infirmity cannot but sin in doing his duty, yet it is the duty
only that he is bound to, and not to the sin, because the sin is not
employed in the duty, but arises by casual and accidental necessity from
the condition of the man. Now therefore a man may doubt whether is greater in
this man, his malice or his ignorance. In respect of his malice we may use to
him the words of the Prophet David: Psalm. 52.3.5.
Thy tongue imagines wickedness, and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp
razor: Thou have loved to speak all words that may do hurt, O thou false
tongue. In respect of his ignorance, we may justly scorn him as a presumptuous
and saucy companion, who being of so base quality, and not knowing how to
frame an argument aright, would take upon him to encounter a whole army of
learned men, and so insolently dedicate his unlearned fooleries to the King.

47. W. BISHOP.
First, they allege these words: Enter not, O Lord, Psalm. 141.
into judgment with thy servant, because no living creature shall be justified
in thy sight. If none can be justified before God, it seems that none of their
works are just in his sight.

Answer. There are two common expositions of this place among the ancient
Fathers: both true, but far from the Protestants purpose. The former is S.
Augustines, S. Ieromes, De perf. justice. Epist. ad Ct^s.
S. Gregory's in his Commentaries upon that place: who say, that no creature
ordinarily lives without many venial sins, for the which in justice they
may be punished sharply either in this life, or else afterward in Purgatory.
Wherefore the best men do very prouidently pray unto God, not to deal with
them according unto their deserts: for if he should so do, they cannot be
justified and cleared from many venial faults. And therefore they must all
crave pardon for these faults, or else endure Gods judgments for them, before
they can attain unto the reward of their good deeds. The second exposition is
more ordinary with all the best Writers upon the Psalms: as S. Hilarie, S.
Hierome, S. Arnobius, S. Euthimius, and others: which is also S. Augustins, S.
Gregory's. All these say, Lib. ad Cro^ia. cap. 10. lib. 9. moral. cap. 1.
that man's justice in comparison of the justice of God, will seem to be no
justice at all: and so take these words, No creature, neither man nor Angel,
shall be justified in thy sight: that is, if his justice appear before thine,
and be compared to it. For as the stars be bright in themselves, and shine also
goodly in a clear night, yet in the presence of the glittering Sun beams, they
appear not at all: even so man's justice, although considered by it self it be
great and perfect in his kind, yet set in the sight and presence of Gods
justice, it vanishes away, and is not to be seen. This exposition is taken
out of Job, where he says: I know truly it is even so, that no man compared to
God, Job 9.
shall be justified. Take the words of the Psalm in whether sense you list
(that either we have many venial faults, for which we cannot be justified in
Gods sight, or else that in the sight of Gods most bright justice, ours will
not appear at all) and it cannot be thereof justly concluded, that every work
of the righteous man is stained with sin: and consequently, the place is not
to purpose.

R. ABBOT.
I would wish thee (gentle Reader) well to observe M. Bishops twofold answer to
this place. The more clear these words of Scripture are against the inherent
righteousness of man, the more notably his singular impudency appears in
seeking to shift them off. David says it, a Prophet says it, a man after Gods
own heart says it: Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for no man living shall be
justified (or found just) in thy sight. Now M. Bishop answ^reth, that this is
spoken in respect of venial sins, without which no creature lives, and for
which a man may in justice be punished sharply, either in this life or in
Purgatory. Where it is to be observed, that he has told us in the Section
last save one, that venial sin is no formal transgression of Gods law, by
reason whereof they hold, that Rhem. Testim. 1. Ioh. 1.8.
venial sins consist with true justice, and hinder it not. So says
Andradius, Andrad. Orth. explicat. lib. 5. Iustitiam euertere nullo pacto
possunt, neque perfectam and ab solutam legis obedientiam quoquo modo impedire.
They can no way overthrow justice, nor in any sort hinder the perfect and
absolute obedience of the law. So then David's prayer must be this: Enter not
into judgment with me for venial sins; for by reason of venial sins
which hinder not, but that a man is just, no man living shall be justified in
thy sight. Which exposition being apparently lewd and shameless, yet he has
learned of his master Bellarmine to countenance it with the names of them who
never thought any such thing. He alleges Austin, who in the place by him
cited has not a word to that effect, which makes him to set none down,
because indeed there are none. But in the place mentioned the same Austin
rightly says, Aug. de perfe. iustit. Superexal^at misericordia iudi^io. Quod
si no^ esset, quae spes esse^? Quando. quidem cum rex iust^s federit in thro^o,
quis glo ritbitur se castu^ habere cor, aut quis gloriabitur se esse immu^em a
peccato?
Were it not that mercy rejoices over judgment, what hope should there be?
For when the just King shall sit upon his throne, who shall glory that he has
a clean heart, or rejoice that he is free from sin? If no man shall be able
then to challenge to himself a clean heart, where is that perfect justice of
works which Master Bishop dreameth of, which cannot come but from a clean
heart? He cites in the second place the reverend Father Saint Hierome, who
beside that he says nothing for him, speaks expressly and directly against
him. Hieron. ad C^esiphont. Quando ^icit, In co^spectu tuo, hoc intelligi vult,
quod etiam qui hominibus sancti videntur, Dei scientiae atque noutiae nequa
qua^ sancti sunt. Homo enim videt in facie, Deu^ in cord. Si aute^ inspiciente
Deo and omnia contemplante, quem cordis arcana no^ fallum, nullus est iustus,
perspicue ostenditur haereticos no^ hominem in excelsa sustollere, sed
potentiae Dei derogare.
When the Prophet says, In thy sight, he will have it to be understood, that
even they which seem holy unto men, are not holy to the notice and knowledge
of God. For man sees in the face, but God in the heart. Now if in the sight
and beholding of God, whom the secrets of the heart cannot deceive, no man be
just, it is plainly showed that the heretics (in affirming men to be just) do
not lift up man, but detract from the power of God. He affirms that by the
place it is proved, that to the knowledge and sight of God no man is just, and
M. Bishop makes him a witness, that the Prophet speaks of venial sins,
which are no let, but that a man is just. In the like fraudulent manner he
names Gregory, whose words are these; Greg. in sept. Psalm. panitent. Scio
multos in conspectu hominum iustos videri, and ad spem coelestium promissoru^
euectos innocenter in mu^do viuere, qui etsi no^ delinquant in opere, labuntur
tamen aliquando vana aut peruersa cogitatione. Cuius enim ment^m vanae
cogitaetiones non laniant? Cuius cor tentationes non vexant? Cuius animum
desideria carnis non turbant? No^ ergo in conspectu Dei iustificatur, qui cord
delinquit quod iniuetur Deus.
I know that many seem just in the sight of men, and being lifted up to the
hope of heavenly promises, do live innocently in the world, who albeit they
offend not in deed or work, yet do sometimes fall by vain and perverse
cogitation and thought. For whose mind do not vain thoughts wound? whose
heart do not temptations afflict? whose mind do not fleshly desires trouble?
Therefore he is not justified in the sight of God who offends in the heart
which God beholds. Now who would not wonder that M. Bishop should refer
himself to these words for the exposition that he makes of the place here in
hand. And yet why should we wonder, for his master Bellarmine had so alleged
it; and that was enough: whether truly or falsely, what was that to him? But how
far Gregory was from that which he would so feign fasten upon him, appears
by that that was a little before cited out of him, as also in that he says,
that Greg. Moral lib. 8. cap. 21. Quantalibet iustitia polleaut nequaquam sibi
ad innocentiam vel ^lecti sufficium si districte in iudicio requirantur.
even the elect howsoever they excel in righteousness, have not sufficient to
approve themselves innocent, if they be narrowly sifted in judgment.
Therefore not for venial sins which hinder not a man from being just, but
for such sins as bereave a man of the title of justice and innocence, does
the Prophet desire that God will not enter into judgment with him. M. Bishops
other answer is taken from an exposition, which he says is more ordinary with
all the best writers upon the Psalms, and yet indeed is no other but a mere
Pelagian shift; that is, that man's justice in comparison of the justice of God,
will seem to be no justice at all, even as the Sun drowneth the light of the
stars that it appears not. Hierome having mentioned the words in question
against the Pelagians, adds thereupon; Hieron. ad Ctesiphont. Non
iustificabitur, etc. Quod testimoniu^ sub nomine pietatis noua argume^tatione
deludunt. Aiunt ad comparationem Dei nullum esse perfectum: Quasi scriptura hoc
dixerit.
Which testimony under the name of piety they delude with a new shift. They
say, that in comparison of God no man is perfect. As if this were it, says he,
that the Scripture speaks of; and so he goes on with the words which I cited
out of him last before. That is not then by S. Hieromes testimony that the
Scripture means when it says, that no man living shall be justified in Gods
sight. For shall we be so mad as to think, that we are taught to pray to God
not to enter into judgment with us, because our righteousness is not
comparable to his? Where has God required it so to be? Ibid. Nu^quid praecepit
mihi Deus vt essem quod Deus est? vt nihil inter me esset and Dominu^
Creatorem? vt mayor essem An gelorum fastigio? vt habere^ quod Angeli non
habent?
Has God, says Hierome, commanded me to be the same that God is? That there
should be no difference betwixt me and the Lord my creator? that I should be
above the height of Angels? that I should have that which the Angels have not?
Shall we think that the creator will be offended, because his creature is not
the same that he himself is? or that God will enter into judgment with us
because we were not made Gods? If this be absurd, as indeed it is, then we must
confess, that therefore the Prophet teaches us by his example so to pray,
because according to that righteousness that is commanded unto us, and belongs
to our duty, we are found greatly defective and wanting in the sight of God,
as in the former section also I have showed that Hierome expounds that place.
As for them whom M. Bishop cites to warrant his exposition, he does notably
abuse them. First Hilary indeed speaks of comparison to God, but not as
touching degree of righteousness, in which there can be no comparison, because
the one is finite and the other infinite, but as touching an uniformity and
constant tenor of righteousness, whereby man should inuiolably and immovably
without interruption continue in that righteousness that concerns him, as
God does in his righteousness. This he expresses when he says, that Hilar.
in Psalm. 142. Non hos demutabilis naturae nostrae promptissimos lapsus secundum
indemutabilis substantiae sua indeflexam constanitam metitur, sed iustus and
moderans tan tum ab homine expectat quantu^ humanae meminerit licere naturae.
God does not measure these slippery falls of our changeable nature according to
the inflexible constancy of his unchangeable substance, but in justice and
moderation expects so much of man as he remembers the nature of man can
reach unto. For so is his promise in our willing mind to accept us according
to that that we have, as the Apostle speaks in another case. To this meaning
he says: Ibid. Quid spei est si iudicari nos fecundu^ se Deus velit; si ad
comparationem sui vitae nostrae innocentiam postulabu?
What hope is there if God will have us to be judged according to himself; if
he shall require the innocence of our life in comparison of him: that is, to
be as free from slippes and falls in our state as he is in his? And to show that
man being subject to alterations and chaunges is not just in Gods sight,
according to the righteousness that concerns him in his own state, he adds:
Ibid. Iustificari in conspectu Dei quis viuentium potest, cui ira, cui dolor,
cui cupiditas, cui obliuio, cui ignoratio, cui casus, cui necessitas vel per
naturam corporis, vel per motum semper fluctuantis animae admixta sunt? Cui and
quotidie grauissimus host^^ immineat, drabolui videlicet animae viri fidelis
insidians eamque ad interitum per sequens? Hanc enim esse causam docet, qua
nemo viuens iustist^aro in conspectu Dei possit.
And what man living can be justified in Gods sight, with whom anger, and
grief, and lust, and ignorance, and forgetfulness, and casualtie, and
necessity, are blended and mingled either by the nature of the body, or by
the motion of the euer-wauering soul; who also has daily a grievous enemy at
hand, even the devil lying in wait against the soul of the faithful man,
and persecuting the same to destroy it? For this does the Prophet teach to be
the cause, why no man living can be found just in the sight of God. By which
words being very clear and manifest, the reader may esteem with what fidelity
M. Bishop has brought Hilarie to justify his exposition of that place. With
the like truth or rather untruth, he cites Hierome, who says, that Hieron. in
Psalm. 142. Manifestissime demonstrauit, quia misericordiam De^ praestolatur,
etc. Hic quasi aliquis iudicet inter Deum and Prophetam, sicut and scriptum
est, vt iustificeris, etc. Et propterea intrat in iudicium Deus vt just pumat.
the Prophet does manifestly show, that he did wait for Gods mercy, that he
supposes some one to be judge betwixt God and him; which so being, God should
be justified in his sayings, and overcome when he is judged: who therefore
enters into judgment that he may justly punish. Then reckoning Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob amongst them of whom the Prophet speaks, he infers: Ergo
nec ipsi Patriarchae iusti ficabuntur in co^spectu Dei. Stellae enim non sunt
mundae in conspectu eius.
Therefore not the very Patriarks themselves shall be found just in the sight
of God: for even the stars are not clean in his sight. What can be more
plainly spoken, to show that even the most righteous and just for want of
purity and justice should justly be punished, if God should enter into
judgment with them, and that if the very stars, not by their own sin, but
by being in the Romans 8.20.21.
bondage of our vanity and corruption be found unclean before God, much more
are we unclean, for whose sake it is that that imputation does lie upon them?
But to make it yet further to appear what Hierome conceived of those words, he
says in another place: Hieron. in Esa. lib. 6. cap. 14. Cum dies iudicij vel
dormitionis aduenerit, dissoluentur omnes manus, quia nullum opus dignum Dei
iustitia reperietur, and non iustificabitur, etc.
When the day of judgment or death shall come, all hands shall be faint,
because no work shall be found worthy of the justice of God, and no man living
shall be justified in his sight. Where he plainly teaches, not only as
touching comparison to God, but as touching that a just man in himself ought to
be, that no man living, no not so much as in any one work shall be justified
in Gods sight, but his hands, that is, all his works shall fail if God enter
into judgment with him. The next that he cites is Arnobius, who for one part
of his exposition of these words, says, that man is not to be found righteous
if he be compared to God; that Arno. in Psalm. 142. Omnis pulchritudo te
praese^te deformis est: omnis fortitudo infirma; omnes diuitiae mendicitas
omnis humaena iustitia iniustitia.
all beauty in Gods presence is but deformity, all strength but weakness, all
riches but beggerie, all righteousness but unrighteousness. But having set
down this because this could not sufficiently express the meaning of the
Prophet, he adds further: Jbid. Et vt vicina^ tuae iustinae iustitiam humanam
exquirere desinas quaeso, quonia^ persecutus est inimicus anima^ mea^, etc.
Tanta me obscuritate suae circu^dedi^ fraudis vt ^^ortuu^ me apud Deu^ credens,
putare^ me nullum ^^uperationis apud iustitia^ tua^ auditu^ inuenire: id^o
anxiatus est in me spiritus meus
And I pray thee that thou will cease to search out the righteousness that
concerns man, that should be neighbor to thy righteousness, because the
enemy has persecuted my soul, and compassed me about with such darkness of
his deceit, as that believing my self to be dead with God, I thought I should
find no hearing with thy righteousness for my recovery: therefore is my
spirit troubled within me. It is plain then by the judgment of Arnobius, that
not only in comparison of God, but even by that righteousness that belongs
unto man, no man living shall be found just before the judgment seat of God.
Euthymius whom he alleges next, is as plain to the same purpose. For
although with Arnobius he on the one side deny justification in comparison of
God, in comparison of whom, says he, not only man, but neither the Angels
themselves are just, because it is he only that is not capable of sin, yet
not contented herewi^h, he on the other side expounds the prayer of the
Prophet in this sort; Euthym. in Psalm. 142. Id est, non districte mecu^ agas in
futuro: ad te fugio and non sum dignus vocari filius tuus, nec ego tecum
intr^re in iudicium volo, nec constituo iustitiam meam quod non iustificab^tur
hic in carne vbi nemo hic viuen^ p^eno mundus est.
Enter not into judgment, etc. that is, deal not strictly with me in the time
to come: I fly unto thee, and am not worthy to be called thy son, neither
will I enter into judgment with thee, neither do I set up mine own
righteousness, because it shall not be justified here in the flesh, where no
man living is perfectly clean. He further adds reasons of the using of this
prayer, Ibidem. Quotidie peccamus: Pauca bona facimus in comparatione
comm^ssionis and omissionis: minima bona faci^^^ in comparatione beneficiorum
Dei.
because we daily sin; because we do few good deeds in comparison of that
that we commit (in evil) and omit (in good): because we do little good in
comparison of the benefits of God. Now then what is become of Master Bishops
righteousness, so perfect as that it fails not in any duty which we are
bound to perform; yea, such as by which we merit everlasting life? Compare the
one with the other, gentle Reader, and thou shall see how well they agree. S.
Austine in the place alleged, has nothing at all concerning this text,
nothing at all concerning the righteousness of man. Only he says of the
Angels, that August. cont. Priscill. and Origin. ad Oros. cap. 10. Cuius
participatione iusti su^t, eius co^paratione nec iusti sunt.
although by participation of God they be just, yet in comparison of God they
be not just. Now if the Prophets words be to be taken as M. Bishop construeth
them, then this prayer must be the prayer of Angels as well as of men, because
by the testimony of Austine, which Euthymius also observes, the very Angels
themselves are not just in comparison of God. Now we do not any where find
that it belongs to the Angels to pray in this sort, and therefore it must be
so understood as is proper unto men. And that understanding thereof, the same
S. Austine declares to us writing upon that Psalm: Jdem. in Psalm. 142.
Quantumlibet rectus mihi videor, producis tu de thesauro tuo regulam; coaptas
me ad eam and prauus inuen^or.
Howsoever I seem to my self right and straight, yet thou bring a rule out
of thy treasury; thou laiest me to it, and I am found faulty. The words
therefore import that not only by comparison, but by rule of righteousness
which God has prescribed to man, every man living is found failing of
righteousness in the sight of God, even as elsewhere he says: Ide^ de peccat.
mer. and remiss. li. 2. ca. 10. Qua^tu^ ad integerrimam regula^ veritatis eius
pertinet, non iustificabitur, etc.
According to the most entire rule of his truth, no man living shall be
justified in his sight. Which he declares yet more plainly in his foresaid
exposition upon the Psalm, when he teaches that by the same defaults for
which we pray daily unto God, forgive us our trespasses, it comes to pass
that no man living shall be justified in Gods sight, Ide^ In Psalm. 142. Dicant
Apostoli, dicant, Dimitte nobis, etc. Et cum eis dictum fuerit, Quare hoc
dicitu? quae sunt debita vestra? respondeant, Quoniam no^ iustificabitur, etc.
Let the Apostles themselves say, let them say, forgive us our trespasses. And
when it shall be said unto them, why do ye say thus? What are your trespasses?
let them answer, Because no man living shall be justified in thy sight.
Gregory's mind is sufficiently plain by that that has been said before. For
what though he say that the righteousness of men and Angels is nothing in
comparison of God? Does that import that there is nothing else meant by the
Prophet, when he prays unto God not to enter into judgment with him? By this
then we may see the lewd consciences of these men in citing the authorities of
the ancient Fathers. He has brought us here a great company of their names
for him, when there is not one of them but speaks expressly against him, and
the most of them in the self same places whence he alleges them. But he
tells us further, that his exposition is taken out of Job, from whom he
alleges these words; Job. 9.2.
I know truly it is even so, that no man compared to God shall be justified. In
which sort it is true, that we also read the words in some of our translations,
but it is true also that the word of comparison is not at all found in the
Hebrew text. Therefore Arias Montanus translateth it ad verbum thus: Quid
iustificabit se homo cu^ Deo?
Why will a man justify himself with God? Pagnine thus; Quomodo instificabit
se homo cum Deo?
How will a man justify himself with God? S. Austine also reads to the same
effect, Aug. de piece. mer. and remiss. li. 2. ca. 10. Que^ admodum iustus erit
homo ante Deum?
How shall a man be just before God? Therefore these words of Job have nothing
at all, whereupon that exposition of his may have any ground, and though Job
had said, that man in comparison of God is not just or cannot be justified, yet
it follows not that that therefore should be all that David meant in saying,
that no man living shall be justified in Gods sight. And that appears by S.
Austine in the place now alleged, where bringing in the words of Job; Job. 20.
If I shall call my self just, my mouth shall speak wickedly; he expounds
the same thus: August. ibid. Si me iustum dixero contra iudicium eius vbi
perfecta illa iustitiae regula me ^onmucit iniustum, profecto impie loquetur
(...) me^^.
If I shall call my self just against his judgment where the perfect rule of
righteousness proves me to be unjust, surely my mouth shall speak wickedly,
and in respect hereof says, that those words were used by David: Enter not
into judgment, etc. For this cause then are we taught so to pray, because the
perfect rule of righteousness proves us to be unjust if God enter into
judgment with us. By this place therefore we wholly overthrow the
righteousness of man, and do firmly prove, that no man living either
generally in the course of his life, or in any particular act or acts can be
justified before God, if God call him to the trial of the precise and perfect
rule of righteousness and truth. Yea, if no man can be found just in the sight
of God, then it must necessarily follow, that no act of man can be found just,
because the act must needs be according to the condition and quality of the
man, so that unless a man be fully and perfectly just, no act fully and
perfectly just can proceed from him, but must needs have a stain of that
sin which bereaueth him of the title of a just man.

48. W. BISHOP.
One other ordinary hackney of theirs, is that out of the Prophet. All our
righteousness is as a menstruous or defiled cloth. Esaias. ^4.
The which I have already rid to death in the beginning of the question of
justification, where it was alleged: The answer is briefly, that the Prophet
praying for the sins of the people, speaks in the person of the sinful;
such as the common sort of them were, who had more sins then good works, and
so their righteousness was like unto a spotted and stained cloth. Now this
disprooueth not, but that their good works although but few, yet were free
from all spots of iniquity: it only proves, that with their few good, they
had a great number of evil, which defiled their righteousness, and made it
like a stained cloth.

R. ABBOT.
He has so rid this hackney of ours, as that he has pitifully galled himself
in the riding of him. We do imagine that by that time he has better advised of
this whole matter, he will think that some body did ride him when first he
took this business in hand. We may here see the blind insolency of a
presumptuous vain man, who having said nothing but what is justly to be
derided and scorned, yet takes upon him as if he had given us some very
admirable and learned answer. Yea, in this very place he bableth as if his wits
were to seek, crossing and thwarting that in one line which he utters in
another. He tells us that the words of Esaias were spoken in the person of the
sinful, who had more sins then good works, and so their righteousness was
like unto a spotted and stained cloth: and yet by and by he says, that their
good works though but few, were free from all spots of iniquity. Again as
uncertain where to stand, he tells us, that their evil works defiled their
righteousness, and made it like a stained cloth. If their good works were
free from all spots of iniquity, how did their evil works defile them, and make
them like a stained cloth? Or if their evil works did defile their good, and
make them like a stained cloth, how were they free from all spots of
iniquity? Again, we would demand of him, how sinful, or as he has called
them before, evil and wicked men should do good works free from all spots of
iniquity, seeing our Savior so plainly says, that Mat. 7.18. Luke 6.43.
an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, no more then we can gather
grapes of thorns or figs of thistles. S. Paul tells us, that Tit. 2.15.
to them that are unclean nothing is pure, their minds and consciences being
defiled. Which made S. Bernard to say, that Bern. in Cant. Ser. 71. Si fuerit
n^^us in conscientia, nec quod ex ea prodieri^ carebit naeuo.
if there be a blemish or blot in the conscience, nothing that comes from it
shall be without a blot. How then can it stand good which M. Bishop says, that
sinful and wicked men do good works which are free from all spots of
iniquity? But thus he turns all vpside down, and according to the present
occasion, lets go whatsoever comes next to hand, without fear or wit.
But upon the place I need not to stand. I refer the Reader to that that has
been Sent. 3.
before said thereof, where it has been showed, that the Prophet by way of
prophecy endited the prayer in the name of the faithful that were to live in
the desolations of Jerusalem and the Temple; that the prayer of the Prophet
Daniel, at that time fully expresses the effect of the same prayer of Esaias:
and therefore that it is the confession of the faithful and godly, that their
righteousness is as a stained cloth, and that the ancient Fathers have used
the place for proof thereof.

49 W. BISHOP.
3. There is not a man who does not sin: And blessed is the man whose sins
be not imputed to him; and such like. I answer that the best men sin
venially, and are happy when those their sins be pardoned: but all this is
clean besides this question, where it is only enquired, whether the good
works that the just do, be free from sin, and not whether they at other
times do sin, at the least venially. This is all which M. Perkins here and
there obiecteth against this matter: but because some others do allege also
some dark places out of the Fathers, I think it not amiss to solue them here
together.

S. Cyprian says: That the besieged mind of man, can hardly resist all
assaults of the enemy: for when covetousness is overthrown, up starts
lechery, and so forth.

Answer. All this is true, that the life of man is a perpetual warfare: yet
man assisted with the grace of God, may perform it most valiantly, and never
take any mortal wound of the enemies: although through his own frailty he may
be sometimes foiled.

Dial. 1. cap. Pelag.
S. Hierome affirms: That then we are just when we confess our selves to be
sinners.

Answer. That all just men confess themselves to sin venially: but neither
of these places come near the point in question, that not one good deed of
the just man, is without some spot or stain of sin.

Epict. 29.
S. Austine has these words: Most perfect charity which cannot be increased, is
to be found in no man in this life: and as long as it may be increased, that
which is less then it ought to be, is faulty, of which fault it proceeds,
that there is no man who does good, and does not sin. All this we grant to
be true: that no man has so perfect charity in this life, but that sometimes
he does less then he ought to do: and consequently does not so well, but that
now and then he sins at the least venially, and that therefore the said holy
Doctor had just cause to say: Woe be to the laudable life of a man, Lib. 9.
confess. cap. 13.
if it be examined without mercy. All which notwithstanding just men may out of
that charity which they have in this life do many good works, which are pure
from all sin as has been proved. They allege yet another place out of S.
Austine: Lib. 3. con. duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 7.
That belongs unto the perfection of a just man, to know in truth his
imperfection, and in humility to confess it. True: that is as he teaches
elsewhere. First, that the perfection of this life is imperfection, being
compared with the perfection of the life to come. Again, that the most perfect
in this life, has many imperfections, both of wit and will, and thereby many
light faults.

Now come we unto S. Gregory our blessed Apostle, out of whose sweet words ill
understood, they seem to have sucked this their poison. He says: The holy man
Job, Lib. 9. moral. cap. 1.
because he did see all the merit of our virtue to be vice, if it be straightly
examined of the inward Judge, does rightly add, if I will contend with him, I
cannot answer him one for a thousand.

I answer, that by our virtue in that place, is to be understood, that virtue
which we have of our own strength, without the aid of Gods grace; which we
acknowledge to be commonly infected with some vice: that S. Gregory so took
it, appears by the words, both going before and following: before he writes
thus: A man not compared to God, received justice: but compared unto him, he
leeseth it. For whosoever compares himself unto the author of all good,
leeseth that good which he had received: for he that does attribute the good
unto himself, does fight against God with his own gifts: And after thus: To
contend with God, is not to give to God the glory of his virtue, but to take it
to himself. And so all the merit of this our virtue, which comes not of God,
but is attributed unto our self, as proceeding only from our selves, is the
very vice of pride, and cannot be prejudicial unto true good works, all which
we acknowledge to proceed principally from the grace of God dwelling in us. He
says further with S. Augustine, that in this life we cannot attain unto
perfect purity, such as shall be in heaven, read the beginning of his first
and second book of Morals, and there you shall find him commending Job to the
skies, as a good and holy man, by his temptations not foiled, but much
advanced in virtue.

R. ABBOT.
These arguments the most of them are foisted in of his own head, there being
none of ours that alleges them to that purpose to which he produces them.
But thus because he would be taken for a valiant warrior, he makes himself a
man of straw to fight with, and with all his might bestirreth himself against
a shadow. But the worth of his answers is first to be seen in that which he
says to the words of the Apostle; Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not sin. The best men sin
venially, says he, and are happy when those their sins be pardoned. Now the
Apostle expounds the forgiveness, or not imputing of sin there spoken of,
to be the imputation of righteousness. But the forgiveness of their venial
sins, is not the imputation of righteousness, because without any
forgiveness of venial sins, a man continues righteous and just, as wherein
there is no breach of justice and righteousness, and notwithstanding the same
a man is just in the sight of God, as out of the Romish doctrine was showed in
the section last saving one. Therefore forgiveness of sins spoken of in that
place, cannot be understood of venial sins. Again, he maintains in the
question of Satisfaction, that forgiveness of sins takes not away the
temporal punishment of sin. How then is a man happy, when those venial
sins be pardoned, if for want of satisfaction he remain still to pay dear
for them, as he speaks in his Epistle, in Purgatory fire?

He brings in a place of Cyprian, as idly as he did the former texts. To
that which he says we answer him, that it is by the grace of Christ through
the forgiveness of sins, that the wounds which the faithful man receives, be
not mortal. His foiles and wounds of themselves are such, as that he must say
with David: Psalm. 130.3.
If thou, O Lord, be extreme to mark iniquities, who can stand? Aug. in Psalm.
129. Vidit prope tota^ vita^ humana^ circu^latrari peccatis suit, accusari
omnes co^scientias cogitationibus suis; non inueniri castum cor praesumens de
iustitia sua. Si ergo cor castu^ non potest inuenirs, quod praesumat de sua
iustitia prasumat omnium cor de miserecordia Dei, and dicat, si, etc.
He saw, says S. Austine, the whole life of man in a manner to be barked at on
every side with his sins; all consciences to be accused by their own
thoughts; that there is not a clean heart found, that can presume of it own
righteousness; If then ther^ cannot be found a clean heart, which may presume
of it own righteousness, let the hearts of all presume upon the mercy of God,
and say, If thou markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall abide it? Let Master
Bishop mark it well, that in this warfare there is no heart clean that can
presume of it own righteousness, and that we have nothing to rest upon, but
only Gods mercy.

To the place of Hierome, he says, that all just men confess themselves to
sin venially. But just men confess their sins in the same meaning as they
say, Forgive us our trespasses. They say, Forgive us our trespasses, as S.
Austin says the Apostles did, as we heard before, for those sins for which
they say also, Enter not into judgment with thy servants, for in thy sight no
man living shall be justified. They confess therefore such sins as hinder
them from being justified in the sight of God, which M. Bishop says his
venial sins do not. The repeating of the whole sentence of Hierome, is a
sufficient answer to him, the latter part whereof he concealeth, because it
takes away his gloss upon the former: Hieron cont. Pelag li. 1. Tunc iusti
^umus qua^do nos peccatores fatemur et iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito,
sed ex Dei consistit miserecordia.
Then are we just when we confess our selves to be sinners, and our
righteousness stands not upon our own merit, but upon the mercy of God. If
our righteousness consist in the acknowledgement of our sins, and in the
mercy of God, pardoning and forgiving the same, then is there in us no such
perfection as M. Bishop speaks of, neither can any work come from us, that
can have the title of absolute and perfect righteousness before God. And this
will be yet more by that that in the next place is alleged out of Saint
Austine, who noting diverse degrees of charity, says that Aug. epist. 29.
Plenissima charitas qua ia^ augeri non potest quamdiu hic homo vinit est in
nemine. Qua^di^ autem augeri potest, profecto quicquid minus est quam ^ebet ex
vitio est.
the most perfect charity no further to be increased, is in no man so long as
he lives here, and so long as it may be increased, that that is less then it
ought to be, is by reason of a corruption or default. Now hereto Saint Austine
adds, not only that which Master Bishop mentions, though he mention it
also by half; Ex quo vitio (...) est iustu^, etc.
By reason of which Vitij nomen maxim solet esse corruption. Aug. de li. a^^i^.
lib 3. cap. 14.
corruption, there is not a man just upon earth, which does good and sins
not, but also another sentence which he concealeth, Ex quo vitio non
iustifica^^tur, etc.
By reason of which corruption, no man living shall be justified in the sight
of God. Now if by reason of a corruption remaining in us, there be such an
imperfection of charity, which is the substance of inherent justice, as that no
man living shall be justified in Gods sight, then can no good work proceed
from us, which can be said to be perfectly and entierly go^d. For from an
imperfect cause, cannot come a perfect effect. Bern in Cant. ser. 71. Si radix
in vitio and ramus.
If the root be faulty, the branch also must be so. A lame leg cannot yield
an upright and steadfast gate. Therefore needs must there be a lamenesse and
blemish in all the good works that issue from us. For charity is not such as
it ought to be, till we love the Lord our God with all our soul. But Aug. de
perfect. iustit. Cum est aliquid concupiscentiae carnalis, etc. no^ omnimodo ex
tota anima diligitur Deus.
so long as there is any carnal concupiscence, God is not loved with all the
soul. And so long as we live here, there is carnal concupiscence against the
law of the mind. Therefore so long as we live here, charity is never perfect
in us as it ought to be, neither can any perfect good work be effected by us.
M. Bishop minceth and qualifieth the matter, that no man has so perfect
charity, but that sometimes he does less then he ought to do. But the argument
proves, that charity is always imperfect in this life, and therefore not
sometimes only, but always a man does less then he ought to do. There is
always a blot that staineth our charity, Hilar. apud August. cont. Julian.
lib. 2. Supra sect. 44.
by reason whereof we have nothing in us clean, nothing innocent, as before
was cited out of Hilary; and therefore it can yield no works that are free
from blot and stain. But the Reader is here to note the constancy of this
man, who affirms here, that no man has so perfect charity in this life, but
that sometimes he does less then he ought to do, whereas before he has told
us of a righteousness so perfect in this life, as that Sect. 45.
it fails not in any duty which we are bound to perform. Thus giddily he
runs to and fro, being uncertain what to say, and never knowing where he
may stand sure. Now here he says, that the other saying of Austine, Woe to the
laudable life of man, if it be examined without mercy, is spoken in respect of
venial sins, whereas Austine uses the words in respect of hell fire, which
they say is not incident to their venial sins. For having professed that he
he durst not say, that after baptism no word went out of his mothers mouth
against Gods commandment, and that Christ says, that if a man say to his
brother, fool, he is guilty of hell fire, he adds these words; Aug. Confess.
lib. 9. cap. 13. Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum si remota misericordia
discutias eam.
And woe even to the commendable life of man, if thou set aside mercy in the
examining (or sifting) of it. To which purpose he says also in another place;
Idem. In Psalm. 42. Quicunque hic vi^^^ quantumlibet just viuat, vae illi si
cu^ illa in iudicium intrauerit Deus.
Whosoever lives here, howsoever justly he live, woe unto him, if God enter
into judgment with him. In which sort Arnobius also says, Arno. in Psalm. 135.
Vae nebis si quod debemus exegerit; vae nobis si quod debet reddiderit.
Woe unto us if he require what we owe to him; woe unto us if he pay what he
owes to us. These woes are not uttered in respect of Purgatory or any
temporal affliction, but in respect of the issue of that final dreadful
judgment, the sentence whereof shall stand for ever. Now if they have learned
by the word of God to denounce this woe, then woe to M. Bishop, that to the
contrary defends a righteousness so perfect in this life, as that his
righteous man Sect. 4.
needs not greatly to fear the rigorous sentence of a just Judge, as who
fails not in any duty that he is bound to perform; who can keep himself
from all but venial sins, which are easily forgiven Rhem. Testam. Annot.
Mat. 10.12. Sext. Proaema^: glossa.
by the Bishops blessing, by holy water, by knocking the breast, by saying a
Pater noster, by extreme unction, and some other such devotions madly devised
to that end. As touching the other place of Austine, it has been already
showed, that our righteousness in this life is imperfect, not only by
comparison, but simply in it self, and according to that that here is required
of us, The imperfections of wit and will, which M. Bishop speaks of, are so
great and so many, as that if he did but with a feeling heart and conscience
consider the same, he would find that there is small cause in the most perfect
of this life, to plead for that perfection that he maintains. But being a
man of a frosen and dead heart, and neither knowing others nor himself, by the
name of many light faults he passes over those things which make the most
righteous and just to groan under the burden of them, and to say with David,
Psalm. 38.4.
Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are like a sore burden, too heavy
for me to bear: Psalm. 40.12.
My sins have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up, they
are more in number then the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me. Tush
says M. Bishop, what need all this ado? all these are but light and venial
faults; but hereby we conceive that neither his will nor his wit have indeed
that perfection, that it were fit they should have. His answer to the words of
Gregory is ridiculous and childish. Gregory forsooth by our virtue means the
virtue that we have of our own strength, when as Gregory teaches, that we
have no virtue of our own strength, but only by the gift of God. Greg. Moral.
lib. 24. cap. 5. Iustitia nostra dicitur non quae ex nostro nostra est, sed
quae diuina largitate fit nostra.
It is called our righteousness, says he in another place, not which is ours
of our own, but which by the gift of God becomes ours. According to this
meaning, he says, that Ibid. li. 9 ca. 1. Sanctus vir quia omne virtu^is
nostrae meritum vitium esse c^nspexit, si ab interno arbitro districte
iudicetur, recte subiungit. si voluero, etc.
the holy man Job, because he saw all the merit of our virtue to be vice if it
be strictly judged by the internal Judge, did rightly add, If I will contend
with him, I shall not be able to answer him one for a thousand. He applies his
speech to Jobs righteousness, which he had no cause to imagine, that Job
alleged as attained unto by his own strength. And shall we be so mad, as to
think that if Job had been perfect by a righteousness received by the gift of
God, he would say he could not therefore answer God, because he saw all the
merit of the virtue that he had by his own strength to be but vice? It is
strange to see that these men should be so blind, as not to see the gross
absurdity of these shifts. Gregory spoke to the instruction of his hearers,
whom surely he thought not to be worse then the Pharisee, but knew that they
attributed their virtue and righteousness to the gift of God; and of that
righteousness which they confessed to be Gods good gift, teaches them to
acknowledge, that through our weakness and frailty, it becomes defective and
faulty, if God call it to precise and strict examination and judgment. Even as
elsewhere he says again; Ibid cap. 11. Omnis humana iustitia iniustitia esse
c^nuincitur, si districte iudicetur. Prece ergo post iustitia^ ind^get, vt quae
succumbere discussa poterat ipsa iudicis pietate conualescat.
All the righteousness of man is convicted to be unrighteousness, if it be
strictly judged: it needs therefore prayer after righteousness, that that
which being sifted might quail, by the mere piety of the Judge may go for
good. Where I hope that M. Bishop, though he will say much, yet will not say,
that Gregory meant that we should pray, that the righteousness which we do of
our own strength, by the piety and clemency of the Judge may stand for good.
And if he dare not so say, then it follows that of that righteousness, which
in this life we attain to by the gift of God. Gregory says, that it is found
to be defective, and to come short of perfect righteousness, and thereby to be
unrighteousness, if severe and strict account be taken of it; which more
peremptorily he affirms elsewhere, saying: Ibid. ca. 18. Si remota pietate
discutimur, opus nostrum paena dignu^ est quod remunerari praemijs
praestolamur, etc. Restat vt postqua^ bonu^ opus agitur lachrymae expiationis
exqu^ra^tur quatenus ad aeterna praemia meritum recti operis subuebat humilitas
postulationis.
If we be judged without mercy, our work is worthy to be punished, which we
expect to have rewarded. Therefore the tears of expiation, as he speaks, are
required, that humble prayer may lift up the merit of our good work, to the
obtaining of eternal reward. So that howsoever he commend Job, as well he
might, sure I am that both Job and he condemn M. Bishop, as a proud Pharisee,
maintaining the righteousness of man against the righteousness of God, to the
impeaching of the glory of God. Which he does also by his quillet of
attributing good works principally to the grace of God, not wholly but
principally, that so he may reserve some place at least to the free will of
man, because he cannot endure that no part of glory should redound to man. To
be short, it appears both by that that is said here, and that that has been
Sect. 4.44 45.
before alleged, that Gregory does not bereave man only of that perfection
that shall be in heaven, but also of that that is required, and by duty ought
to be in him here upon the earth.

50. W. BISHOP.
Now before I depart from this large question of justification, I will handle
yet one other question, which commonly arises about it: it is, Whether Faith
may be without Charity.

I prove that it may so be: first out of these words of our Savior: Many
shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, Math. 7.
have we not prophesied in thy name, have we not cast out devils, have we not
done many miracles? to whom I will confess, that I never knew you, depart from
me all ye that work iniquity. That these men believed in Christ, and
persuaded themselves assuredly to be of the elect, appears by their confident
calling of him, Lord, Lord, and the rest that follows: yet Christ declares
manifestly that they wanted charity, in saying that they were workers of
iniquity.

2. When the King went to see his guests, Math. 22.
He found there a man not attired in his wedding garment, and therefore
commanded him to be cast into utter darkness. This man had faith, or else he
had not been admitted unto that table which signifies the Sacraments: yet
wanted charity, which to be the wedding garment, besides the evidence of the
text is also proved, where in express terms, Apoc. 1^.
The garments of Christ's Spouse is declared to be the righteousness and good
works of the Saints. And that with great reason: for as S. Paul teaches: 1.
Cor. 13:
Faith shall not remain after this life: With what instrument then (trow you)
will the Protestants lay hold on Christ's righteousness?

That charity is that wedding garment, S. Hierome upon the same place does
witness, saying: That it is the fulfilling of our Lords commandments. And S.
Gregory does in express words define it. Him. ^8. in Euang. Can. ^2 in Mat.
Tract ^^m Ma^^ Math. 25.
What (says he) must we understand by the wedding garment but charity: So do
S. Hilary, and Origin: and S. Chrysostom upon that place.

3. The like argument is made of the foolish Virgins, who were part of the
Kingdom of God, and therefore had faith, which is the gate and entrance into
the service of God. Yea in the house of God, they aspired unto more then
ordinary perfection, having professed Virginity, yet either carried away with
vain glory, as S. Gregory takes it, or not giving themselves to the works of
mercy, spiritual and corporal, as S. Chrysostom expounds it: briefly not
continuing in their former charity (for faith once had, cannot after the
Protestants doctrine be lost) were shut out of the kingdom of heaven, albeit
they presumed strongly on the assurance of their salvation, as is apparent by
their confident demanding to be let in: for they said, Lord, Lord, open unto
us.

John. 12.
4. Many of the Princes believed in Christ, but did not confess him: for they
loved more the glory of men, then the glory of God. What can be more evident,
then that these men had faith? when the holy Ghost says expressly, that they
believed in Christ, which is the only act of faith: and yet were destitute of
charity, which prefers the glory and service of God, before all things in
this world.

R. ABBOT.
That there may be faith without charity we make no question, but the question
is of that faith whereby we are justified, or wherein stands our justification
before God. It is to be known, that faith is of diverse sorts: there is a faith
which is called Tit. 1.1.
the faith of the elect, as being peculiar unto them, and for which men are
called Ephe. 1.1.
faithful: and there is a faith by which the Iam. 2.19.
devils also are said to believe, and yet are not to be called faithful. There
is a faith whereby we Ibid.
believe that there is one God: and there is another faith, whereby John. 14.1.
we believe in God. There is a faith whereby Simon Magus Act 8.13.21.
believed, whose heart was not right in the sight of God, and there is a Act.
15.9.
faith whereby God purifieth the heart. There is a Iam 2 20.
dead faith, and there is a Gal. 2.20.
faith whereby we live, and Christ lives in us. There is a 1 Timothy 1.5.
faith unfeigned, and thereby we understand, that there is also a fained faith.
There is a faith that consiste^h in Oecumen in Iac. ca. 2. De simplici assensu
fide^ dicere solemus, etc. Rursum co^secutionem ex affectu procede^tem cum
firmo assensu nomine fidei vocamus.
bare assent of the understanding, and there is a faith that implies the
affection of the heart and will. There is a faith whereby John 3.15.
he which believes shall never perish: and there is a faith whereby some ^^k.
8.13.
believe for a time, and in time of temptation go away. There is a faith which
the world 2. Tim. 2.18.
destroys, and there is 1. John. 5.4.
a faith which is our victory, whereby we overcome the world. According to
these differences, there is Iam. 2.14
a faith without works, and there is Gal. 5.6.
a faith which works by love. We affirm then of the faith of the elect,
whereby we believe in God, to which the promise of justification and eternal
life is made, that it is a faith which cannot be separated from charity and
good works, but wheresoever it is, there is infallibly joined with it the love
of God, bringing forth Phil. 1.11.
the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and
praise of God. Now as touching this faith M. Bishops arguments must be
understood, or else they are nothing against us, and being so understood, a man
would wonder that a wise man should show so much folly, to bring arguments so
impertinent and frivolous, as he has done. The first is taken from the words
of reprobate hypocrites, who Mat. 7.22.
at that day shall say unto Christ, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name, etc. to whom he shall profess, saying, I never knew you, depart from me
ye workers of iniquity. They shall say, Lord, Lord; therefore they believed in
Christ, and were persuaded assuredly that they were of the elect; the
conclusion as well agreeing to the antecedent, as a goose feather to a foxes
tail. It is to be noted, that faith is grounded upon the word of God, and the
thing which it believes, is that that God has said. Thus the Apostle tells
us, that, Romans 10.17.
faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; and therefore calls the
word of God Ver. 8.
the word of faith, because that is the object and matter of faith. Whatsoever
we conceive toward God beside the word of God, it is opinion, imagination,
presumption, but faith it is not. Now the word of God denounces, that Psalm.
11.6.
the soul of the Lord hates them that love iniquity; that Psalm. 92 9.
all the workers of iniquity shall be destroyed, that Christ shall say to them
at the last day, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. If then there be no
faith but by the word of God, and the word of God denounce destruction to the
workers of iniquity, how can it be said that the workers of iniquity have
faith to persuade themselves assuredly, that they are of the elect? S. Austine
says, Aug. de verb. Dom. ser. Qui fidem h^bet sine spe and dilectione Christu^
esse credit, non in Christum credit.
He who has faith without hope and charity, believes that Christ is, but he
believes not in Christ. For Cyprian. de simplic. praelat. Credere se in
Christum quomodo dicit qui non facit quod Christus facere praecepit?
how does he say that he believes in Christ, says Cyprian, who does not what
Christ has commanded us to do? How then does M. Bishop say, that these believe
in Christ, in whom he confesses there is no charity, no love to Christ to do
those things which he commands? They of whom Christ speaks as the words
very plainly import, are heretics, schismatikes, false Apostles, false
teachers, yea and such also, as though they preach the truth of Christ, yet
preach it not truly and sincerely, but Phil. 1.15.18.
of envy and strife, and under a pretense, who under the name of Christ Gap.
2.21.
seek their own, and not that that is Christ's, making the word of God to
serve them, and themselves not serving it; using the Gospel for their purpose,
when they have no true purpose for the Gospel: Psalm. 50.16.17
taking the testament (of Christ) in their mouths, but hating to be reformed
thereby; Tit. 1.16.
professing to know God when by their deeds they deny him. To the name of
Christ even in the mouths of such wicked men, God sometimes does that honor,
as that miracles are done thereby, devils are cast out, and great effects are
wrought, wherein they much glory, and in respect thereof assume much unto
themselves. These in the end, not of faith, but for fear, when they shall see
that which they believed not, that Phil. 3.19.
damnation is their end, shall in perplexity of mind cry unto Christ, who^
before they regarded not, and therefore by him now shall be rejected. Of such,
though professing to know God, and prophesying in the name of Christ, yet the
Apostle says as the vulgar Latin translateth, and as the word well bears,
that they are Tit. 1 16.
unbelievers, yea as Thomas Aquinas expounds it, Thom. Aquin. in Tit. 1.
lect. 4. Non apti ad credendum.
not fit to believe. And if they be unbelievers, why does M. Bishop say they
have faith? or if they have faith, why does the Apostle say that they are
unbelievers? Surely they that believe destruction to be the end of the works of
iniquity, will be careful to avoid the same. Cyprian truly says: Cyprian. de
simplic. praelat. Metueret conscientiae nostra si crederet; quia non credit
omnino nce metu^t: si autem crederet and caueret. Si caueret, euaderet.
Our conscience would be afraid if it did believe: because it believes not,
therefore it fears not. If it did believe, it would take heed, and if it did
take, it should avoid or escape, namely the punishments to come, whereof he
speaks in that place. The cause why men Heb. 4.2.
profit not by the word of God, is because it is not mingled with faith in
those that hear it. Where there is faith, men profit by it, and it is the 2.
Cor. 2.16.
savor of life unto life; but where faith is wanting, it comes to pass
which Ambrose says: Ambros in. 1 Thessalonians. ca. 4. Tra^seunt hinc in gehennam vt
ediscant verum esse quod credere noluerunt.
They go from hence to hell, that there they may learn that that is true which
here they would not believe. Thus it comes to pass with them of whom M.
Bishop here speaks, who either preach their own devices under the name of
Christ, or mingle not that with faith in themselves, which they preach to be
believed of other men. There is not so much as one word in the text whence he
should conclude, that ever they were endued with true faith.

The next of his arguments is taken from the man that came to the wedding,
Math. 22.11.
not having on a wedding garment. This argument he handles very learnedly.
First, he says, that this man had faith; which because he knew we would deny,
therefore for proof thereof, he adds, that else he had not been admitted to
the table which signifies the sacraments. But this needs as much proof as
all the rest, nay it cannot be proved at all. For men are admitted to the
sacraments by men, and they are admitted for profession of faith, when they
that admit them cannot tell whether they have faith or not. For as Hilary
says, Hilar. in Mat. ca. 22. In fallendis hominibus plurimum artis solet
habere simulatio. Et paulo post. Humana simplicitas difficile fraudulentiam
simulatae mentis intelligit.
hypocrisy is wont to use much art to deceive men, and humane simplicity
hardly perceives the fraud of a dissembling mind. Many pretend that which is
not in them, and make profession of faith with the mouth, when in the heart
they have no faith at all. Aug. in Psalm. 7. Postquam in tanto culmine nomen
coepit esse Christianu^, creuit hypocrisis; id est, simulatio eorum qui nomine
Christiano malunt hominibus placere quam Deo.
Since the name of Christianity has begun to be in so high regard, the
hypocrisy of men has increased; that is, the dissembling of them who by
bearing the name of Christians, regard more to please men then God. Now since
all these are admitted to the sacraments, and yet 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Tho. Aqui.
ibid. Licet videantur habere eam, non tamen habent veram.
all have not faith, it follows not, that because men are admitted to the
sacraments, therefore they have faith; nay, it is a very ridiculous and
childish proof. Wherefore as it is said, that this man wanted charity, so we
say that he wanted also faith, and so M. Bishop is become as wise a man as he
was before. Let him then expound the wedding garment to be charity, it shall
hurt us nothing. For we will answer him that he wanted the wedding garment of
charity, because he wanted faith: for had he had true faith, he should also
have had love, because Gal. 5.6.
faith works by love. But the wedding garment is as well faith as love. It is
indeed Jesus Christ himself, of whom the Apostle says; Romans 13.14.
Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; and again, Gal. 3.27.
so many as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Him we put on first
by faith, thereby making him ours, and applying to our selves the benefit of
his redemption, that appearing before God in the scarlet garment of his
obedience to bloodshed and death, we may by forgiveness of sins be accepted
for his sake, and thenceforth the residue of our spiritual attire may be put
upon us, whilst in putting on Christ, we put on Ephe. 4.24.
the new man, which according to God is created in righteousness and holiness
of truth; whilst we Col. 3.12.
put on the bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long
suffering, whilst by growing and increasing, we are still 1 Thessalonians. 5.8.
putting on the brestplate of faith, and love, and the hope of salvation for an
helmet. Thus Chrysostom truly and rightly says, that Chrysostom. Op. imperf.
hom. 44. Nuptiale vestimentum est fides veraquae est per Iesum Christum and
iustitia eiu^, etc.
the wedding garment is true faith, which is by Jesus Christ and the
righteousness thereof, or his righteousness. And thus Ferus, one of M.
Bishops own Doctors has taught us, that the wedding garment which is Christ,
is put on two manner of ways: Perus in Mat. cap. 22. Primo interne per fide^
cum peccatu tuis superinduu Christi iustitia^, etc. Dein^e cum externe
charitatem eius aemulaeris.
first inwardly by faith, when upon our sins we put on his righteousness:
then outwardly when we imitate his love. The place which he alleges out of
the Revelation, contains nothing to the contrary, Apoc. 19.8.
The fine linen (wherewith the bride and spouse of Christ is araied) is (...).
the righteousnesses of Saints, for so is the word in the plural number. Here
is then first Romans 4.5.11
the righteousness of faith fully perfect in the blood of Christ, by the
imputation of his obedience and merits; and secondly the righteousness of good
works and inward conformity unto God begun in this life, and fully to be
perfected at the resurrection of the dead, when Christ shall make his Church
Ephe. 5.27.
a glorious Church; not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but to be
holy and without blame. But the exception which he makes, why faith can be no
part of this wedding garment, is worthy to be noted. He has before told us,
that the wedding supper imports the Sacraments, the use whereof is only in
this life; and here says, that faith cannot be the wedding garment, because
faith remains not after this life. How many mile to London? a poke full of
plummes. But howsoever that be, his wisdom might conceive, that since the
last judgment depends respectively upon that that has been precedent in
this life, therefore as with him the righteousness and good works of the
Saints which they have wrought here, are their wedding garment for the last
day, so we may also truly say, that the faith whereby in this life we believe
in Christ, shall be our wedding garment then, when as Saint Peter says, 1. Pet
1^.
we shall receive the end of our faith, which is the salvation of our souls.
He alleges Hierome for his purpose very falsely, or at leastwise very vainly.
The words of Hierome are these: Hieron. in Math. cap. 22 Vestis nuptialis
praecepta sunt Domini and opera quae complentur ex lege and Eua^gelio, nouique
hominis efficient vestimentum.
The wedding garment are the commandments of the Lord, and the works which
are made up of the law and the Gospel, and do make the garment of the new man.
Why does he allege these words to exclude faith from being a part of the
wedding garment, when as one of the commandments of the Lord, as S. John
tells us is this, 1. John. 3.23.
that we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ; when as John. 6.29.
this is the work of God, as our Savior says, that is, a work that God has
commanded, and wherein he is pleased, that we believe in him whom he has
sent: when as the works that are made up of the law and the Gospel, consist
not only in charity but in faith also. I stand not upon the rest of the
testimonies which he brings: for though any do by occasion name charity for
the wedding garment, as men by diverse occasions speak diversely thereof: yet no
man was ever so absurd, as expressly to exclude true faith from being one part
of it, as M. Bishop does. And if any do speak sometimes of a faith without
charity and fruits of good works, they speak thereof as we do, as being
only a bastard faith, a false and fained faith, an idle outward receiving and
professing of the faith, or doctrine of faith: not that true faith which the
Apostle speaks of, to which he assigns our justification in the sight of
God.

The like foolish argument he makes from the Mat. 25.1.
foolish virgins: he may well call it the like, because indeed they are all
naught. They had faith, says he: true, but they had not true faith; they had
not that faith which the Apostle speaks of, wherein our justification is
affirmed to consist. For of that faith the Protestants say truly, that it
cannot be lost, because God has made unto it the promise of eternal life, and
therefore Christ prays for it, that it may never fail. They had a form or
show of faith, as they had 2. Tim. 3.5.
a form or show of godliness, but never knew the power thereof. His tale of
perfection is an idle dream, as we shall see hereafter, if God will. As for
them that apply this text to the profession of virginity, they do apparent
wrong therein, the very text it self giving to understand, that thereby is
described the kingdom of heaven, by which in these parables every where is
understood the whole state of the outward and militant Church professing to
seek the kingdom of heaven. To take it otherwise is to offer violence to a
very plain and manifest text. Under the name of Virgins all are comprehended,
who by profession and promise of faith and baptism, have undertaken to be 2.
Cor. 11.2.
virgins, that is, entire and faithful unto Christ. By the lamp is imported
that outward profession to men: the oil signifies true faith and a good
conscience inwardly to God. Howsoever the lamps of foolish virgins, of idle
and empty professors give them credit with men, so as that they are not barred
from the company and conversation of the wise, yet in the sleep of death they
shall go out, and shall not serve to light them to go to God: then shall they
too late seek and wish for that, the opportunity whereof before they carelessly
omitted. Then shall they cry, Lord, Lord, as the other did before, but it shall
not boot them to cry when the doors shall be shut against them. Thus does
Christ give the same to understand of hypocrites in general, which before he
had done of hypocritical and false teachers, and what he says here, he
expresses more fully by the other Evangelist, that when they shall cry, Luke
13.25.
Lord, Lord open to us, and Christ shall answer unto them, I know you not
whence you are: then they shall begin to say: We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets. Where we see them pleading that
they have heard Christ preach and they have been partakers of his Sacraments,
but they cannot plead for themselves, that they have believed in him: therefore
he shall answer the^ again: I tell you, I know ye not whence ye are, depart
from me ye workers of iniquity.

His fourth argument is of Ioh. 12.42.
many amongst the chief rulers of the Jews, who believed in Christ, but yet
confessed him not, because of the Pharisees, lest they should be cast out of
the synagogue: for they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of God.
Here we see faith indeed as he says, but we see no necessity that faith
should be understood here to be without charity. Here is weak faith and weak
love, too much yet entangled and tied in the nets of carnal and earthly
respects, but he has no ground to affirm that there is no love. Yes, says
he, for charity prefers the glory and service of God before al things in the
world, whereas these men were afraid to confess Christ. Indeed 1. Ioh. 4 18.
perfect charity casts out all fear, and perfect faith breeds perfect
charity; but there is a beginning of true faith and love, which being yet
little and weak, and having not yet ouermastered all worldly regards, is for a
time timorous and fearful to confess Christ, yet grows to strength by
little and little, till it resolve to cleave unto him with loss of all other
things. Such was the faith of Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, who were two
of these chief rulers, the one Ioh. 3.2.
coming to Jesus by night, the other a disciple also, Cap. 19.38.
but secretly for fear of the Jews, who yet afterward being stirred up with
those things which they beheld and saw in the death of Christ, more boldly
showed themselves in his behalf, and in the end forsook all for the following
of his service. In the mean time they showed love also to Christ, though
weakly, Cap. 7.50.51.
the one in speaking in his behalf, Luke 23.51.
the other in withholding his consent from the counsel and deed that was acted
against Christ; both in yielding themselves to be his disciples, and to be
instructed by him. Such was the faith and love of the Apostles themselves, who
were every while affrighted, and in his greatest distress Mat. 26.56.
all forsook him and fled. But he that Cap. 12.20.
breaks not the bruised reed, nor quenches the smoking flax, till he bring
forth judgment into victory, wheresoever he sees true faith, and unfeigned
love, though yet weak and feeble, waters and cherishes, and vndersetteth
the same that it may grow to strength. Aug. in Joan. tract. 53. Videte
quemadmodum Euangelista notauerit and improbauerit qu^sdam, ques tamen in eum
credidisse dixit, qui in hoc ingressu fidei si proficerent amorem quoque
humanae gloriae proficiendo superarent.
The Evangelist (says S. Austin) notes and reproves some, of whom
notwithstanding he says, that they did believe in Christ, who if they did grow
forward in this beginning of faith, would by growing forward overcome the love
of humane glory, which the Apostle had overcome, who says, God forbid, that I
should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. This growth there is
wheresoever there is true and unfeigned faith, and because it cannot grow
without love, it grows to the ouercoming of all contrary love, til it cleave
wholly unto God. Thus the Gospel expressly teaches concerning some of these
chief rulers, and we cannot doubt, but that the like befell in the rest of them
that did truly believe in Christ. They believed, but their faith was weak, and
their love was according to their faith: til increase of faith brought further
strength of love, and they learned by faith and love to prefer the service of
Christ before all the glory of this world. Albeit, it is not to be omitted,
that S. John sometime following the Hebrew phrase, uses the term of believing
in Christ abusiuely, applying it to them who by the miracles of Christ, and his
manifest declaration of the truth, were convicted in conscience to acknowledge
him to be of God, but yet did not at all in their hearts submit themselves unto
him. Thus he says in another place, that Ioh. 2.23.
many believed in the name of Christ when they saw his miracles which he did,
to whom yet he did not commit himself, because he knew what was in them. Thus
might it be said of some of those chief rulers, that they believed in Christ,
that is, were persuaded in their minds that he spoke the truth, but yet
preferring their credit and reputation with men, gave no regard unto it. But
that there is another manner of believing in Christ, which is that whereof we
speak, not incident to them who continue wholly possessed with such respects,
Christ himself shows, saying: Ioh. 5.44.
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes of God alone? They might therefore in some meaning be said to
believe in Christ, when yet they had no true faith which as appears by these
words cannot be separated from love, and seeking of the honor that comes of
God alone: which wheresoever it is begun, begins to look unto God, and
winding by degrees out of all other regards, yields it self entirely to
follow him. Therefore the distinction of faith being observed, which the
Scripture it self enforces upon us, M. Bishop has yet alleged nothing to
prove, that true faith and charity may be divided, or that any man may be said
truly to believe in whom there is not also love to righteousness and good
works.

51. W. BISHOP.
Cap. 2.
5 This place of S. James, (What shall it profit my brethren, if any man say
that he has faith, but has not works: what, shall his faith be able to save?)
supposes very plainly, that a man may have faith without good works, that is,
without charity, but that it shall avail him nothing: Calvin says, that the
Apostle speaks of a shadow of faith, which is a bare knowledge of the articles
of our Creed, but not a justifying faith. Without doubt he was little acquainted
with that kind of faith by which Protestants be justified: but he directly
speaks of such a faith, as Abraham was justified by, saying, That that faith
did work with his works, and was made perfect by the works. Was this but a
shadow of faith? But they reply, that this faith is likened unto the faith of
the Devil, and therefore cannot be a justifying faith: that follows not: for
an excellent good thing, may be like unto a bad in some things as Devils in
nature are not only like, but the very same as Angels be: even so a full
Christian faith may be well likened unto a Devils faith, when it is naked and
void of good works, in two points: first, in both there is a perfect knowledge
of all things revealed: secondly, this knowledge shall not stead them any whit,
but only serve unto their greater condemnation, because that knowing the will
of their master, they did it not. And in this respect S. James compares them
together: now there are many points wherein these faiths do differ, but this
one is principal: that Christians out of a godly and devout affection, do
willingly submit their understanding unto the rules of faith, believing things
above humane reason, yea such as seem sometimes contrary to it. But the devil
against his will, believes all that God has revealed, because by his natural
capacity he knows that God cannot teach, nor testify any untruth. Again,
that faith may be without charity, is proved out of these words of the same 2.
chapter. Even as the body without the spirit is dead, so also faith without
works is dead. Hence thus I argue: albeit the body be dead without the soul,
yet it is a true natural body in it self: even so faith is perfect in the kind
of faith, although without charity it avail not to life everlasting. Lastly,
in true reason it is manifest, that faith may be without charity, for they have
several seats in the soul, one being in the will, and the other in the
understanding: they have distinct objects, faith respecting the truth of God,
and charity the goodness of God. Neither does faith necessarily suppose
charity, as charity does faith, for we cannot love him of whom we never heard.
Neither yet does charity naturally flow out of faith, but by due consideration
of the goodness of God, and of his benefits and love toward us, into which good
and devout considerations few men do enter, in comparison of them who are led
into the broad way of iniquity through their inordinate passions. This
according to the truth, and yet more different in the Protestants opinion: for
faith lays hold on Christ's righteousness, and receives that in: but charity can
receive nothing in, as M. Perkins witnesses, Pa. 85.
but gives it self forth in all duties of the 1. and 2. Table. Now sir, if
they could not apply unto themselves Christ's righteousness without fulfilling
all duties of the 1. and 2. Table, they should never apply it to them: for they
hold it impossible to fulfill all those duties: so that this necessary lincking
of charity with faith, makes their salvation not only very evil assured, but
altogether impossible: for charity is the fullness of the law, which they hold
impossible, Romans 12.
and then if the assurance of their salvation must needs be joined with such an
impossibility, they may assure themselves, that by that faith they can never
come to salvation.

R. ABBOT.
That faith may be without charity and good works, it is true, and we doubt
not thereof, according to the meaning of faith of which S. James speaks,
which Calvin very justly and rightly says, is but a shadow of faith. For it
plainly appears by the text, that he speaks of faith, as only professed
before men, as before has been alleged. Therefore he compares it Iam. 2.16.
to the good words of him, that wishes well to the poor man, but does nothing
at all for him. To this tends his question, Ver. 14.
What avails it though a man say that he has faith? and his other demand,
Ver. 18.
show me thy faith? The uttermost that he extends it to by instance, is a
mere historical faith: Ver. 19.
Thou beleeuest that there is one God. His purpose is to show, that faith if it
be truly professed has a root within, from whence spring by obedience the
fruits of al good works, and if it give not forth it self by works, it is
no true faith. Whereas M. Bishop says, that S. James speaks directly of such
a faith as Abraham was justified by, he says very untruly and absurdly: for S.
James brings the example of the true, and lively, and workfull faith of
Abraham, as opposite to that idle and dead faith, concerning which he
propounded that question of faith and works. Yea of Abraham's faith he shows
that it was said, Ver. 23.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness, which
was never said of any man for saying that he had faith, for believing that
there is one God, for that faith that consists only in profession before
men. Now the faith of Abraham which Ver. 22.
wrought with his works, and was made perfect by his works, Beda in Epist.
Iac. cap. 2.
that is, says Beda, was proved by the performance of works to be perfect in
his heart, this faith of Abraham, I say, is it whereby the Protestants hope to
be justified in the sight of God, as Abraham was, because Rom 4.23.
it was not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness, but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed believing in him
that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. We allege further, that the faith
whereof S. James speaks, is likened to the faith of devils, and therefore
that it cannot be the same with that which the Scripture names for a
justifying faith. M. Bishop answers, that that follows not, and for
auouching thereof, makes Abraham's faith not only the same with the faith of
hypocrites and false Christians, but also with the faith of devils. He would
qualify the matter in show, but in truth makes no difference. An excellent
good thing may be like unto a bad in some things, says he. True, but yet the
bad cannot be like the good in that wherein stands the goodness and
excellency of the good. Now he makes the Hypocrites faith, if we consider the
very act of faith, the same that Abraham's faith was, which was reputed unto him
for righteousness, and for which the Scripture sets him forth as an
excellent pattern of faith to be followed of all believers. But to avoid the
odiousness hereof, he sophisticateth the matter, and so much as in him lies,
blinds his reader. They are like (says he) in two points: where in the first
point, he comprehends the fulness and perfection of that which he calls
Catholic and Christian faith, consisting (as here absurdly he says) in the
perfect knowledge of all things revealed, as if every one that has their
Catholic faith, have the perfect knowledge of all things revealed, but as more
plainly he has delivered his mind before Sect. 18.
in believing all to be true that God has revealed. No more is there in
Abraham's faith, if we keep within the compass of the nature of faith, and no
less in the devil, and the same in every Catholic Christian, and so the
devil is become a Catholic whether he will or not. Come on M. Bishop, rid us of
this doubt, for we cannot find by you, but that the devil by Catholic faith
is become a Catholic. He goes on: Secondly this knowledge shall not steed them
any whit. But that is nothing to the very nature of faith, whether is steed or
not steed. The essence and act of faith whether it steed or not steed, is no
more but this, to believe generally all to be true which God has revealed, and
therefore whether with good works or without, the faith of the Catholic
Christian in the act of faith, is no other but the devils faith. Now albeit he
say, that these faiths differ in many points, yet of those many he names but
only one, and that nothing to the purpose. For if he will show a difference of
faith betwixt Christians and devils, he must take it from faith it self, and
not from those things which to the nature of faith are merely accidental.
Christians, says he, out of a godly and devout affection, do willingly submit
their understanding to the rules of faith. But this is not to make a
difference, but to add charity unto faith. This godly and devout affection,
and willing submission, is an act of charity, and not of faith: an act of the
will and affection wherein charity is seated, not of the understanding, wherein
he says is the seat of faith. And in this affection and submission, faith it
self still is no more then it was before, to believe all to be true that God
has revealed. The devil then still pleads for himself, that if the
Catholic faith which M. Bishop has described, do make a Catholic, there is
no reason to except against him for being a Catholic, because he believes all
to be true which God has revealed. Or if he will say that true Christian faith
does always actually and necessarily imply this godly and devout affection and
willing submission of the understanding to the rules of faith, then because
this cannot be without charity, let him grant the question, let us travel no
further about this point, but let him say as we say, that the true Christian
faith whereby it is said we are justified ca^ never be separate from charity and
good works. Thus he casts himself into he knows not what Labyrinths and
mazes, and cannot tell how to get out. How much better were it for to
acknowledge the simple and plain truth of God, then to intricate himself in
these perplexities, wherein he can find no place to stand secure. But yet out of
the words of S. James, As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead, he will further prove, that faith may be without charity, and
yet perfect in the kind of faith. Now this is it that has been said, that in
the kind of faith, considering faith entirely in it self, he makes Abraham's
faith and the devils faith to be all one. As touching the words of S. James
sufficient has been said before. If faith be considered as outwardly professed
to men, as he intends it, good works are the life of faith. If it be
considered as it is inward in the heart to God, good works cannot be the life
thereof, because that which is without cannot give life to that that is within.
Whereas he turns works into charity, he plays the Sophister: for it is
one thing to talk of charity, another thing to talk of works; the one being
in habit, the other in act; the one inward, the other outward; the one the
tree, the other the fruit; the one the spring, the other the stream. But
letting this pass as handled before, let us see how he argues from the place
of James: Albeit the body be dead without the soul, yet is it a true natural
body in it self. But that is not true, for a true natural body is that only,
which has the true members and parts of a natural body, which a dead body
has not. Arist. Polit. lib. 1. cap. 1,
When the body is dead, says Aristotle, there shall be neither foot nor hand,
but only by semblance of name, as a man terms a hand of stone; for in like
sort is a dead hand: for all parts of the body are defined by their office and
faculty. Therefore when they lie dead they are not the same, but retain only
the show and shadow of the name. The argument therefore must be turned against
himself, that as the dead body is not a true natural body, but only by
equivocation is so called: even so a dead faith is no true faith, but only by
equivocation for some semblance to men it carries the show and shadow of the
name of faith. Yet he will not so give over, but as having set the stock upon
it, he will win it in this period, or else he will loose all. Indeed he is
like a sheep tangled in the briars, the more he struggleth and strives, the
faster he tyeth himself. He says, that faith and charity have several seats in
the soul, faith in the understanding, and charity in the will. But that is not
so: for as has been before said, true and unfeigned faith which the Scripture
commends, for justification is a mixed action of the understanding and will.
Yea the Apostle expressly places faith in the heart, which is the seat of the
affections. Romans 10.10.
With the heart (says he) man believes unto righteousness: If thou confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God raised him
from the dead, thou shall be saved. No marvel that M. Bishop cannot tell what
true faith is, who knows no other faith but only a faith of the head,
consisting in speculatiue fancies and imaginations of the brains, and
descending no lower then the tongue: whereas the Apostle speaks of a faith of
the heart, a feeling faith, which by feeling gathers to it the affection and
will; which is not only an act of knowledge and understanding, as M. Bishop
dreameth, but implies an affecting, desiring, embracing, seeking of that which
it believes, a ioying and reviving of it self therein. So I alleged before
out of Oecumenius, that the faith whereof Saint Paul speaks is not a bare
assent, as is the faith of devils and M. Bishops Catholic faith, but Oecumen.
in lac. cap. 2 Consecutionem ex affectu procedente^.
has some further consequence arising from the affection. Again, they have
distinct objects, says he, faith respecting the truth of God, and charity the
goodness of God. Indeed the truth of God is the object of our faith; but what
is the matter of that truth, but the promise of God concerning his goodness
toward us? Psalm. 27.13.
I should utterly have fainted (says David) but that I believe verily to see
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Ferus in Mat. ca. 8. Fides
quam Scriptura commendat nihil aliud est quam fidere gratuita Dei miserecordia
The faith (says Ferus) which the Scripture commends, is nothing else but to
trust to the free mercy of God. So then the goodness and mercy of God is
properly and truly the object of our faith. Yea and how should the goodness of
God be the object of our charity, but by being first the object of our faith?
For therefore do we love the goodness of God, or love God for his goodness
toward us, because first we believe the same, neither can we so love but by
believing. For charity consisting simply in affection, apprehends nothing in
God of it self, but receives all from faith, which is it as Chrysostom
notes, Chryso in Romans hom. 8. Conuenientem de Deo opinione^ accipit.
whereby we conceive a due and convenient opinion concerning God. Love is not a
reciprocal action; the passage thereof is merely from him that loves to the
thing that is loved. Thus therefore it is in our love to God, but what we
conceive back again of him toward us, it is by faith and not by love. Yea M.
Bishop himself verifieth this, in that he says, We cannot love him of whom we
never heard. For what is all our hearing, but only by believing that which we
hear? First therefore we hear of Gods goodness, his mercy, his truth, etc.
and by believing that which we hear, our affections are drawn unto him. First
therefore all these are the objects of our faith, and consequently become the
objects of our love. His next difference is a mere begging of the question. We
say, that faith though it do not presuppose charity as a thing precedent, yet
always supposes and infers it as an immediate and necessary consequent.
For faith receives Christ Ephesians. 3.17.
to dwell in our hearts, who comes not but accompanied with grace and with
the fruits of the spirit, which always grow and increase according to the
increase and growth of faith. Great faith has fervent love, weaker faith has
weaker love, but always has a measure of love answerable to it self. Now by
this that has been said, it appears how untruly M. Bishop says for his last
difference, that charity does not naturally flow out of faith, whereas indeed
common sense in divinity does instruct him, that the original thereof is from
thence and only from thence. For if we cannot love God but by hearing and
believing him to be that that he is, then it is faith which setting God before
us such a one as he is, wise, mighty, just, merciful, loving and gracious unto
us, enamoreth our hearts, and breeds in us affections correspondent to his
grace, neither is there any spark of love but what arises from this ground.
Yea M. Bishop himself confesses so much, but that his wits are so besotted
with his minion of Rome, that he knows not what he says. Charity (says he)
does not naturally flow out of faith, but by due consideration of the goodness
of God, and of his benefits and love toward us. Which is as much as if he
should say, it does not naturally flow out of faith, but does naturally flow
out of faith. For whence is this consideration of Gods goodness, etc. but from
faith? Do we consider these things any otherwise but as by faith we first
apprehend and believe the same? It is faith (as has been said) which affects
and seasoneth the heart with the sweet taste and feeling of those considerations,
and thereby allureth and draws us to love him of whom we have received so
great love. And for want of faith it is that it comes to pass which M. Bishop
to make up his sentence impertinently complains of, that few men enter into
these good and devout considerations; yea he and his by oppugning and
destroying true faith, do help to draw men back from considering of these
things. Now all that hitherto he has said, he tells us is according to the
truth, whereas indeed there is not a word true, as has appeared: and if it
had been true, yet he had gained nothing thereby, because it follows not,
that those things which are divided in faculty and use, are therefore divided
in the subject, or may be the one without the company of the other, as by
infinite examples may be seen. But he makes faith and charity more different
yet in the Protestants opinion. And how? For faith (says he) lays hold of
Christ's righteousness, and receives that in; but charity receives nothing
in, but gives it self forth in all duties of the first and second table. But
what of this? Will he conclude thus, There is a difference betwixt faith and
charity, therefore faith may be without charity? No forsooth: but unless
faith may be without charity, the Protestants salvation is impossible. And why
so? Marry charity is the fullness of the law, and the Protestants hold it
impossible to fulfill the law, therefore they can have no charity; and
therefore by their own doctrine they can have no faith, because without
charity there is no faith. What a horrible disputer M. Bishop is? how deep a
reach has he into hell, that he can fetch from thence these profound
conclusions against the Protestants? The Protestants answer to his ridiculous
and childish collections, is easy and ready. True and lively faith, by the
consideration of the goodness and mercy of God toward us in Jesus Christ,
enkindleth in our hearts true charity and love toward God, and toward our
brethren and neighbors for Gods sake. The aim and mark of which charity, is
to give forth it self in all duties of the first and second table. But
charity so long as here we live is imperfect in all men, and but imperfectly
attaineth to that that it aymeth at. Some attain in some good sort to the
performance of some duties, others to the performance of some other duties, but
none attaineth to all, as Hieron. aduer Pelag. lib. 1. Nullus in isto
corpusculo cunctas potest habere virtutes, etc.
Hierome well notes against the Pelagian heretics: yea and in those that we
do attain unto, there is also some weakness and default, some blot and
stain, as has been showed by the corruption of sin Heb. 12.1.
that hangs so fast on, and presses us down whilst we are laboring and
striving to ascend upward unto God. Thus therefore faith and charity go
together, weak faith, and charity imperfect, running in the way, but
oftentimes through frailty stumbling and falling; striving to the keeping of
all Gods commandments, but yet forced to say with the Apostle, Romans 7.19.
The good that I would, I do not, but the evil that I would not, that I do: I
delight in the law of God as touching the inner man, but I see another law in
my members rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the
law of sin. But faith is our comfort, that God for Christ's sake, and for his
righteousness sake which he has wrought for our redemption, accepts us as
perfectly righteous in him, that he forgiueth all our sins, winketh at all our
imperfections, and will heal all our wounds and infirmities, that what is now
impossible through the weakness of the flesh, may be made expedite and ready
unto us, when there shall be no longer the flesh lusting against the spirit,
but sin and death and all enemies shall be destroyed, and 1. Cor. 15.28.
God shall be all in all. Thus the linking of faith and charity makes no
impossibility of our salvation, but it is the spirit of error that has
dazeled M. Bishops eyes, that he cannot discern how one truth agrees and
stands with another.

52. W. BISHOP.
Let us annex unto these plain authorities of holy Scripture, one evident
testimony of antiquity: that most incorrupt judge S. Augustine says flatly,
Lib. 15. de Trin. ca. 17. con. Cresc. lib. 1 cap. 29.
that faith may well be without charity, but it cannot profit us without
charity. And, That one God is worshipped sometimes out of the Church, but that
unskillfully, yet is it he. Also that one faith is had without charity, and
that also out of the Church, neither therefore is not faith. For there is one
God, one Faith, one Baptism, and one immaculate Catholic Church: in which God
is not served only, but in which only he is truly served: neither in which
alone faith is kept, but in which only faith is kept with charity. So that
faith, and that only true faith, Ephesians 4.
of which the Apostle speaks, One God, one faith, may be, and is in many
without charity.

R. ABBOT.
The former of these two places which he cites out of Austin, is answered
Sect. 22.
before. The faith of which he speaks, is not (...) true justifying faith,
but only the outward profession of the doctrine of faith. That is plain by
the second, August. cont. Crescon. lib. 1. cap. 29.
One faith is had without charity, even without the Church, that is, one
doctrine of faith: even as the Apostle means, when he says, One faith, one
baptism, etc. Thus Saint Austin declares it, when he calls it Ibid cap. 28.
Fides qua creditur Christum esse filium Dei vi^i. Et cap. 29. Fides qua
co^fitemur Christum esse filium Dei viui.
the faith whereby it is believed that Christ is the Son of the living God:
the faith whereby we confess Christ to be the Son of the living God: and in
other meaning he could not say there is but one faith, because of the faith of
particular consciences the Scripture says, that every man shall Habac. 2.4.
live by his own faith. That that he makes the matter of faith, the devils
acknowledge and confess, who yet cannot truly say, I believe in God, I believe
in Jesus Christ, which is the voice and profession of a true justifying faith,
and cannot be separated from hope and charity, as has been before made
manifest by the acknowledgement of Austin himself: yea and the doctrine of
faith, though in general terms it may be sometimes found amongst heretics,
yet according to the substance and true meaning thereof, it is not to be found
with them, as the same Saint Austin acknowledges, saying, August. Enchirid.
cap. 5. Si diligenter quae ad Christum pertinem cogite^tur, nominetenus
inuenitur Christus apud quoslibet haereticos, qui se Christianos vocari volunt,
te vero ipsa non est apudeos.
If diligently those things be considered which belong to Christ, Christ is
found, as touching his name, amongst all sorts of heretics, who will needs be
called Christians, but indeed he is not with them. So as then there may be the
true faith of Christ in general words, where the true meaning of the faith of
Christ is denied, and there may be the true meaning of the faith of Christ in
the profession of the mouth, when the same faith is not truly and effectually
imprinted in the heart. And in this sort there may be indeed faith without
charity, but not the justifying faith, as has bin often said. If there be
that faith concerning which it is said of Abraham, Genesis 15.6.
He believed the Lord, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: there
follows always charity as a necessary and infallible consequent and
companion thereof.

53. W. BISHOP.
The Protestants bold asseuerations, that they cannot be parted, are great, but
their proofs very slender, and scarce worth the disprouing.

The first, He that has not care of his own, has denied his faith: 1. Tim. 5.
therefore faith includes that good work of providing for our own.

Answer. That faith there seems to signify, not that faith whereby we believe
all things revealed, or the Protestants the certainty of their salvation: but
for fidelity, and faithful performance of that which we have promised in
Baptism, which is to keep all Gods commandments: one of the which, is to
provide for our children, and for them that we have charge of: so that he who
has no such care over his own charge, has denied his faith, that is,
violated his promise in Baptism. There is also another ordinary answer,
supposing faith to be taken there for the Christian belief, to wit, that one
may deny his faith two ways: either in flat denying any article of faith, or
by doing some thing that is contrary to the doctrine of our faith. Now he that
has no care of his own, does not deny any article of his faith, but
commits a fact contrary to the doctrine of his faith: so that not faith, but
the doctrine of faith, or our promise in Baptism, includes good works.

Ioh ^.
2 There are among you that believe not; for he knew who believed, and who was
to betray him: Opposing treason to faith, as if he had said: faith contains
in it self fidelity. This argument is far fetched, and little worth. For
albeit faith has not fidelity and love always necessarily joined with it, yet
falling from faith, may well draw after it hatred and treason: yea ordinarily
wickedness goes before falling from the faith, and is the cause of it: which
was Judas case, whom our Savior there taxed, for he blinded with
covetousness, did not believe Christ's doctrine of the blessed Sacrament, and
by incredulity opened the devil a high way to his heart, to negotiate treason
in it.

^ Ioh 2.
3. They object that: Who says he knows God, and does not keep his
commandments, is a liar.

Answer. He is then a liar in grain, who professing the only true knowledge
of God, yet blusheth not to say, that it is impossible to keep his
commandments: but to the objection, knowing God in that place, is taken for
loving of God, as: I know ye not: that is, I love you not. Our Lord knows the
way of the just, Math 7. and 25. Psalm. 1. Ioh. 14.
that is, approues it, loves it: so he that knows God, keeps his
commandments, as Christ himself testifies: If any love me, he will keep
my word. And he that loves me not, will not keep my words.

Lastly, they say with S. Paul: That the just man lives by faith. But if faith
give life, then it cannot be without charity.

Answer. That faith in a just man is not without hope and charity, by all which
conjoined he lives, and not by faith alone. But faith is in a sinful and
unjust man, without charity: who holding fast his former belief, does in
transgressing Gods commandments, break the bands of charity. And so it
remains most certain, that faith may be and too too often is without the
sacred society of charity.

R. ABBOT.
The Protestants asseuerations are indeed very bold, but not upon slender
proofs. Their proofs are stronger then that any such silly disputers as M.
Bishop is, shall be able to disprove them. As for his proofs to the contrary,
thou have seen gentle Reader, how miserable, and poor, and beggarly they be.
See now what choice he makes of our arguments, culling out those that he was
best able to deal with, and what slender shifts he makes to avoid them. 1.
Tim. 5.8.
He that provides not for his own, says S. Paul, and namely for them of his
household, he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel. It must follow
therefore, that there can be no faith where this work of charity is wilfully
cast off. M. Bishop tells us, that by faith is here meant either fidelity as
touching the performance of that we have promised in baptism, or else the
doctrine of faith. But let him expound it as he list, of either of them it
shall yield an illation and consequence of that which we affirm. For seeing
the introduction of justifying faith is Mark. 1.15.
repentance from dead works, justifying faith must always imply a conscience
and care of conforming a man's self to the doctrine of the Gospel, and to the
promise and vow that he has made in baptism of obedience unto God, and
therefore where dead works still reign, it cannot be said that justifying
faith has there taken any place. Therefore he that shakes off the yoke of
the doctrine of the Gospel, and by his conversation disclaimeth the promise
that he made in baptism, plainly shows that howsoever he profess the
faith, yet that he has no true faith abiding in him. And this the Apostle
teaches of him who is so inhumane and barbarous, as that the commandment of
God cannot move him to provide for them, the care of whom even infidels by
instinct of nature do know and conceive to belong unto them. But we would
gladly understand how M. Bishop divides the articles of faith from the
doctrine of faith. For what do the articles of faith contain but only the
doctrine of faith? That then contrary to the doctrine of faith, must needs also
be contrary to the articles of faith. He therefore that by his deeds denies the
doctrine of faith, denies in effect also the articles of his faith, howsoever
with his tongue outwardly to men he make show to confess the same. M. Bishops
answer then takes not away the strength of this argument, but rather adds
further force and strength unto it. But it is plain by the very words, that
the Apostle understands faith as it is opposed to infidelity, affirming that
such, though they be Hieron in 1. Tim. cap. 5. Fideles nomine.
believers in name, as Hierome speaks, yet in deed are not believers.
Therefore Chrysostom expounding the words by that saying of the same Apostle,
Tit. 1.16.
They profess that they know God, but by their deeds they deny him,
infers, Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. hom 14. Quomodo hutu^nodicredit qui Deum
ab^egauit^
How does he believe that has denied God? The argument therefore is firm and
sure, that howsoever there may be an outward profession of faith, yet indeed
there is no faith wheresoever there wants a correspondence of good works.

In the second place, it is strange to see how M. Bishop making choice of his
adversaries weapons, yet is foiled in his own choice. The argument he says is
little worth, but sure I am, howsoever little worth it be, it is more worth
then his answer. He sets down the words of S. John according to his vulgar
Latin, but according to the true text they are thus: Ioh. 6.64.
But there are some of you that believe not; for Jesus knew from the beginning
which they were that believed not, and who should betray him. Where when the
Evangelist setting down Christ's words, There are some of you which believe
not, infers as a reason of his speech, for he knew who should betray him, as
if it had been jointly, There are some of you which believe not, for one of you
shall betray me, does he not plainly demonstrate that the betraying of him
could not stand with believing, that he could not be a believer that was to be
the traitor? For what reason were it to say, he believed not, for he was to
betray him, if he might believe and yet betray him? Whereas M. Bishop says,
that faith has not always fidelity and love joined with it, he beggeth the
question; but that which he adds of falling away from the faith, as if Judas
having before believed, were now relinquishing his faith, beside that it is the
begging of another point in question also, it is excluded by the Evangelist, in
that he noted that Jesus knew from the beginning that Judas believed not. Which
words from the beginning, M. Bishop knowing that in the true reading of the
text, noted also in the margin of his vulgar Latin, they would be prejudicial
to him, thought it a point of wisdom to conceal. But to speak of that faith
which Judas had, he was not yet falling away from it: he was yet an Apostle,
and a preacher of the faith, and we see that others departing from Christ, he
still continued with him, and gave no outward token of unbelief, and without
doubt little thought now of doing that which afterward he did, which the
Evangelist expressly notes, that Ioh. 13.2.
the devil did afterward put into his heart. But yet there is a truth of
faith, concerning which our Savior says, intending his speech specially of
him, There are some of you which believe not, which is not incident to any
child of perdition, because it is Gods gift, as our Savior at large in that
chapter expresses, to them that Ioh. 6.64.65.
come unto him by the same gift, whom being come, he never Ver. 37.
casts away again, and therefore they never lose that which they have
received.

Thirdly, he cites for us the words of Saint John, 1. Ioh. 2.4.
He that says, I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. From which place we argue, that because faith always
implies knowledge of that we believe, so as that where there is no knowledge,
there is no faith, nor can be, it must needs follow, that since there is no
knowledge of God where there is no keeping of the commandments, therefore
where there is no keeping of the commandments, there is no faith. Now by
knowledge we understand a true acknowledgement of that which we believe, which
is not a matter of bare Thom. Aqu^n. 21. art. 2. ad 2. Duplex est cognitio
diuinae bonitatis vel voliitatis vna q^idem speculatiua, etc. Alta est
affectiua sieve experimentalis dum quis experitur in seipso gustum diuinae
dulcedinis and complecentia^ diuinae voluntatis, etc.
speculation by verbal apprehension, such as whereby blind men talk of colors,
and home-dwellers discourse of foreign countries where they never came, but an
experimental and approving knowledge, an effectual and feeling knowledge, to
which, because it is the knowledge of faith, our Savior attributes eternal
life, when he says, Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent: Col. 3.10.
by which the Apostle says that the new man is renewed according to the image
of him that created him. In which latter place we are to observe, that it is
one thing to which we are renewed, and another thing, by which. The thing
whereto we are renewed, is the image of God, which consists in charity: the
thing whereby we are renewed is knowledge. Thus the Apostle S. Peter teaches
us, that 2. Pet. 1.23.
grace and peace is multiplied unto us by the knowledge of God, and of Jesus
Christ our Lord; that the divine power gives us all things pertaining to life
and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us. Seeing then
that knowledge here is the thing whereby charity and all things pertaining to
godliness are ministered unto us, it shall be absurd to expound knowledge to be
charity it self, albeit true it is that of this knowledge of God, even as of
faith, there ensues always charity and love. This true and lively and
effectual knowledge it is of which Saint John here speaks, giving to
understand that barren and idle and fruitless knowledge is indeed no
knowledge, and that howsoever a man seem able to say much, yet that he talks
but as by hearesay, not knowing what he says, if his knowledge be not such as
season his heart to the love and keeping of the commandments of God. Because
then true faith cannot be without this true knowledge, and this true knowledge
cannot be where there is not the keeping of Gods commandments, it must
follow, as I said before, that there is no faith where there is no keeping of
the commandments of God. Now although M. Bishop allege a place or two, where
there is a necessity of expounding Gods knowledge toward us in other sort
then the word seems to import, yet he brings none to import any necessity
of making the same construction of our knowledge toward God. Let it be granted
him, that Gods knowledge may import his love, yet I suppose he cannot show us
any where, that to know God, is to be expounded simply to love God. As for the
liar, let him keep it to himself, because he best deserves it: he has taken
pains for it, and no reason that any man should bereave him of his right. We
profess the knowledge of God, and we profess and teach the keeping of Gods
commandments, although we also teach, that by reason of our corruption and
weakness it is impossible for us so long as we live here, to keep them
perfectly, and in such fort as thereby to be justified in the sight of God. If
M. Bishop will say that he keeps them, I am sure that he is a lier, and as
Hierome did the Pelagian heretic, so do I put him Hieron. ad Cresiphon^.
Profer ^uis impleuerit.
to bring in example of any other that has so done.

The last place he draws in backwards and by force, there being no man of us
that alleges it to the purpose here in hand. He makes his choice, as we see,
to serve his own turn. Because he had no great skill to answer, he thought it
wisdom to take heed what he did object. But yet out of that sentence truly
alleged, we may take somewhat to this point. The words are, Gal. 3.11.
The just shall live by faith. According to these words, true faith is said
always to imply and contain eternal life. Our Savior Christ speaks as of a
thing presently had: Ioh. 3.36.
He that believes, has eternal life; Cap. 5.24.
he is passed from death to life. But without charity there can be no state of
eternal life, because 1. Ioh. 3 14.
he that loves not, abides in death. If then wheresoever there be true faith,
there be eternal life, and without charity there can be no eternal life, it
must necessarily follow, that wheresoever there is true faith, there is also
charity, and love bringing forth the fruits of good works, and seeking to
win others by example of just and holy life. M. Bishops answer we see gives
check to the holy Ghost. The holy Ghost says, The just shall live by faith.
Not so, says M. Bishop: he lives by faith, hope and charity, and not by
faith alone. Further I trouble not my self with his idle words, which contain
nothing but a begging of the matter in question, and are applied only to an
argument of his own device.

CHAPTER 5. OF MERITS.
1. W. BISHOP.
Observe that three things are necessary to make a work meritorious: First,
that the worker be the adopted son of God, and in the state of grace.
Secondly, that the work proceed from grace, and be referred to the honor of
God. The third, is the promise of God through Christ to reward the work. And
because our adversaries, either ignorantly or of malice do slander this our
doctrine, in saying untruly that we trust not in Christ's merits, nor need not
Gods mercy for our salvation, but will purchase it by our own works: I will here
set down what the Council of Trent does teach concerning Merits: Sess. 6.
cap. vlt.
Life everlasting is to be proposed to them that work well, and hope well to the
end: both as grace, of mercy promised to the sons of God through Christ
Jesus, and as a reward by the promise of the same God to be faithfully rendered
unto their works and merits. So that we hold eternal life to be both a grace,
as well in respect of Gods free promise through Christ, as also for that the
first grace (out of which they issue) was freely bestowed upon us. And that
also it is a reward in justice, due partly by the promise of God, and in part
for the dignity of good works unto the worker, if he perseruere and hold on
unto the end of his life, or by true repentance rise to the same estate again.
In infants baptized, there is a kind of merit, or rather dignity of the
adopted sons of God, by his grace powered into their souls in baptism,
whereby they are made heirs of the kingdom of heaven, but all that arrive to
the years of discretion, must by the good use of the same grace either merit
life, or for want of such fruit of it, fall into the miserable state of death.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop sets down three things which he says are necessary to make a
work meritorious, but gives us no ground at all whereby we may rest persuaded,
that where those three things do concur, a man may be said to merit or
deserve at Gods hands. He leaves us still to wonder, that a sinful wretch
offending and provoking God from day to day, should dare to talk of merit and
desert with God, but that we know that heresy and ignorance make men bold to
frame the majesty of God to their own brainsicke and senseless conceits. The
conditions and circumstances by him mentioned, we always teach and require in
our doctrine of good works, but far are we from finding merit in any of
them. For first the adopted son of God stands bound by duty to do all
things to the honor of his Father, and there can be no merit in doing that
which a man by duty is bound to do. Secondly, if the work proceed from the
grace of God, the work is Gods and not man's, and therefore man can thereby merit
nothing. Thirdly if the reward depend upon promise, then it arises not of the
merit or worth of works, especially there being by the frailty of the worker
and the bounty of the promiser that disproportion betwixt the work and the
reward, as that it is merely absurd to imagine that the one should be merited
and deserved by the other. These things (God willing) shall further appear in
the process of this question. In the mean time M. Bishop here challenges us
for slaundering their doctrine with some matters of truth, as that they trust
not in Christ's merits, that they need not Gods mercy for their salvation, but
will purchase it by their own works. Now we wot well that they use speech of
Christ's merits, and Gods mercy, and of trusting therein, because they know
that if they abandoned the mention hereof, they would soon grow odious and
hateful to all men. For the cup of poison of the whore of Babylon they must
use a cover of such good words, least they make men loath to drink thereof. But
let it be examined how they teach these things, and their falsehood will soon
appear. By trust in Christ's merits, men conceive the placing of the confidence
of salvation immediately therein, as the proper cause for which God accepts us
to eternal life, who our selves are miserable sinners, and altogether unworthy
thereof. But their trust in Christ's merits, is that he has purchased for us
grace, if we list by free will to merit heaven for ourselves, thereby to be
just before God in our selves, and worthy of the kingdom of heaven, as M.
Bishop in the former question of Sect. 2.
Justification has declared. So then the effect of Christ's merits is tied
only to this life, and thenceforth we are to depend upon that which here we do
for our selves, by well using that grace which the merits of Christ first
purchased for us. Therefore one Richard Hopkins translating into English a
book of Granatensis, as touching prayer and meditation, gives it one where
for a marginall note, that our Savior Christ is our Advocate for the time of
this life, but after our departure out of this life he is no more our Advocate,
but our Judge, for the time is past (says he) of dealing with God by an
Advocate, etc. and we shall have our definitive sentence according to our
works. Whereby it appears what reckoning they make of the mercy of God,
which they also pen up within the compass of this life, and deny it that
place which the Apostle gives it, 2. Tim. 1.18.
at that day. Yea so little use is there with them of Gods mercy, as that M.
Bishop doubts not to demand, Cap. 4. Sect. 4.
What need any justified man greatly fear the rigorous sentence of a just
Judge? Hence are those most insolent speeches of theirs, that good works are
Rhem. Annot. 2. Tim. 4.8.
truly and properly meritorious, and fully worthy of everlasting life; that
heaven is the due and just stipend which God by his justice owes to the
persons working by his grace; that we have a right to heaven, and deserve it
worthily; that it is our own right, bargained for and wrought for, and
accordingly paid unto us as our hire: Ibid. Heb. 6.10
that good works be so far meritorious, as that God should be unjust if he
rendered not heaven for the same. Thereupon Tapper sticks not to say, Ruard.
Tapper. in explic. art. Louan. tom. 2 art. 9. Absit vt iusti vi tam aeternam
expectent sicut pau per eleemosynam: Multo namque glori^sius est ipso^ quasi
victores and triumphatores eam possidere tanquam palma^ suit sudoribus debitam.
God forbid that the just should expect eternal life as the poor man does an
alms: for it is much more glorious that they should have it as conquerers and
triumphers, as the prize due unto their labors. Thus you your selves have
written M. Bishop, and do we slander you in reporting truly what you have
written? No, no, your speeches are impudent and shameless in this behalf, and
such as we wonder that your foreheads serve you to avouch. Why does it not
suffice you to preach good works simply, as Christ and his Apostles did, with
commendation of Gods mercy in rewarding the same? What need this vain foolery
of merit, so improbable, so absurd, so impossible, whereby you do not magnify
God, but set up the righteousness of man against the grace of God? As for the
definition of the Council of Trent, we esteem it not, knowing the same for
the most part to have been but a conuenticle of base Italianate Machiauels, who
by equivocations and sophistications have deluded the world, and by casting the
chafe of some phrases of the Fathers upon the meeres and puddles of the
schoolmen, have labored to cover and hide the filth and mire thereof, and
indeed have left them still to serve by false confidence and trust for gulfes
and whirlpools to swallow up and devour the souls of men. Although the words
of the Council may bear some good construction according to the ancient
fathers meaning of the name of merits, yet by them they are deceitfully set
down, to leave open a gappe to the absurd and intolerable presumption of men,
in advancing and lifting up the desert of men's works, as if God were thereby
greatly bound and beholding unto them. How far their meaning extends, will
appear by M. Bishop, who will not have us think that he will speak any thing
but by the authority of that Council. And first he tells us, that they hold
that eternal life is a grace; which indeed they dare not deny, because the
Scripture expressly so affirms, Romans 6.23.
Eternal life is the grace (or gift) of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. But
he adds to grace a supply of works, quite contrary to the Scriptures; for it
is expressly said, Chap. 11.6.
If it be of grace, it is not of works, otherwise grace is no grace. August.
contra Pelag. and Celest. lib. 2. ca 24. Non enim gratia Dei gratia erit vllo
modo, nisi fuerit gratuita omni modo.
Grace (says Saint Austin) is not grace in any sort, if it be not free in
every sort. It is of grace, says M. Bishop, and yet it is of works also. But
still to make a show of upholding grace, he tells us that though eternal
life be by works, yet the first grace, out of which those works do issue, is
freely bestowed upon us. Which he says only as ashamed to deny grace
altogether, and not of any conscience that he makes faithfully to avouch the
same. For if the grace, whence those works do issue, which is the grace of
justification, be freely bestowed upon us, why does he before labor to approve
that we are justified by works? Or if we obtain the grace of justification by
works, how does he say that the same is freely bestowed upon us? The plain
truth is, that by their works of preparation they make a man at least in some
sort, as we have heard before out of Bellarmine, to merit and deserve even the
first grace, if by the first grace we understand the grace of their first
justification, as M. Bishop usually does. But beside grace, it is also a reward
due in justice, says he. And how so? Marry partly by the promise of God. Now
if he rested here, we would not contend with him. For promise is indeed grace,
and justice in respect of promise is nothing but truth in the performance
thereof, neither is here any impeachment of the free gift of God. But not
contented herewith, he adds, that it is due in part also for the dignity of
good works. And thus he confounds those things which the Scripture still
very precisely distinguishes, aduertising us that Romans 4.14.
if they which are of the law (that is of works) be heirs, then is faith made
void, and the promise is made of none effect: and again, Gal. 3.18.
if the inheritance be of the law (that is of works) it is no longer by
promise. To be inheritors by works, and to be inheritors by promise, are
things so opposite as that the one wholly excludes the other, neither can they
possibly stand together. As for that which he says of infants merit and
dignity, it is also the schoolemens fiction and device. Remission of sins is
their salvation as it is ours, and in them it stands good which the Apostle
says, Romans 5.2^.
As sin has reigned (over them) unto death, so grace also reigns by
righteousness (that is, by imputation of righteousness) unto eternal life,
not by any dignity in them, but through Jesus Christ our Lord. But as touching
them that arrive to years of discretion, he tells us that either they must
by good use of grace merit life, or for want of such fruit fall into the
miserable state of death. A very hard sentence for himself; for if he never
have life till he merit and deserve it, we can well assure him that he shall
go without it. And I wonder that his heart did not tremble at the writing
hereof, but that he has hardened the same against the truth, and writes but
only for maintenance of that occupation and trade, that must yield maintenance
back again to him. What will he say in the end, when he shall lie wrestling
with death, and ready to resign his soul into the hands of God? Will he then
crave for mercy, who writes now so earnestly for merit? Let him take heed
that God do not then answer him, Luke 19.22.
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou evil servant. Thou have
despised my mercy. Thou have defined, that every one that does not merit life
must fall into the state of death. Thy sentence shall stand good against thy
self: thou art far off from meriting life, and therefore thy just portion
shall be everlasting death. Let him learn in time to fear this doom, and
leave off by this wilful oppugning of the faith and doctrine of Christ to
rebel against God.

2. W. BISHOP.
With this Catholic doctrine M. Perkins would be thought to agree in two
points: First, That merits are necessary to salvation: Secondly, That Christ is
the root and fountain of all merit. But soon after like unto a shrewd cow,
overthrows with his heel the good milk he had given before: renouncing all
merits in every man, saving only in the person of Christ: whose prerogative
(says he) it is, to be the person alone in whom God is well pleased. Then he
adds, that they good Protestants, by Christ's merits really imputed to them,
do merit life everlasting. Even as by his righteousness imputed unto them,
they are justified and made righteous.

To which I answer, that we most willingly confess our blessed Saviors merits
to be infinite, and of such divine efficacy, that he has not only merited at
his Fathers hands both pardon for all faults, and grace to do all good works,
but also that his true servants works should be meritorious of life
everlasting. As for the real imputation of his merit to us, we esteem as a
fained imagination, composed of contrarieties. For if it be really in us, why
do they call it imputed? and if it be ours only by Gods imputation, then is it
not in us really. Further, to say that he only is the person in whom God is
well pleased, is to give the lie unto many plain texts of holy Scriptures. Iac
2. Eccles. 45. Act. 13. Ioh. 16. Romans 1.
Abraham was called the friend of God; therefore God was well pleased in him:
Moses was his beloved: David was a man according unto his own heart: God
loved Christ's Disciples, because they loved him. Briefly, all the Christians at
Rome, were truly called of S. Paul the beloved of God. And therefore although
God be best pleased in our Savior, and for his sake is pleased in all others,
yet is he not only pleased in him, but in all his faithful servants. Now to
that which he says, that they have no other merit then Christ's imputed to
them, as they have no other righteousness but by imputation, I take it to be
true: and therefore they do very ingeniously and justly renounce all kind of
merits in their stained and defiled works. But let them tremble at that which
thereupon necessarily follows. It is, that as they have no righteousness or
merit of heaven, but only by a supposed imputation, so they must look for no
heaven but by imputation: for God as a most upright judge, will in the end
repay every man according to his worth: wherefore not finding any real
worthiness in Protestants, but only in conceit, his reward shall be given
them answerably, in conceit only: which is evidently gathered out of S.
Augustine, Lib. 1. de mori. Eccles. cap. 25.
where he says: That the reward cannot go before the merit, nor be given to a
man before he be worthy of it: for (says he) what were more iniust then that,
and what is more just then God? Where he concludes that we must not be so
hardy as once to demand, much less so impudent as to assure our selves of
that crown, before we have deserved it. Seeing then that the Protestants by
this their proctor renounce al such merit and desert, they must needs also
renounce their part of heaven, and not presume so much as once to demand it,
according unto S. Augustines sentence, until they have first renounced their
erroneous opinions.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins has indeed given good milk, as M. Bishop says, even 1. Pet. 2.2.
the sincere milk of the word, which he had drawn from August. in Joan. Epist
trac. 3. Est matter Ecclesia; and vbera eius du^ Testamenta Scripturari, (...)
naru^.
the breasts of the Church, the old and the new Testament, the writings of the
Apostles and Prophets, which are Ephesians. 2.20.
the foundations whereupon the house of God is built. He played not the shrewd
cow, to overthrow it when he had given it, but what he gave M. Bishop seeks
to corrupt by blending and mingling with it, not the leaven only, but the very
poison of humane traditions. He renounceth, and so do we, all merit but what is
in the person of Jesus Christ for us, and thereby only do we lay hold of
eternal life, acknowledging that not for any thing that we do, but only Mat.
3.17.
in him the Father is well pleased toward us, and accepts us to be his
children, and heirs of his kingdom. Whereas in his pleasance he terms us
good Protestants, I must tell him as before, that if the Protestants do not
exceed the goodness of them who will be taken to be the very best amongst the
Papists, without question they are very bad: and I doubt not but he himself
will acquit the Protestants from being so bad as he and his fellows have told
us that their good masters the Jesuits be. But for answer he says, that
Christ did merit for his, not only pardon of all faults, and grace to do all
good works, but also that their works should be meritorious of life
everlasting. A strange speech, and such as the Apostles and Primitive Church
were not acquainted with. Forsooth Christ did not merit eternal life for us,
but he merited for us grace, that so we might merit eternal life for our
selves. Now M. Bishop has taught us before, that grace is nothing, but as Free
will adioyneth it self unto it, and so the conclusion is, that the grace of
God does not save man, but man by the help of grace does save himself. Thus
the matter rests upon us, Christ offers us grace; we may receive it, if we
will; and when we have it, we may, if we will, thereby deserve eternal life,
otherwise we go without it. But the Scripture teaches us far otherwise, that
1. Ioh. 5.10.11
the record that God has witnessed of his Son is this; that God has given
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. Here is no record, that God
has given us grace to deserve eternal life, but that he has given us
eternal life; nor that this life is in our merits, but that this life is in
his Son, so as that Ioh 3.36.
he that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, and 1. Ioh. 5.13.
they that believe in the name of the Son of God, are to know, that they have
eternal life, God by the beginning giving them certificate and assurance of
the end. The real imputation of Christ's merits to us, is no fained
imagination, but a clear truth, as has been before showed. The contrariety
and opposition that he conceiueth therein, is his own fond dream, no doctrine
of ours. We do not say, that Christ's merits are really in us, neither did
Master Perkins give him any word whereof to imagine it, but only that by
imputation they are made really ours, because they were undertaken and done for
us, even as Christ the doer thereof is become really ours, even Ierem. 23 6.
the Lord our righteousness. Whereas he says, that to say, that Christ only
is the person in whom God is well pleased, is to give the lie to many texts of
Scripture, which testify, that God has been pleased toward Abraham, Moses,
etc. we suppose he does not well understand himself. It is said of many, that
God was pleased with them, or they pleased God, but the question is, in whom,
for whose sake, by whose mediation God was well pleased toward them, and that
was only in Christ, only for Christ's sake, accordingly as the Apostle Saint
Paul says of all the elect: Ephesians. 1.6.
He has made us accepted in his beloved, and Saint Peter, that our 1. Pet. 2.5.
spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And this
prerogative the voice of the Father gives him from heaven: Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: namely, toward Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, and all toward whom he is well pleased. Which
seeing it was the plain meaning of M. Perkins, and M. Bishop acknowledges it
to be true, that Christ is he, for whose sake God is pleased in all others,
what is it but childish and idle cauilling to make a question there, where by
his own confession none is to be made? Now where we say, that we have no
righteousness to justify us before God, but only the righteousness of
Christ, nor any merit whereby to presume of heaven, but only the merit of
Christ, all our own works being blemished and stained with sin, he bids
us tremble at that which thereupon necessarily follows. And what is that?
Marry, that as we have no righteousness but by imputation, so we must look
for no heaven but by imputation. But why should we not think, that the merit
of Christ's obedience and righteousness is of sufficient value and estimation
to purchase for us the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting glory? Is it
sufficient to purchase grace for us to merit heaven for our selves, and is it
not sufficient it self to merit heaven for us? And if we have no merit of our
own, what should hinder but that we may say with Saint Bernard: Bernard. in
Cant. Ser. 61. Ego fidenter quicquid ex me mihi deest, vsurpo mihi ex
visceribus Domini: quoniam misericordia effluunt, etc. Meritum proinde meum
miserationes Domini. Non plane sum maritiinops, quamdiuille miserationum non
fuerit. Quod si misericordiae Domini multa, multus nihilo minus ego in meritis
sum.
Whatsoever is wanting to me of my self, I boldly take it unto me out of the
bowels of the Lord, for they flow out with mercy. My merit is the Lords mercy:
I am not poor in merit, so long as he is not poor in mercy: and if he be rich
in mercy, then am I also rich in merits. Yea Bellarmine M. Bishops master
after that he has swet and traveled mightily to avouch the righteousness and
merit of works, in the end being quite spent is content to retire into our
port, and draws to this conclusion, that Bellar. de just. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Propter incertitudine^ propriae iustitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae
tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benig nitate
reponere.
because of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and the peril of
vain glory, the safest way is to repose our whole trust in the only mercy)
and goodness of God. Now if there be no salvation, no heaven without merits,
and a man have no merits of his own, by what merits shall the mercy of God
save him, but only by the imputation of the merits of Christ? And will M.
Bishop say of him, that as he has no merits but by imputation, so he shall
have no heaven but by imputation? Shall this be all the comfort of that which
Bellarmine commends for the safest course, to fly to the sole and only
mercy and goodness of God? Yea, says M. Bishop: for God as a most upright
judge will in the end repay every man according to his worth. What, and do you
M. Bishop expect, that God in the end should repay heaven to you according to
your worth? Go fool, go, leave off this talk of merit and worth: learn to
know God, learn to know thy self, learn to say with Chrysostom: Chrysostom.
in Coloss. hom 2. Nemo talem vitae conuersatio nem ostendit, vt regno dignus
esse possit, sed totum donum est ipsius D^.
No man shows such conversation of life, as that he may be worthy of the
kingdom, but it is wholly the gift of God. Was not Mar. 1.7.
John Baptist worthy to loose the latchet of Christ's shoe, and do thou
think to be worthy to reign with Christ? But I leave him here to be whipped
with his own rod: his own conscience will one day sting him sufficiently with
the remembrance of these assertions. As for the Protestants, let him take no
care for their worthiness. We believe that there is for us in Christ a real
worthiness, for which we shall receive a real heaven. But let him take heed,
lest whilst he feeds himself with a conceit of worth where there is none,
he be deluded with a conceit of heaven in his end, and indeed find none, nor
ever attain to that which is prepared for them that maintain the truth of the
Scripture, and glory of God to their own comfort. But of worthiness there
will be further occasion to speak hereafter. As for the place of Austine which
he alleges as good to stand for him, it was written by him when he was newly
converted from the heresy of the Manichees in such words and phrases as seem
plausible to humane understanding and judgment, which comparing one man with
another, expresses to it self the difference by terms of worthy and
unworthy, deserving and hot deserving, howsoever to the sight and judgment of
God worth and desert are far from all. The purpose of S. Austine in that
place, is to show the ordinary course that God takes, that he will first have
us to travel in his service, before we receive the reward thereof, as the
Apostle declares in saying, 2. Tim. 2.6.
The husbandman must labor before he receive the fruits. But that S. Austine
in maturitie and ripeness of judgment was very far from M. Bishops fancy
of merit, may sufficiently appear by one sentence of his where he says,
August. in Psalm. 109. Promisit hominibus diuinitatem, mor talibus
immortalitatem, peccatoribus iustificationem, abiectis glorificationem.
Quicquid promisit, indignis promisit, vt non quasi merces operibus
promitteretur, sed gratia a nomine suo gratis daretur, quia and hoc ipsa^ quod
just viuit, inquantum homo potest just viuere, no^ merit humani, sed
beneficij diuini est,
God promised to men participation with God, immortality to mortal creatures,
justification to sinners, glorification to abiects and cast-awayes. Whatsoever
he promised, he promised to men unworthy, that it might not be promised as a
reward to works, but being grace might according to the name be freely given;
because to live justly, so far as man can live justly, is not a matter
importing man's merit, but the benefit and gift of God. Where plainly he
shows, that whatsoever God has promised, it is his mere and only gift;
that to speak simply thereof, it is to be bereaved of the title of a reward of
works, because God promised the same when we had no works: that it is not
given for our worth, because it was promised when we had no worth: yea and
that we have any good works, it is an effect of the same promise; it cannot be
thought to make any merit on our behalf, but to set forth grace and mercy on
Gods behalf: so that all is free gift, all is grace and mercy, and the adding
of one gift, and grace, and mercy to another, howsoever sometimes in some
respects, as hereafter we shall see, the gift of God is set forth unto us
under the name of recompense and reward. In a word, by that that follows, I
doubt not but it will appear, that the Protestants Proctor, if he must needs
be so termed, has said nothing in this behalf, but what by S. Austine and
other ancient Fathers may well be defended against this Romish prater, who
has great insolency of words, but sound matter of proof he can find none at
all.

3. W. BISHOP.
But M. Perkins will nevertheless prove, and that by sundry reasons, that
their doctrine is the truth at self, and ours falsehood.

First, by a sorry short syllogism containing more then one whole page. It is
taken out of the properties of a meritorious work: which must be (says he)
four: first, That the work be done of our selves, without the help of
another: secondly, That it be not otherwise due debt: thirdly, That it be done
to the benefit of another: fourthly, That the work and reward be equal in
proportion. These properties he sets down pythagorically without any proof:
but inserreth thereon, as though he had proved them inuincibly, that Christ's
manhood separated from the Godhead cannot merit: because whatsoever he does, he
does it by grace received, and should be otherwise due. He might in like manner
as truly say, that Christ's manhood united to the Godhead, could not merit
neither: for he received his Godhead from his Father, and whatsoever he does,
is therefore his Fathers by due debt. And so the good man, if he were let
alone, would disappoint us wholly of all merits, as well the imputed of Christ's,
as of all ours done by virtue of his grace. Wherefore we must a little sift his
four forged proprieties of merit: and touching the first, I say, that one may
by the good use of a thing received by free gift, merit and deserve much even
at his hands that gave it. For example, the farther bestows a Farm upon his
son freely; who may by often presenting his Father of the pleasing fruits
growing on the same, deserve his further favor: yea, he may by the commodities
reaped out of that farm, buy any thing that it shall please his father to set
to sale, as well as if he had never received the farm from his fathers gift.
Which is so common a case, and so sensible, that every man of mean wit, may
easily reach unto it: even so by good manuring the gifts which God freely
bestows upon us, we may both merit the increase of them, and according to his
own order and promise, purchase thereby the kingdom of heaven: which is
plainly proved by that parable, Of the talents given by a king to his
servants; Mat. 25.
the which they employing well and multiplying, were therefore esteemed worthy
of far greater, and withal to be made partakers of their Lords joys.

M. Perkins then was not a little ouerseene, to put for the first propriety of
merit, that it must be done by a man, and of a man himself.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins says very truly upon noting the conditions necessarily required in
a meritorious work, that the manhood of Christ considered a part from his
Godhead, because it is but a creature, and has all by the gift of God, and
does all by bond of necessary duty, cannot merit at Gods hands: Whereas M.
Bishop against this says, that he might in like manner as truly say, that
Christ's manhood united to the Godhead could not merit neither, because he
received his Godhead from the Father, and therefore whatsoever he does is his
Fathers by due debt, he bewrays his notable and absurd ignorance. For Christ
receives his Godhead of the Father to be equal to the Father, not inferior;
to be the same in substance, and majesty, and glory, that the Father is. Now
duty and debt do necessarily enforce minority and subjection. Seeing therefore
there is no minority or subjection in the Godhead of the Son toward the
Father, there can be no debt or duty of the Son in that respect toward the
Father. Thus the good man, to repay him with his own stout, is taken before
he is aware in the nets of the Arian heresy, which made Christ as God
inferior, and subject to the Father. The merit of Christ therefore consisted
in this, as S. Paul notes, that being equal to God his Father, and owing no
debt or duty, did voluntarily humble himself to obedience and duty for our
sakes. So then M. Perrkins, indeed a good man, as M. Bishop shall one day see,
has not by his assertion bereaved us of the merits of Christ, but has taught
how rightly to understand the same. But now he will a little sift, as he says,
the four forged proprieties of merit, which M. Perkins has set down. Whether
they be forged or not, will appear by the sequel; in the mean time his
answers to them may seem rather to have come from the Smiths forge, then out
of the study, and from the learning of a Doctor of Divinity. The first
condition required in a meritorious work, properly so to be called, to which
by duty, debt and right for the works sake, reward is to be yielded, is, that
a man do it of himself, and by his own power. For so says Hilary: Hilar. de
Trin. lib. 11. Mereri eius est qui ipse sib^ meriti acqui rendi author existi^.
It is for him to merit, who himself is to himself the author of getting his
merit. Therefore S. Bernard having said, that Bernard. in A (...) c^at. ser. 1.
Non talia sunt hominum merita^i propter ea vita aeterna debeatur ex ^ure, etc.
Nam merita omnia Dei donu sunt, and ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debtor est
quam Deus hom^^.
the merits of men are not such, as that life eternal by right is owing for
them, gives this for one reason thereof, because all merits are the gifts of
God, and so man is rather a debtor to God for them, then God to man. So Origin
says, that Origin. in To. cap 4. Vix mihi su^deo vllum opus esse posse, quod
ex debito remuneratione^ Dei deposcat, eum etiam hoc ipsum quod agere aliquid
possumus, vel cogitare vel proloqui ipsius do^^ and larguione faciamus.
he can hardly be persuaded, that there can be any work, which by debt may
require reward at Gods hands, in as much as it is by his gift that we are able
to do, or think, or speak any thing that is good. By this reason S. Austine,
though according to the language of his time, he uses the name of merit, yet
takes away the true nature of merit, by bereauing the righteousness of man of
having any thing due unto it. Aug. Epist. 105. Tibi tanqua^ debita redderetur
si ex te tibi esset iustitia cu^ debetur. Nunc de plenitudine eius accepimus
non solum gratiam qua nunc just in laboribus vsque in fine^ viuimus, sed etiam
gratia^ pro hac gratia vt in requie postea sine fine viuamu^.
Eternal life (says he) should be rendered as due unto thee, if of thy self
thou had the righteousness to which it is due: but now of his fullness we
receive not only grace now to live justly in our labors to the end, but also
grace for this grace, that afterward we may live in rest without rest. Here is
then nothing due unto us, and therefore no merit, because whatsoever
righteousness is in us, it is only Gods gift unto us. This reason in sundry
places he gives against opinion of having God Idem in Psalm. 32. and in Joan.
tract. 3.
a debtor unto us by our doings, against the conceit of In Psalm. 43. in fine.
our worthiness, or thinking that we have any thing due unto us for the good
works that we perform, because of God it is that we have all. But M. Bishops
head is sufficient to answer this, and that with greater depth of wit assure
your self, then is to be found in the heels of any Protestant whatsoever. A
man (says he) may by the good use of a thing received by free gift, merit and
deserve much even at his hands that gave it. For example forsooth: The father
bestows a Farm upon his son freely, who may by often presenting his Father
of the pleasing fruits thereof, deserve his further favor, yea by the
commodities thereof he may grow to be able to buy any thing that his father
shall set to sale. Surely this reason is very farmerlike, and smells more
strongly of the cart, then it does of the Bible. But for answer, if a man
bestow a thing upon another, and the same can make no good use thereof, but by
his hand and help that gave it him, is he not in all that redoundeth to him
bound to him, by whose gift he first enjoyed that which he has, and by whose
only hand he makes use and profit of it? If a father bestow a farm on his
son, and the son can do no good therewith but by the father: if he increase
nothing, raise nothing, but what is raised and increased to him by his father:
if he be not able of himself so much as to stir a hand to help himself,
but his father does all for him, shall we think that by the increase and
profit that arises thereof, the son meriteth and deserves any thing at his
fathers hands? can he give the Father any thing, but what was first the fathers
gift to him? Even so is the case with us. God has bestowed upon us his calling
and grace; but what are we the nearer, if his hand do not still work for us who
has said, John. 15.5.
Without me ye can do nothing; who in the beginning and to the end Phil. 2.13.
works in us both to will and to do; so that Romans 15.18.
we have nothing to speak of, but what Christ has done by us; Cyprian. ad
Quirin. lib. 3. ca. 5. De nullo gloriandum quando nostru^ nihil est.
nothing to rejoice or glory of, because we have nothing of our own, Aug in
Joan. tract. 5. Nemo habet de suo nisi mendacium and peccatum.
nothing of our own but lying and sin, so that we can yield nothing to God
but what is his, Esa. 26.12.
who has wrought all our works for us, Romans 11.36.
of whom, and for whom, and through whom are all things, that he may be blessed
for ever. Therefore the ancient Church taught against Pelagius the heretic,
that Aug. epist. 106. Gratiam Dei and adiutorium eius etiam ad singulos actus
dari.
the grace of God is given to every several action. Hieron. ad Ctesiphont.
Sciamus nos nihil esse nisi quod donauit, in nobis ipse seruaue^it, etc. semper
largitor, semper donator est. Non sufficit mihi quod semel donauit, nisi semper
donauerit: Peto vt accipiam, and cum accepero, rursus peto.
We must know, says Hierome, that we are nothing if he himself do not keep
in us that which he has given. God is still giving, still bestowing: it
suffices me not that he has once given, unless he be still giving: I pray to
receive, and when I have received, I pray again. This is it that we are here
to understand, that not only the first grace, but whatsoever consequently we
have or do toward God, it is altogether and wholly of the gift of God, and
therefore in nothing can we be said to merit or deserve at Gods hands, because
we cannot bind God as a debtor unto us, by any thing that is his own. But
Master Bishop makes no more account but this, that God has given him a
Farm, and by the well husbanding of it he must grow rich, and then make a
further purchase of God again. His Farm is the grace of God, which he must
manage by free will, and so fill his bags with merits, that when God shall
set heaven to sale, he may be able at once to buy a whole Kingdom for
himself. But if this be all, let him take heed least of a rich Farmer he
become a poor beggar, and his purchase be to be turned out of doors. Let him
thankfully acknowledge the gift of God, but if he thus brave the matter with
God with terms of purchase, he will prove like the Laodiceans, of whom the
holy Ghost says; Apoc. 3.17.
Thou say, I am rich and increased with goods, and want nothing, and know
not how thou art wretched and miserable, and blind, and naked. God will have us
Bernard in Cant. Ser. 50.
to know at that day that not for the works of righteousness which we have
done, but of his own mercy he has saved us, and that Aug. in Joan. tract. 3.
Quod praemiu^ in. mortalitatis postea tri^uit, coro^at dona sua, non merita tua.
in giving the reward of immortality, he crowns not our merits but his own
gifts. As for that which he alleges of those that received the talents, and
for the well using thereof were so bountifully rewarded, it proves that God
does well requite the good usage of the gifts that he bestows upon us, but
well he knows that of worth, of merit, and desert, there is nothing spoken
there. The talent is Gods gift, and the well using of the talent is Gods gift,
and therefore the reward commends the mercy of God, but can in no sort
approve any merit or desert of man. But of reward more hereafter: in the mean
time M. Bishops sensible case is become senseless in this case. M. Perkins
like a Divine, has set down this first condition of merit, and he has
answered it like a Farmer, as being more sensible to make use of a piece of
ground, then to dispute a question of the word of God. Let us see now whether
he have any better success against the second.

4. W. BISHOP.
The second, That a man must do it of his own free will and pleasure, and not
of due debt: carries in show an opposition, but in deed there is no
contradiction in it: for a man may, and every honest man does of his own free
will and pleasure, pay his due debt: but let us pardon the disorder of words:
his meaning being nothing else, but that the payment of that which is otherwise
due debt, cannot be any meritorious work, to which S. Austine does answer in
these words: Ser. 3. De verb. Apost.
O great goodness of God, to whom when we did owe service by condition of our
estate, as bondmen do to their Lord, yet has he promised again and again the
reward of friends. In which there is couched a comparison, which being laid in
the light, will much help to the understanding of this matter. He that has a
slave, or bondman, may lawfully exact of him all kind of service without any
wages: Bread and a whip (says a Philosopher) serve for a slave. Now suppose
the Master to be sovereign governor of a state: then if it please him to
make his man free, and withal a member of his commonweal, the same man by
performing many good offices to the state, may justly deserve of his Prince as
great reward and promotion, as any other of his subjects: and yet may his Lord
and old Master say truly to him, all this that thou have done, or could do,
is but due bebt unto me, considering that thou wast my bondman. So fares it
with us in respect of God: all that we can do is due debt unto him, because he
has made us, and endowed us with all that we either be, or have: yet it has
pleased him, as a most kind Lord, to set us at liberty through Christ, and to
make us Citizens of the Saints, and as capable of his heavenly riches, as the
Angels, if we will do our endeavor to deserve them: and whereas he might have
exacted all that ever we could do, without any kind of recompense: yet he of
his inestimable goodness toward us, does neither bind us to do all we can do;
and yet for doing that little which he commands, has by promise bound
himself to repay us a large recompense: by which we may well understand those
words of our Savior: Luke 17.
When you have done all these things that are commanded you, say that you are
unprofitable servants: we have done that we ought to do. True. By our native
condition we were bound to perform, not only all these things that be now
commanded, but whatsoever else it should have pleased God to command: and this
we must always confess, to preserve true humility in us: yet God has
bettered our estate through Christ, and so highly advanced us, that we not
only be Citizens of the Saints, but his sons and heirs, and thereby in case
to deserve of him a heavenly crown, and this is S. Ambrose exposition upon the
place. S. Chrysostom pondering these words, let us say, takes it for a
wholesome counsel for us to say, that we be unprofitable servants, least pride
destroy our good works: and then God will say, that we be good and faithful
servants, as it is recorded. Mat. 25. Verse. 21.


Again, we may truly say, when we have done all things commanded, that we are
unprofitable servants, as venerable Bede our most learned countriman
interprets: Because of all that we do, In Luc, 17.
no commodity rises unto God our Lord in himself: who is such an infinite
ocean of all goodnesses, that he wants nothing: Whereupon David says, That
thou art my God, Psalm. 15.
because thou stand in need of no good that I can do.

R. ABBOT.
That that shall merit, must be a work done of a man's own free will and
pleasure, and not of due debt. The opposition of these terms is plain and
pregnant, and M. Bishops instance to the contrary is absur^. A man does
willingly pay his debts, but not upon his own (...) will and pleasure. For what
a man does of his own free will and pleasure, it is at his own choice to
leave it undone if he list, but it is not at an honest man's choice to pay his
debts or not to pay, but by necessary duty he is tied to the payment thereof.
There is no man but in common course of speech understands a contradiction in
those words, but M. Bishop cannot let a rush go by him, but he will be seeking
a knot in it, and being sick of Pisoes disease, albeit he know not how to
speak, yet he can by no means hold his peace. But to show that the payment of
that which is due debt, may be a meritorious work, he alleges a testimony of
S. Austine, importing no such matter. Aug. de verb. Dom. ser. 3. O magna
bonitas Dei, cui cum pro condition obsequia redilere debeamus vtpote ser^^
Domino, famuli Deo, subiecti potenti, ma^cipia redemptori, aemicitiaru^ nobis
praemia repromittit, vt a nobis obsequia debita seruitutis exterqu^at.
O the great goodness of God, says he, to whom whereas by our condition and
state, we are of duty to do service as bondmen to their Lord, and as servants
unto God, as subjects to a Potentate, and slaves to him that ransomed them, yet
does promise unto us the reward of friendship, that he may wrest or draw from
us the duties of service which we owe. All is but this, that God of his mercy
by promises of reward, draws us on to the performance of our duty toward
him. I doubt not but the Reader will wonder what should move M. Bishop here to
allege this place to that purpose that he does, and yet he needs not wonder
that sees still his manner of idle and impertinent allegations. Very common
sense teaches that I am not bound to a man, for the doing of that which he
stands bound to do for me. There is no merit in the doing of it, but
trespass if he do it not. Yet he tells us, that in S. Austines words there
is a comparison couched that will put this matter out of doubt. Which indeed is
so closely couched, as that in S. Austines words we can see no token of it, and
full ilfauouredly does he deal with S. Austine therein to serve his own
turn. For whereas the godly Father uses the words to set forth Gods mercy,
that he vouchsafes to promise reward for works of due service, this cosening
impostour charge God hereby with duty of justice bound to payment of wages
for merit and desert of works. But in the comparison by him laid down, there
are many differences to be observed, which do lay open unto us the absurdity of
it. First of the infinite disproportion betwixt God and man it arises, that no
man by bondage or villanage can be bound in that high degree to another man, as
every man is bound to God; and therefore though one man being by co^munity of
nature the same that another is, may deserve at the hands of another man, yet
it follows not therefore that a man may deserve or merit at Gods hands.
Secondly, manumission and freedom with men extinguisheth bondage and service,
but liberty and adoption to Godward, are a bettering of the condition of our
service, but no discharge at all of the duty of it; nay, we are freed by
liberty from sin, from death, and from the devil, but we continue still bond
and servants unto God. So does the Apostle tell us, that thereby we are made Romans
6:18.22:
servants unto righteousness, servants unto God. Therefore does he write
himself Phil 1:1:
the servant (or bondsman) of Christ, and S. Peter teaches us to acknowledge
our selves 1. Pet. 2.16.
the servants (or bondmen) of God. Yea, and S. Austine in the place cited,
calls our works Obsequia debita seruitutis.
duties of service (or bondage) that are owing unto God, which being the last
part of the sentence, M. Bishop very guilefully left out, because it wholly
overthrows that which he says of the changing of our former state. Thirdly,
the Prince is in some sort tied to the subject, as well as the subject to the
Prince. For as the subject has need of the Prince, so has the Prince also of
the subject; as the subject stands by the Prince, so does the Prince by the
subject, and therefore by necessity is tied to reward the service of the
subject, for the securing of his own estate. But it is not so with God; we do
nothing to benefit him, he needs us not, and therefore it is his mere mercy
to vouchsafe any countenance to our service. Fourthly, there is some proportion
betwixt temporal service and temporal reward, and yet such is the
magnificence of Princes, as that for small service they give great reward,
far beyond the worth of the work which they reward; but there is no
proportion as shall be showed betwixt out temporal service to God, and his
eternal rewards to us, and much more royal and magnificent is he to reward
far beyond all possibility of desert. Last of all, add concerning M. Bishops
free man, that that was said before concerning his farmer, that in the service
of his Prince he is able to do nothing but by the help of his Prince, so that
what is done, is indeed his Princes doing for him, and not his own for
himself, yea and that in his Princes service he commit so many defaults, as
that if he be questioned he be not able for a thousand to answer one, and we
shall leave the free man and the farmer both alike, both disclaiming merit and
pleading mercy, content to take that of free gift which M. Bishops pride will
not take but by desert. Now therefore briefly to touch his application: all that
we can do, says he, is due debt unto God. True, but not only by state of our
creation, but also in that liberty wherewith he has set us free in Christ,
because by our liberty we are free from sin and death, but still continue
bond to God. In this liberty he says, that God has made us capable of
heavenly riches, if we endeavor to deserve them, but no where has God set them
forth with that condition, and after all our endeavor we are very far from
deserving. God, he says, does not bind us to do all that we can do. A lewd
man, who cannot but know that we cannot by many degrees do that that we are
bound unto, and seeing he binds us to give him Mar. 11.30.
all the heart, all the soul, all the mind, all the strength, how can he say
that God does not bind us to all that we can do? Again, by the same spirit he
terms the commandments of God that little that he commands. A foolish
and senseless man, a mere Pharisee not knowing the power of Gods law;
otherwise if he had grace and spirit to conceive it, he would by the law, as
the Apostle did, find himself Romans 7.10.
dead in himself, and acknowledge that which now seems to him but little, to
be a burden beyond his strength. At length he tells us, that God by promise
has bound himself to repay us a large recompense. But if by promise, then of
mercy on his own part, not of merit on our part. By promise he binds
himself, but by merit we bind him to us. It is in his own power to promise,
and without promise he should be tied to nothing; but whether there be promise
or not, he is tied in justice to render for merit and desert. Now because
Master Bishop in the issue of his comparison, can find nothing but promise,
the end of his comparison must be, that merit and desert is altogether to be
excluded. But by that that he has said, he tells us that we may well
understand those words of our Savior, Luke 17.20.
When ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. And how
then are we to understand them? Marry by our native condition we were bound to
perform all the commandments of God, and this we must confess to preserve
true humility in us; yet God has bettered our estate in Christ, and made us
thereby in case to deserve of him. But what, in this better state are we not
still bound to perform that which God commands? does our high advancement
to be the children of God, take away the obligation of our duty toward God?
If it do not so, (and surely we are so far from opinion of taking it away,
as that rather it does increase it) then what shall become of Master Bishops
answer? We were bound before to the keeping of Gods commandments, and we
continue bound still; what merit can there be more now in the doing of them,
then there was before? What, Master Bishop, did our Savior mean that by our
native condition we were to say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done but
our duty, and did he mean that in our better condition of grace in Christ we
are not to say so? See, gentle Reader, this is one of them who take upon them
to be the only Masters of the world; and as if all learning and truth were
locked up in their Schools. But had he not so much reason, as to consider that
Christ taught his Disciples this lesson, when they were now partakers of that
better state? In this betternesse of condition and estate, Christ teaches
them, that when they have done all that is commanded, they should say, We are
unprofitable servants, yea and by the comparison precedent, sets them forth
still in condition of servants unto God, and shows that they cannot of duty
expect so much as thanks for all that they have done. Does a man thank his
servant, because he does that which was commanded him? I trow not. So likewise
ye when ye have done all, say, we are unprofitable servants, etc. As if he
should say, Because you are servants, learn you to conceive in like sort of
your service. Now Master Bishop having set down that goodly commentary,
adds, And this is Saint Ambrose his exposition upon the place. But why does
he not set down the words of Ambrose? why does he seek to steal away only
with setting down his name? Let Saint Ambrose himself speak, and he says
to his purpose not one word, nay he speaks against him. Ambros. in Luc. lib.
8. cap. 17. Nemo in operibus glorietur, quia iure Domino debemus obsequium.
Agnosce te esse seruum plurimis obsequijs defaeneratum. Non te praeferas quia
filius Dei diceris: agnoscenda gratia sed non ignoranda natura: neque te iactes
si been s^ruisti quod facere debuisti.
Let no man rejoice, says he, or glory in works, because by right we owe
duty to the Lord. Acknowledge thy self to be a servant that art indebted in
manifold service. Do not set up thy self, for that thou art called the child
of God: thou art to acknowledge grace, but not to be ignorant of nature: and
do not vaunt thy self, that thou have served well which thou wast bound to
do. In which words he gives plainly to understand, that our native condition
of service continues still, and is not taken away by the state of the grace of
God, and that we are still to remember that we do but out duty; we do but what
we are bound to do in all that we can do. Now further he alleges Chrysostom,
but where is the place? We doubt him to be as false in Chrysostom as he was in
Ambrose, and yet in that which he cites what is there for merit, or what
against debt and duty of service unto God? Chrysostom takes it for wholesome
counsel for us to say, that we be unprofitable servants, least pride destroy
our good works. But what, was it Chrysostomes mind that we should say so and
not think so? Did he mean that by lying we should avoid pride? S. Austine
well asks the question; Aug. de verb. Apost. ser. 25. Propter humilitate^
ergo mentiris.
Will thou then lie to show humility? S. Bernard having cited those words of
Christ, adds thus, Berna. de tripl. custod. Sed hoc, inquies, propter,
humilitate^ monuit esse dicendu^. Plane, propter humilitatem sed nunquid co^tra
veritatem?
But thou will say that Christ has taught so to say for humilities sake. True,
says he, it was for humility indeed, but what, against truth? What
Chrysostom conceived of the words, it may appear when he says: Chrysostom. ad
pop. Antioch. hom. 53. Omnia quae facimus, aginius debitum implentes. Propterea
and ipse dicebat etc.
All that we do, we do as fulfilling duty; therefore Christ said, When ye have
done all, say, We are unprofitable servants, etc. In another place he gathers
thereof, that Idem de paenitent. Qui omnia faciunt, parua fecisse computabuntur.
they which have done all, shall be reckoned to have done but little: and
again, that Christ thereby commands us Ide^ de paenit. and confess.
Obliuion^ tradere bona opera.
to forget our good works, namely as not worth the remembrance and reckoning
of, howsoever God in favor and mercy do accept them. But most directly he
speaks to our purpose, where having set down the words before alleged,
Chrysostom. ad Coloss. hom 2. Supra sect. 2.
No man shows such conversation of life, as that he can be worthy of the
Kingdom, etc. he adds, Wherefore Christ says, When ye have done all, say,
We are unprofitable servants, etc. This is it then that our Savior Christ
would signify in those words, that a man by doing whatsoever he can do, cannot
attain to be worthy of the Kingdom of Christ, but that it is to us altogether
the gift of God. To which purpose Mark the ancient Hermit notably applies
the same words; Marc. Heremit. li. de bis qui se putant operib. iustificari.
Dominus totius legis debitores nos esse iudicari volens, and filioru^
adoptionem proptio sanguine nobis gratuito datam, inquit, Cum omnia feceritis,
etc. Propterea regnum coeloru^ non est merces eperu^ sed gratia Domini
fi^clilus seruis praepara^a.
Our Lord, says he, willing to show that we are debtors of the whole law, and
that the adoption of children is freely given to us by his blood, says, when
ye have done all things that are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, etc. Therefore the Kingdom of heaven is not the reward (or wages) of
works, but it is the grace (or gift) of God prepared for his faithful
servants. On every side therefore those words of Christ are taken to import
somewhat against merit and worth, yet M. Bishop by means that his minion of
Rome has hoodwinked his eyes, cannot see so much, but he is still doting upon
that which he can no where find. Which the more plainly to show, he cites
Bid for another construction of these words of Christ, that therefore we are
to account our selves unprofitable servants, because of all that we do, there
arises no profit to God; but why did he leave out that which Bid there
adds, as giving to understand that that former was not the whole meaning of
Christ's words; Beda in Luc. cap. 17.
We are unprofitable servants, because the sufferings of this time, are not
worthy of the glory to come, as in another place, which crowns thee in mercy
and compassion. He says not, in thy merits, because by whose mercy we are
prevented that we may humbly serve him, by his gift we are crowned to reign
with him. What M. Bishop, no more faith, no more trust in you? do you allege
Authors, when they condemn your doctrine, even in the places whence you cite
them? Leave of, leave of; Act. 26.14.
it is hard for you to kick against the pricks. You fight against the Gospel
of Christ, against the truth of God, and do not you doubt but it will prevail
against you, and the conquest thereof shall be your utter confusion if you hold
on your course.

5. W. BISHOP.
And thus we fall upon the third property of M. Perkins meritorious work,
which is, That it be done to the profit of another: and say that albeit God in
himself receive no profit by our works, yet does he in the administration of
his holy commonweal the Church, wherein good men's services do much pleasure
him. And in this sense it is said of S. Paul, That by cleansing our selves from
wicked works, 2. Tim. 2. Math. 5.
we shall become vessels sanctified, and profitable unto our Lord. Again, God
is glorified by our good works. That seeing your good works, they may
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Finally, God does rejoice at the
recovery of his lost children. Ioh. 15. ver. 8. Luke 15.
If then good men travailing painfully in Gods Vineyard, do yield him outwardly
both honor, joy, and commodity: that may suffice to make their work
meritorious.

R. ABBOT.
As touching this condition, we contend not with Master Bishop concerning his
exposition thereof. Merit must be done by the will, and for the use and behoof
of him at whose hands it must merit. So Christ's obedience by the will of the
Father, to the praise of the glory of his grace, did merit and deserve at his
Fathers hands in our behalf. Only it is to be added, that it must fully
satisfy the use and behoof whereto it is intended, and not fail in any point
thereof. Now because Aug. Eu^hirid. cap. 64. Sic spiritu Dei extitantur vt
etiam spiritu suo, etc. tanqua^ filij hominu^ quibusda^ motibus humanis
deficiant ad seipses, etc.
the children of God are so moved by the spirit of God, as that by their own
spirit as the sons of men through humane motions and affections, they
sometimes fail and fall back to themselves, and therefore do not so entirely
and perfectly serve the uses of the Lord, to yield either glory to God, or love
to their brethren as they ought to do, therefore neither do they attain to
this condition of merit, nor can in any sort bind God to repay them for that
broken service that they have done, nay if he would call matters to strict
reckoning and account, he has rather occasion of quarrel against them, for
disgracing and defiling the works that he has wrought in them.

6. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins fourth property is, That the work and reward be equal in
proportion: If he understand Arithmeticall proportion, that is, that they be
equal in quantity, to wit, the one to be as great, or of as long continuance
as the other: then we deny this kind of equality to be requisite to merit:
there is another sort of proportion, called by the Philosopher 5. Ethic.
Geometrical: and the equality of that is taken by a reasonable correspondence
of the one unto the other: as when a good office is given unto a Citizen of
desert, it may be that the honor and commodity of the office is far greater,
then was the merit of the man: yet he being as well able to discharge it as
another, and having better deserved it, is holden in true justice worthy of
it: In like manner in a game where maisteries are tried, the prize is given
unto him that does best, not because the value of the reward is just as much
worth, as that act of the man who wins it: but for that such actiuitie is
esteemed worthy of such a recompense. Now the crown of heavenly glory, is
likened by Saint Pule, unto a Garland in a game: where he says, 1. Cor. 9. 2.
Tim. 2.
That we all run, but one carries away the prize. And, he that strives for
the maisterie, is not crowned, unless he strive lawfully. It is also resembled
unto places of honor: Math. 25. Ioh. 14.
I will place thee over much. And, I go to provide you places.

Grace is also in many places of Scripture compared to seed: Math. 13. 1. Ioh.
3.
For the seed of God tarieth in him. But a little seed cast into good ground,
and well manured, brings forth abundance of corn. Briefly, then such
equality as there is between the well deserving subject and the office,
between him that strives lawfully and the crown, between the seed and the
corn, is between the reward of heaven, and the merit of a true servant of God.

And thus much of M. Perkins first Argument, more indeed to explicate the
nature and condition of merit, then that his reason nakedly proposed, did
require it.

R. ABBOT.
The proportion that makes merit or desert, must be Arithmeticall, wherein the
work must fully equal the reward, though not in greatness and continuance,
yet in value and worth. If the one in that sort do not counterpoise the other,
the one cannot be said to be deserved by the other. But there is no proportion
at all either Arithmeticall or Geometrical, betwixt that that is finite and
that that is infinite; therefore none at all betwixt the work of man and the
reward of heaven, the one being every way finite, the other in continuance
infinite. So then Master Bishops Geometrical proportion and reasonable
correspondence is excluded also, because Fulgent. ad Monim. lib. 1. Tantu^ ibi
graetia diuinae retributionis exuberat vt inceparabiliter atque ineffabiliter
omne meritu^ quamuis bonae and ex Deo datae humanae voluntatis and operationis
excedat.
the grace (or gift) of Gods reward, as Fulgentius says, does so much there
abound, as that incomparably and unspeakably it exceeds all the merit of the
will and work of man, albeit it be good and given unto him of God. There is no
reasonable correspondence where the one incomparably and unspeakably exceeds
all the merit and desert of the other. The same is imported by Saint Bernard,
who having said, that men's merits are not such as that life eternal is due
unto the^ of right, gives reason thereof, beside that that I mentioned before:
Ber. in Annunciat. Ser. 1. Quid sunt omnia merita ad tanta^ gloriam?
For what are all merits to so great glory? M. Bishop will have us think that
he did amiss to ask such a question, because there is as he says such a
reasonable correspo^dence betwixt the one and the other, as that the one
contrary to S. Bernards sentence, is justly and duly deserved by the other. And
in the same sort does he control Macarius, who affirms, that Macar. homil.
15. Siqui^ abeo tempore quo co^ditus est Adam vsque ad fine^ mu^di militasset
co^tra diab. lum and omnes dolores cruciatusque perrulisset, nihil magnum
fecisset respectu gloriae qua^ co^secuturus est, and in qua infinitu seculu cu^
Christo regnabit.
though a man from the time that Adam was created even to the end of the world,
were in warfare against the devil, and did suffer all afflictions and sorrows,
yet should he do no great matter in comparison to the glory which he shall
receive, being to reign with Christ world without end. Now the^ because all
reasonable correspondence is quite sunk, Master Bishops merit is quite
drowned, and his device of Geometrical proportion will not serve his turn.
But we are here to note the notable stupiditie of this merit-monger Pharisee,
who makes the like correspondence betwixt the merit of man and the reward of
heaven, as is betwixt the well deserving subject, and an office bestowed on
him, betwixt him that strives lawfully and the crown; betwixt the seed and
the corn increasing thereof. Who would think that he could be so absurd, so
basely to proportion those 1. Cor. 2.9.
good things which neither eye has seen nor ear has heard, nor have entered
into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him. And yet even
in these comparisons how far is he beside the stool. For first we know that
subjects do not challenge offices at their Princes hands, by right and title of
merit and desert, but by request of favor and grace. Whatsoever a man has
done, he has done the duty of a subject, and it is at the discretion and
pleasure of the Prince, to consider of that he has done, and what is it to
him, if his Prince bestow the office which he desires, upon a man of meaner
quality and worth then he thinks himself to be? But if the honor and
commodity of the office be far greater, as M. Bishop says, the^ the merit of
the man, shall we not think that he meriteth a dagger and a bell, that will go
about hereby to approve a title of merit and desert with God? For if the
reward of heaven be far greater then the merit of man, why does he seek to
make good our meriting thereof? As touching his second comparison of games and
trial of maisteries, he might easily conceive, that the prize ex condicto
stands good to him that wins it, but there is no question of the value or
worth of it, which happily is much less then to counteruaile the labor and
pains that is bestowed for the gaining of it. As in the games of Olympus, the
most famous that ever were in the world, the prize was but an Olive garland,
nothing for worth in comparison of the pains and expense me^ were at, to
prepare themselves, and to travel for the obtaining thereof. So that Tigranes
when Mardonius had persuaded Zerxes to war against the Grecians, hearing
thereof said unto him, Polydor. Virgil. de invent. rerum. lib. 2. ca. 13.
Good Lord, Mardonius, what kind of men have thou brought us to fight against,
who try maisteries not for gaining of money, but for showing of prowess and
valor? So that the correspondence betwixt the gamester and the prize may be
this, that the labor and pains on the one side is much, and the prize on the
other side worth just nothing, nor is esteemed at all for the value and worth
of it, and yet hereby forsooth Master Bishop will set forth unto us a
correspondence betwixt the merit of our works, and the reward of heaven. As
for the places of Scripture that he cites hereof, the Apostle thereby sets
forth the consequence and order of the work and the reward, God having
designed the one to the other, as the prize is proposed in the game, but as
touching value and worth, as touching merit and desert he intends nothing
therein. His third comparison is, that the grace of God is compared to seed,
as where Saint John says: 1. John. 3.^.
His seed remains in him. In which place Saint John having said, that he
that is borne of God sins not, that is, finally and utterly, gives reason
thereof; for that being once borne of God, though he do grievously fall, as did
David and Peter, and many other, yet there is still a seed remaining in him,
which albeit for the time it seem covered and dead, yet shall revive and
spring again, and bring forth fruit unto God; and what is this to M. Bishops
merit? He tells us, that by seed is imported the grace of God, but he does
not show us, that by seed is imported the merit of man. To what end then is
this brought in, but to let us see that his head is idle, and does not well
advise what he has to say? Well, we must conceive his meaning by that he
says, that a little seed brings forth abundance of corn. But we must ask
him whether there be that reasonable correspondence betwixt the seed and the
increase, as that the one in worth should be esteemed with the other? If M.
Bishop should offer that correspondence to the husbandman for his crop, would
he not judge him with his Geometrical proportion to be scarcely correspondent
to a wise man? Shall we then think him well in his wits, that thinks the seed
of his merits to be a valuable consideration for the receiving of the crop of
heavenly rewards? Again, the husbandmans increase of his seed whence proceeds
it? Does he by sowing his seed, expect it as a matter of merit and desert? Is
it not wholly the blessing of God that sends the early and latter rain, and
gives strength to the earth to bring forth increase thereof: Even so is it in
all the reward that God bestows upon us. We sow the seed of our good works,
but of themselves they yield us no fruit; there is no worth or merit in them to
require wages at Gods hands, but it is only the mercy and bounty of God whereby
we shall reap the increase that we expect thereof. Thus M. Bishop can find no
means to thrive. He has been a farmer, and a freeman, and an officer, and a
gamester, and a seedman, and yet every where he is crossed in his merit, and
can no where light upon a foundation to set it firm and sure. And yet mark,
gentle Reader, how with his reasonable corespondence he minceth the matter,
over that other his fellows do. The Rhemistes speak plain English, as we
have heard before, and tell us that their works are truly and properly
meritorious, and not only reasonably, but fully worthy of everlasting life,
that they have a right to heaven and deserve it worthily, and that God by his
justice owes it unto them. These are downright lads, that stick not to
utter their minds, but M. Bishop he comes in paltring with his Geometrical
proportion, and reasonable correspondence, and like a young nouice is abashed
to say all, and by that means if good heed be not taken, is likely to mar
the market of merit, to the harm of himself and the rest of them. Hitherto
then it appears, that M. Perkins did rightly assign those four conditions
or circumstances to be required in a meritorious work; which standing good as
they do, there can be no merit; because all the good that we do is Gods,
because in all we do but our duty, because that that we do does not fully
satisfy our duty, nor has any due proportion or correspondence to the reward
of heaven.

7. W. BISHOP.
Exodus 20.
His second testimony is, God will show mercy upon thousands, in them that
love him and keep his commandments. Hence he reasons thus: Where reward is
given upon mercy, there is no merit: but reward is given upon mercy, as the
text proves, ergo.

Answer. That in that text is nothing, touching the reward of heaven which is
now in question: God does for his loving servants sake, show mercy unto their
children or friends, either in temporal things, or in calling them to
repentance, and such like: but does never for one man's sake, bestow the
kingdom upon another, unless the party himself be first made worthy of it.

That confirmation of his, that Adam by his continual and perfect obedience,
could not have procured a further increase of Gods favor, is both besides the
purpose, and most false: for as well he, as every good man sithence, by good
use of Gods gifts, might day by day increase them: And that no man think that
in Paradise it should have been otherwise, S. Augustine says expressly, That in
the felicity of Paradise, Jn E^chir. cap. 25.
righteousness preserved, should have ascended into better. And Adam finally,
and all his posterity (if he had not fallen) should have been from Paradise
translated alive into the Kingdom of heaven: this by the way.

R. ABBOT.
What, when God promises mercy to thousands in them that love him and keep
his commandments, does he mean his mercy to their children only, and not to
themselves? and is the mercy that is promised only for earth, and not for
heaven? Here M. Bishop as it appears, was hardly bested, when he could find
no way to get out, but by such a senseless and absurd shift. But to take away
that corrupt gloss of his, the Prophet David expressly refers all reward to
Gods mercy. Psalm. 62.12.
Thou O Lord art merciful, or mercy O Lord is to be ascribed unto thee, for
thou rewardest every man according to his work. Which words are general of
every man, not signifying that which God does to some for others sake, but that
which every man receives for his own work, and import not only reward of
temporal things, because they are the words which the Scripture every where
uses to signify the reward that shall be given at that day. Now then there is
no merit either in things temporal or eternal, because it is of mercy that
God rewards every man according to his works. And thus of Gods eternal
mercy, the same Prophet alluding to the words of the commandment, says in
another place: Psalm. 103.17.
The mercy of the Lord is for ever and ever upon them that fear him, and his
righteousness toward their childrens children, even such as keep his
covenant, and think upon his commandments to do them. It is Gods mercy then
whereby to them that fear him and keep his commandments, he gives reward
for ever and ever, showing himself just also in performance of the same
promise of his mercy to their childrens children. But could not the blind man
here see, how by his own answer he does circumuent himself? The place he
says must be understood of temporal graces and benefits, not of the reward of
heaven. So then by mercy God bestows the reward of temporal benefits, but by
merit he bestows the Kingdom of heaven. Now how strange a thing is it and
improbable, that merits should extend to the purchase of the Kingdom of
heaven, and yet should not serve to purchase temporal benefits here upon the
earth? Hieron. Si tanti vitru^, quanti pretiosissimum margaritum?
If glass be of so great price, how much more worth is a most precious
jewel? If earth be so much worth, as that mercy only can yield it, shall we
think that we have merit to deserve heaven? But we will leave the man to his
folly: it may be when he has better considered of the matter, we shall have of
him some wiser answer. In the mean time we acknowledge, that God does not for
one man's sake bestow the Kingdom of heaven upon another, but yet of mercy he
bestows it both upon the one and upon the other, both upon the fathers and
upon the children, even all that fear him and keep his commandments. And
fith of mercy he bestows it, certain it is that they have no merit to
deserve and challenge it, whosoever they be that love him and keep his
commandments. That which he says of Adam, he says it without book, and
has no warrant for that he says. As for the place of Austine, though it
contain nothing but what is probable, yet we answer to it by a rule which the
same S. Austine has prescribed otherwhere, that Aug de peccat. mer and remiss.
lib. 2. ca. 36. Vbi de re obscurissima disputatur, no^ adiuuantibus diuinarum
scripturarum certis clarisque documentu, cohibere se debet hum^^a praesumptis,
nihil faciins in alteram parte^ declinando.
where there is controversy of a very obscure matter, there being no certain
and clear instructions of holy Scriptures to help us therein, humane
presumption is to stay it self, doing nothing by inclining either way.

8 W. BISHOP.
Now to the third Argument.

Romans 6.
Scripture condemns merit of works: The wages of sin is death. True. But we
speak of good works, and not of bad, which the Apostle calls sin: where
were the man's wits? but it follows there, That eternal life is the grace or
gift of God. This is to purpose: but answered 1200. years past, by that famous
Father Saint Augustine, in diverse places of his most learned Works. I will
note one or two of them.

First, thus here arises no small doubt, De great. and lib. arb. cap. 8.
which by Gods help I will now discuss. For if eternal life be rendered unto
good works, as the holy Scripture does most clearly teach, (note) how then can
it be called grace? when grace is given freely, and not repayed for works: and
so pursuing the points of difficulty at large, in the end resolves: that
eternal life is most truly rendered unto good works, as the due reward of
them: but because those good works could not have been done, unless God had
before freely through Christ, bestowed his grace upon us, therefore the same
eternal life, is also truly called grace: because the first root of it was
Gods free gift.

The very same answer does he give, where he has these words: Epist. 106.
Eternal life is called grace, not because it is not rendered unto merits: but
for that those merits to which it is rendered were given, in which place he
crosses M. Perkins proportion most directly, affirming, that S. Paul might
have said truly, eternal life is the pay or wages of good works: but to hold
us in humility partly, and partly to put a difference between our salvation
and damnation, chose rather to say, that the gift of God was life eternal:
because of our damnation, we are the whole and only cause, but not of our
salvation, but principally the grace of God, the only fountain of merit, and
all good works.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins alleged the whole words of the Apostle, not to argue only from
the assertion expressed in the latter part, that Romans 6.23.
eternal life is the gift of God, but also from the connection of the whole
sentence, that whereas it being said, that the wages of sin is death, the
sequel of the speech, if there were any merit in our works, should have been,
The wages of righteousness is eternal life, he says not so, but the gift of
God is eternal life: and so both by that which he does not say, and also by
that which he does say, shows, that there is no place to be given to the
merit and desert of man. Now Master Bishop takes the first part of the
sentence by it self, The wages of sin is death, as if Master Perkins had
thence argued against merit, and asks, Where were the man's wits? Surely his
own wits were not so far from home, but that he well knew wherein the proof
stood, but we see he is disposed sometimes to show his apish tricks, that we
may see how he can skippe and leap about the chain, howsoever he advantage
himself nothing at all thereby. But at his pleasure he produces the words
which M. Perkins properly intended, Eternal life is the gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. He tells us, that the place is answered 1200. years
past by S. Austine in diverse places of his works. Now indeed it is true, that
S. Austine in diverse places of his works has handled those words, but the
spite is, that in none of all those places he has said any thing to serve M.
Bishop for an answer. This may appear by that that he says in the very same
book, and very next Chapter to that that M. Bishop cites: August. de gr^^ and
(...) arbit. cap. 9. C^^^ posse^ dicere and recte dicere, Sti^^end^m iustitiae
vita et^rn^, malu^ ^^^e^ dicere, Gratia Dei, etc. vt intelligantus non pro
merit^ nostru Deum nos ad vitam aeterna^ se^ pro miseratione sua perducere, de
quo, etc.
Whereas the Apostle might say, and rightly say, The wages of righteousness is
eternal life, yet he chose rather to say, The grace of God is eternal life,
that we may understand, that not for our merits, but for his own mercies sake
he brings us to eternal life, whereof it is said in the Psalm, He crowns
thee in mercy and compassion. Hereby it may seem, that S. Austine meant to
yield M. Bishop small help by his expounding of this place to the maintenance
of their merits. But in the Chapter cited by M. Bishop, she propounds the
question Ibid. cap. 8. Si vita aeterna bonus operibus redditur sicut
apertissi^^e dicit Scriptura, Quoniam Deus red^es, etc quomodo gratia est vita
aeterna, cum gratia non operibus reddatur, sed gratis detur, etc.
how eternal life should be called the grace of God, seeing that it is
elsewhere said, that God will render unto every man according to his works.
The difficulty he shows to arise of this, that that is called grace, which
is not rendered unto works, but is freely given. Whereof he cites the words of
the Apostle: If it be of grace it is not of works; otherwise grace is no
grace. Then he solueth the question thus, that Intelligamus and ipsa bona opera
nostra quibus aeterna redditur vita ad Dei gratiam pertinere.
we must understand that our good works to which eternal life is rendered, do
belong also to the grace of God, signifying that God of his mercy intending to
give us eternal life, does by the same mercy give us those good works to
which he will give it. For conclusion of that Chapter, he says consequently:
that Vita nostra bona nihil aliud est qu^m Dei gratia sine dubio and vita
aeterna quae bonae vitae redditur Dei gratia est: and ipsa enim gratis ^ata
est, quia gratis data est illa cui datur: sed illa cui datur, tantum. modo
gratia est; haec autem quae illi datur quoma^ praemiu^ eius est, gratia est pro
gratia, tanquam merces pro iustitia, vt verum sit, etc.
because our good life is nothing else but the grace of God, therefore
undoubtedly eternal life, which is rendered unto good life is the grace of God:
for that is freely given, because that is freely given to which it is given.
But good life to which eternal life is given, is only grace; eternal life
which is given to good life, because it is the reward thereof, is grace for
grace, as it were a reward for righteousness, that it may be true, as it is
true, that God will render to every man according to his works. In all which
discourse plainly he shows, that good life is the grace and gift of God, and
when God renders thereto eternal life, he does but add one grace to another
grace, which although it be as it were a reward for righteousness, yet is
indeed but grace for grace. Which fully accords with that that was cited out
of him before, that Supra Sect. 2. August. in Psalm. 109.
Whatsoever God promised, he promised to men unworthy, that it might not be
promised as a reward to works, but being grace, might according to the name be
freely given, because to live justly, so far as a man can live justly, is not
a matter of man's merit, but of the gift of God. So that although eternal life
be as it were a reward of righteousness in consequence and order, yet
absolutely to speak it is not so, because both the one and the other are only
the grace and gift of God. Now if God by his free gift intending to us eternal
life, do give us his grace to lead a just and holy life, that thereto he may
give it, have we reason hereupon with M. Bishop, of mercy whereby we should
glorify God, to build up merit and desert for the glorifying of our selves? or
shall we rather subscribe that which S. Austine says for conclusion of that
whole disputation concerning that place of the Apostle, as before I cited, that
it is not for our merits that God brings us to eternal life, but for his
own mercies sake. The other place cited by M. Bishop is wholly to the same
effect: Idem Epist. 105. Cum Deus coronat merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat
quam munera sua, sicut enim ab initio fidei mi sericordiam consecuti sumus, non
quia fideles eramus, sed vt essemus, sic in fine corona bit nos in miseratione
and misericordia. Vnde and vita ipsa aeterna gratia nuncupatur, non ob aliud
nisi quia gratis datur nec ideo quia meritis non datur, sed quia data sunt and
ipsa merita quibus datur.
When God crowns our merits, he crowns nothing else but his own gifts. For
as from the beginning we obtained mercy to be faithful, so in the end he
shall crown us in compassion and mercy. Whence eternal life is called grace
for no other cause, but because it is freely given, not for that it is not
rendered to merits, but for that the merits themselves are given to which it is
given. In which there is nothing that gives any show of favor to M. Bishop but
the very name of merits, but that that helps him nothing shall appear
hereafter, S. Austine meaning thereby merely good works, without any conceit
of merit as it is now understood in the Church of Rome. Yea and that appears
plainly here also: for if God in crowning merits, crown nothing but his own
gifts, then those merits are not truly and properly so called, because a man
cannot properly merit at Gods hands by that that is to him nothing else but the
gift of God. And this S. Austin shows further in that that follows: Ibid.
Cui debetur vita aeterna vera iustitia est. Si autem vera iustitia est ex te
non est: desursum est, descendens a Patre luminum, etc. Qua propter, o homo si
accepturus es vitam aeternam, iustitiae quidem stipendium est, sed tibi gratia
est, ^ui gratia est and ipsa iustitia. Tibi enim tanquam debita read:
redderetur, si ex te tibi esset iustitia cui debetur. Nunc ergo, etc. vt supra
Sect. 3.
It is true righteousness to which eternal life is due. But if it be true, it
is not of thy self, it is from above, descending from the Father of lights:
that thou might have it, if at least thou have it, verily thou have received
it. For what have thou that thou have not received? Wherefore o man, if thou be
to receive eternal life, it is indeed the wages of righteousness, but to thee
it is grace to whom righteousness it self also is grace. It should be rendered
as due unto thee, if of thy self thou had the righteousness to which it is
due. Now therefore of his fullness we receive not only grace, etc. but also
grace for grace, etc. If eternal life be merited and deserved by us, then to
us it is the wages of righteousness; then it is rendered as due unto us. But S.
Austine though he confesses, that it may be said, that it is the wages of
righteousness, yet denies it to be so to us; and denies that it is rendered
as due unto us. Therefore it must necessarily be granted, that it is not merited
and deserved by us: it can no way be avoided, but that if it be deserved by us,
it is due unto us: but it is not due unto us, says S. Austine, because the
righteousness is none of ours. There is therefore on our behalf no merit, no
desert to which it should be accounted due. Thus S. Austine wholly bends
himself to establish the truth of the grace of God, against the Pelagian
heretics, and says nothing whereof M. Bishop may infer the doctrine of
merit, which he together with them maintains against the grace of God. But
for the further declaring of S. Austines mind, I will observe that one sentence
of his upon the Psalms: Aug. in Psalm. 144. Data est venia peccatori, datus
spiritus iustificationis, data est charitas and dilectio, in qua omnia bona
faci a (...) super haec dabit and vitam aeternam and societatem Angelorum:
totum de misericordia. M^rita tua nusquam iactes, quia and ipsa sua merita
illius dona sunt.
To thee being a sinner is granted forgiveness; the spirit of justification is
given thee; there is given thee charity and love, whereby to do all good
things: and beyond all these things, he will give thee also eternal life, and
the society of the Angels, all of mercy. Do not talk of thy merits any where,
because even thy merits also are his gifts. In which words it plainly
appears, that albeit S. Austine uses the name of merit, according to the
language of his time, yet he did it not in any such sense, but as still
intending, that both in the beginning, and in the proceeding and in the end all
is wholly and only to be ascribed unto Gods mercy. But M. Bishop tells us
here, that S. Austine crosses M. Perkins proportion, in that he affirms,
that S. Paul might have said, that eternal life is the wages of good works.
Wherein he does but deceive himself; because to speak simply it is true, that
eternal life is the stipend and wages of true and perfect righteousness,
according to the sentence of the law: Gal. 3 12
He that does these things shall live in them; and yet it is so but only by
covenant and condition, not by merit, because in doing all we should do but
that that we are bound to do. But as has been already said, S. Austin, though
he grant that simply it might have been so termed, yet denies it to be so to
us. It is indeed the stipend or wages of righteousness, but to thee it is
grace, that is, to thee it is no stipend. Now this is spoken upon a supposall
of entire and perfect righteousness, but take withal the exceptions that S.
Austine puts in by the way, as we have seen: Si tamen habet Epist. 105.
if at least thou have it; and again, Inquantum homo potest just vinerean
Psalm. 109.
so far as a man can live justly, and let it be considered herewith, which
out of Austine has been abundantly declared in the former question, that there
is no righteousness so perfect in this life, as that thereby we can be found
just in the sight of God, and then merit and stipend shall be excluded, not
only for that our righteousness is the gift of God, but also for that we have
not that righteousness to which the stipend and wages of righteousness should
be due. But let us here consider the reasons which M. Bishop sets down in
S. Austines name, why he did not say: The wages of righteousness is eternal
life: partly, says he, to hold us in humility. Well, but yet it was not S.
Austins meaning, that the Apostle would keep us in humility by co^cealing that
that is true, but by withholding us from conceiving proudly of our selves that
that is not true: Ne iustitia de humano se extolleret bono merito
lest (says S. Austin) righteousness should advance it self as of any merit
that man should have thereby. Again, partly (says he) to put difference
between salvation and damnation. This reason he makes of his own, S. Austin
has it not: but what is that difference? Observe it well, gentle Reader, for
herein is the secret, and thou shall see the lewdness of there wretched men in
abusing the name of S. Austin to the coloring of their falsehood. We are
(forsooth) the whole and only cause of our damnation, but not of our
salvation, but principally the grace of God. The grace of God he says is
principally the cause of our salvation, but not the whole and only cause: for
we must understand, that we our selves by our Free will are a part of the cause
of our salvation. Yea upon Free will they hang the effect of the grace of God,
and from thence do they derive unto man that merit whereby he does deserve
eternal life. For they know well, that man cannot be said to merit any thing
by that that is wholly the gift of God: and therefore for the upholding of merit
and desert, they are so eager and earnest for the maintenance of free will.
They walk in this behalf in the very steps of the Pelagian heretics, who
as Prosper records, alleged for defense of Free will, Prosper de li. arbit.
Asserunt nec laudem ha b^re eos, nec meritum qui ex dono gratiae sunt fide^es.
that men can have no commendation nor merit, who are faithful by the gift of
grace. So S. Hierome brings in the Heretic saying resolutely: H^^r^n.
aduer. Pelag^^ Mihi ^ullus ^nf^^re pe^erit arbitrij libertatem, ne si in
operibus m^s Deus adiutor extu^rit no^ mihi debeatur merces sed ei qui in me
operatus est.
No man shall take away from me free will, lest if God be my helper in my
works the reward be not due to me, but to him that works in me. Even so
Popish merit stands upon free will: for Rhemish Annot. in Romans 9.14
men, say the Rhemists, work by their own Free will, and thereby deserve
their salvation. So says Alphonsus de Castro, Alphons. de Castro adu haere.
lib. 7 in Gratia. Ex hoc quodnos monitio^ illius consentimus, qui tamen
dissentire poteramus, debetur nobis merces and praemium and inde meritum
nostrum.
In that we by free will consent to Gods monition, who yet had it in our power
to dissent, a reward and wages is due unto us, and thence is our merit. In like
sort Andradius tells us, that Andrad. Orth. explicat. lib. 6. Nostra merita
dicuntur quia libere and sponte illas actiones suscipimus quibus apud Deum
promeremur.
they are called our merits, because we freely and voluntarily undertake those
actions whereby we merit with God. Now of this poisonfull doctrine whereby man
is made partaker with God in the glory of our salvation, they would make S.
Austine a partaker and patron with them, who in condemning the Pelagian
heresy, condemned the same, and challenges our good works which he calls
merits, wholly and only unto God. So he says, that August. Epist. 105. Omne
bonu^ meritum nostru^ non in nobis facis nisi gratia.
all our good work or merit is wrought unto us by grace only, that Jdem
Hy^og. lib. 3. Iustorum per totam seculi vitam meritum em^^ est gr^tia.
all the merit of the just through the whole life of this world is grace. De
ve^. Dom. S^rm. 7. Totum reputa quod iustus es pietati.
That thou art just, says he, repute it wholly to mercy. De verb. Apost Ser.
16. Totum quod sumus and quod habemus boni ab illo habemus.
That that we are and have in goodness, we have it wholly of him. To that
purpose he alleges against the Pelagians a speech of Cyprians, requiring that
Idem de bo^o perseu. cap. 6 ex Cypriano de Orat. Dom. Nequis sibi superbe
arroganterque aliqu^d assumas, nequis aut confessionis aut passionis gloriam
suam dicat, etc. vt dum praecedit humilis and submissa confessio, and datur
totum Deo qu^cquid suppliciter cum Dei timore petitur, ipsius pretate
praestetur.
no man proudly and arrogantly assume any thing to himself, nor call the
glory of confessing or suffering his own, that whilst humble and lowly
confession goes before, and all wholly is yielded unto God, it may be granted
unto us by his mercy, whatsoever we humbly request in the fear of God. Now
according to those words of yielding or attributing all wholly unto God, he
says in the same place, Jbid Tutiores viuimus si totum Deod^^^us, and non nos
illi ex part, and notis ex part committimus.
We live more safely if we attribute all wholly to God, and do not commit our
selves partly to God and partly to our selves. For reason whereof he says
anon after, that Jbid cap. 7. Post casum hominis nonnifi ad gratiam suam Deus
pertinere voltus, vt homo accedat ad eum; neque nisi ad gratiam suam pertinere
volunt, vt homo non recedat ab eo.
after the fal^ of man, God would not have it belong to any thing but to his
grace that we come unto him, nor would have it to belong to any thing but his
grace, that we do not depart from him. And to those words of Cyprian he
alludeth in diverse and sundry places, as namely, where he says, that Enchir.
cap. 32 Propterea dictu^ No^ volentis, etc. vt detur totum Deo. See of
Free Will, Sect 15.
therefore the Apostle says, It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy, that all wholly may be attributed unto
God, discoursing at large, that our willing and our running is not to be
divided betwixt the will of man and the mercy of God, because then as it is
said on the one side, It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy, because the will of man alone suffiseth not, so
on the other side it may be said, It is not of God that shows mercy, but of
him that wills and him that runs, because the mercy of God alone
suffices not. Now it were wickedness thus to cross and contradict the Apostles
words, and therefore does he conclude, that al is wholly to be ascribed unto
Gods mercy. See then the good dealing, or rather the lewd falsehood of M.
Bishop and his fellows who teaching for the maintenance of their doctrine of
merits, that good works are principally indeed of God, but yet partly of our
selves, do allege S. Austine for the defense thereof, who constantly teaches
to the utter overthrow of merits, that our good works are wholly and only of
the grace of God, and in no part of our selves. This is one thing for which we
justly detest them, as setting up the glory of man in stead of the glory of
God; the righteousness of man in stead of the righteousness of God, and so by
bearing men in hand with a merit of eternal life, do bereave them of Gods
mercy, by which only they should attain the same. And yet all this is graced
and shadowed with goodly fair words, as we see here by M. Bishop, who having
said that the grace of God is principally the cause of our salvation, and
therein implied that our free will also is partly though not principally a
cause thereof, yet adds, that the grace of God is the only fountain of
merit and all good works. If grace be the only fountain of all good works,
then all good works proceed only from grace, and if only from grace, then
what can we merit or deserve thereby? If we merit and deserve thereby, then
they are partly of us, and of our free will, and then grace is not the only
fountain of merit and all good works. Therefore let him not lie in this sort;
let him speak as he means, and acknowledge that which they al maintain,
that good works are therefore our merits, because they proceed from our Free
will, and are no otherwise our merits, neither do we otherwise deserve by them,
but as they proceed from our free will. Yea when the grace of God has done all
that appertains to it to do, all is nothing with them unless man adioyne
thereto the work of his own free will. Either let him renounce his doctrine
of Free will, or else let him leave with colorable words thus to delude and
mock the simple and ignorant reader, in saying that which he thinks not,
that the grace of God is the only fountain of merit and all good works.

9. W. BISHOP.
Ad Ephesians. 2. Ad Tit. 3.
Now to those texts cited before about justification, We are saved freely, not
of our selves, or by the works of righteousness, which we have done. I have
often answered that the Apostle speaks of works done by our own forces,
without the help of Gods grace: and therefore they cannot serve against works
done, in and by grace.

R. ABBOT.
The oftennesse of his answer shows the corruption of his conscience, that
was not moved with so often repeating a manifest untruth. What, was it the
Apostles meaning to teach the Ephesians, that they were not saved by the works
which they did, when they yet were Ephesians. 2.1.
dead (as he says) in trespasses and sins, or had the Ephesians any such
opinion that the Apostle should need to reform in them? Did they renounce
their former works to come to Christ that they might be saved by him, and did
they afterward grow again to a conceit of being saved by their former
works? These are gross and palpable untruths, neither has the Scripture any
thing at all, that may give any show for warrant of such constructio^. Nay, as
has been before said, when the Apostle having said, Ver. 9.
Not of works lest any man should boast, adds as a reason and proof hereof:
Ver. 10.
for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc. as
if he should have said, We cannot be said to be saved by works, because our
works are none of ours, but Gods works in us, he plainly shows, that not
only works before grace, but after also are excluded from being any cause of
our salvation. The place to Titus likewise rests our salvation only upon Tit.
3.5.
Gods mercy, and therefore leaves no place to our good works, and therefore
it is used by S. Bernard not only in this day for an exception against works
before grace, but Bernard. in Cant. ser. 50.
that we may know at that day, that not for the works of righteousness which
we have done, but of his own mercy he has saved us.

10. W. BISHOP.
Now to that text which he hudleth up together with the rest, although it
deserved a better place, being one of their principal pillars in this
controversy: it is, Romans 8.
The sufferings of this life are not worthy of the glory to come. The strength
of this objection lies in a false translation of these words, Axia pros tein
doxan equal to that glory, or in the misconstruction of them: for we grant (as
has bin already declared) that our afflictions and sufferings be not equal in
length or greatness with the glory of heaven; for our afflictions be but for
the short space of this life, and they cannot be so great as will be the
pleasure in heaven; notwithstanding we teach that this shorter and lesser
labor, employed by a righteous man in the service of God, does merit the
other greater and of longer continuance, and that by the said Apostles plain
words, 2. Cor. 4.
for (says he) That tribulation which in this present life is but for a moment
and light, does work above measure exceedingly an everlasting weight of glory
in us. The reason is, that just men's works issue out of the fountain of grace,
which gives a heavenly value unto his works. Again, it makes him a quick
member of Christ, and so receiving influence from his head, his works are
raised to an higher estimate: it consecrateth him also a temple of the holy
Ghost, and so makes him partaker of the heavenly nature, as S. Peter speaks:
which adds a worth of heaven to his works. 2. Pet. 1.
Neither is that glory in heaven, which any pure creature attaineth unto of
infinite dignity, as M Perkins fableth, but has his certain bounds and
measure, according unto each man's merits, otherwise it would make a man equal
to God in glory: for there can be no greater then infinite, as all learned men
do confess.

R. ABBOT.
These words of S. Paul to the Romans, Romans 8.18.
The afflictions of this time are not worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed upon us, are very directly cited, and are as pregnant to the matter
here in hand. M. Bishop says, that that text is one of our principal pillars
in this controversy; and indeed it is so strong a pillar, as that all M.
Bishops strength is not able to shake it from upholding that which we profess
to teach by it. But yet pro forma he charge us with false translation and
misconstruction. He tells us, that we should not say, worthy of the glory,
but equal to the glory. The Greek word, as Gramarians note, does by his
original signify those things which being put into the balance, are of
equal weight and poise one to the other, and from thence is it taken to
signify worth or worthiness, because there is a full correspondence of value
betwixt that that is said to be worthy, and the thing that it is worthy of. And
according to this usual signification of the word, do we translate, not worthy
of the glory, etc. and though we should translate not equal, yet must we
perforce understand it as touching equality in worth. And herein their own
vulgar translation does justify us, Non sunt condignae passiones huius
temporis ad futuram gloriam, etc. that is, as the Rhemists translate it, The
passions of this time are not condign to the glory to come, etc. for what is
condign but equal or comparable in worth; whence they take their meritum
condigni or ex condigno, to be that which in value and worth is fully
equivalent to the reward. Therefore Arias Montanus ad verbum reads it thus,
Non dignae passiones nunc temporis ad futuram gloriam, etc. The sufferings of
this time are not worthy to the glory to come: which what is it but the same
as to say, they are not comparable in worth to the glory to come? Now then why
does he go about to impeach our translation, when it is thus approved by their
own? But that it may plainly appear that we have no way falsified or
misconstrued this text, let us see in what sort the ancient Fathers have cited
and applied the same. Saint Austin reads the words thus, August. lib. 83.
quaest. 67. Jndignae sunt passiones huius temporis, etc.
The sufferings of this time are unworthy to the glory to come: and saying in
another place, that Idem de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 18. Nullo mods superbiant
sancts Martyrs, tanquam dignum aliquid pro illius patriae participatione
fecerint, vbiaterna est and vera foelicitas. Et sub finem: superbia ne
extollamur; Quoniam sicut dicit Apostolus, Indigna, etc.
the holy Martyrs are not to be proud as if they did any worthy matter for the
participation of that country where is eternal and true happiness: alleges
afterward for reason hereof these words, Because as the Apostle says, the
sufferings of this time are unworthy, etc. In the very same sort does Ambros.
de Jacob. lib. 1. cap. 6. and de Interpellat. Job. lib. 1. cap. 1. and in Psalm
118. ser. 19.
Ambrose cite the same words in sundry places, and although in the text
inserted in his commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans, he read as the
vulgar Latin does, yet in expounding the next verse he expresses the effect
thereof thus, Idem in Romans 8. Praesentu temporis passiones indignas dixit ad
futuram gloriam.
The Apostle has said that the sufferings of this time are unworthy to the
glory to come. Therefore elsewhere alluding to those words, he says that the
Saints Idem de bono mortis. cap. 2. Gloriosam mercedem laboris exigui
incipientes recipere cognoscent indignas esse passiones huius temporis, quibus
remunerationis aeternae gloria tanta refertur.
when they shall begin to receive the glorious reward of their small pains,
shall know that the sufferings of this time are unworthy to have so great
glory of eternal reward yielded unto them. And again in another place, Idem
de interpellat. David ca. 2. Indigna sunt quae in hoc corpore sustinemus
remuneratione futurae gloriae.
The things which we suffer in this body, are unworthy of the reward of the
glory to come. Hierome upon that place says, that Hieronim. in Romans 8. Reuerea
nihil posset homo condignum pati gloriae coelesti etiamsi talis esset ilia
qualis modo est vita. etc.
a man could do nothing comparable in worth to the heavenly glory, albeit it
were but even such as this life is. For whatsoever a man shall suffer before
death, it is no more then he deserved before by his sins. But now both his
sins be forgiven him, and then eternal life shall be given, the company of
Angels, the brightness of the Sun, etc. Oecumenius expounds it, that
Oecumen. in Romans 8. Non possumus quiequam futura retributione condignum aut
pati aut ad illam confer.
we cannot suffer any thing worthy of the reward to come, or help any whit
thereto. Fulgentius having said that Fulgent. ad Momin. lib. 1. supra sect. 6.
the gift of Gods reward does incomparably and unspeakably exceed all the
merit of the good will and work of man, brings for proof hereof these words
of the Apostle, The sufferings of this time, etc. Bernard likewise affirming
that Bernard. in Annunciat. ser. 1. supra sect. 3.
the merits of men are not such as that eternal life may be due unto them of
right: and asking, what are all merits to so great glory: for confirmation
cites also the same words, and adds, Nec si vni^ omnes sustineat.
No not if one man did endure them all. By all which it may appear how truly
M. Bishop and his fellows make construction of this place, that the sufferings
of this time are not equal in length and greatness to the glory to come, but
yet for value and worth they be equal to it, and the one does merit the
other, expressly contrary to their own text and translation. But to prove this,
he alleges further that the Apostle says, that 2. Cor. 4.17.
this momentany and light tribulation works unto us a far most excellent
and eternal weight of glory. Yet we find not here the thing that he would
prove, that this short and light tribulation does merit and deserve that most
excellent and eternal weight of glory: nay who does not see, that it is
plainly excluded by the words? For if our sufferings and good works be but
according to the scant and small measure of our frail and weak condition,
short in time, and light in burden, and on the other side, the glory to come
be exceedingly or beyond measure excellent, surely then apparent it is, that
the littleness and lightness of the one can never in worth attain to the
unmeasurable excellency of the other. But he will say, the one works the
other, the affliction works unto us the glory. True, and what then? Does the
one therefore merit and deserve the other? Surely as it is said of affliction,
so it may be said of them that afflict us, that they work unto us an excellent
and an eternal weight of glory; and yet it cannot be said that they deserve
the same for us. Affliction works unto us glory, only as an isntrumental
cause, which beyond the nature thereof God uses amongst other means to prepare
us and fit us to be partakers of his glory. He thereby Job 33.16.17
opens our ears, and subdueth our pride, and Osc. 14.5.
heals our rebellions, and frames us to understanding, and Heb. 12.10.
makes us partakers of his holiness, and 2. Cor. 4.16.
whilst our outwardman is corrupted, our inner man is renewed from day to day.
In a word, 1. Cor. 11 32.
when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. Chrysosan Genesis hom. 25. Afflictiones nos inducu^t vt
operemur bona Deoque gratae opera.
Afflictions (says Chrysostom) do induce us to those things that are good and
acceptable unto God. And thus the Apostle tells us, that Romans 8.28.
all things work together for good unto them that love God: yea says Saint
Austin, August. sol^leq. cap. 28. Quibus omnia cooperantur in bonu^ etia^ ipsa
peccata. vide de corrept. and gratia. cap 9.
even their very sins: and yet M. Bishop will not say, that all things and
specially their sins do merit and deserve the same good unto them. Yea the
devil himself, by the ouerruling hand of God, is made to work unto us our
salvation and glory, whilst (as Ambrose says) Ambr. de poenit. lib. 1. cap.
13. Ipse se morsu suo vulnerat et contra se armas, que^ debilitandum pu rauit,
etc. Imperante Christo and diabolus ipse fit praede suae custos.
he armeth us against himself, and by the commandment of Christ is made the
keeper of him whom he would make a prey; whilst by being exercised with his
temptations, we grow stronger in faith, and patience, and obedience, and so
more and more able to resist him. Therefore neither have these words of the
Apostle any thing for M. Bishops turn, that our sufferings here do merit the
glory of the life to come. Yet, as if he had very firmly proved his merit,
he goes on to tell us how it comes to pass that our works have this
virtue, because they issue out of the fountain of grace, which gives a
heavenly value unto them. To which purpose their Andradius says, that Andrad.
Orthod. explic. lib. 6. Diuinitatem quanda^ habeant necesse est, etc. Tantum
promerentur, quantum spiritus quo ducuntur dignitas atque amplitudo postulat.
our works have a kind of divine quality, and we deserve so much thereby,
as the dignity and excellency of the spirit requires, by which we are led.
But if we have this heavenly value, no otherwise but as they proceed from the
grace of God, what have we thereby to challenge to our selves? how should we
be said to merit by that that is none of ours? It has been already showed
that it cannot be ascribed as a merit unto us, which is wrought of God in us.
And it is worth the while to note here the giddiness of these men. The
heavenly value and merit of their works comes of the grace of God, and yet
forsooth they merit nothing by them but as they proceed from their own free
will. Why are they thus warbling and turning to and fro? Either let them say
that the value of good works is wholly of the grace of God, and then what is
the worth thereof to them; or if they will say that they merit thereby, let
them say that they have a value and worth from them, whereby they deserve for
them? But what will they say to Fulgentius and Bernard, who expressly say, as we
have heard, of the good works that are given of God, that Gods reward does
incomparably and unspeakably exceed all the merit thereof, and that they are
not such as that by any right eternal life should be due unto them. And when
Austine and Ambrose say, that the afflictions of this life are unworthy to the
glory to come, of whose afflictions or sufferings do they speak but of the
Saints, even as the Apostle does, who suffer by the gift and grace of God, are
members of Christ and temples of the holy Ghost, even of those sufferings
wherein they suffer with Christ; of which Saint Ambrose yet further says, to
show the meaning of the words here in hand, Ambr. epis. 22. Conglorificatur
ille qui patiendo pro ipso compatitur ei. and vt hortetur ad passione^ adiungit
quonia^ minora sunt omnia quae patimur and indigna pro quoru^ laboribus tanta
rependatur futurorum merces bonorum.
He is together glorified, who in suffering for him suffers with him: and
that the Apostle may exhort us to suffering, he adds, that all those things
which we suffer, are too little and unworthy, that for the pains thereof so
great reward of good things to come should be returned unto us. As for the
infiniteness of the glory of heaven, M. Bishop well knows, but that his
idle head delights to make matter to talk of, that M. Perkins was never so
idly conceited, as to imagine it according to his construction, that any pure
creature enjoys the same in infinite extent of measure and greatness, but
only of time and continuance, because it has no end. Now infinite in what
sort soever, cannot be answered but by that that is infinite. The trespass of
man against the infinite majesty of God, could not sufficiently be answered
but by the infinite punishment, which because it could not be in greatness,
whereof a creature could not be capable, was therefore supplied and made
infinite by continuance. For the taking away thereof, there was to be yielded
an infinite satisfaction, which the Son of God yielded by the infiniteness
of his person, though by only temporary sufferings and death. As then to take
away a punishment not infinite in greatness, but in continuance there was
necessarily required the merit of an infinite person, so to purchase the
glory of heaven, which to the Saints is infinite in continuance only, not in
greatness, there is likewise required the merit of an infinite person, which
is only the merit of Jesus Christ; so far are we from doing any thing that
may carry any semblable proportion of merit and desert. Now infiniteness of
glory as touching continuance, does not make a man equal to God, nay it does
not make the Saints of God equal one to another, who are different in measure
of glory, though every one enjoys the measure that he has infinitely and
without end. Thus M. Bishop like a drunken man is still offering to stand up,
but at every next step tumbleth down again, and can say nothing, but what
still redoundeth to his own harm. The pillar we see stands firm and sure,
and he can find no means to throw it down.

11. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins fourth reason. Whosoever will merit, must fulfill the whole Law:
for if we offend in one commandment, we are guilty of the whole Law; but no
man can fulfill the whole Law. ergo.

Answer. I deny the first proposition: for one good work done with his due
circumstances, does bring forth merit, as by all the properties of merit may
be proved at large, and by his own definition of merit set down in the
beginning. Now if a man afterward fall into deadly sin, he leeseth his former
merit: but recovering grace, he rises to his former merit, as the learned
gather out of that saying of our Savior, in the person of the good father,
Luc. ^5.
Do on him (that is on his prodigal son returning home) his former garment.
His second proposition is also false, as has been proved at large in a
several question. To that of Saint James, although it belong not to this
matter, I answer, that he who offends in one, is made guilty of all, that
is, he shall be as surely condemned, as if he had broken all: See Saint
Augustine. Epist. 29. ad Hieron.


R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins says, that he that will merit must fulfill the whole Law. M.
Bishop denies that, and says that one good work done with his due
circumstances does bring forth merit. Now happy men are they with whom one
good work is of so great worth. But what does a man merit by that one work?
Surely if it be a merit of heaven, I doubt not but M. Bishop for his part in
that meriting faculty wherein he lives, has in his opinion by many merits
devoured a number of the heavens of Democritus his innumerable worlds. But I
pray you tell us M. Bishop, if he be Gal. 3.10.
cursed that continues not in all things that are written in the book of the
Law, how should any man merit by performing only one thing? If life be tied
only to the doing of all, why do you make so many merits of that which by the
sentence of the Law can yield only one? Nay S. James plainly tells us, as
M. Perkins alleges, that Iam. 2.10.
he that keeps the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, is guilty of
all, that is, he is in general guilty of breaking the Law, and therefore
lies under the curse that is pronounced by the Law. But this place M. Bishop
says belongs not to this matter, and why, but because he knew not what to
say unto it? for that that he does say, does fully make against himself. For
how should one work done with his due circumstances bring forth merit, when
notwithstanding the doing of many works with their due circumstances, a man
for offending in any one is as surely to be condemned as if he had broken all?
Marry says he, a man may merit, and after by falling into any mortal sin,
he loses his merit. But that cannot be: for the Law as has been said, makes
no promise but to him that fulfilleth all; and therefore till a man have
fulfilled all, he can merit nothing; and therefore has merited nothing by any
former act or acts, if afterward he fall into any trespass of the Law. Now
therefore there can be no rising again to former merit, where there is no
merit at all, and the place which he cites in that sort as he cites it, may
import a renewing to the former estate; but as touching merit, it imports
nothing at all. But whether those words of S. James belong to this matter or
not, let S. Ierom tell him, who thereupon infers thus, Hieron. aduer. Pelag.
lib. 2. Quis nostru^ aliquando non peccauit? Si autem peccauit (quod negari nou
potest) and per vnum peccatum omnium est reui peccatorum, non suis viribus sed
Dei misericordia saluatur.
Which of us has not sometime sinned? And if he have sinned (which cannot be
denied) and by one sin be guilty of all sins, then is he not saved by his
own power but by Gods mercy. The place then by his judgment, takes away
from man all power of being saved by any thing in himself, and leaves him to
be saved only by the mercy of God. To the other proposition of M. Perkins
argument, he answers also by denial, and says that in a several question
he has proved that a man may fulfill the whole law: but by that he has read
the disproofe of his proof, it will appear to him I hope that he has proved
nothing. Now it is to be observed how silly he omitteth the place of S. John
alleged by M. Perkins, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, etc. which inuincibly
proves that no man fulfilleth the whole law, because there is no man without
sin, and every sin is Cap. 3.4.
the transgression of the law.

12. W. BISHOP.
His fifth reason. We are taught to pray on this manner, Give us this day our
daily bread: where we acknowledge every morsel of bread to be the mere gift
of God, much more must we confess heaven to be.

Answ. M. Perkins takes great delight to argue out of the Lords prayer; but he
handles the matter so handsomely, that a man may think him to be so profoundly
learned, that he does not yet understand the Pater noster: for who takes our
daily food to be so merely the gift of God, that we must not either make it
ours with our penie or travel, we must not look to be fed from heaven by
miracle, by the mere gift of God, but according unto S. Paul's rule, either
labor for our living in some approved sort, or not eat. Yet because our
travels are in vain unless God bless them, we pray to God daily to give us
our nouriture, either by sending or preserving the fruits of the earth, or by
prospering our labors with good success: or if they be men who live of alms,
by stirring up the charitable to relieve them. So we pray, and much more
earnestly, that God will give us eternal life: yet by such means as it has
pleased God to ordain, one of which and the principal is by the exercise of
good works, which God has appointed us to walk in, to deserve it. And it
cannot but savor of a Satanicall spirit, to call it a Satanicall insolency
(as M. Perkins does) to think that eternal life can be merited: when Saint
Augustine and the best spirit of men since Christ's time so thought and taught
in most express terms.

R. ABBOT.
It well appears that M. Perkins better understood the Lords prayer, then
that he had any need to learn of any such slender master as M. Bishop is. The
argument which he uses, is very effectual and strong. If we cannot merit the
food of this life, but must crave it of gift, much less can we merit
everlasting life. But says M. Bishop, our daily bread is not so merely the
gift of God, but that we must either make it ours with our penie or travel; we
must labor for our lining, etc. Be it so; and yet by all our expense and
labors and travels we merit nothing; we look for nothing by desert, but crave
it of the blessing and free gift of God. Let M. Bishop say, Is there any man,
who by his labor and pains can challenge at Gods hands a morsel of bread as
of merit and desert? If he cannot, but is still bound to cry amidst all his
travels, Give us this day our daily bread, why does he put man in opinion of
meriting at Gods hands eternal life, who cannot by all his works bind God
unto him for his daily bread? We labor therefore to lay hold of eternal life
by such means as God has ordained, and by the exercise of good works which
God has prepared for us to walk in, but after all our labor we still beg
eternal life at Gods hands, as of his mere blessing and gift, that it may be
true both in the beginning and in the end, that Romans 6.23.
eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Yet he tells
us that God has appointed good works for us to walk in to deserve eternal
life. But where has he so appointed? We find that God 1. Ioh. 5.11.
in his Son has given unto us eternal life, and that he has Ephesians. 2.10.
prepared for us good works to walk in, as the Apostle speaks, namely to
that eternal life which he has given us, but that he has appointed us good
works to deserve eternal life, M. Bishop cannot tell us where to find. Now
because the spirit of God has not any where taught us so to conceive, what is
it but Satanicall insolency thus to teach against the doctrine of the spirit?
And whereas he says that Saint Austine and the best spirit of men since
Christ's time, have taught that heaven may be merited, we first tell him, that
all that is nothing unless Christ himself have so taught: and secondly, that
he falsely fathereth upon the Fathers this misbegotten bastard of merit, which
in that meaning as he and his fellows teach it, was never imagined by the
Fathers, as partly has appeared already, and shall (God willing) appear
further.

13. W. BISHOP.
But let us hear his last argument, which is (as he speaks) the consent of
the ancient Church, and then begins with S. Bernard, who lived a thousand
years after Christ: he (in I know not what place, the quotation is so
doubtful) says, Those things which we call merits, are the way to the
kingdom, but not the cause of reigning. I answer, that merits be not the whole
cause, but the promise of God through Christ and the grace of God freely
bestowed on us, out of which our merits proceed: Ser. 68. in Cantie
which is Bernards own doctrine.

Manu^l. cap. 22.
Secondly, he cites S. Augustine: All my hope is in the death of my Lord: his
death is my merit. True in a good sense: that is, by virtue of his death and
passion my sins are pardoned, and grace is bestowed on me to do good works,
and so to merit.

In Psalm. 114.
Thirdly Basil: Eternal life is reserved for them that have striuen lawfully,
not for the merit of their doing, but upon the grace of the most bountiful
God. These words are untruly translated: for first he makes with the Apostle,
eternal life to be the prize of that combat, and then adds, that it is not
given according unto the debt and just rate of the works, but in a fuller
measure, according unto the bounty of so liberal a Lord: where hence is
gathered that common and most true sentence, That God punishes men under their
deserts, but rewards them above their merits.

Psalm. 120.
4. M. Perkins turns back to Augustine upon the Psalm. 120. where he says (as
M. Perkins reports) He crowns thee, because he crowns his own gifts, not
thy merits.

Answ. S. Augustine was too wise to let any such foolish sentence pass his
pen. What congruitie is in this? He crowns thee, because he crowns his own
gifts, not thy merits. It had been better said, He crowns thee not, etc. But
he mistook belike this sentence of S. Augustins: When God crowns thee, he
crowns his gifts, not thy merits. De great. and lib. arb. cap. 6.
Which is true, being taken in that sense which he himself declares: To such
a man so thinking (that is, that he has merits of himself, without the grace
of God) it may be most truly said, God does crown his own gifts, not thy
merits, if thy merits be of thy self, and not from him: but if we acknowledge
our merits to proceed from grace working with us, then we may as truly say,
that eternal life is the crown and reward of merits.

His other place on the Psalm is not to this purpose, Psalm. 142.
but appertains to the first justification of a sinner, as the first word,
quicken and revive me, shows plainly: now we confess that a sinner is called
to repentance and revived, not for any desert of his own, but of Gods mere
mercy.

R. ABBOT.
The place of Bernard, is in the very end of his book De gratia and libero
arbitrio, where having before divided Bernar. de great. et lib arbit. Dona sua
Deus in merita diuisit and proemia.
the gifts of God into merits and rewards, he shows that merits are wholly
to be ascribed unto God, because Non equidem quod consensus ip se in quo
meritu^ omne consistit ab ipso (libero arbitrio) sit, etc. Deus facit volente^,
hoc est voluntati suae consentientem.
to consent to God, which is the thing wherein merit wholly consists, is not
of our free will, but of God himself. So that although God in the work of
man's salvation do use the will of man himself, yet there is nothing in the
will of man to that purpose, but what is Totum ex illa.
wholly of the grace of God. Now having disputed and showed these things at
large, in the end of the book he shuts up all with this conclusion, Si
proprie appellentur ea quae dicimus nostra merita spei quaedam sunt seminaria,
charitatis ince^tiua, occuliae praed^stinationis iudici^, futurae foelicitatis
praesagia, via regni, no^ causa regnandi.
If properly we will term those which we call our merits, they are the
seedgrounds of our hope, incitements of our love, tokens of our secret
predestination, foretokens of our future happiness, the way to the kingdom,
not the cause of our reigning, or of our having the kingdom. Where plainly he
gives to understand, that whatsoever is spoken of our merits, is but
improperly spoken; that God having purposed unto us eternal life, bestows
his grace upon us to lead a godly life, as a foretoken thereof, and therefore
that our good works are but the way wherein God leads us to his kingdom,
which he of his own mercy has intended and given unto us, and not the cause
for which he is moved to bestow the same upon us; even as Saint Augustine
speaks, August. in Psalm. 109. Via qua nos perducturus est ad finem illum
que^ promisit.
the way by which he will bring us to that end which he has promised. Now
what says M. Bishop to this place of Bernard? no question but he has an
answer ready, though by his own confession he never saw the place; so notable
a faculty have these men to tell an Authors meaning before ever they look
into him: forsooth Bernards meaning is, that merits are not the whole cause,
but the promise of God through Christ, and the grace of God freely bestowed
upon us, out of which our merits proceed. Thus he answers Bernard by a plain
contradiction to Bernards words. Bernard says, they are not the cause: Yes
says M. Bishop, they are the cause, though they be not the whole cause. But
see how scholerlike he deals therein; for it is as much as if he should say,
The tree is not the whole cause of the fruit that it brings forth, but the
root whence it proceeds, and the boughs whereupon it grows, whereas the
root and the boughs are parts of the tree, without which it is not a tree;
and therefore the exception makes nothing against it, but that the tree is
called the whole cause of the fruit. So says he, Merits are not the whole
cause of salvation, but the grace and promise of God, distinguishing merits as
one part of the cause, from the grace and promise of God as another part of the
cause; whereas merit by his own rule in the beginning of this question, does
always necessarily include the promise and grace of God, and can be no merit
but as it proceeds from grace, and has of God a promise of reward. By this
exception therefore he says nothing to hinder, but that merits are the whole
cause of salvation, fully and directly contrary to that that Saint Bernard
says, that merits (which he intends no otherwise but implying the grace and
promise of God) are the way to the kingdom, but not the cause of our obtaining
the kingdom. Yet of that which he says, he tells us that it is Saint
Bernards own doctrine, not alleging any words of Bernard to that purpose, but
only quoting a sermon of his where there is nothing for his purpose, as
afterward shall appear in answering his testimonies of the Fathers. In the
mean time, whereas he excepteth that Bernard lived a thousand years after
Christ, I must answer him that his testimony is so much the more effectual,
in that God in the midst of so great corruption and darkness did still by
him and others continue the light and acknowledgement of this truth.

The next place cited by M. Perkins is under S. Austins name, though that book
indeed be none of his: August. Manu^l. ca. 22. Tota spes mea est in morte
Domini meis mors eius meritum meum; refugium meum, salus, vita and resurrectio
mea.
All my hope is in the death of my Lord: his death is my merit. M. Bishop
hereto says that it is true in a good sense. Where we see him to be an apt
scholar, and well to have learned the lesson of the Index Expurgatorius, Jndex
Expur. in castigat. Bertram.
We set some good sense upon the errors of the Fathers when they are opposed
against us in contentions with our adversaries. But what is that good sense?
Marry, by the virtue of his death and passion grace is bestowed on me to
merit. But surely he does not think that ever the author of those words
intended that sense. If he will make that sense of the one part of the
sentence, he must necessarily make the like of the rest. The death of the Lord
is my merit, my refuge, my salvation, my life and resurrection. If his meaning
be, the death of the Lord is my merit, that is, has purchased for me that I
should merit for my self; then in the rest also shall be likewise said, the
death of the Lord is my refuge, that is, has purchased for me that I should be
a refuge for my self; the death of the Lord is my salvation, life and
resurrection, that is, has purchased for me to be salvation, life and
resurrection to my self. So likewise where he adds, Meritum ^^e^^ miseratio
Domini: no^sum meriti inops quamdiis miserationum Dominus non de fuerit.
My merit is the mercy of the Lord; so long as the Lord of mercy shall not
fail, I shall not want merit: the meaning shall likewise be, the mercy of
the Lord gives me ableness to merit for my self, and so song as his mercy
fails not, so long shall not I fail of good works to merit and deserve
heaven. Now these constructions are lewd and absurd, and indeed far from the
conscience of the writer of those words, who finds nothing in his own works
to comfort himself withal, and therefore flies unto the death and merit of
Christ, and the mercy of God, as his only succor, and the only stay that
he has to rest upon. Which, that the Reader may thoroughly understand, I hold
it not amiss to set down what the same author has written in another place
of the same book, even out of the same spirit: Ibid. cap. 13. Sileat sibi and
ipsae anima, et tra^seat se no^ cogita^do se, sed te Deus meus quoniam tu es
reuera tota spes and fiducia m^a. Est enim inte Deo meo and Domino nostro Jesus
Christo, vniuscuiusque nostrum, and portio, et sang^ and c^ro. Vbi ergo portio
mea regnat, ibi regnare me credo. Vbi sanguis meus dominatur, ibi dominaeri me
confido Vbi caro mea glorificatur, ibi gloriosum me esse cognosco. Quamuis
peccator sim, tamen de hac communione gratiae non diffido. Etsi peccata mea
prohibent substantia mea requirit. Etsi delicta propriae mea excludunt, naturae
communio non repellit, etc. Desperare vtique potuissem propter nimia peccata
mea and vitiae, culpas and infinitas negligentias meas quas egi and quotidi e
indesinenter ago cord and ere, and opere, and omnibus modis quibus humana
fragilitas peccare potest, nisi verbum tuum Deus meus caro fieret and habitaret
in nobis. Sed desperare iam non audeo, quoniam subditui ille tibi vsque ad
mortem, mortem autem crucis, tulit chyrographum peccaetorum nostrorum, and
affigens illud cruci peccatum crucifixit and mortem. In ipso autem securus
respiro, etc.
Let my soul (says he) be silent to it self, and pass over it self, not
thinking of it self, but of thee, O my God, because thou art indeed my whole
hope and trust. There is in thee my God and our Lord Jesus Christ, the portion
and flesh and blood of every one of us. Where my portion reigns, I believe
that I also reign; where my blood rules, I believe that I also have dominion;
where my flesh is glorified, I know that I also am glorious. Albeit I be a
sinner, yet I doubt not of this fellowship of grace. Albeit my sins hold
back, yet my substance (namely being now of his flesh and his bones) requires
it. Albeit mine own defaults do exclude me, yet fellowship of nature puts
me not away. I might despair because of my exceeding great sins and
corruptions, my defaults and infinite negligences which I have committed, and
daily without ceasing do commit in thought, and word, and work, and every way
that humane frailty can sin, but that thy Word (O my God) became flesh, and
dwelt amongst us. But now I dare not despair, because he being obedient unto
thee unto death, even the death of the cross, has taken away the handwriting
of our sins, and fastening it to the cross, has crucified sin and death.
Now securely I take breath and heart again, in him who sits at thy right
hand, and makes intercession for us. By these words, and many other that might
be alleged out of that book, the Reader may judge of the construction that M.
Bishop makes of the words cited by M. Perkins. We see nothing here but
confession of sins in himself; no other hope but only forgiveness of sins in
Christ. Surely these are not the speeches of a man dreaming of an ableness
given unto him to deserve eternal life. No, no, it was never heard of in the
world, that the meaning of these words, My hope is wholly in the death and
merit of Christ, should be, that we hope to be able by Christ to merit and
deserve salvation, until these brazen faced hypocrites were hired and set to
work by Antichrist for the confusion of souls, by making them to lean upon
the broken staff of their own merits, in steed of the only saving merit of
the blood of Christ. The faithful have always in their end betaken themselves
to this hold, and many returning unto God even at the last gasp, having
nothing in themselves to comfort themselves, have securely reposed their hope
in the merit and death of Christ, and with joy and comfort have gone to God;
who if they had understood hope in Christ according to M. Bishops exposition
thereof, of being to be made able by Christ to merit heaven, would have been
rent and torn in pieces with perplexity and fear, neither could have
conceived any comfort thereof at all. But let him alone, he shall one day
understand the untruth of his answer, when he shall be glad to make use of
those words which we have spoken of, or the like, without that good sense as
he calls it, which now his senseless and dead heart imagines of them. The
place of Basil is as clear as the light, yet he labors to cast a mist
before it also: but cannot so do it, but that he is forced in part to
acknowledge the truth on our behalf. Basil. in Psalm. 114. (...)
There is laid up eternal rest (says he) for them that strive lawfully in
this life, not to be rendered according to debt for works, but provided
according to the grace of the bountiful God, for them that trust in him. Where
apparently Basil alludeth to the words of the Apostle, Romans 44.
To him that works, that is, to him that has the righteousness of works, the
reward is not imputed (...).
by favor but by debt; and therefore the phrases being borrowed from the
Apostle, must with him have the same meaning as with the Apostle they have. His
meaning then is plain, that that eternal rest is not rendered by way of debt,
but by way of favor and grace; and never has any ecclesiastical writer
understood those phrases otherwise. Only M. Bishop tells us, that Basils
meaning is, that it is not rendered according to the debt of works, that is,
according to the just rate of works, but in a fuller measure, and above our
merits. But his masters of Rhemes reject this commentary of his, and do tell
him that our works are Rhem. Testam. Annot. 2. Tim. 4.
fully worthy of everlasting life. God then does not exceed the rate of our
works, as they say, but gives only what we are fully worthy of, what we
fully and justly merit and deserve thereby. Yea and they saw well, that to
teach otherwise as M. Bishop does, is to overthrow merit. For if God do give
us above our merits, then we do not merit that which God gives; or if we do
merit it, then it cannot be said to be above our merits. But it is above our
merits, says M. Bishop, therefore it follows necessarily that we do not
merit or deserve it. Yea we have seen before out of Fulgentius and Bernard,
that Gods reward does so incomparably exceed all the merit and work of man,
as that eternal life is not due thereunto by right, neither should God do any
wrong if he did not give it: and therefore the sentence of Basil is true,
according to the Apostles intendment of those terms which he uses, that
eternal life is not rendered by way of debt for works, but by grace, that is,
freely bestowed to them that trust in him. M. Bishop tells us, that he
makes eternal life to be the prize of the combat: but what of that, seeing
he gives us to understand that this prize is with favor and mercy proposed,
and with the same mercy and favor rendered to them that fight the combat?
Therefore he says in another place, Basil. de humilit. (...).
There is nothing left thee O man to glory of, whose glorying and hope
consists in this, that thou mortify all that is thine, and seek in Christ
the life to come; whereof having the first fruits we are now therein, living
wholly by the grace and gift of God. There is then with Basil no merit, no debt
in any sort, because we live wholly by the grace and gift of God, so that M.
Bishops exposition is but a mere falsification of Basils words.

M. Perkins further alleges a saying of Austin, He crowns thee because he
crowns his own gifts, not thy merits. M. Bishop answers that S. Austin was
too wise to let any such foolish sentence pass his pen. He questioneth the
matter, What congruitie is it to say thus? He directs a better form of
speech, It had been better said thus. Now if the sentence be S. Austins, what
will men but take M. Bishop for a fool, that would so unadvisedly befoole S.
Austin, and take upon him to correct his words when he had no cause. The place
indeed is misquoted, either by M. Perkins mistaking, or by the oversight of the
Printer, for in steed of Psalm. 102. he has quoted Psalm. 120. by misplacing of
the figure, a very small and easy oversight. But S. Austin in Psalm. 102. has
these words, August. in Psalm. 102. Ergo coronat te quia donae suae coronat non
merita tua.
He crowns thee because he crowns his own gifts, not thy merits. Which is
the same in effect with that which M. Bishop puts in place of it, very often
repeated by S. Austin, either in the same, or very near the same words, that
God when he crowns us, Ide^ epist. 105. et in Joan. trac. 5. and de great. et
lib. arb. cap. 6. 7.
crowns his own gifts, not our merits. But he answers hereto very untruly
and deceitfully. It is true indeed that S. Austin there speaks to him that
thinks he has merits of his own and of himself, that God will not crown
those because they are only evil, and he gives not the crown to evil
works, but he crowns only his own gifts, because in us there is no good
work, to which only the crown is given, but only by Gods gift. De great. et
lib. arb. ca. 6. Prorsus talia cogitanti veriffimedicitur, dona tua coronat
Deus, non merita tua, si tibi and teipso, non ab illo sunt merita tua. Haec
enim si talia sunt, mala sunt: quae autem mala sunt, non coronat Deus. Si autem
bona sunt, Dei dona sunt.
To him that so thinks (says he) it is rightly said, God crowns his own
gifts, not thy merits, if thou have thy merits of thy self and not of his
gift: for if they be such, they be evil, and God crowns not those that be
evil; but if they be good, they be the gifts of God. Now to those words M.
Bishop adds in the same letter as if it were S. Austins, whether by the
Printers fault, or by his own lewd falsehood he can best tell himself, this
animaduersion, But if we acknowledge our merits to proceed from grace working
with us, then may we as truly say, that eternal life is the crown and reward
of merits. But M. Bishop, did S. Austine tell you so? Will you so wilfully
abuse him and pervert his words and meaning? Surely in the beginning of the
next Chapter, which is but ten lines after the words cited, S. Austine says
thus: Jbid. cap. 7. Siergo Dei donae sunt merita tua, non Deus coronat merita
tua tanquam merita tua sed tanquam dona sua.
If then thy good merits be Gods gifts, God does not crown thy merits as thy
merits, but as his own gifts. In which words he plainly denies, that there
is any respect of our merit, or that God accounts us as having merited, but
that he gives the crown and reward only as to his own gifts which he
himself has bestowed upon us. How bad a man then is M. Bishop, to make S.
Austin say, that God crowns our good works proceeding from his grace as our
merits, when S. Austin expressly and flatly denies the same. But there is yet
some further poison hidden in his words: for when he names merits proceeding
from grace working with us, he divides betwixt God and us that which S. Austin
makes entirely the gift of God. The work is not merely of the grace of God
in us, but of grace working with us, because we also as well as grace are
partakers of the work. So then S. Austin must not say, that God crowns his
own gifts, not our merits, but God crowns partly his own gifts, and partly
our merits, because the good works which he crowns are partly of his grace,
and partly also of our own freewill. By this means Master Bishop will hold
it very absurd, which the same Saint Austine says in the other place: Epist.
105. C^^^ Deus coronat merita nostra nihil aliud coronat quam namerae sua.
When God crowns our merits he crowns nothing else but his own gifts: for
if he crown nothing else but his own gifts, if he crown nothing at all of
ours, then what part of the c^owne is it that we can say is merited and
deserved by us?

His answer to the last words of Austine is excluded by the very words
themselves: Aug Psalm. 14^ Propter ^^men tuum D ^^ine, viuificabis ^e^in tua
iustitia, non in mea, no^ quia ego merut, s^^ quia tu miseritis
Lord for thy names sake thou will quicken me: in thy righteousness, not in
mine; not because I have deserved it, but because thou art merciful. This
place he says appertains to the first justification of a sinner: but it
seems he gave the answer somewhat too early in the morning before his eyes
were well opened: for otherwise he might have seen, that these are the words
of a man already justified, uttered in the name of the Prophet of God, not in
the preterperfect tense as of a thing past, but in the future tense, as of a
thing to come: Thou shall or wilt quicken me, and therefore cannot be
understood of any first justification. The Prophet being already in part
revived to the life of God, prays still to be revived and quickened more and
more, and promises to himself by assurance of faith through the holy Ghost,
that God will so do, not in my righteousness, says he, as Austin expresses
it, not because I have deserved it, but for his own names sake, for his own
mercies sake, giving to understand, that not only the beginning of the work
of God, but also the proceeding thereof is, not for any merit of man, but by
the mercy of him by whom it was first begun. And whereas he says that they
confess, that a sinner is called to repentance and revived, not for any desert
of his own, but of Gods mere mercy, he does but blind his Reader with a
concealed distinction of merit, having himself Of Justification. Sect. 21.
before taught, that his works of preparation are the cause of the
justification of a sinner, as he has corruptly argued out of the words of
Christ, Many sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much. So that the
term of mere mercy is used only colourably and for fashion sake, neither
does he acknowledge the mere mercy of God in any sort, but as the Pelagian
heretics did, in the first offer of his grace.

14. W. BISHOP.
Having thus at length answered unto all that M. Perkins has alleged against
Merits: let us see what can be said for them, following as near as I can M.
Perkins order.

Objections of Papists, so he terms our reasons.

First, in sundry places of S^ripture, promise of reward is made unto good
works. Genesis 4. Prou. 11. Eccl. 18. Mat. 5.
If thou do well, shall thou not receive? To him that does well there is a
faithful reward. Fear not to be justified unto death, because the reward of
God remains for ever: and, When you are reviled and persecuted for my sake,
rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven, and a hundredth such like: therefore
such works do merit heaven, for a reward supposes that there was a desert of
it.

M. Perkins answers first, that the reward is of mere mercy, without any
thing done by men. But this is most apparently false: for the Scripture
expresses the very works whereof it is a reward: again, a reward in English
supposes some former pleasure which is rewarded, otherwise it were to be
called a gift, and not a reward: and much more the Latin and Greek word,
Misthos, Merces, which rather signify a man's hire and wages, then a gift or
reward. Wherefore M. Perkins skippes to a second shift: that forsooth eternal
life is an inheritance, but not a reward.

Reply. We know well that it is an inheritance, because it is only due unto the
adopted sons of God: but that hinders not it to be a reward, for that it is
our heavenly Fathers pleasure, that all his sons coming to the years of
discretion, shall by their good carriage either deserve it, or else for their
bad behavior be disinherited.

M. Perkins having so good reason to distrust his two former answers, flies to
a third: and grants that eternal life is a reward, yet not of our works,
but of Christ's merits imputed unto us: this is that castle wherein he holds
himself safe from all Canon-shot: but he is foully abused, for this answer is
the most extrauagant of all the rest, as being furthest off from the true sense
of the Scripture: examine any one of the places, and a babe may discover the
incongruitie of it: namely, Christ says, that great is their reward who are
reviled and persecuted for his sake: assigning the reward unto their constant
bearing and enduring of tribulation for Gods sake; and not to his own merits
imputed: and if you desire a formal sentence s^tting this purpose, take this:
1. Cor. 3. Iac. 1.
Every man shall receive his reward, according unto his own proper labor, and
not according to Christ's merits imputed unto him. So a doer of the work shall
be blessed in his deed: and not in the imputation of another deed.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop having hitherto said much, and answered just nothing, falls
in hand to sharpen his tools and weapons again, which were blunted and dulled
by M. Perkins. And first, he opposes places where mention is made of reward,
presuming that reward must necessarily suppose and enforce merit and desert. To
this M. Perkins has answered, that reward is twofold: of debt, and of mercy.
Eternal life, he says, is a reward of mercy given of the goodwil of God, and
not properly repayed as due to any thing that is done by man. M. Bishop
replieth, that this is apparently false: for the Scripture (says he)
expresses the very works whereof it is a reward. But I answer him again, that
it is not false, but very true, because although the Scripture do set forth
unto us eternal life as the reward of such and such works, yet that is not to
tie the original of the reward to the work, but only to note the sequel
thereof: the reward being in truth derived from a former mercy whereby it was
promised before the work, and by which both the work and the reward are given
unto us. Nay, Aug. in Psalm. 118. conc. 13. Nondum eram quib^^ promitteretur ne
quisqua^ de me^itis gl^riaritur: and quibus promissum est, etiam ipsi promissi
sunt, vt totum corpus Christi d^^at, Gratia Dei sum id quod sum.
They yet were not themselves, says S. Austin, to whom salvation was promised,
that no man might glory in his merits; yea they to whom it was promised, were
also promised themselves, that the whole body of Christ may say, By the grace
of God I am that I am. Idem in Psalm. 109. vt supra Sect 2.
Whatsoever God promised, says he again, he promised it to us being
unworthy, that it might not be promised as a reward to works, but being grace
might according to the name be freely given. So that although eternal life be
Idem de great. and lib. arbit. cap. 8. Supra sect. 8.
as it were a reward for righteousness, yet it is indeed but grace for grace,
as out of him also we have heard before. But says M. Bishop, a reward in
English supposes some former pleasure which is rewarded. But that is not
always so: for I doubt not but many times an English beggar has come to him
and asked him a reward, at whose hands notwithstanding he has received no
former pleasure: and even so must Master Bishop beg at Gods hands the reward
of everlasting life. Yea but then it should be called a gift, and not a reward:
and did not he know that it is called a gift? Rom: 6.23. (...).
Eternal life (says Saint Paul) is the free gift ^f God. Christ says of his
sheep: Ioh 10.28.
I give unto them eternal life. 1 Ioh. 5.11.
This is the record, says Saint John, that God has given unto us eternal
life. It may be he cannot see how it should be called both a gift and a reward.
I will tell him therefore, that secundum quid, and in a respect it is called a
reward, but simply and absolutely it is only gift. Compare eternal life to
the work, and look no further* and so the Scripture calls it a reward. But
consider the original from whence the work it self also proceeds, and all is
merely and wholly gift: yea and though in act and execution the work be before
the reward, yet in intendement and purpose that which we call the reward is
before the work, and God therefore gives us good works, because formerly by his
election he gives us eternal life. From the English word he goes to the
Greek and Latin, (...), and merces, and says, they rather signify hire or
wages, then gift or reward. And what of that, seeing the Apostle teaches us to
distinguish, that (...), wages, may be reckoned to a man by favor and not by
debt. For he could not say: Romans 4.4.
To him that works, the wages is not imputed by favor, but by debt, but that
there is an imputing of wages by favor also. And this appears in the^, who
being called into the vineyard at the 11. hour, yet received for wages, Mat.
20.10.14
by favor, not by debt, as much as they who were first called, and had borne
the burden and heat of the day. The Lord of the vineyard gave them the same
wages, Prosper. de voc. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 5 Non labori pretium soluens sed
diuitias bonitatis suae in eos quos sine operibus eligit effundens, vt etiam ij
qui in multo labor sudarunt, nec amplius quam nouissimi acceperunt,
intelligan^ donum se gratiae non operum accepisse mercede^.
not as paying a price to their labor, but pouring forth the riches of his
goodness to them whom he chose without works, that even they also who have
swet with much labor, and have received no more then the last, may understand,
that they have received a gift of grace, not a wages for their works. Thus M.
Bishop sees hire and wages to be a matter of favor, and the reward of works,
in some sort so called, to be nothing else indeed but a gift of grace. And if
he will understand it otherwise, let him hear the resolution of Mark the
Heremite, saying: Mark. Herem. De his qui putant ex operibus se iustificari.
(...).
Some not keeping the commandments, yet think they believe aright: again,
some there are who keeping the commandments hope to receive the kingdom of
heaven as a wages due unto them: both of these fail of obtaining the same.

M. Perkins answers secondly, that the kingdom of heaven is properly an
inheritance, but is called a reward only by figure and resemblance. To this M.
Bishop replieth, that it is an inheritance, because it is only due to the
adopted sons of God. But that is not all: for it is not so called only,
because it is only due to the adopted sons of God, but because by virtue of
their adoption they have the title of it, even by being newborn the sons of
God. For inheritance is a matter of birth, and though a man be of never so good
desert, yet can he have no title of inheritance thereby. The younger brother
may be of better desert then the ^^der, yet that cannot make him his fathers
heir. Where the thing is by desert, a man can have no title to it till he have
deserved it, but what is by inheritance a man has the right of it before he
can do any thing toward the deserving of it. When therefore the Scripture
sets forth unto us eternal life under the condition of inheritance, it
plainly teaches us, that we attain not unto it by any merits or works, but
that before any works God by adopting us to be his children, gives us the
state and prerogative thereof. And therefore whereas M. Bishop says, that it is
our heavenly Fathers pleasure, that all his sons coming to the years of
discretion, should by their good carriage either deserve it, or else for their
bad behauior be disinherited, he speaks at all adventure, quite contrary to
the nature of the thing whereof he speaks. And see how improbably he speaks
in respect of humane courses, to which he alludeth: what, is there no remedy
but that a son must either deserve his inheritance, or else be disinherited?
Are fathers wont to measure their children by that rule? Is there no mean
betwixt these two? Surely the behavior of the heir is seldom such, as may be
said to deserve the inheritance whereto he is borne, and yet fathers do not
disinherit their children for not deserving. There is an indifferent behauior
of sons that yields no desert, and there is many times behauior whereby
they ill deserve, and yet by birth the right of inheritance stands good unto
them. And this is our title, even our new birth in Jesus Christ, whereby we are
Tit. 3.7.
made heirs of everlasting life, when as notwithstanding our behavior is
such, as that being strictly examined, we well know that we deserve the
contrary. As for that which he says of disinheriting, it is sometimes found
with men who cannot reclaim their sons from evil courses, or fashion them
to their own desire, (which what Father would not do, if it were in his power
to do it, to avoid the disinheriting of his son?) but with God who has the
hearts of his children in his hands, and can dispose them to his own will, it
is never found; but in this case it holds which the Apostle says: Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance: that is, as S. Austine
says, August. de Praed Sanct cap. 16. Sine mutatione stabiliter fixa sunt.
They are firmly settled without any change.

The third answer M. Perkins adds, not for any distrust of the two former,
but to give further strength unto them, and this answer is indeed a castle,
that al M. Bishops Canon-shot is not able to shake. He says, that it is more
extraungant then the rest, and furthest off from the true sense of Scripture
and I know not what, but all his extrauagant terms will not help him to
avoid the force of it. It is first to be noted how he peruerteth M. Perkins his
words: for M. Perkins denies not but that eternal life is the reward of our
works: but says, if it be granted to be a deserved reward, it is not for our
works, but for Christ's merits imputed unto us. It is then the reward of our
works, not for the desert of our works, but because Christ by his merits has
purchased it, and we in him receive it for reward of our works. To his merits
only the reward is assigned and given to our use: for his works sake is it
that any reward is promised or yielded to our works. For 2. Cor. 1.20.
in him all the promises of God are yea and Amen: for his sake they were first
made, and for his sake they are performed. The father giving unto us his son,
Romans 8.32.
together with him gives us all things: 1. Ioh. 5.11.
He has given unto us eternal life, but this life is in his Son, in his
obedience, in his merits eternal life is the reward of our works. If it be
said, Mat. 5.11.12.
Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you for my names sake: great
is your reward in heaven, it is for Christ's sake that it is said: Blessed are
ye; great is your reward in heaven. If it be said: 1. Cor. 3.8.
Every man shall receive his reward according to his labor, it is for Christ's
sake that it is so said. If it be said: Iam. 125.
The doer of the word shall be blessed in his deed, it is for Christ's sake,
that he shall be blessed in his deed. For if we consider our persons, the
Father 1. Ephesians. 6.
has accepted us in his beloved, in Jesus Christ, and 3. Mat. 17:
in him is well pleased toward us. If we look to our works, our sufferings,
our service, all our spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God, not by their
own worth, not by our desert, but Pet. 2.5.
by Jesus Christ, by his merits, by his deserts, and therefore by his merits
have the reward allotted unto them. Thus M. Bishop fights hard and gets no
ground: he thinks, poor man, that he has trodden M. Perkins under foot, but
M. Perkins lives triumphantly in heaven, and he lives a base conquered man
here upon the earth, and by his defending of Merits, secludeth himself from
that mercy, whereby he should attain heaven and perpetual joy and felicity.

15. W. BISHOP.
In stead of our second reason blindly proposed by M. Perkins, I will confirm
the first with such texts of holy Writ, as specify plainly our good works to
be the cause of eternal life. Mat. 25.
Come unto me ye blessed of my Father, possess a kingdom prepared for you. And
why so? For when I was hungry, ye gave me meat, and so forth: the like is in
the same chapter of the servants, who employed all their talents for their Lord
said unto them: Because you have been faithful in few things, I will place you
over many. And many such like: where good works done by the parties themselves
are expressly said to be the very cause why God rewarded them with the kingdom
of heaven. Therefore he must needs be holden for a very wrangler, that does
seek to pervert such evident speeches, and would make the simple believe, that
the cause there formally specified, is not to be taken for the cause, but does
only signify an order of things. But if any desire besides the evidence of
the text, to see how the ancient Fathers take it, let him read S. Augustine,
In Psalm. 40.
where he thus briefly handles this text: Come ye blessed of my Father,
receive: what shall we receive? a kingdom: for what cause? because I was
hungry, and you gave me meat, etc. Of the real imputation of Christ's merits,
there was no tidings in those days: and that judicious Doctor found, that good
works was the cause of receiving the kingdom of heaven.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop to help the former argument adds some texts of holy writ, which
specify plainly, as he says, our good works to be the cause of eternal
life. To this purpose he alleges the words of Christ as touching the last
judgment: Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father; possess, or rather (...)
inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you before the foundations of the world;
for I was hungry and ye gave me meat, etc. Where the very place it self
disproueth that that he intends to prove by it: for by that that he says,
Inherit ye the kingdom, it is plainly gathered which S. Ambrose thence
affirms: Ambros. de abitis Theodosij. Tanquam possessionem haereditariam
recipimus ea quae promissa sunt ^^bis.
We receive as a possession of inheritance those things that are promised unto
us. And if we receive the kingdom by way of inheritance, then it is not by
merit, as has already been declared. Again, when he says, prepared for you
from the foundations of the world, even as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 1.4.
God has chosen us in Christ before the foundations of the world, he shows
that the kingdom was prepared for them that inherit it before they had any
works: and therefore, to reason in the same manner as the Apostle does: Romans 9.11.
not by works, but by (the grace and mercy of) him that calls, it is said:
Come ye blessed, inherit the kingdom, etc. For to say that God August. contra
Julian. Pelag. li. 5 cap 3. Ne forte ante constitutionem mundi ex operibus
praecognitis putarentur electi, se^utus est and adiunxit, si autem gratia, etc.
vide Epist. 105.
prepared the kingdom for them, upon foresight of their works, is the heresy
of the Pelagians long agone condemned. It must needs be therefore that it was
prepared for them without respect of works, and that their works are alleged
not as the proper cause fot which the kingdom is given unto the^, but as
signs and tokens that they are they for whom it is prepared, even as before we
heard out of S. Bernard, that Bernard. de great. and lib arb. Occultae
praedestinationis indicia, futurae foelicitatis praesagia, via regni, no^ causa
regnandi.
they are tokens of our predestination, foretokens of our future happiness,
the way to the kingdom, not the cause of our obtaining it. No more can be
argued out of the other place. Reward we find there, but Merit we find none,
neither can the one of these be euicted by the other. It only shows how God
graceth his faithful servants by assigning unto them under the name of reward,
that which indeed he otherwise freely bestows upon them. A most clear
example whereof we ha^ (...) our father Abraham, to whom God made at first an
absolute promise, that he would Genesis 12.2.3.
make of him a great nation, and would bless him, and in him all nations of
the earth should be blessed, and yet afterward upon the trial that he made of
him for the offering of his son Isaac, takes occasion to renew the promise,
as if he would do it for his obedience therein. Cap. 22.16.
Because thou have done this thing, and have not spared thine only son,
therefore will I surely bless thee, and I will multiply thy seed after thee,
etc. and in thee shall all nations of the earth be blessed, because thou have
obeyed my voice. The blessing was assured to Abraham infallibly by the former
absolute promise of God, Prosper, de vocat. gent. lib. 1. cap. 3. Sine
conditio: ne promisit, sine lege d^nauit.
without any caution or condition, as Prosper well says, but he would have
Abraham to take knowledge by occasion of that that he had done, that the
promise before freely made, should inuiolably and without any impeachment stand
good unto him. Even so God from our works takes occasion of the renewing of
his promises, and thereto for our assurance tieth the performance thereof under
the name of reward, when as the true cause of all is his mercy in Jesus Christ,
by whom only it is that the work is accepted in his sight. Now if God
vouchsafe to honor us, let not us thereby take occasion to dishonor him, or
challenge proudly to our merits, that for which we should sing praise only to
his mercy. Neither do we herein wrangle or pervert the Scripture, but finding
by the Scripture that God has chosen and called us, Ephe. 1.6.
that we should be to the praise of the glory of his grace, Aug. cont. Pelag
and Celest. lib. 2. cap. 24. No^ enim Dei gratia gratia erit vllo modo nisi
fuerit gratuita omni modo.
which is not grace in any sort, except it be free in every sort, we endeavor
that this glory may be yielded entirely unto God, and that to this end it may
always be acknowledged, that Romans 6.23.
eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Now whereas he
alleges S. Austin to his purpose, he abuses S. Austin as he is wont to do,
who questioneth not any cause in the place by him cited, but using the words,
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive ye a Kingdom, goes on hereupon to
demand, not as Master Bishop says, For what cause, but Aug. in Psalm. 49.
Quid percipite? Regnum. Pro quare? Esuriu^, etc. Quid tam vile, quid ta^
terrenum quam frangere panem esueriente? Tanti valet Regnum coel^ru^. Si non
habes facultate^ frangendi pane^, etc. da calicem aquae frigidiae; mitte duo
mi^uta in gazophylacium. Ta^tu^ emi^ vidua duob^s minuus, quantu^ ^mit Petrus
relinquens re^^a, quantum emit Zach^us dando dimidium patrimonium. Tanti valet
quantum habueris.
for what thing? He answers, I was hungry and ye gave me to eat. What is
there so base, says he, what so concerning the earth, as to break bread to
the hungry? At so much is the Kingdom of heaven valued unto thee. If thou have
no ability to break bread to the hungry, etc. yet give a cup of cold water,
cast two mites into the treasury. The widow for two mites bought as much as
Peter forsaking his nets, as Zachee did in giving half his goods. It is valued
unto thee at so much as thou have. Thus the purpose of this iuditious Doctor,
is directly against Master Bishops cause of receiving the Kingdom of heaven,
showing how base and of how little worth the things are, whereto God
notwithstanding of his vouchsafing grace returns the Kingdom of heaven, that
we may know that it is not for our merits sake that he bestows the same. As
for the imputation of Christ's merits, M. Bishop knows no use of it, because
he yet knows not himself; but he will then know the use of the merits of
Christ, when he comes to know how vainly and fondly he has presumed of his
own. To the true Church of Christ, it was never strange tidings that Christ's
merits should be imputed unto them; whose hope has always been to find
favor at Gods hands, by virtue of that merit that he has performed for them.

16 W. BISHOP.
Here by the way M. Perkins redoubleth that common slander of theirs: that we
take away a part of Christ's mediation. For, says he, if Christ's merits were
sufficient, what need ours? It has been told them, but they will never learn
to understand it: I will yet once again repeat it. We hold our Saviors
merits to be of infinite value, and to have deserved of God all the graces and
blessings, which have or shall be bestowed upon all men, from the beginning of
the world unto the end of it: yet his divine will and order is, that all men of
discretion having freely received grace from him, do merit that crown of
glory, which is prepared for them, not to supply the want of his merits, which
are inestimable, but being members of his mystical body, he would have us also
like unto himself in this point of meriting: and further desirous to train us
up in all good works he best knew, that there could be no better spur to prick
our dull nature forward, then to ordain and propose such heavenly rewards unto
all them that would diligently endeavor to deserve them. The man seems to be
much ignorant in the matter of Christ's mediation: I will therefore help him a
little. It consists in reconciling man to God: which he performed by paying
the ransom of our sins, in purchasing us Gods favor, and in ordaining
means how all mankind might attain to eternal life: in the two first points
we do for the most part agree: to wit, that our sins are freely pardoned
through Christ's passion: and that we are as freely justified, and received
first into Gods grace and favor: although we require other preparation then
they do, yet we as fully deny any merit of ours to be cause of either, as they
do. Marry about the means of attaining to heaven, we differ altogether: for
they say that God requires no justice in us, nor merit at all on our parts, but
only the disposition of faith, to lay hold on Christ's righteousness and
merits: but we say that Christ's righteousness and merit, are incommunicable
unto any mere creature: but that through his merits, God does power into every
true Christian a particular justice, whereby he is sanctified, and made able to
do good works, and to merit eternal life. Which ability we receiving of Gods
free gift, through Christ's merits, does much more magnify both Gods grace,
and Christ's merits: for the greater that the gift is, the greater is the glory
of the giver, And to argue that to be a derogation unto his mediation and
merits, which he has appointed to be the very instrument of applying the
virtue of them to us, is indeed under color of magnifying Christ's merits, to
undermine and blow out all the virtue of them. But says Master Perkins, what
should we talk of our merits, who for one good work we do, commit many bad,
which deface our merits, if we had any?

True it is, as it was once before said, that every mortal sin blotteth out
all former justice and merit: but by repentance both are recovered again: but
must we not speak of any good, because we may hap to do evil? that is a fair
persuasion, and well worthy a wise man.

R. ABBOT.
To say that they take away a part of Christ's mediation, is no slander but
truth, as by M. Bishop himself appears in this very place. To M. Perkins
saying that if Christ did sufficiently merit eternal life for us, then he
should do more then is needful, in making us able to merit for our selves, he
answers, that though Christ's merits be of infinite value, and have deserved
of God all graces and blessings, yet his divine will and order is, that we also
merit that crown of glory. But to what end when he has merited it already?
Marry not to supply the want of his merits, but as being members of his
mystical body, he would have us like unto himself in this point of meriting.
Thus we must think that M. Bishop is like unto Christ in this point of
meriting, or rather we must think him an impious wretched man thus in meriting
to consort himself and his with the Son of God, and to bring in these
profane novelties into the Church, which neither Scripture, nor council, nor
father, nor any antiquity was ever acquainted with. Where has he ever read,
that Christ would have us like unto himself in this point of meriting? What is
this but to affirm him in a kind of generality, Our conformity and likeness
to Christ wherein it stands see of satisfaction. Sect. 2.
only to be Jesus Christ, but that otherwise he has left it to every man to
be a Jesus Christ, a Redeemer and Savior for himself, because it is his will
to have us like unto himself in this point of meriting, by which it is that he
is become Jesus, and a Savior unto us? It is by meriting I say, that Christ is
unto us Jesus a Savior, and therefore if we be like unto him in meriting, it
cannot be avoided but that we also are Saviors. Yea, and for this matter of
meriting, necessary it was that he that should be our Redeemer should be God,
because none but God, no Angel, no Archangell, no creature whatsoever could
merit at the hands of God; and yet this man sticks not blasphemously to
affirm, that in this point of meriting we are like unto the Son of God. And
all this meriting for ought he says, remains still needless and causeless,
because for shame he dares not deny that in words which indeed he does deny,
that Christ's merits are inestimable, and have deserved all graces and blessings
for us. Which being granted, to what end should we be like unto Christ in
meriting? Nay, we rightly conclude thereof, because God does nothing idly,
that therefore he does not appoint us to merit that for our selves, which
Christ has already merited in our behalf. Whereas he says, that God desirous
to train us up in all good works, best knew that there is no better spur to
prick forward our dull nature, then to ordain and propose such heavenly
rewards, we acknowledge that so far he says truly, but where he adds that
they are proposed to such as will endeavor to deserve them, I must remember him
of the sentence of Mark the Hermit before alleged, that Marc. Herem. Supra
sect. 14.
some keeping the commandments, expect the Kingdom of heaven as a wages
deserved or due unto them, and that these fail of the Kingdom of heaven. Now
here M. Bishop in his bravery sits him down in his chair, and takes upon
him to teach M. Perkins, as a man much ignorant in the matter of Christ's
mediation, but if M. Perkins had known it in no better sort then he teaches
him, we might have taken him indeed for a very simple and ignorant man. True
it is which he says, that the office of Christ's mediation consists in
reconciling man to God, and that he performed this by paying the ransom of our
sins, by purchasing Gods favor, and ordaining means how all mankind might
attain to eternal life. But he says very untruly, that in the two first
points for the most part we agree; for they are far from agreeing therein
with us, or with the truth of the Gospel of Christ. They do not hold that our
sins are freely pardoned, or that we are freely justified, albeit he is
ashamed to confess that they hold it otherwise. For what is it to say freely,
but Rhem. Testam. explication of words in the end.
for nothing, as his Rhemish Masters have expounded it? and they do not hold
that our sins are pardoned, or we justified for nothing, but for works. And
that appears by that he adds next: although we require other preparation
then they do. For the works of preparation they make to be the cause of the
forgiveness of sins and justification, as he himself has Of Justification.
Sect. 21.
before disputed; only he thinks the matter handsomely salued, that works
are the cause of justification, but not the merit of works, and with this
iugling device he adds, that they as fully deny any merit of ours, to be
cause thereof as we do. Whereas the Scripture says nothing of the merit of
works, but absolutely excludes works from being any part of the cause of our
justification before God; neither opposes each to other grace, and merits, but
grace and works; not saying, If it be of grace, it is not of merits, but Romans
11.6.
If it be of grace, it is not of works, otherwise grace were no grace.
Therefore these words of his, are but words of hypocrisy and falsehood, and
used only to blind the unskillful Reader, and to conceal that venime and
poison that would otherwise easily be espied. Albeit his master Bellarmine
sticks not to tell us, that Bellarm. de iustificat. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Iustificat per modu^ meriti: suo quoda^ modo meretur remissione^ peccatorum.
faith which is one of their preparations, does justify by way of merit, and
does in some sort merit forgiveness of sins, that we may know that very
untruly and against his own knowledge, M. Bishop affirms that they as fully
deny merit to be the cause of forgiveness of sins or justification, as we do.

About the means of attaining to heaven, he says, we differ altogether. For
they say, says he, that God requires no justice in us. Where as he has sought
to clear his own part with a lie, so does he with a lie seek to disgrace
ours. We do not say that God requires no justice in us; we only deny that the
justice which God requires in us, is the cause of our justification before
God, or can yield us any merit toward God, and therefore in this respect we
desire Phil. 3.9.
to be found in Christ, and by faith to stand under the couerture of his merits
and righteousness, and in the imputation thereof to be accepted unto
everlasting life. Now against this, he says, that Christ's righteousness and
merits are not communicable unto any mere creature. But he says he knows
not what; for what should hinder but that what Christ has done for us, should
be communicated and imputed unto us? And is not Christ himself communicated
unto us, Esa. 9.6.
borne unto us, given unto us, become John. 17.23.
one with us? Accordingly therefore he is 1. Cor. 1.30.
of God made righteousness unto us, even Ierem. 23.6.
the Lord our righteousness, that we may say, Psalm. 71.14.
I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God, and will make mention of thy
righteousness only. But he will have it, that through Christ's merits grace
is given unto us to do good works, and to merit eternal life. One part
whereof we acknowledge to be true, that through Christ's merits grace is given
unto us to do good works, because good works are the way wherein we are to
walk to that eternal life which he has merited and purchased for us. But the
other part thereof is false, and we deny that he has appointed us by our good
works to merit for our selves eternal life. It is a Romish fancy, which we
marvel they so busy themselves to commend to others, when none of them dare
presume of it in himself. M. Perkins by sound argument has confuted it, and
M. Bishop is content again barely to affirm it, without either proof of his
own part, or disproofe of that that is said against it. In a word, we do not
find in Scripture that Christ died for our good works that they might merit,
but only for our sins that they might be pardoned. This is the ancient
received faith of the Church of Christ, but the other is a nouelty which
antiquity never imagined, but is lately devised in the Church of Rome. He says
that they by this doctrine of Merits, do much more magnify Gods grace and
Christ's merits then we do. And why? For the greater the gift is, says he, the
greater is the glory of the giver. But I answer him that the gift is greater,
in that Christ gives himself to be our merit and righteousness, then it
should be in giving us ableness to merit for our selves. And by this the glory
of the giver is most of all set forth, which then most clearly shines, when
there is least show or appearance of any thing to be attributed unto us. Which
is not in their Popish doctrine, where man by his merits is set on horseback,
and those merits are affirmed so to proceed from grace, as that they proceed
also in part from his own free will. Therefore to deny our merits, is not to
undermine and blow out the virtue of Christ's merits, but to acknowledge the
same to be in themselves entirely and perfectly sufficient without us, that
whilst we yield nothing to our selves to rejoice in, the glory of our
salvation may redound wholly to him to whom wholly and only it does belong. But
to affirm merits on our part, cannot be without singular derogation to the
mediation and merits of Christ, who has taught us to apply unto us the virtue
of his merits, not by meriting again for ourselves, but by believing in him,
according to that which the Apostle has taught us, that God has Romans 3.25.
set him forth to be an atonement (for us) through faith in his blood.

M. Perkins against this vain presumption of merit, alleges further, that
for one good work that we do we have many evil, the offense whereof defaceth
the merit of our best deeds, and makes them too light in the balance of the
law. This M. Bishop lightly regards. Tush his mortal sins are taken away
by penance, and his merits though they were gone, yet return again, and
without doubt he will thereof make himself a ladder that shall serve him to
climb to heaven. What, says he, must we not speak of good, because we may
hap to do evil? That is a fair persuasion, and well worthy of a wise man. It
is but a hap we must think that he does any evil, and therefore he will not be
barred from speaking of his good, and is no fool I warrant you in the
persuasion thereof. Surely we think that Job was somewhat wiser then M.
Bishop, and yet he thought that persuasion not to be unworthy of him. Job. 9.2.
If I would contend with him, I should not be able to answer him one for a
thousand. And when by the provocation of his friends he had used that great
justification of himself, being reproved for it by the Lord, he renounceth to
speak of his good any more, and says, Job. 39.37.
I am vile: what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once
have I spoken, but I will answer no more, yea twice, but I will proceed no
further. David Aug in Psalm. 129. Vidit prope totam vitam humanam circumlatrari
peccatis suis.
seeing the whole life of man in a manner on every side to be barked at by his
sins, thought his evils sufficient to stop his mouth from talking of his
good, and cries out unto God, Psalm. 130.2.
O Lord if thou straightly mark iniquities, who can stand? S. Austine thought it
worth the while to consider, and took it to be a bar against all pleading of
Merit, that if God strictly examine our behavior, August. Plarae inueni^^
peccata quam merita.
he shall find more sins then merits or good works; and therefore he could
cry out, Confess. lib. 9. ca. 13. Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominu^ siremotae
miserecordia discutias eam.
Woe even to the commendable life of man, if thou, O God, examine it without
mercy. I wonder then what merit M. Bishop can find in the commendable life of
man. The same S. Austine asks again, De verb. Dom. ser. 15. Quis est qui no^
sit debtor Dei nisi in quo nullum potest inueniri pecca^^m?
Who is he that is not a debtor unto God, but he only in whom can no sin be
found? Now if we be all debtors unto God by our sins, can we by our good
works have him a debtor unto us? And what though God of his mere mercy and
goodness do pardon our sins, and putting out of sight and remembrance our
evil deeds, do still reserve the acknowledgement of our well-doings? Shall we
thereupon out of his mercy build a merit unto our selves, and think that we
have well deserved at Gods hands, and bound him to us by our good deeds, when
by our sins we have a thousand times more provoked him to destroy us? M.
Bishop is no doubt a wise man, and has some great reason to settle himself in
this persuasion; but yet a fool may be so wise, as to wish him to take heed
that the golden house of merits that he builds now, do not fall heavy in the
end upon his own head.

17 W. BISHOP.
Let us to our third Argument; God has by covenant and promise bound himself
to reward our works with life everlasting: Therefore good works do in justice
deserve it: for faithful promise makes due debt. Math. 20.
The covenant is plainly set down: where God in the person of an householder
agrees with his workmen for a penny a day: that is, to give them life
everlasting for travailing in his service during their life time, as all
ancient interpreters expound it. Whereupon S. Paul infers, that God should
be unjust, Heb. 6.
if he should forget their works, who suffered persecution for him: 2 Thessalonians.
1.
and says, If it be just with God, to render tribulation to them that
persecute you, and to such as are persecuted, rest with us: Li. 2. cont. Iouin.
cap. 2.
upon the same ground S. Hierome says, Great truly were the injustice of God,
if he did punish evil works, and would not as well receive good works. To all
these, and much more such like, M. Perkins answers, that covenant for works
was in the old Testament, but in the new, the covenant is made with the
workman, not with the work.

Reply. All that I cited in this argument, is out of the new Testament, where
express covenant is made for working and works, as you have heard. And as it
was said in the old law, Math. 19.
Do these things and thou shall live: so is it said in the new, If thou will
enter into life, keep the commandments: and life eternal is the hire and
wages for laboring in Gods vineyard, and not of the imputed justice or merits
of Christ: but look about you, and behold the goodly mark which M. Perkins
sets up: Mark, says he, that it is said, God will render unto every man
according to his works: not to the work, or for the work. O sharp and
ouer-fine wit! does he render according to the works, and does he not render
for the works? If the rate of the works be the measure of the reward, that
for fewer or lesser works there is a lesser reward, and for many and worthier
a greater: surely in my simple understanding, he that gives according unto the
works, gives for the works. That other addle invention (that works are there
mentioned, not because they are rewarded, but because they are tokens that the
doer is in Christ, for whose obedience God promises the crown of life) is not
worth the confuting, it is so flat contrary to the text: which ascribes
distinctly that reward unto the workman for his works, and not for Christ's
obedience imputed unto him.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop in the former section, as we have seen, has flowted M. Perkins
with the name of wise man, and pronounced his ignorance, and has taken upon
him to teach him. Now a man would wonder, that taking so much upon him there,
he should here argue so childishly and simply as he has done. God has by
promise bound himself to reward our works with life everlasting: therefore
good works do in justice deserve it. But what if some man for a goose quill
should promise M. Bishop a goose, should not he be taken for a goose that would
thereupon conclude, that a goose quill were worth a goose? Who would not deride
and scorn the absurdity of such men, who set forth themselves like champions
and chalengers, and bring such reeds or rather rushes to fight with? What,
because God in mercy promises to reward our works with life everlasting,
does it follow that our works do deserve the same? Faithful promise, says
he, makes due debt. But what of that? for the debt in that case arises not of
any desert of him to whom the promise is made, but only of the word of him
that promises. A man for nothing may promise something, and for very small
things very great; where though there be no comparison betwixt the one and the
other, yet the promise stands good. We must therefore distinguish betwixt
debt of desert, and debt of promise. For debt of desert arises out of the
nature and condition of the work it self, which by it self binds him to
whose use and service it is done. But debt of promise grows not from the
thing that is done or yielded to another, but only from the promise it self,
whereby a man has bound himself. Saint Austine well observes, that Aug. de
verb. Apost. Ser. 16. Aliter decimus homini. D^b^s mihi quia d^di tibi^ and
aliter decimus, De^es mihi quia promisi^ti mihi. Quando d^cis, Debes mihi quia
dedi tibi, processit a te beneficiu^ sed mutuatum, non donatum. Quando dicis,
Debes mihi quia promisi^ti mihi, tu nihil dedisti and tam^n exigu. B^nitas enim
ei^s qui prom^sit dab^t n^^^ mal ti^^ fid^^ conuertatur. Qui autem fall^t malus
est.
it is one thing to say to a man, Thou art debtor to me, because I have given
to thee; another thing to say, Thou art debtor to me because thou have promised
me. When thou say, Thou art debtor to me because I have given to thee, a
benefit has proceeded from thee, though by way of lending, not of mere
giving. But when thou say, Thou art debtor to me because thou have promised
me, thou give nothing to him, and yet requirest of him. Where the goodness
of him that has promised, will make good that which he has promised, least
fidelity be changed to naughtiness or evil. For he that deceives is naught.
Therefore debt of promise we see is so far from implying or importing desert,
as that it binds the promiser for his own sake, though there be nothing in
the party to whom he has promised that may move him, or give him cause of the
performance of his promise. The covenant, he says, is set down, where God in
the person of a householder, agrees with his workmen for a penny a day, etc.
But that thence no merit can be gathered, has been before showed in S^^^. 14.
answer to the first objection. Yea, and it is plain; because if there had
been respect of merit, there should to unequal work have been assigned
unequal reward. But there all are made equal, that all may know, as was
before alleged out of Prosper, that Pr^^. de vocat. gent. lib. 1. cap. 5. Se
donum gratiae non ^p^^u^ ^ccepisse (...) cedem*
they receive a gift of grace, not a wages due to works. It is Heb. 6.10.
just then with God, as Master Bishop cites, not to forget the works of his
servants; 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
just with God to render rest to them that are persecuted for his sake, not in
respect of any merit of ours, but for his own word and promise sake. Ambros in
Rom cap 3. Iust^tia Dei dicta est quae videtur esse misericordia quia de
promissio^e originem habet, and cum promissum Dei redditur, iustita Dei
dicitur. Iustitia enim Dei est quia redditu^ est quod promissu^ est.
It is called the justice of God, says Ambrose, which seems to be mercy,
because it has his original from promise, and when the promise of God is
performed, it is called the justice of God. For it is the justice of God that
that is paid or performed which is promised. Thus and no otherwise is the
saying of Saint Hierome to be understood, that Hieron. Cont. Jouinian. lib. 2.
Reuera grandis iniustitia Dei si tantum peccata puniret and bonae opera non
susciperet.
great should be the injustice of God, if he did only punish sins, and did
not receive or accept good works, namely because as he has in judgment
threatened to punnish the one; so he has promised in mercy to reward the
other. Otherwise if we consider the works themselves, they are Bernard in
Annunciat. Ser. 1. Non talia vt iniuriam saceret Deus nisi eam donaret.
not such as that God should do wrong, though he gave not unto them eternal
life, as Saint Bernard speaks, yea says Hierome, Hieron in Esa. lib. 6. cap.
14. Cu^ Dies iudicij vel dormitionis aduenerit dissoluentur omnes manus, quia
nullum opus dignu^ Dei iustitia reperietur.
All hands shall fail at the day of death and judgment, because no work
shall be found worthy of the justice of God. The more wickedly deal the
Rhemish glosers, in referring those words of Hierome to the very merit of
works, not doubting with manifest blasphemy, to affirm that Rhem Testam.
Annot. Heb. 6.10.
good works be so far meritorious, as that God should be unjust, if he
rendered not heaven for the same. But Saint Austine far otherwise says:
August in Psalm ^^9 Debit^rem se no^is Deus fecit nihil a nob^ a^^ piendo, se^^
omn^ no^^ (...)
God has made himself a debtor unto us, not by having any thing of us, but by
promising all things unto us. (...)
He is become a debtor, not by receiving any thing from us, but by promising
what it pleased him. Hereupon, says he, that which in so many places he
repeateth: (...) 32 83. 109. and de verb. Dom. Ser. 31. Non dicimus illi, Read
quod accipisti; sed Read quod pro^ (...)
We say not unto God, Repay that which thou have received, but, Pay that which
thou have promised. Yea, he plainly argues, that Jn Psalm. 32. Cum ab illo
habeamus quicquid illi offerimus and ex illo sit qui^quid boni sumus, etc.
(...) quid dedimus and tenemus debitorem Vnde debitorem? Quia promissor est.
since we have of him whatsoever we offer to him, and all our goodness is of
him, therefore we have not yielded any thing to him to hold him debtor
thereby. Whence then have we him a debtor? Marry, says he, because he is a
promiser. See here Master Bishop; because all our good works are of God, we
cannot have him a debtor unto us by any merit of works that we do unto him,
but he is a debtor only for his promise sake. Ibid. Te^eamus fidelissimum
debitorem, quia habemus miserecordissimum promissorem.
Let us hold him a most faithful debtor, says he, because we have him a
most merciful promiser. The promise was made in mercy; the performance
thereof now depends upon the fidelity of the promiser, not upon the merit of
the worker, even as the same Saint Austine says; In Psalm. 88. Non secundum
merita nostra sed secundum misericordiam illius firma est promissio.
The promise is sure, not according to our merits, but according to his mercy.

But to the objection here made M. Perkins answers by distinguishing the
covenant and promise of God, that one is of the Law, another of the Gospel:
one of works, the other of faith: one of the old testament, the other of the
new. By the old covenant of the Law, the promise is made only to the work,
neither is the person accepted, but for the works sake. Now by this covenant
God Heb. 8 9.
has no delight in us, because we continue not in his covenant, there being
none found that perfectly fulfilleth the righteousness of the law. By the new
covenant the person is first accepted by faith for Christ's sake, and then the
work is accepted and rewarded, not for the merit of it self, but for the
condition of the person. By the first covenant, the work is rejected, if it
have not the uttermost that it ought to have. By the second covenant 2. Cor.
8.12.
if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, not according to that that he has not; so that though there be by humane
frailty some imperfection in the work, yet God pardoning the imperfection,
accepts of it, and rewards it, dealing as fathers with their children, who
accept their good endeauours, when in the works happily there is nothing
worthy to be respected. Here therefore the promises of God properly respect
the person working, and not the desert or worthiness of the work. But Master
Bishop in the height of his ignorance, answers, that all the places by him
cited, are out of the new Testament, understanding by the new Testament, the
books which we call the new Testament, and the old Testament, for the books
that go under that name. Whereas Master Perkins distinguishes the two
Testaments, as God himself does, not by the books, but by the matter of the
books; there being in the books of the old Testament, many things that belong
to the new, and many things repeated in the books of the new Testament, that
belong properly to the old. Such are the sentences by Master Bishop alleged,
Luke 16.28.
Do this and thou shall live: Math. 19.17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments, though according to his
reading he so cites the former of them out of the old Testament, as if it
were not spoken in the new. But these, though by occasion they be mentioned in
the Gospel, yet are conditions indeed properly belonging to the Law. Now in
the old testament according to M. Bishops meaning, we may see example of that
that M. Perkins says, where it is said of Cain and Abel; Genes. 4.4.5.
The Lord had a respect to Abel and his offering, but to Cain and his offering
he had no regard. First he had respect to Abel, because of his faith in Christ,
and consequently to his offering: but he had no respect to Cain being void of
true faith, and therefore he had no respect to Cains offering. For it is here
true which the Law says, Cuius persona non placet, nec caetera placent: where
the person is not pleasing, nothing else can please; and therefore S. Bernard
says; Bernard. in C^nt. Ser. 24. Quid miraris ^ Cain quod munera tua non
respicit qui te despicit?
What wonderest thou Cain, that he has no re^pect to thy gifts who despises
thee? Wherefore it should not seem strange to M. Bishop which M. Perkins has
observed, that God rendering to the faithful according to their works, should
be said notwithstanding not to do it for their works sake, because their works
are secondarily accepted for their own sakes, and they are accepted for
Christ's sake, and both they and their works are rewarded by virtue of that
atonement, whereby he has reconciled them unto God. And thus howsoever
Master Bishops simple understanding conceiueth it not, greater works have
greater reward, and lesser works have lesser reward, and yet for Christ's sake
it is that greater or lesser have either greater or less reward. But it is
further demanded, if works do not merit, why are they mentioned in the
promises? Not because they merit, says Master Perkins, but Master Bishop
repeateth it, Not because they are rewarded, whereas Master Perkins denies
not, but that works are rewarded; only he denies that they are rewarded by
virtue of their own merit and worth, but by virtue of Christ's mediation, for
whose sake they are accepted in the sight of God. But we must not think
strangely of this, because he does therein but as he is wont to do. It is
further added, that good works are mentioned in the promises, as the proper
marks and signs of them to whom appertain the promises that are made freely
for Christ's sake: as tokens that the doer of them is in Christ, through whose
merits the promise shall be accomplished. This to M. Bishop is an addle
invention, not worth the confuting, it is so flat contrary to the text. But it
is his addle head that takes this for an addle invention, and his ignorance of
the text that makes him think it so flat contrary to the text. The text,
says he, ascribes distinctly that reward unto the workman for his works, and
not for Christ's obedience imputed unto him. But we tell him again, that it is
for the imputation of Christ's obedience, that the text ascribes any reward to
the workman for his work, as is sufficiently approved unto him in the Supra.
Sect. 14.
defense of the answer to the first objection. His whole error stands in
this, that he cannot conceive how the reward should be given to our works, if
it be given for Christ's sake, or how it should be given for Christ's sake, if
it be promised to our works, whereas both these accord in one, and for
Christ's sake it is that any such reward is assigned to our works.

18 W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins fourth objection for us is proposed unskillfully, yet could he not
answer it, but by relying upon that which is most untrue, that forsooth no one
action of the best man is without fault: which has been already confuted, and
might be by instances of Abraham's oblation of his son, Saint John Baptists
preaching, and reprehending of Herod, and Stephens martyrdom, with infinite
such like, in which Master Perkins nor any else will be able to show in
particular, what fault there was. Math. 6. Luke 11.
Again, our Savior says: That if the eye be simple, the whole body is
lightsome, not having any part of darkness in it: and very reason teaches us,
that a man's action for substance and all due circumstances, may be perfect. It
was then a very silly shift to say, that never any man did any one action, with
all his due circumstances.

But in steed of that fourth Argument, I will put this: If a greater reward be
due unto them that do better works, then a reward is due unto them that do
good works, which is evident in reason: But a greater reward is provided for
them that do better, as S. Augustine grounded upon Gods word, Sermon. 46. De
verb^^ Dom. 1. Cor. 15.
proves in sund^y places: namely upon that, For star differs from star
in glory, so shall be the resurrection of the dead: specifying that virginity
shall shine after one sort, chastity in wedlock after another, and holy
widowhood yet after another: Sermon. 95. Lib. de virg. cap. 44.
all (says he) shall be there, but they shine diversely: And of the same work
affirms, That martyrdom shall be higher rewarded then any other work. The
like does he upon those words, One ground shall yield thirty fold, another
threescore fold, another an hundred fold: Comparing chastity in wedlock to the
thirty, in widows to the sixty, and in virgins to the hundred. But most
directly in his sixty seven treatise upon Saint John's Gospel, upon this
verse: In my fathers house are many mansions: where he says, that albeit some
be holier, iuster, and more valiant then others, yet there shall be fit rooms
for them all, where every one is to receive his place according unto his merit.
That penny spoken of (by which says he is signified eternal life) shall be
given to every man equally: Math. 20.
because every one shall live for ever, and not one longer then another: but
many mansions do signify the different dignities of merits in the same
everlasting life.

And S. Gregory in most express terms, does teach the same doctrine, saying:
Lib. 4. mor. cap. 42.
Because in this life there is a difference of works amongst us, there shall
be in the other life without all doubt a distinction of dignities: that as one
here exceeds another in merit, so there one surpasses another in reward.
Finally, S. Augustine, and S. Hierome, De here is. her. 8^* Lib. 2. cont. Ioui^.
condemn it as an heresy, to hold that there is not diversity of merits in
this life, and rewards in the next: Whereon follows most manifestly, that
there be merits and rewards.

R. ABBOT.
The fourth objection he tells us is unskillfully proposed, but yet he does
not tell us how he would have it proposed, because belike he had small opinion
of it. Yet I will do him the favor to put it into form for him, to let it
appear whether he be likely of any advantage by it. It must be thus: If good
works be perfect and without fault, then they merit. But they are perfect and
without fault, because they are the works of the holy Ghost. Therefore they
must needs merit. Now the first of these propositions is false. For although
it be granted that good works be perfect and without any defect, yet can they
not merit at Gods hands, as may appear by that that has been Supra Sect. 3.
4.
before said as touching the conditions of Merit. Even Adam himself in the
state of Paradise, could by desert have challenged nothing at Gods hands, as
neither can the elect Angels still continuing in that integrity wherein they
were first created. But Master Perkins denies the minor proposition,
affirming that no works of ours are perfect and without blemish, but do all
carry the marks of our uncleanness, whereby being exacted in rigor, they are
subject to reproof. For although in their original, which is the spirit of
God, they be pure and clean, yet as water though clear in the fountain, yet
gathers uncleanness from the channel wherein it runs, so the works of
grace wrought in us, do receive some taint of the corruption of our nature
through which they pass. And as the hand of the most cunning Scribe, write he
never so excellently by himself, loses much of his perfection and grace, in
holding the hand of a child to teach him to write, so the work of the holy
Ghost being most absolute in it self, yet in us through the crookedness and
corruption of our nature, whilst it is framing us to it self, loses much of
the beauty and glory that it should have, until the same spirit have fully
consumed all our dross, that it alone may prevail in us. M. Bishop replieth,
that this is most untrue, and tells us, that it has been already confuted,
but yet against his confutation it is justified to him before, and will stand
good, that there is no action of man so perfect, but that there is a defect to
be found in it. The best of our actions is weakened by Gal. 5.17.
the flesh lusting against the spirit, so as that we cannot do the things that
we would. In our best actions it happens which our Savior says; Math. 26.41.
The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. And howsoever faith
fighting against the weakness of the flesh, do prevail and overcome, yet
even of the resistance of the flesh there grows a blemish, and the neerenesse
of the infection thereof, does breath out some distasteful quality upon our
works, for which we have need to ask pardon at Gods hands. But M. Bishop
brings instances of Abraham's oblation of his son; of John Baptists
preaching and reprehending Herod; of his and Steuens martyrdom, with infinite
other such like, says he, in which no man can show in particular what fault
there was. But why should we not conceive the like of the martyrdom of John
and Steven, as we do of the martyrdom of Peter? And of Peter's martyrdom our
Savior Christ beforehand says; John. 21.18.
When thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and another
shall gird thee and lead thee whither thou would not. Thus spoke he, says
S. John, signifying by what death he should glorify God. Where when he says,
Whither thou would not, there is plainly approved in Peter's martyrdom a
shrinking and drawing back, a resistance and opposition of the will, so that
though willingly he did undergo it, yet it was in some part also against his
will. Whereupon S. Austin makes this collection: August. in Psalm. 30. conc. 1.
St Petrus Apostolus tanta perfectione quo nollet ductus est, and volens nolens
mortuus est, sed volens coronatus est, quid mirum si est aliquis pauor in
passione etia^ iustorum, etiam Sanctorum. Pauor est ex humana infirmitate, spes
ex diuina promissione.
If Peter the Apostle being of so great perfection, was led whither he would
not, and dyed with his will against his will, but with his will received the
crown, what marvel is it if there be some fear in the suffering even of just
men, even of the Saints? There is fear by humane infirmity, and hope by the
promise of God. And this resistance, this fear, this shrinking back, the same
S. Austine imputes to the corruption of sin. Idem Epist. 120 Mente seruiens
legi Dei, carne autem trahens desideria peccati, quibus obedire vetat Apostolus
mentis quidem ratione concupiscit homo dissolui and esse cum Christo, sed id
sensu carnis recusat and refugit.
A man (says he) in mind serving the law of God, and in the flesh carrying
still the lusts of sin, which the Apostle forbids to obey, by reason of
the mind desires indeed to be loosed, and to be with Christ, but by sense of
the flesh refuses and shunneth it. Now what ground has M. Bishop to except
John and Stephen in their martyrdom from the common condition of the Saints?
and why should he think that John's preaching and reprehending of Herod was
without that spot of resistance and fear, when his martyrdom was not? And why
should we imagine, that that weakness of the flesh which has his work in the
martyrdom of the Saints, had not the like also in Abraham's oblation of his
son, being a thing without doubt as cross to his nature and will, as his own
death was. But says M. Bishop, Our Savior says, that Mat. 6.22. Luke 11.34.
if the eye be simple, the whole body is light some, not having any part of
darkness in it. It is true, if the eye be wholly single and clear, but where
is the eye that is so clear? Where is he that says not with David, Psalm. 13.3.
Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy law. Aug. de
verb. Dom. ser. 18. Tota opera nostra in hac vita est sanare oculum cordis vnde
videtur Deus.
It is our whole work or endeavor in this life, says S. Austin, to heal the
eye of the heart wherewith we should see God. If it be our whole work in this
life to heal our eyes, then we expect not in this life to have them fully
whole. In the mean while therefore because it is Gods prerogative which S.
John speaks of, 1. Ioh. 1.5.
God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, it must needs be, as S.
Hierome collecteth thereof, Hieron. contr. Pelag. lib. 2. Quando dicit nullas
tenebras in Dei lumine reperiri, ostendit omnia aliorum lumina sorde aliqua
maculari.
that all our lights are spotted and darkened with some filth. But he tells
us yet further, that very reason teaches us, that a man's action for substance,
and all due circumstances may be perfect. And it may be indeed that his broken
reason so teaches him, howsoever his conscience be contrary to his reason.
But our reason teaches us, that if there be yet darkness in the
understanding, and waywardness in the will, and in both a stooping and
inclining to the weakness and corruption of the flesh, as indeed there is,
then all our works favor of our earthly vessels, and nothing can come from
us, but certainly carries a blot and imperfection with it. And therefore it
was no silly shift of M. Perkins, but a true defense, that never any man did
any one action with all his due circumstances, because Deuteronomy. 6 5. Aug. de
perfect. iustit. Cum est aliquid con^upiscentiae carnalis, quod vel continendo
fraenetur, non omnimodo ex tota anima diligitur Deus.
all the soul which God wholly requires in every action of his service, cannot
be wholly bestowed therein, so long as concupiscence possesses any part
thereof, as perpetually it does so long as we continue in the warfare of this
life. But here in stead of that fourth objection proposed by M. Perkins, M.
Bishop brings us forth a leaden dagger of his own. If greater reward be due
unto them that do better works, then a reward is due unto them that do good
works. But a greater reward is provided for them that do better works: the
conclusion should be, Therefore a reward is due unto them that do good works.
In stead whereof in the end of this idle discourse, he brings in this: Whereof
follows most manifestly, that there be merits and rewards. But I pray you M.
Bishop, whereof does that follow? do merits follow in the conclusion, when in
the premises there is no mention of them? But we must pardon you: it seems
your traveling to Rome has iogged your Logic out of your head, and
therefore such conclusions may easily slip you. But the direct conclusion of
your argument we grant, therefore a reward is due unto them that do good
works, only with this exception, that it is due by the merciful promise of
God, not by virtue of any our merit or desert, and more your argument proves
not. Now he takes great pains in the handling of this worthy argument, to
prove inequality of reward, and all to no purpose, because we deny not, but
that as God in this life diversely distributeth his graces, to some in greater
measure, to some in less: so in the life to come he will sort his rewards
accordingly, that it may be true which is written, that 1. Cor. 3.8.
every man shall receive his wages according to his labor. But whether greater
wages to greater labor, or lesser wages to lesser labor, both are promised
for Christ's sake, as has been showed: and God will perform the same Ezech.
36.22.
for his own names sake, and not for any merit of ours, whereby he stands
bound unto us. As for the term of merits which he alleges out of the
Fathers, what we are to conceive thereof follows anon after to be declared.
Of virginity and widowhood we are to entreat in the question of Vows.

19. W. BISHOP.
The fifth reason is taken out of those texts, which teach that men are worthy
of eternal life: They shall walk with me in whites, Apoc: 3. Sap. 3. 2 Thessalonians.
1. Luke 20.35.
because they be worthy. God proved them, and found them worthy of himself.
That you may be esteemed worthy of the kingdom of God. Now if men be worthy of
eternal life, it must needs be granted, that they have deserved it.

M. Perkins answers: that they were indeed worthy, but not for their own
merits, but for Christ's imputed unto them. This is his only refuge, yet has
he not, nor cannot show any one text in Scripture that speaks so. But to
refell him, turn only to the places, and there you shall find, that this
worthiness rose of good works, as Christ says: Apoc. 3.
I know thy works, and find them not full: yet there be some amongst you, who
have not defiled their garments (but have their works full) they shall walk
with me in whites, because they be worthy: 2 Thessalonians. 1.
and by sustaining persecutions, they were made worthy of that kingdom. And in
the words following the Apostle signifies, that it is as just for God to
requite good works with the joys of heaven, as he does punish wicked with the
pains of hell.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins for objection proposes the place of the Revelation, Apoc. 3 4.
They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy, as whereby they would
prove merit, because a man cannot be worthy but he must merit and deserve. M.
Bishop out of his store adds two other places of the new Testament, but they
are such as whereby is ministered unto us a very ready and pregnant answer to
the first. The place of Saint Luke is by their own vulgar translation thus:
Luke 20.35.
Qui digni habebuntur: that is, They who shall be accounted worthy. The words
of Saint Paul are: 2 Thessalonians. 2.5.
Vt digni habeamini: that ye may be esteemed worthy of the kingdom. Whereby
we conceive and understand what man's worthiness is, Gods dignation, Gods
acceptatio^, Gods vouchsafing to take him as worthy for Christ's sake, though in
respect of himself he be not worthy. To this M. Bishop says: This is his
only refuge, yet can he not show any one text of Scripture that speaks so.
But we answer him, that all those texts of Scripture which do thus speak of
God, reputing, or esteeming, or accounting worthy, do import so much unto us.
For if our worthiness stand in Gods esteeming and accounting of us, we may not
of the title of worthiness conclude, that by perfection of real quality we
are that for which he is content in mercy and favor to accept us. We are
accordingly worthy as we are just. We are just, to speak of perfect justice,
not by righteousness of works, but only by Gods imputation of righteousness
without works, as we have seen before. In like sort therefore we are worthy
Bernard in Dedicat. Eccles. ser. 5 Nos sumus sed ipsius dignatione, non
dignitate nostrae.
by Gods vouchsafing acceptance, not by our worthiness, as S. Bernard says.
And hereto agree the confessions of the faithful. Jacob says, Genesis 32.10.
I am less then all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou have showed unto
thy servant: that is, as we read it, I am not worthy thereof: according to
that which Chrysostom says: Chrysostom. de compunct. cordis. Etsi millies
moriamur, etsi omnes animae virtutes expleamus nihil tamen dignum gerimus ad ea
quae ipsi a Deo percepimus.
Though we dye a thousand deaths, though we fulfill all the virtues of the
soul, yet do we nothing worthy in comparison of those things which we our
selves have received of God. John Baptist, Mat. 11.11.
then whom there arose not a greater amongst women's children, yet says of
himself in respect of Christ, Mat. 3.11.
I am not worthy to bear his shoes: Mar. 1.7.
I am not worthy to untie the latchet of his shoe. The Centurion of whose faith
our Savior testifies, that Mat. 8.10.
he had not found so great faith, no not in Israel, yet says of himself, Ver
8,
I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof. Bernard. in Dedicat.
Eccles. Ser. 5. Lege, o homo, in cord tuo, lege intra te ipsum de teipso
testimonia veritatis, and hac communi luce iudicabis te indignu^.
Read, O man, says S. Bernard, in thine own heart, read within thy self
concerning thy self the witness of truth, and thou will judge thy self
unworthy of this common light. Thus holy men have spoken, thus they have
thought, and if our unworthiness be such to these things, shall we dream of a
worthiness to the crown of heaven? Psalm. 31.16.
Save me, says David, for thy mercies sake: that is, says S. Austine, Aug. in
Psalm. 30. Hoc est, non in mea iustitia, non in meis meritis, sed in tu^
misericordia; non quia ego sum dignus, sed quia tu misericors.
not in my righteousness, not in my merits, but in thy mercy: not because I am
worthy, but because thou art merciful. Again, the same S. Austine says in
another place: Idem in Psalm. 41. Nobis Deus omnia bona praestat, quia bonus
est, non quia nos digni sumus: quia ille misericors est, non quiae in aliquo
promeruimus.
God yields unto us all good things because he is good, not because we are
worthy; because he is merciful, not because we have meririted in any thing.
The Prophet acknowledges God giving deliverance Psalm. 44.26.
for his mercies sake, or as the vulgar Latin reads, for his names sake.
Saint Austin again expounds it: Aug in Psalm. 43. Hoc est, gratis, propter
nome^ tuum, non propter meritu^ meu^, quia tu digna turus es facere, non quia
ego dig^us sum cui facias,
That is, freely, for thy names sake, not for my merit: because thou shall
vouchsafe to do it, not because I am worthy to whom thou should do it. Thus
does S. Austine oftentimes give check to M. Bishops conceit of worthiness,
by occasion of those phrases so often used, for thy names sake, for thy mercies
sake, for thy righteousness sake. So Basil expounds the same phrase: Psalm.
143.12.
For thy mercies sake: Basil. in Psalm. 142. Non quod ego dignus sim, sed
propter benignitatem tuam.
not because I am worthy, but because of thine own goodness. Now if M. Bishop
will have no salvation but that he will be worthy of it, let him hear what S.
Bernard says: Bernard. in Dedicat. Eccles. Ser. 5, Quod si nos puerili
animositate gratis saluari nolumus merito non saluamur Excludit miseriae
dissimulatio miseratione^ nec dignatio locu^ habet, vbi fuerit praesumptio
dignitatis.
If we of childish stomach will not be saved freely, justly are we not saved
at all. The dissembling of our misery excludes mercy, neither has Gods
vouchsafing any place where presumption is of our worthiness.

But M. Bishop to refell M. Perkins, bids us turn to the places, and there
we shall find, that the worthiness rose of works. But we have turned to the
places, and find no necessity thereof. We find that they that defiled not their
garments were worthy, but that by their very works they were worthy we find
not. Nay their worthiness indeed was in their garments. For what garments were
they that they had not defiled, but the same whereof the Apostle speaks: Gal.
3.27.
so many as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. He is our purple
garment of redemption by his blood: he is our Lilly white garment of innocence
by his righteousness. They that with this profession of Christ do join
idolatry, heresy, uncleanness, do dishonor the name and profession of
Christ, and disgrace the garments which should grace them; which these had not
done. By these garments therefore they were worthy, by Christ, by his merits,
by his obedience, by his righteousness; in him and for his sake they were
counted worthy; and whatsoever worthiness God pronounces of them for their
works, it is by the gracious acceptance thereof in him. Albeit the place may
very well bear another construction also, that they were worthy, not
absolutely, but compared to the other spoken of before. For one man compared to
another, may be called wo^thy in comparison of the other, when simply
considered in himself, and compared to the judgment of God, he is not worthy.
And to this distinction S. Ambrose leads us, who speaking of the calling of
the Apostles, whom Christ put 2. Cor 6.20.
in his stead to beseech us to be reconciled unto God, says of them: Ambros.
in 2. Tim. 1. Si ad liquidum quaeras nullus hominum potest dignus videri
Vitarius esse Christi. Omnes enim quos elegit, prius fuerant peccatores.
Quantum ergo ad comparatione^ caeterorum hominum, hi digni inuenti sunt,
quantum vero ad rem ipsam omnes indigni sunt.
If we enquire the matter strictly, there can no man be found worthy to be the
deputy of Christ: for all whom he chose, were formerly sinners. In comparison
then of others, these (the Apostles) were found worthy; but as touching the
thing it self all are unworthy. Thus plainly does he give us to understand,
that men may be called worthy only in respect of other men. In the other place
M. Bishop says, that by sustaining persecutions, they are said to be made
worthy. But he says untruly: for the Apostle says only as was before
alleged, that ye may be counted worthy, which (as I have said) is for Christ's
sake, Phil. 1.29.
in whom it is given unto us, that not only we should believe in him, but also
suffer for his sake, and because it is given us, therefore howsoever patiently
we bear it, yet we must still say as S. Austin teaches: Aug. in Psalm. 43.
Sieve patientes in tribulationibus, sieve gaude^tes in prosperitatibus redime nos
non propter meritum nostrum, sed propter nome^ tuum.
Deliver us, not for our merit, but for thy names sake. Yet he goes further
and tells us, that in the words following the Apostle signifies, that it is
as just with God to requite good works with the joys of heaven, as to punish
wicked with the pains of hell. Neither do we make any doubt thereof, because he
has given his word and promise so to do. And it is as just with God to perform
his promise to the one, as it is to punish the evil deseruings of the other.
By justice and just judgment God gives rest unto the persecuted, but this
just judgment consists in justifying and maintaining Aug. in Psalm. 42.
Iudica, inquit^^ne Deus no^ timeo tu licium tuum quia noui misericordiam tuam.
Discern causam meam, distet inter eum qui in te credit, and eum qui non
credit: par infirmitatis sed dispar conscientia, etc.
their cause, as S. Austin notes, not in weying or examining their merit and
worth. By just judgment God puts difference Jdem in Psalm. 32. Nec in
miseritordia Deus amittit iudi^ium nec in iudicio mesericordi^m, etc. N^n qu^d
iudiciu^ amisit, aut non debuit iudicare inter conuersos and non conuersos? An
vobit iustum videtur vt conuersus, and non conuersus aequaliter habeantur? Ergo
habet and iudicium in ipsa m^sericordia. Rursus in illo iudicio habet and
misericordiam, etc.
betwixt the converted and the not converted; betwixt the righteous and the
wicked; betwixt him that serves God, and him that serves him not, betwixt him
that believes, and him that believes not; and yet he that believes and
serves God, yea and is persecuted for Gods sake, must crave judgment with
mercy to be received unto life, praying with David against mere judgment:
Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant etc. That justice therefore is to the
faithful such as Basil speaks of: Basil in Psalm 141. Iustitiae immixta est
misericordia, and ita immixta vt ipsa iustitia benignitas vocetur.
Mercy is mingled with justice, and so mingled, as that justice it self is
called mercy. That just judgment is such, as Saint Ambrose speaks of:
Ambros. (...) Psalm. 118. Ser. 20. Iudicium quo fragilitatis nostrae
aestimatione censemur. In hoc ipso iudicium cum misericordiae copulatum est, vt
veritas iudicij miseratione Domini temperetur.
A judgment wherein we are judged with consideration of our frailty, in which
judgment is joined with mercy, so that the truth of judgment is tempered or
qualified with the mercy of the Lord. Now Ber. in Cant. Ser. 14. Iudicium
temperatum misericordia est.
judgment tempered and qualified, is indeed mercy as Saint Bernard says. As
for the place cited out of the book of Wisdom: Wisd. 3.5.
God proved them and found them worthy of himself: though it be out of a book
the authority whereof we deny, and therefore can require no answer, yet it
has answer sufficient by that that has been said. God found them worthy of
himself by finding them answerable to those conditions and rules, by which he
is content in mercy to accept men as worthy, though simply no man can be
worthy of him.

20. W. BISHOP.
The sixth reason M. Perkins delivers thus: 2. Tim 4.
Eternal life is termed a crown, and a crown of righteousness to be given by
a just Judge: therefore in this life it must be justly deserved, otherwise it
were not well called a crown of justice, nor could be said to be rendered by a
just judge. M. Perkins answers, that it is called a crown by resemblance,
because it is given in the end of the life, as the crown is given in the end
of the race.

Reply. If that were all the cause, and that there were no respect to be had to
former deserts, it might then as well be called a halter by resemblance,
because that also is given in the end of life: and in their opinion, more
properly: because all their works are defiled like a menstruous cloth: and a
halter is the end of such wicked works. But as a halter is due to a thief, so
is a crown of glory the just reward of the righteous man.

Secondly he answers, that it is called a crown of justice, because God has
bound himself by his promise to give it: here then at length we have by his
own confession, that by Gods promise eternal life is due debt unto the
righteous: but as having ouer-shot himself, he adds, not for any desert of
theirs, but only for the promise sake. But as you have heard before out of S.
Matthew, Math. 20.
that promise was made for working the time of his life in our vineyard, and so
there was some desert on their part: and the servants were rewarded, because
they employed their talents well: and in this very place, Math. 25.
Saint Paul reckons up his good services, for which the just judge would
render him a crown of justice: and therefore the justice is not only in
respect of Gods promise. And if you will not believe me, proving that I say out
of the very text, rather then M Perkins on his bare word, let S. Augustine be
arbitrator between us, Li. 50. Hom. hom. 4.
who most deeply considers of every word in this sentence: Let us hear
(says he) the Apostle speaking, when he approached near unto his passion, I
have (quoth he) fought a good fight, I have accomplished my course, I have kept
the faith: concerning the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice,
which our Lord will render unto me in that day, a just judge: and not only to
me, but to the^ also that love his coming: he says, that our Lord a just judge
will render unto him a crown, he therefore does owe it, and as a just judge
will pay it. For the work being regarded, the reward cannot be denied. I have
fought a good fight, is a work: I have accomplished my course, is a work: I
have kept the faith, is a work: There is laid up for me a crown of justice,
this is the reward. So that you see most clearly by this most learned Fathers
judgment, that the reward is due for the work sake, and not only for the
promise of God. See him upon that verse of the Psalm: Psalm. 100.
I will sing unto thee O Lord, mercy and judgment. Where he concludes, that
God in judgment will out of his justice crown those good works, which he of
mercy had given grace to do.

R. ABBOT.
To the objection of this place M. Perkins answers, that everlasting life is
called a crown only in resemblance. For as he which runs a race, says he,
must continue and run to the end, and so be crowned, even so must we continue
to walk in good works unto the end, and then receive eternal life. Now for
reply to this answer it seems M. Bishop had some conference with the hangman,
and learning of him that a halter is the end of a wicked course, (let him
remember his own wicked course, and fear the judgment of the just God) he
thought good to draw that observation to serve him for one shift. And first to
give way to his hangmans device, he curtalleth M. Perkins his answer: as if he
had said no more but thus, that eternal life is called a crown, because it is
given in the end of the life, as the crown is given in the end of the race.
Whereto he replyeth, that if that were all, and that there were no respect to
former deserts, it might then as well be called a halter. But M. Perkins answer
expresses plainly, as we see, that the crown has reference to them that
continue to the end to walk in good works, and therefore left no occasion or
place for this hangmanlike and uncivil reply. But his mind, it seems, was
strongly set upon the halter, and therefore by head and shoulders he would pull
it in, only to please himself and his table companions with a forced and
witless jest. He adds further, that in our opinion it should more properly
be called a halter, because all our works are defiled like a menstruous cloth,
and an halter is the end of such wicked works. Now we know no reason but that
M. Bishop by most right, because he has set down the sentence, should keep
the halter to himself; for that we are well assured that his best works are
defiled as well as ours. But what will he say (I marvel) to Pope Leo the
third, of whom Matthew of Westminster reports, that Math. Westminster. lib. 1. anno
798. Mulier quaedam ad qua^ aliqua^do acc^ssum habuit, vt ^^cebatur manum eius
comprimit inter celebra^ dum and comprimendo deoscula^s incentiuum libibinis in
Papa excitauit.
being at Mass, about a good work no doubt, a woman of his good acquaintance
coming with her offering, crushed and kissed his hand, and therewith stirred
up in the Pope (a holy father I warrant you) some motions of the flesh. Now was
this no defilement shall we think to so good a work? Surely if M. Bishop had
lived then, he would have given judgment of the Pope that he should be hanged,
because a halter is the end of such wicked Mass. But tell us M. Bishop, do all
your works go so currantly and cleanly from you, as that you can presume to be
free from the halter that you have here made? Have you never offended at Mass
in some such like sort as the Pope did? Does not your mind often wander when
you seem to pray? Do not sinister thoughts and respects many times interpose
themselves, and make you to go crooked when you think to go upright? Take heed
that hereafter it be not said unto you, Patere legem quam ipse tuleris: Be
tried by the law which thou thy self have made: a halter is the end of such
wicked works. But of the condition of our works, more has been said before,
then ever M. Bishop will be able to disprove. Here he concludes, that as a
halter is due to a thief, so is the crown of glory the just reward of the
righteous man. True say we, but yet not by the virtue of his righteousness and
desert, but by the merciful promise of Almighty God. In respect of which
promise, it is called, as M. Perkins answers, a crown of justice, because
God by his promise has bound himself to give it, and in the performance of
his promise he is approved just. And this is the constant confession of us all,
which M. Bishop seems to apprehend as casually or forcedly spoken by M.
Perkins, that eternal life is a due debt to the righteous and faithful, yet
with that exception still, which he thinks M. Perkins added as having
ouershot himself, because his ignorance conceiueth not how these two stand
together, not for any desert of theirs, but only for his promise sake, as has
been declared sufficiently Sect. 17.
before, in defending the answer to the third objection. But as touching the
place here handled, he shall find S. Bernard expounding this crown of justice
in the same sort as we do. Bernard. de gr^t. and lib. arb. Est ergo quam P^ulus
expectat corona iustitiae, sed iustitiae Dei, non suae. Iustum est quippe vt
redd^t quod debet debet aute^ quod pollicitus est. Et haec est iustitia de qua
praesumit Apostolus promissio Dei.
It is a crown of justice (says he) which Paul expects, but of Gods
justice, not his own. For it is just that God pay what he owes, and he owes
that which he has promised. And this is the justice of which the Apostle
presumes, even the promise of God. Albeit it is true also, that man's justice
is crowned, and that in that respect also it is a crown of righteousness, who
makes question thereof? but still it is true, that it is not due to man's
righteousness by merit and desert, but is tied to it only by the promise and
grace of God. And thus does the Apostle reckon his good service, for which the
just Judge would render a crown of justice, not as pleading his desert
thereof, but knowing that God has promised such reward to such service. He
alleges to the contrary the examples of them that were called into the
vineyard, and of the other that received the talents, but of them he has
before received answer. All his error is, that he cannot conceive work and
reward, but that it must necessarily imply merit and desert, which
notwithstanding children can distinguish, because great reward by favor may be
given when the work is in no sort to be thought worthy of it. As for the place
of Austine which he produces, it gives him no succor. We find there work and
reward: I have fought a good fight, etc. the work. There is laid up for me a
crown of justice; the reward: but we do not find that the reward is deserved
by the work: we do not find that by virtue of merit the justice of God any
way stands bound unto him. Nay in the same sermon S. Austin says, Augus.
lib. 50 homil. 14 Da veniam Apostole, propria tua non noui nisi mala. Cum ergo
Deus coronat merita tua, nihil coronat nisi dona sua.
Pardon me Apostle, I know nothing of thine own but evil: therefore when he
crowns thy merits, he crowns nothing but his own gifts. His collection
from the place is already answered, that by the promise the reward is yielded
to the work. In the other place there is nothing more then in that I have
spoken of, and has full answer by the same exception. Only I will remember M.
Bishop, that by S. Austins doctrine there can no merit be pleaded on our
behalf, because all our good works come from grace on Gods behalf, so that
therefore the crown is but grace for grace, and a latter mercy added as the
consequent of a former mercy. And this S. Austin notes concerning this very
place of S. Paul here debated. Idem in Psalm. 102. Reddet miho Dominus, etc.
Quare? Quia bonum certamen certau^, etc. Vnde certasti? etc. Non ego autem sed
gratia Dei mecum. Ergo and quod coronar^^, ill^us mesericordia coronaris.
Nusquam sis superbus: semper lauda dominum.
The Lord will render unto me a crown of righteousness. Why? because I have
fought a good fight, etc. But whence have thou fought a good fight? etc. Yea
not I, but the grace of God with me. Then it is by his mercy that thou art
crowned. Be no where proud, but always praise the Lord. In a word he says
again as before we have seen, that Idem. de great. and lib. arb. cap 7. No^
coronat Deus merita tua tanqua^ merita tua, sed tanquam dona suae.
God crowns our merits, not as our merits, but as his own gifts: and if they
go not under account of our merits in heaven, why are they so earnestly pleaded
for as ours here upon the earth?

21. W. BISHOP.
And that the Reader may understand, that not only S. Augustine does so
confidently teach this doctrine of merits (which M. Perkins blushed not to
term the invention of Satan,) I will fold up this question with some
testimonies of the most ancient and best Authors.

S. Ignatius, the Apostles auditor says: Epist. ad Roman.
Give me leave to become the food of beasts, that I may by that means merit
and win God.

Iustine a glorious Martyr of the next age has these words, Apolog. 2. ante
med.
speaking in the name of all Christians: We think that men who by works have
showed themselves worthy of the will and counsel of God, shall by their merits
live and reign with him, free from all corruption and perturbation.

S. Irenaeus says: Lib. 4. cont. h^res. cap. 72.
We esteem that crown to be precious which is gotten by combat and suffering
for Gods sake.

S. Basil. All we that walk the way of the Gospel, as merchants do, Ora in
initium prou. Lib. de Spir. sancto. cap. 24.
buy and get the possession of heavenly things by the works of the
commandments. A man is saved by works of justice.

S. Cyprian. If the day of our return shall find us vnloden, swift, Sermon. de
eleemos. in fine.
and running in the race of works, our Lord will not fail to reward our merits.
He will give for works to those that win in peace, a white crown, and for
martyrdom in persecution he will redouble unto them a purple crown.

S. Hilary. Can. 5. in Math.
The kingdom of heaven is the hire and reward of them that live well and
perfectly.

Lib 1. de Offic. c. 25.
S. Ambrose. It is evident that there remains after this life either reward
for merits, or punishment.

S. Hierome. Now after baptism it appertains to our travels, according unto
the diversity of virtue, to prepare for us different rewards.

Ser. 68 in Cant.
S. Bernard. Provide that thou have merits, for the want of them is a
pernicious poverty.

Briefly that this was the universal doctrine of all good Christians above a
thousand years past, is declared in the Council of Arausicane: Reward is debt
unto good works if they be done, C^^. 18.
but grace which was not debt, goes before, that they may be done. These
testimonies of the most ancient and best learned Christians, may suffice to
batter the brazen forehead of them that affirm the doctrine of merits to be a
Satanicall invention, and to settle all them that have care of their salvation,
in the most pure doctrine of the Catholic Church.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop will give us to understand, that not only S. Austin, but all
antiquity teaches the doctrine of merits, so that M. Perkins might blush to
call it the invention of Satan. But M. Perkins had no cause to blush in that
respect. He knew well that antiquity is more vanted by Papists then followed.
He knew well that in this doctrine of merits they wickedly belly antiquity and
the Fathers. And indeed never any Father spoke of merits as they have done.
Justly therefore did he call it as it is the invention of Satan, serving only to
delude men, to put them in vain hope, to lift them up in pride, with opinion
of gaining heaven, that they may by their pride be cast down to hell. But for
the clearing of this point, it is to be understood, that the name of merits is
indeed very usual amongst the fathers of the Latin Church, but with no such
meaning as the church of Rome has fancied thereof. For they only intended
thereby briefly and in one word to signify good works, works that please God,
that are accepted in Gods sight, that find favor with God, and obtain reward at
his hands. They dreamed not that in good works there should be a just desert of
heaven, that they should deserve it worthily, that they should be fully worthy of
everlasting life, that good works should as well be the cause of salvation, as
evil works are the cause of damnation, that good works are so far meritorious,
so far I say meritorious, as that God should be unjust if he rendered not
heaven for them, as in the beginning has bin showed that now is the language
of the church of Rome. These speeches or the like were never heard of amongst
the Fathers. They used the word merit according to the signification wherein
commonly they used the verb mereri, which with them imported to obtain, to
find favor for any thing to be given or done; so as that wicked men are said
sometimes mereri, not surely to deserve, but to receive or to find the favor
of benefits at Gods hands; yea and good men are said mereri, not to deserve,
but to receive or to find evil usage at the hands of the wicked. But by
examples the matter will be plainer then by words. S. Austine says, August. de
ciu. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 24
Huius vitae solatia quidam etiam cultores daemonum accipere meruerunt: Some
who have bin worshippers of devils have merited, that is, have found the favor
to receive the comforts of this life. Again, Idem in Psalm. 35.
Apostolia suis ciuibus occidi meruerunt: The Apostles merited, that is, found
such usage as to be killed of their own people. Cont. lit. Petil. lib. 3. cap.
6.
Pro action gratiarum flammas meruimus odiorum: In steed of thanks we have
merited, that is, we found at their hands the fire of hatred. De anima and eius
orig. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Caveat homo ne ab illo miserecordiam mereatur homo contra eius sententiam a
quo factus est homo: Let man take heed that man do not merit, that is, obtain
mercy of him against the sentence of him by whom man was made. So does Ambrose
use the same word, Ambr. de Cain and Abel. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Iniquus Cain longaeuam duxit aetatem, duxit vxorem, and hoc meruit promissione
diuina: Wicked Cain lived long, and married a wife, and this he merited, that
is, obtained or received by the permission of God. Idem ser. 53.
Non debemus mirari quod Ioannes tantam gratiam nascendo meruerit: We are not
to wonder that John in his birth merited, that is, obtained so great grace. So
Hilary speaks, Hilar. epist. apud Aug. tom. 7.
Libros quaeso habere mereamur: I pray you let us merit, that is, find the
favor to have those books. So Hierom, Hieron. praefat: in Abdiam.
Veniam mereri debeo: I am to merit, that is, to obtain pardon. So Gregory
Bishop of Rome, Gregor. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 17.
Paulus cum redemptoris nomen in terra conaretur extinguere, eius verba de
coelo meruit audire: Paul when he went about to extinguish the name of Christ
upon earth, merited, that is, found the mercy and favor to hear his words from
heaven. In another place, O foelix culpa quae talem ac tantu^ meruit habere
Redemptorem: O happy sin of Adam that merited, that is, found the mercy to have
such and so great a Redeemer. S. Austin applies the word also to beasts and
cattle, August. in Psalm 35.
Homines habent aliquid apud Deum exceptum quod iumenta non merentur: Men have
somewhat excepted with God which beasts merit not, that is, obtain not. Thus
the word has grown also into translations, where in the originals there has
bin no occasion of it. Where Cain says, Mine iniquity is greater then can be
pardoned, the vulgar Latin translateth, Genes. 4.13.
Mayor est iniquitas mea quam vt veniam merear: Mine iniquity is greater then
that I can merit, that is, obtain pardon. Where S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 1.13.
I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly, etc. S. Austine out of some
translation reads, Aug. de Bapt. con. Donat. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Misericordiam merut, I merited mercy, but importing nothing but the obtaining
thereof. In an Epistle of Ignatius we have it commonly translated, Ignat.
epist. ad Romanos.
I am in love with none of the things that are seen, vt Iesum Christum merear
adipisci, that I may merit to obtain Christ, whereas in the Greek it is (...),
that is as Hierom translateth it, Hieron in Cat. Eccles. Script.
vt Iesum Christu^ inuentam, that I may find Jesus Christ. Again, in the next
period the Greek is (...), where the same translator reads as before, the
words being translated by Hierome, Jbid.
tantum vt Christo fruar, only that I may enjoy Christ. And thus in infinite
places have they made the Greek Fathers to speak of merit, where they never
meant any such thing. But to make it plainly to appear, that by merit they
meant not any such worthiness or desert as M. Bishop speaks of, let one
sentence of Ambrose fully suffice. Amb. epist. 22. Omnia quae patimur minora
sunt and indigna pro quorum laboribus tanta rependatur futurorum merces bonorum
quae reuelabitur in nobis cum ad Dei imaginem reformati gloriam eius facie ad
faciem aspicere meruerimus.
All the things that we suffer are too little and unworthy for the pains
whereof there should be rendered to us so great reward of future good things,
as shall be revealed in us, when being reformed to the image of God we shall
merit (that is, attain) to see his glory face to face. Where to take merit
properly to import desert and worthiness, should be to make Ambrose in one
sentence absurdly cross and contrary to himself, to say, that we deserve to
see God face to face, when he has first affirmed that even our sufferings for
Christ's sake are unworthy to have so great glory yielded unto them. The same
is more plain by that that before has been alleged out of Gregory, Of
justification sect. 49. ex Gregor. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 18.
If we be judged without mercy, our work is worthy to be punished which we
expect to have rewarded: therefore the tears of expiation (says he) are
required, that humility of prayer may lift up the merit of our good work to
the obtaining of eternal reward. Where we see he uses the name of merit as
usually they were wont, but shows that it is so far from being truly merit,
as that in extremity it is worthy to be punished, and that it needs tears
of expiation, that is, earnest intercession and prayer to God for Christ's sake
to remit the spots and blemishes thereof, and that it is thus by prayer only,
that is, by favor, that any reward is yielded unto it. But to this place most
properly belongs that of S. Bernard before mentioned, that (...) in A^^^^ne
ser. 1. Neque enim taliae sunt hominum merita vt propter ea vita aeterna
debeatur ex iure, aut Deus iniuriam faceret nisi eam donaret.
the merits of men are not such as that eternal life is due for them of right,
or as if God should do wrong if he did not yield the same unto them. Idem de
great. et lib. arb. Si proprie appellentur ea quae nostra ditimus merita, etc.
vta regni sunt, non causa regnand.
If (says he) we will properly name those which we call our merits, they are
the way to the kingdom, not the cause of our obtaining the kingdom. Where
most plainly he gives to understand, that the name of merits is improperly
abused, and howsoever custom had taken it up, to call good works by the name
of merits, yet that we are not to conceive, that good works for themselves can
challenge any thing by any right, or that we can truly and properly be said
thereby to deserve at the hands of God. And this is fully confirmed by Alfonsus
de Castro, who mentioning reward due to works, says Alphons. cont. haer. li.
7. tit. Great. Debetur inquam non ex operis natura, quia vt ait Paulus, Non sunt
condignae, etc. sed ex iure promissionis. Hanc enim legem nos naturae docuit,
vt quod quisque promisit debere se credat.
It is due, not by the nature of the work, for the sufferings of this time are
not comparable in worth to the future glory which shall be revealed upon us, but
it is due by right of promise: for nature has taught us this law, that every
man should take himself to ow that which he has promised. Surely if the debt
of the reward arise not from the nature of the work but only by virtue of
promise, then merit is no merit properly, because merit properly so called,
arises from the nature of the work, being in it self justly worthy of that
that it is said to deserve.

To come then to the testimonies cited by M. Bishop, the first thereof which he
cites out of Ignat. epist. ad Roman. (...). Sinite me bestiarum escam esse per
quas Deu^ assequi licet.
Ignatius, is a false translation, there being nothing in the Greek to import
merit, but only the getting, or gaining, or obtaining of God, as has been
said. Suffer me (says he) to be the food of beasts, that by them I may obtain
God. And how far Ignatius was from any such opinion of his own merit,
appears toward the end of the same Epistle, where he says, Jbid. Ego
erubesco ex ipsis dici. Non enim sum dignus esse vltimus aut purgamentum, sed
miserecordiam consecutus sum vt sim aliquis si Deum adipiscor. (...).
I am ashamed to be named one of them (the Pastors of the Church:) for I am not
worthy to be the very last or the very outcast of them, but I have found mercy
to be some body if I obtain God. He reckoned not of merit or worth, but held
it a matter of mercy to him to come to God. How hardly then was M. Bishop
bestead, that in the forefront would put Ignatius, when the words that he cites
are nothing for him, and his words in the same Epistle are altogether against
him?

The words of Justinius Martyr also are very lewdly abused in the same manner.
The words meritis suis, by their merits, are merely foisted in, neither is
there any thing that can be construed to that purpose. Justin. Mart. Apol. 2.
(...). Qui si dignos consilio illius se operibus ostenderint, co^uersatione cum
ipso dignatu^ iri accepimus vt vna regnent incorruptibiles, and a perturbatione
immunes effecti.
They (says he) who by their works shall show themselves to the counsel of
God worthy, or as M. Bishop translateth out of Bellarmine, who by their works
show themselves worthy of the counsel and will of God, we have received that
he does vouchsafe them to have company with him to reign with him, being made
immortal and free from all perturbation. Where he names worthiness in no
other sort then the Scripture does, as has bin before showed, comparatively,
not simply; by acceptance, not by perfection; according to the phrase of men,
whereto the holy Ghost is content sometimes to submit himself, not according
to the exact censure of the judgment of God; not as a matter of Popish merit,
whereto God in justice is bound, but to which God in favor vouchsafes, as he
says, to have company with him. And this he makes very plain, when in the
next words he adds, See the same of Freewil. sect. 14.
For in like sort as he created us when we were not, so do we think that he
vouchsafes them of immortality and dwelling with him, who willingly make
choice to do those things that are pleasing unto him. Now to have being at
first, it was not of our selves. In like sort to choose and follow what is
pleasing to him by those reasonable powers which he has given us, it is by his
persuading and moving of us to the faith. Whereby he teaches, that our being
in God, and following of those things that are pleasing to him, is no more of
our selves then our first creation and being was, but that it is by Gods
persuading us, Gods moving us, Gods working in us, there being nothing therein
to be attributed to our selves. Whereby he destroys the nature of merit, as I
have showed Sect. 3.
before, and to that purpose acknowledges the vouchsafing favor and grace of
God in receiving us to immortality and life with him; for where merit and
desert is, there terms of vouchsafing can have no place. Now that which
Bellarmine translateth of men showing themselves worthy of the will and counsel
of God, may well be understood according to the phrase of the Apostle,
instructing us Col. 1.10.
to walk worthy of the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
to walk worthy of God who has called us unto his kingdom and glory, that is
to say, as is fit for them to walk who have received so great mercy at the
Lords hands, to the very same purpose as elsewhere he says, Phil. 1.27.
Let your conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ. In which sort
John Baptist says, Mat. 3.8.
Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, that is, such as are fitting and
beseeming them that profess to have repented. So then men show themselves
worthy of the will and counsel of God, in behauing themselves as is agreeing
to them that profess to know the will and counsel of God, without any
necessity of merit to be imported thereby.

The words of Irenaeus are these: Iren. lib. 4. cap. 27. Bonus agonista ad
incorruptelae agonem adhortatur nos vt coronemur, and pretiosam arbitremur
coronam, videlicet quae per agonem acquiritur sed non vltro coalita^. Et qua^to
per agonem nobis aduenit, tanto est pretiosior. Qua^to autem pretiosior tanto
ea^ semper diligamus. Sed neque similiter diliguntur ea quae vltro adueniunt
quam illa quae cum multa sollicitudine adinueniuntur.
The good combatant exhorts us to the combat of immortality, that we may be
crowned, and may think the crown precious, as being attained by fight, and
not of it self accruing unto us. And by how much the more it comes by fight,
so much the more precious it is: and the more precious it is, so much the more
we may love it. But the things are not in like sort loved which come of their
own accord, as those which are attained with much care. In all which, what is
there to M. Bishops purpose? He only shows that God has appointed, that not
with our ease and idleness the crown of life shall voluntarily come unto us,
but that we with labor and travel must strive to come to it, that in the
attainment of it, it may be the more joyful and precious unto us. What is this
other then we also teach, who yet cannot find hereby that our labor and travel
does merit and deserve the crown of life? The case is all one, as if a Prince
having a subject fallen from him, and gone into a far country should of mere
grace and favor send for him to come again, by letters patents granting him his
pardon, and assuring him place of honor and state upon his return home: who
being to pass through the midst of the enemies of his Prince, must use much
fighting, and travel, and pains, and undergo many dangers both by sea and land
for the atchieuing of this honor. When he comes to his journeys end he has no
title to plead for his place, but only the free donation and gift of his
Prince. By his labor and pains he has gained himself the possession of it,
and he might for the mean time lay it before him as a reward to comfort and
encourage himself in the journey that he was to make; but merit he can allege
none; no right can he allege whereby to claim it, but only his Princes gift.
Even so it is with us. We were fallen from God, and he has called us to him
again, and given us the promise of eternal life. By much combat and travel we
must attain to it, and yet when we have done all, we can plead no merit, we
can make no claim but only by our Princes gift, by the free and merciful
promise and bounty of Almighty God.

And hereby appears the answer to the place of Basil, that Basil orat. in
princip. Proverb. Omnes nos qui viam Euangelicam incedimus mercatore^ sumus p^r
opera mandatorum nobis possessionem coelestium comparantes.
we all who walk the way of the Gospel are merchants, getting by the works of
the commandments the possession of heavenly things. For by the works of the
commandments we obtain the possession, but not the right and title of heavenly
things. They are the way wherein we walk to attain to that which God of his
free mercy bestows upon us. Wherein because we yield our labor in the one to
receive the other, S. Basil so far fitly compares it to a kind of
merchandise or exchange, though not intending that in the merit of the one
should be the purchase of the other. As for the other place, it is none of
Basils, being taken out of a counterfeit addition, which Erasm. epist. praefixa
libro Basil. de Spir. sancto.
Erasmus well observed, and by good arguments declared to be no part of Basils
work. Basil. de Spir. sanct. cap. 24. Homo saluus fit per iustitiam operum.
A man (says he) is saved by righteousness of works. But the Scripture says,
Ephesians. 2.8.
Ye are saved by grace through faith, not of works, least any man should boast.
Basil. in Psalm. 43. Vide quomodo sermonem clauserit. Post mill virtutes vnde
seruari orat? Ex misericordia and benignitate.
Whatsoever the author might mean in that he says, we are sure that his words
accord not with the phrase and style of the holy Ghost. And that the true Basil
was far from that mind, appears plainly by the note that he gives upon the
words of the Psalm, p Arise, O Lord, help us and deliver us for thy mercies
sake. Psalm 44.26.
Behold (says he) how he ends his speech. After a thousand virtues, whereby
does he pray to be saved? Even of mercy and goodness. And upon another of the
Psalms he says, Idem. in Psalm. 23. Retributiones quae putantur, propter solam
Dei benignitate^ hominibus praestantur. Vniuersae siquidem mortalium iustitiae
^e praestita quidem ab ipso bona adaequant, nedum futura quae and humanam
cogitationem transcendunt.
Rewards, as they are thought to be, are yielded unto us by the only mercy and
goodness of God: for all the righteousnesses of men cannot equal the benefits
which he has already bestowed, much less those that are to come which go
beyond all the conceit of man. He saw well, that the Prophet after thousands of
virtues could have no hold of salvation but only by Gods mercy. He saw well,
that albeit Gods benefits go under the name of rewards, yet in all our
righteousness there is nothing to counteruaile in any sort the bounty of his
goodness, and therefore was far from that Pharisaicall and proud opinion of
merit, which M. Bishop desires to fasten upon him. Which is easy to be seen
in that also which I cited out of him before, that Basil. in Psalm. 114. supra
sect. 13.
eternal rest is laid up for them who lawfully fight the combat of this life,
not to be rendered by way of debt to works, but provided by the grace of the
bountiful God for them that trust in him.

Cypr* de eleem. Si expeditos, si celeres, si in hoc operis agone currentes
dies nos vel reditiones, vel persecutionis inuenerit, nusquam Dominus meritis
mostris ad proemium decrit. In pace coronam vincentibus candidam pro operibus
dabit; in persecutione purpuream propassione geminabit.
Cyprian has nothing for M. Bishops turn, but only the name of merits; and
it is already showed that that can avail him nothing. In steed of merits put
in good works, which is all that it imports; and Cyprian says nothing but
what we say. No more does Hilary, whose words are, Hilar in Mat. can. 5. Haec
recte perfecteque viuentium merces est vt in nouam ^oelestemque substantiam ex
hac corruptibilu corporis materie transferantur.
This is the reward of them that live well and perfectly, that from this matter
of a corruptible body they are translated to a new and heavenly substance. M.
Bishop somewhat forces the place to serve his turn, but it is plain by that
that has been said before, that the names of hire and reward are far enough
off from proving merit and desert. And whatsoever they import with men, yet
that they import not so with God, let Hilary himself be witness, who speaking of
the wages of them that were hired into the vineyard, says, Idem ibid. can. 20.
Merces quide^ ex dono nulla est quia debetur ex opere, sed gratuita^ Deus
omnibus ex fidei iustificatione donauit.
Wages indeed there is none of gift, because it is due by work: but God has
given the same freely to all by the justification of faith. There is no merit
then in the reward that Hilarie speaks of, because though it be termed
reward, yet it is freely given by the justification of faith.

In the place of Ambrose it is plain, that the name of merits is taken
indifferently for works either good or evil. He says, that Ambros. Offic.
lib. 1. cap 15. Nonne euidens est meritorum, aut proemia, aut supplicia post
mortem manner?
it is evident that for merits there remains after this life either reward or
punishment: and M. Bishop will not say, that punishment remains for the
merits that he pleads for. Yet he calls good works by the name of merits,
but to how little purpose for Popish merit has bin already showed. And how
far Ambrose was from opinion thereof, his own words shall witness, where he
says, Ambr. in Psalm. 118. ser. 20. Quis nostrum sine diuina potest miseratione
subsistere? Quid possumus dignum proemijs facere coelestibus? etc. Quo tand^m
hominum merito defertur vt haec corruptibilis caro induat incorruptione^, and
mortale hoc induat immortalitatem? Quibus laboribus quibusue iniurijs possumus
nostra leuare peccata? Indignae sunt passiones huius te^poris ad superuenturam
gloria^. Non ergo secundum merita nostra, sed secundum misericordiam Dei
coelestium decretorum homines forma praecedit.
Which of us can stand without the mercy of God? What can we do worthy of the
reward of heaven? By what merit of man is it yielded, that this corruptible
should put on incorruption, or this mortal should put on immortality? By what
labors, by what suffering of wrongs can we abate our sins? The sufferings of
this time are unworthy for the glory that is to come. Therefore the form of
heavenly decrees goes before men, not according to our merits, but according
to Gods mercy. This being so by the judgment of Ambrose, why does M. Bishop
seek to persuade us by the name of Ambrose, that God frames his heavenly
decrees concerning us according to our merits, and that the works that we do,
are worthy of the reward of heaven? He uses commonly the name of merit as the
rest do, but never had in his heart that matter of merit that M. Bishop
dreameth of.

Hierome also is cited but for show, and only to fill up a place. Hieron.
adue^. Jouinian. lib. 2. Nostri laboris est pro diuersitate virtutu^, diuersa
nobis proemia praeparare.
It belongs to our labor according to diversity of virtues to prepare for
our selves diversity of rewards. The rewards by the promises of God are tied to
the works, and therefore in doing the works to which the rewards belong, we
may well be said to prepare for our selves the same rewards. As we are said to
work out our salvation, because though it be Gods mere grace by which we are
saved, yet he uses our will and our work for the effecting thereof, so are we
said also to prepare rewards for our selves, because God uses us as
instruments to do for our selves the works that belong to those rewards which
he has prepared for us. And these rewards we doubt not, as before was said,
but that they are diverse, according to the diversity of our works, greater
rewards to greater works, and less reward to lesser works; but what is all
this to prove that the rewards are justly merited and deserved by our works?
That Hierome thought not so, it is plain by that we have seen out of him
Supra sect. 17.
before, that there can no work be found worthy of the justice of God, as also
for that he says in the name of the people of God, Hieron. in Esa. lib. 17.
cap. 64. Si consideremus merita, desperandu^ est.
If we consider our own merits, we must despair, and resolves even
concerning Ide^ adu. Pelag. lib. 2. Pro nihilo saluos faciet eos: haud dubiu^
quin iustos qui non proprio merito, sed Dei saluantur clementia.
the just, that they are not saved by their own merit, but by the mercy of
God. There follows Saint Bernard, whom M. Bishop would not have cited if he
had meant so faithfully as he should have done. In what sort S. Bernard takes
the name of merits, has been declared a little before, so as they may well
blush to cite any thing out of him for maintaning their doctrine of merits. But
M. Bishops dealing is so much the more dishonest, for that in the very same
sermon Bernard overthrows that that he would prove by him. Bernar. in Can.
ser. 68. Quid de meritis solicita sit Ecclesia cui de proposito Dei firmior
suppetit, securiorque gloriandi ratio? etc. No^ est quod iam quae ras quibus
meritis speremus bona praesertim cum audias apud prophetam, Non propter vos,
etc. Ezec. 36. Sufficit ad meritum scire quod non sufficient merita, etc.
Merita habere cures; habita data noueru; fructum speraueris misericordiam Dei,
etc. Perniciosa paupertas meritorum penuria est.
To what end is the Church careful as touching merits, which has a more sure
and secure ground of rejoicing by reason of the purpose of God? It is not for
thee to ask, by what merits we hope for good things, seeing thou hear by
the Prophet, Not for your sakes, but for mine own sake will I do it, says the
Lord. It suffices for merit, to know that merits are not sufficient. Be
careful to have merits; when thou have them, know them to be given thee; but
for fruit thereof hope for the mercy of God. The want of merits is a
pernicious poverty. Thus under the name of merits he commends the having of
good works, and our care to be rich therein, showing that it is a pernicious
want to be destitute thereof, and to be men fruitless in the Church of God.
But yet when we have them, he teaches us to conceive the insufficiency
thereof, and to rest the expectation of the fruit and reward thereof only upon
Gods mercy, who has promised to perform it, not for our sakes, but for his
own sake, and so fully bereaueth them of that nature of merit which M. Bishop
does assign unto them. Thus does he every where give us to understand his
mind: Ibid. ser. 61. Meritum meum miseratio domini.
My merit (says he) is the mercy of the Lord. Ibi. ser. 73. Opus habent and
sancti pro peccatis exorare vt de misericordia salui fiant propriae iustitiae
non fidentes.
Even the Saints have need to entreat for their sins, that by thy mercy
they may be saved, not trusting to their own righteousness. And again: In
Psalm. Qui habitat. ser. 1. Periculosa habitatio illorum qui in meritu sui^
sperant: periculosa quia ruinosa.
Dangerous is the dwelling of them that trust in their own merit: it is
dangerous because it is ruinous. Ibi. ser. 16. Hoc totum homini^ meritum si
totam spem suam ponat in illo qui totum hominem saluu^ fecit.
This is the whole merit of man, to put his whole trust in him who has wholly
saved man. Many other such like speeches of his might be alleged, whereby M.
Bishop may well take occasion to bethink himself, whether he have not done S.
Bernard wrong to make him a patron of the doctrine of merits, which the Church
of Rome now maintains. Let him duly consider whether he have done well to
take a little advantage of a scrap of a sermon, and to urge it contrary to the
whole drift of the Author in that place, and his perpetual doctrine other
where.

For conclusion, we are assaulted with a whole general Council that says
never a word against us. The Arausican Council says, Council. Arausic. cap.
18. Debetur merces de bonis operibus si fiant: sed gratia quae non debetur
praecedit vt fiant.
Reward is due for good works if they be done, but grace which is no due, goes
before, that they may be done. Even so say we: we also confess that there is a
reward due unto good works, which God takes upon him to owe unto us; but we
say it with that limitation that before we have heard out of S. Austin, from
whom that Council boroweth almost all that they have set down, that Supra
sect. 17
God has made himself a debtor unto us, not for any thing that he has
received of us, but by promising all things unto us. It is due then to the
work, not simply in respect of the work it self, or for the merit and worth
thereof, but by virtue of the promise that God has made to them that so work.
And thus we are come to an end of M. Bishops antiquity, which we may see does
pitifully fail him, in that out of all antiquity he could bring no stronger
proofs then he has done; his doctrine of merits being expressly thwarted by
the most of them whom he has brought for defense of it.

But as touching Antiquity, gentle Reader, for thy further satisfaction, and
the better arming of thee (if need require) against the fraud of these
undermining Sophisters, it shall not be amiss to advertise thee thus much,
that as we do, so did the ancient Fathers upon diverse occasions speak
diversely of good works, and both their speeches and ours are always to be
weighed according to the same occasions. When there is cause to set forth the
true and proper cause of our salvation, they refer the same as we do to the
free grace and mercy of God, and wholly to his gift; they vilify as we do the
works and worth of men, and acknowledge that there is nothing in us in the
confidence whereof we may offer our selves to God; nothing in strength, whereof
we can stand before God, or whereby we should merit and deserve any thing at
Gods hands. Here works are considered merely as they are, and as God instrict
and precise judgment finds them to be, and therefore are pronounced of
accordingly. But when occasion requires to speak only of good works and of
the end thereof, and we look no further but to enforce a conscience of the way
wherein God has called us to walk to that salvation that he has promised, or
when we have in hand to commend any special point of godly and virtuous
conversation, we press the same with all instance, as the Fathers do; we show
how necessarily God requires the works of our obedience, how graciously he
vouchsafes in mercy to accept them, how he has promised of his bounty to
reward them. We forbear not to say, that eternal life is the stipend of our
warfare, the hire and wages of our works; that God has not appointed heaven
for idle persons and loiterers, but for such as labor for it; that because God
rendereth heaven, we must have that whereto it is to be rendered: if we have
not, there is no heaven for us. We say, it is a crown or garland; win it and
wear it: it is a harvest; labor for it if thou will enjoy it: it is a field of
treasure; if thou will possess it, thou must purchase it. Such kind of
speeches every man may observe, who is either a hearer of our sermons, or a
reader of our books. Now if any man will hereof conclude, that we teach the
merit of works, it is his ignorance and mistaking, and he does us wrong. We
teach what follows of what; we teach the dependence and consequence of good
life and eternal life, of the work and the reward, God having so ordained the
one to be the way whereby he will bring us to the other. But when we look to
the true cause of all, we truly teach that it is God that gives us both good
life and eternal life, both the work and the reward, not the one properly for
the other, but the one to follow the other, only for his mercies sake. Thus
the fathers also conceived hereof, as appears by that that has been alleged
from them. We speak as they spoke, and they as we; and the Papists do them
absurd wrong to wrest and strain their speeches as they do. Whatsoever M.
Bishop has cited from them, understand it according to S. Bernards rule before
set down, as of the way not as of a cause, and they differ nothing at all from
that that we say.

CHAPTER 6. OF SATISFACTION.
1. W. BISHOP.
MAster Perkins acknowledges first civil satisfaction, that is, Page 117.
a recompense for injuries or damages any way done to our neighbor: such as
the good Publican Zacheus practiced, Luke 19.
who restored fourefold the things gotten by extortion and deceit. This is
wittily acknowledged by him, but little exercised among Protestants; for where
the Sacrament of Confession is wanting, there men use very seldom to
recompense so much as one fold for their extortion, bribes, usury, and other
eraftie ouerreaching of their neighbors. But of this kind of satisfaction,
which we commonly call restitution, we are not here to treat, nor of that
public penance, which for notorious crimes is done openly, but of such private
penance which is either enjoined by the confessor, or voluntarily undertaken by
the penitent, or else sent by Gods visitation to purge us from that temporal
pain, which for sins past and pardoned we are to endure, either in this
life, or in purgatory if we die before we have fully satisfied here.

R. ABBOT.
We will never believe you M. Bishop, that your vpstart sacrament of Confession
has any such effect as you pretend for satisfaction and restitution of evil
gotten goods, until we shall certainly understand, that your masters the
Jesuits have made restitution of those goods which you and your fellow
Seculars, by Watson your proctor, have charged them to have embezelled by
cosinage and villainy, in drawing them by their notable imposture of spiritual
exercise to sell their whole estate, and to put the money into their hands. I
might write here a pretty story, to show what fruits your sacrament of
confession has yielded in that behalf, but the occasion no further requiring
then it does, let that one example now suffice. But in M. Perkins words you
might have taken knowledge of a Protestant, namely Zacheus, without any
sacrament of confession, offering restitution to them to whom he had done
wrong; and doubt not you, but the rest who faithfully are that which they
profess to be, are always ready to do the like, and that more holily and
religiously then you are wont to do. But to the purpose, the satisfaction here
spoken of, is the yielding of a sufficient and worthy recompense and
contentment to God for the trespass that we have done unto him. The very
naming whereof may be sufficient to make us detest the doctrine of these
wretched men, who doubt not, to the singular impeachment and dishonor of the
cross of Christ, to attribute unto men a power for the performance of any such
satisfaction unto God. We may well marvel, that any taking upon him to be a
Christian man, should have his heart so senseless and dead, as not to abhor
to think that a man should be said to give a worthy recompense to God for his
own sin. By which means they make that a matter of our merit, which never
any faithful man imagined to be any other but Gods mere mercy; and teach men
to seek for that in themselves, which they should find only in the blood of
Christ; and take away the true conscience of thankfulness to God for the
remission of our sins, whilst we can plead that he does not so forgive us,
but that we are feign to make him amends, and give him full satisfaction for the
wrong. Nay it takes away also the true conscience of sin it self, whilst
it is hereby conceived to be a matter of so small moment, as that our beggarly
devotions and observations should be thought to be an effectual expiation and
redemption thereof. Yea and it argues a very base conceit of the high majesty
of God, to think so base trumpery, such baggage devices as they have forged,
to be a fit and sufficient recompense for an offense to him. But herein the
Church of Rome has renewed another point of the Pelagian heresy, who taught
August. Epist. 106. Quod poenitentibus venia non detur se^undum gratiam and
misericordiam Dei, sed secundum meritum and laborem eorum qui per poenitentiam
dignificerint misericordia
that pardon and forgiveness is not given to penitents according to the grace
and mercy of God, but according to the merit and labor or pains of them who
by repentance shall be worthy of Gods mercy. Thus the Pelagians affirmed, and
thus the Papists affirm; the fathers and the children still accord in one.
Against the Pelagians the ancient Church defined as we do now against the
Papists, Ibid. Fateatur secundum gratia^ and misericordia^ Dei veniam
poenitentibus dari, non secundum merita ecrum, quandoquidem etiam ipsam
poenitentiam donio^ Dei dixit Apostolus, etc.
that it is to be confessed, that pardon is granted to the penitent or
repentant by the grace and mercy of God, not according to their merits, in as
much as the Apostle tells us, that repentance it self also is the gift of
God. Here is no interposing of merit or satisfaction; here is nothing but grace
and mercy, August. conc. Pelag. and Celest. lib. 2 cap. 24.
which is not grace in any sort, as we have heard before out of S. Austin,
except it be free in every sort. Arnobius derided in the Pagans this opinion of
their satisfactions to their gods, and out of the nature and disposition of the
true God, tells the^ what the behavior of their gods should be, if they were
indeed as they are called Gods. Arnob. adu. gentes lib. 7. Ergone iniurias suas
Dij vendu^t atque vt paruuli pusiones quo animis parcant abstineantque
ploratibus passerculos, pupulos, equuleos panes accipiunt, quibus auocari se
possint, ita Dij immortales placamenta ista sumunt, quibus ira^ atque animos
ponant, and in graetiam suis cum offensoribus redeant? Atqui ego rebar Deos,
etc.
Do the gods then, says he, sell their own wrongs, and as little children to
appease them and to make them leave crying, do take birds, and puppies, and
hobbihorses, and cakes, to withdraw them from the things they minded, so do the
immortal Gods receive these pacifications whereby to put away their anger and
stomach, and to be reconciled to them that offended the^? But I had thought
that the Gods without any recompense or satisfaction would leave their anger,
and remit to sinners their offenses. For it is, says he, the property of Gods
liberally to forgive and to grant free pardons. This censure of Arnobius the
Papists also undergo, who make God in the like sort as did the Pagans, to sell
his own wrongs for our satisfactions, and deny that God gives to the penitent
any free pardon, but he will have a recompense for the offense done unto him,
yea and that after the sin is not only past, but also pardoned, as we are here
told. Which I wish thee, gentle reader, to observe diligently, that thou may
see herafter how vnhansomly he manageth this matter. These satisfactions M.
Bishop tells us, are either enjoined by the Co^fessor, or undertaken by the
penitent, or sent by Gods visitation. The two first kinds are in matter all
one, either alms by giving a fee to a Priest, or a gift to holy Church, or
after a full Friday dinner to fast at night with Sugar cakes and suckets, and
wine, or to mumble so many Pater nosters, Aue-maries, and Creeds, such and such
days for thus or thus long. And if they be but venial sins Sext Proaem. in
Glossavenialia remittuntur per benedictionem Praelati, per orationem dominica^
aquam lenedictam, tunsionem pectoris, etc.
to receive the Bishops blessing, or to be besprinkled with holy water, or to
say one Pater noster, or to give himself a knock on the breast, or some such
like matter will be satisfaction good enough. Such impudent and shameless
harlots have we to do with, who stick not with their ridiculous toys to abuse
and vilify the majesty of God, and to make a mockery of the appeasing of that
wrath before which the Angels themselves have no strength to stand. The like
impiety we see in the other kind of satisfactio^s, which he says are sent by
Gods visitation, whereby we must think that every ague, every bile, every sore
finger is a satisfaction for our sins. For although God do lay these things upon
us, yet we in the bearing thereof do yield him a recompense for such trespass
or offense as we have done to him. Now if we perform not these satisfactions
here, then we must after this life make satisfaction in the fire of Purgatory,
if we take not good order for the quenching of it. As for hell fire it makes no
great matter; that burns but little at Rome: the only Catholic fire is
Purgatory fire. Hell yields neither gold nor silver, but Purgatory is a rich
mine, and the fire thereof melts much treasure out of men's purses, that it
may run into the Popes mint: and therefore no marvel if there be much Catholic
business, and many bellows blowing to keep it from going out. This is a
terrible fire, I warrant you, and if it be hot enough to melt gold and silver,
how cruelly does it scorch the tender souls, that lie frying and broyling in
it? Hard therefore will be the case of them that neglect to make full
satisfaction while they live here: but yet there is a help for that, for the
Popes pardon will cut off all. The Pope has a store house of satisfactions at
Rome, wherein he has hoorded up whatsoever the Virgin Mary, and the Apostles,
and other Saints and Martyrs have by way of satisfaction paid to God more then
they ought him, and if a man will come off and be liberal, he can thence
furnish him with sufficient to make up that which he wants of his own for
payment for all his sins. And he (good holy Father) perceiving in these times
R^^m, Testam. Annot. in 1. Cor. 2.11.
a fall of devotion, and a lothsomnes that men commonly have to do great
penance, though their sins be far greater then ever before, even of pure
compassion fearing to drive them either to despair, or to forsake Christ and
his Church, enioyneth small penance, and pardons exceeding often and much,
not only all enjoined penance, but also all or great parts of what temporal
punishment soever due or deserved either in this world or the next. Belike God
is waxen more remiss in these later times, and is not so strict to require
satisfactions as he was wont to be, and has bin content to put the penalties
and forfeitures that are made to him into the Popes hands, that he may make
benefit of them, as having greater occasion of expense then Peter and Paul, and
the first Bishops of Rome had. But one thing there is that makes us here
somewhat to stick: M. Bishop reckons Gods visitations for one part of these
satisfactions. Now the Pope having so large power to remit all te^porall
punishment due or deserved, either in this world or the next, we wonder that we
could never yet hear, that a Popes pardon has eased a fit of an ague, or
cured headache, or toothache, or such like, whereas by their assertion it
should be strong enough to break the stone in the bladder, to cure the
Strangurie, the Gowt, the Gangrena, the Nolime tangere, and whatsoever else
Physicians and Chirurgians do accountincurable. How should we think that he
that cannot give help for any of these, should be of power to set men free
from Purgatory pains? But by his failing so wholly in these, we take him to be
a lier in all the rest, and do prove both him and his Factors to be the notable
impostors and cousiners of the world, 2. Pet. 3.^. Apoc. 18.13.
through covetousness with fained words making merchandise of men's souls, and
Tit. 1.11.
speaking things which they oughs not for filthy lucres sake. We must take you
(M. Bishop) to be one of these, unless you bring us better matter then we
look for, for the proof of these things. Of Purgatory until you give us
further occasion to speak further of it, sufficient has been already said in
Sect. 10.16, 26.
answer of your Epistle to the King.

2. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins in his third conclusion decrees very solemnly, That no man can be
saved, unless he made a perfect satisfaction unto the justice of God for all
his sins. Yet in the explication of the difference between us, defines as
peremptorily, that no man is to satisfy for any one of all his sins, or for
any temporal pain due to them: which be flat contradictory propositions, and
therefore the one of them must needs be false, B^^ such odd broken rubbish does
he commonly cast into the ground-wo^^^ of his questions, and thereupon raises
the tottering building of his n^^ doctrine: and lets not, like a blind man, to
make an outcry, that in this matter the Papists err in the very foundation and
life of religion: which in his first argument he goes about to prove thus:

Imperfect satisfaction is no satisfaction at all: but the Papists make Christ's
satisfaction imperfect, in that they do thereunto add a supply of humane
satisfaction: ergo, they make it no satisfaction at all.

Answ. This is a substantial argument to raise the cry upon: which has both
propositions false. The first is childish: for he that satisfies for half his
debts, or for any part of the^, makes some satisfaction, which satisfaction is
imperfect, and yet cannot be called no satisfaction at al, as every child may
see. His second is as untrue: man's satisfaction is not to supply the want of
Christ's satisfaction, but to apply it to us, as M. Perkins says his faith does
to them, and to fulfill his will and ordinance.

God does in baptism for Christ's sake pardon both all sins, and takes fully
away all pain due to sin, so that he who dies in that state, goes
presently to heaven. But if we do afterward ungratefully forsake God, and
contrary to our promise transgress against his commandments, then lo the
order of his divine justice requires, that we be not so easily received again
into his favor: but he upon our repentance pardoning the sin and the eternal
punishment due unto it through Christ, does exact of every man a temporal
satisfaction, answerable unto the fault committed: not to supply Christ's
satisfaction, which was of infinite value, and might more easily have taken
away this temporal punishment, then it does the eternal: but that by the
smart and grief of this punishment, the man may be feared from sinning, and be
made more careful to avoid sin: and also by this means be made members
conformable to Christ our head, that suffering with him, we may reign with
him. And therefore he having satisfied for the eternal punishment, which we
are not able to do, does lay the temporal pain upon our shoulders, that
according unto the Apostle, Gal. 6.
Every man do bear his own burden.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop well knew that M. Perkins speech imports no contradiction, because
in the one he intends that every man is to make satisfaction for his sins,
either by himself or by a Mediator, and in the other denies that any man
makes this satisfaction, or any part thereof by himself. Though the phrase
were not so easy of our making satisfaction when he meant it by another, yet
his meaning was very plain. There must be a satisfaction yielded to the
justice of God, which is done only in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.25.
whom God himself has set forth to be an atonement or reconciliation
through faith in his blood. Here is therefore no broken rubbish, but a sure
foundation laid, and the building settled upon it stands firm and fast, the
wind wherewith M. Bishop has blown against it being only his own breath. And
because 1. Cor. 3.11.
there is no other foundation to be laid, but only that which he has laid,
which is Jesus Christ, therefore not like a blind man, but upon good
discernement and sight, he has made the outcry, that the Papists laying
another foundation in the merits and satisfactions of men, do err in the very
foundation and life of Christian faith. To show this he argues in this sort: A
satisfaction that is made imperfect either directly or by consequent, is no
satisfaction at all. But the Papists make Christ's satisfaction imperfect, in
that they add a supply of humane satisfactions: therefore they make Christ's
satisfaction no satisfaction at all. A substantial argument, says M. Bishop:
well, if it be not so, we expect that M. Bishop make it appear to us by a very
substantial answer. He tells us, that both the propositions are false, yea
the first (says he) is childish, but well we wot that he has given us a very
childish reason why he so says. He that satisfies for half his debts or any
part thereof, says he, makes some satisfaction. But we tell him, that therein
he fondly misapplyeth the name of satisfaction, which is a word of perfection,
and therefore cannot be rightly used of that that is imperfect. It imports the
doing of that that is sufficient and enough to give full contentment to the
party to whom it is done, and fully to quit the offense and wrong that is done
unto him. Therefore no man but M. Bishop is so mad as to say, that by the
tender of a penny, a man offers a satisfaction, when the debt or damage is an
hundred pounds. Yea and howsoever the name of satisfaction may be abused in
party-payment for matters of mere debt, yet he should remember, that in their
schools it is resolved, that because Satisfaction, as here it is spoken of, is
Thom. Aquin. Supplement. q. 14. art. 1. c. Cum per satisfactione^ tolli debeat
offensa praecedentis peccati, offensae autem ablatio sit amicitiae diuinae
restitutio, quaeper quoduis peccatu^ impeditur, sieri non potest, vt homo de
vno peccato satisfaciat alto retento. Vide in corp^art.
the taking away of displeasure and offense, and the taking away of offense is
the restitution of friendship and love, and there cannot be restitution of
friendship and love, so long as any impediment thereof continues, therefore
there can be no satisfaction for one sin, (that is, for one part of a man's
debt) so long as there is a remainder of another. M. Bishop might very well
conceive, that God receives not recompense of his wrongs by pence and
halfpence, nor does account the sacrifice of a sheep to be some satisfaction
toward the saving of a soul. But it is the 2. proposition that specially
concerns the point. To that he answers, that man's satisfaction is not to
supply the want of Christ's satisfaction. Where we see it to be with them, as
Tertullian mentions of the Valentinian heretics, Tertullian. aduers.
Valent. Nihil magis curant quam occultare quod praedicant. si tamen praeditant
qui occuliant, etc. Negant quicquid agnoscum.
They care for nothing more then to hide that which they preach, if at least
they preach who conceal and hide: they deny it howsoever they well know it.
They do indeed make the satisfaction of Christ imperfect, and our satisfactions
to be the supply of his want, but yet because that sounds odiously, they will
not have it known or taken that they do so. Yet M. Perkins brought proof
thereof out of one of their great Schoolmen, Gabriel Biel, who plainly says,
that although the passion of Christ be the principal merit for which is
conferred grace, and the opening of the kingdom and glory, yet it is never the
alone and total meritorious cause. It is manifest (says he) because always
with the merit of Christ there concurreth some work, as the merit of
congruitie or condignitie of him that receives grace or glory, if he be of
years, and have the use of reason, or of some other for him if he want reason.
Here it is expressly affirmed, that the passion of Christ is not a total
meritorious cause, and if it be not a total cause, then it wants a supply,
and that that is added for the producing of the effect, must necessarily be
holden to be added for a supply of that that it wants. Seeing then to the
satisfaction of Christ, as not being a total and perfect cause, our
satisfactions are added for the producing of the effects of grace and glory,
it cannot be denied but that our satisfactio^s are a supply of somewhat wanting
to the satisfaction of Christ. To this acknowledgment taken out of their own
books, why does M. Bishop answer nothing, but that in his conscience he
knows that they are guilty of that wherewith they are charged? Yea and the
thing is very apparent of it self: for if they held the satisfaction of Christ
to be a total and perfect satisfaction, then they must needs confess that in
the nature of a satisfaction nothing else should be needful for us. But they
require somewhat else as needful in the nature of a satisfaction. Therefore they
do not confess the satisfaction of Christ to be a total and perfect
satisfaction: for it implies a manifest contradiction, to affirm any thing to
be a total cause, and yet to require another cause as necessary for the same
effect. M. Bishop tells us, that the use of our satisfactions is to apply
unto us Christ's satisfaction, and to fulfill his will and ordinance. A goodly
and witty device. I have a medicin fully sufficient and available for the
curing and healing of my wound, and I must have another medicin for the healing
of the same wound, which I must apply and lay to the former medicine. My surety
has fully and perfectly discharged my debt, and I must my self pay the debt
again, that my sureties payment may stand good for me. A satisfaction to apply
a satisfaction, is a toy so improbable and senseless, as that we may think
them miserably put to shifts, that could find no better cloak to hide their
shame. Yet this is the cover of al their poisoned cups. They multiply their
witchcrafts and sorceries without end, and bring into the Church what they
list, lewdly to devise, and then tell us that these things serve to apply unto
us the merit and passion of Christ. The sacrifice of the Mass is the
propitiation for our sins, but it applies unto us the sacrifice of the cross
of Christ. The blood and sufferings of Saints and Martyrs are available for
the forgiveness of sins, but they apply unto us the virtue of the blood and
sufferings of Christ. But here M. Perkins noted, that the means of application
consist in Gods offering to us, and our receiving of him. God offers Christ
unto us by the word and Sacraments; we receive him by faith. He required it to
be proved, that by satisfactions Christ is either offered on Gods part, or
received on our part. Why did M. Bishop omit to do this? why does he neither
bring reason, example, nor authority to show us, that satisfaction has any
such nature or use of application, or in what sort it should be said to apply?
We have showed Of Justification Sect. 19. 29.
before, that faith is as it were the hand of the soul, an instrument properly
serving for apprehending, receiving, laying hold of, and applying to our
selves: why does not he make the same appear to us concerning satisfaction?
But why do we require him to do more then he can do? But here is a secret,
gentle Reader, which I wish thee to take knowledge of, and if thou be
acquainted with him, ask him (if occasion serve) the solution of this doubt.
He tells us through all this discourse, that the use of Christ's satisfaction
is to take away the guilt of sin, and the eternal punishment thereof, and that
this we obtain in the forgiveness of our sins. But now after the forgiveness of
our sins, these satisfactions remain to be performed by us. If this be so; if
the use of Christ's satisfaction be determined in the forgiveness of our sins,
and these satisfactio^s follow after, how or to what use do these satisfactions
apply unto us the satisfaction of Christ? As for example, M. Bishop gives a
man absolution before he dies: he has thereupon his sins forgiven him, and a
release from eternal punishment, but yet being not yet thoroughly scoured, to
Purgatory he must go. Now then in what sort, and to what end does Purgatory
apply unto him the satisfaction of Christ? For the satisfaction of Christ
medleth not with temporal punishments; he has left the kingdom of temporal
satisfactions and the whole reuenew thereof to the Pope. What do we here then
with applying the satisfaction of Christ? Riddle this riddle he that can, for
M. Bishop cannot do it: yet he tells us further, that our satisfactio^s are
to fulfill the will and ordinance of Christ, and hereupon he enters into a
goodly tale to declare unto us this ordinance. But his declaration is such, as
that we may see in him that which Hilary said of the Arian heretics: Hilar. de
Trin. lib. 6. Ingerunt nomina veritatis vt virut falsitatis intr^^at.
They thrust in words of truth, that the poison of their falsehood may find
entrance. It fitteth them which Tertullian said of the Valentinians: Tertul.
aduers. Valent. Sanctis nominibus and titulis, and argumentis verae religionis
vanissima and turpissima sigmenta co^figurant.
They fashion their most vain and filthy devices to the holy names, and
titles, and arguments of true religion. He tells us, that God in Baptism for
Christ's sake both pardons all sin, and takes fully away all pain due to
sin. But where I marvel has he seen this miracle wrought? That God in
Baptism gives full forgiveness of sins we acknowledge, but yet did we never
find, but that baptism for pain and outward grieuances leaves a man the same
that it found him; sick and diseased before, sick and diseased still; lame
before, lame still; blind before, blind still. We see that infants baptized,
who (he says) have no sin to satisfy for, yet have many pangs, and frets, and
sicknesses, and how then does baptism take away al pain due to sin? He who
dies in that state, says he, goes presently to heaven: but he who dies in
that state, dies he without pain? We see he talks at randon wholly by fancy,
and not by reason, neither do his eyes look which way his feet go. Well, let
this pass: What after baptism? If after we transgress, says he, then lo
the order of his divine justice requires, that we be not so easily received
again into his favor. Why but the Apostle S. John says to them that are
baptized, 1. Ioh. 22.
If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just,
and he is the propitiation, or satisfaction for our sins. What is the
difference then, if both in baptism and after baptism Christ be the
atonement and satisfaction for our sins? Yea says M. Bishop, God upon our
repentance pardons the sin, and eternal punishment due unto it through
Christ, but does exact of every man a temporal satisfaction answerable to the
fault committed. But this cannot be, Hieron. in Esa. cap. 53 lib. 14. Ne
exparte veritas, and ex part mendaciu^^ eredatur in Christo.
least as S. Hierome says in another case, it be partly a truth, and partly a
lie which we believe in Christ. For then as touching eternal punishment it
shall be a truth, that Christ is the propitiation for our sins, but as
touching temporal satisfactions it shall be a lie, and we shall be said to be
the propitiation and atonement for our own sins. Which because it is
blasphemous and wicked to affirm, neither has the Scripture taught us any
such division betwixt Christ and us, therefore we must confess that in name of
satisfaction for reconcilement unto God, we do nothing for our selves, but
Christ only both temporally and eternally is the satisfaction for our sins.
Christ did not only bear the infinite wrath of God, to acquit us of eternal
punishment, but according to the words of the Prophet cited by the Evangelist,
Esa. 53.4. Math. 8.17.
He took (upon him) our infirmities, and bear our sicknesses, that is, our
temporal punishments; which what does it import, but that in respect of
temporal punishments also Christ is our Redeemer, Christ is our satisfaction
unto God. And if not so, why do we then pray to God to be delivered from
temporal calamities and afflictions for Christ's sake? Nay, see how wickedly
this device is framed. The blood of Christ serves not to acquit us from
temporal punishments, but the blood of S. Peter does, and the blood of Paul,
and the blood of the Martyrs; these all are helpful to free us from temporal
satisfactions. They pray by one Saint against the toothach, by another against
the falling sickness, by another against the plague, etc. their merits are
available in this behalf, but the merit of Christ avails nothing. And yet
they tell us that the conclusion of all their prayers is, Per Christum Dominum
nostrum; through Christ our Lord. But why do they thus bring in the mediation
of Christ, if Christ in this respect have done nothing for us? If Christ have
left the burden of temporal satisfactions to lie wholly upon us, why do they
pray by him and through him to be disburdened thereof? This the Church of the
faithful has always done, and in all times. The Church of Rome therefore
deals unfaithfully to retain the words of the faithful, and to give check
to the meaning of them, by denying Christ to be our Redeemer from that wrath of
God, whereby temporal afflictions and punishments are laid upon us. As for us
we resolve that as the disobedience of the first Adam, brought upon us not
only eternal punishments, but also temporal, so the obedience and merit of
the second Adam, to answer that in saving which the other had done in
destroying, has made satisfaction to God for both, so that the faithful
penitent soul believing and receiving in Christ forgiveness of sins,
believes it self to be perfectly reconciled unto God, and reckons not of
any further satisfaction to be made unto him. Now M. Bishop acknowledges that
Christ's satisfaction is of infinite value, and therefore that our satisfaction
is not to supply his. But if it be of infinite value, why does he restrain and
abridge the effect thereof, in respect of them to whom the infinite value of it
does belong? why does he make the value thereof in respect of the temporal
punishments of sin, altogether idle and of no use? and if it might have freed
us from doing satisfaction for our selves, why does it not? He gives us
reasons, that by the smart thereof we may be feared and made careful to avoid
sin, and that by suffering, we may be co^formed as members to Christ our head.
You say well, M. Bishop, but yet we hear nothing here concerning satisfaction.
We require a reason of the assertion of our satisfactions, for that Christ we
say has yielded a full satisfaction for us, and you tell us of being frighted
from sin, and made comfortable unto Christ, which are things that stand very
well without any matter of satisfaction. The Scripture teaches us these uses
of the sufferings of the faithful, but it says nothing to us concerning
satisfaction. But for the better understanding of this whole matter, it is to
be observed, that the temporal calamities and evils of this life are of
themselves, and in their own nature the punishments of sin, the effects of Gods
curse, the beams of his everlasting fury and wrath, the forerunners of his
dreadful judgment, preparations to death, and death it self the vpshot of all
the rest, as it were a gulf swallowing us up into fearful darkness, and
utter destruction both of body and soul. Now Christ being John. 1.29.
the lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, in taking away our
sins, takes away consequently the effects of sin, because the cause being
removed, the effects cannot remain. But in sin as has been before declared,
we are to consider both the corruption and the guilt, of which the guilt being
taken away, the corruption may still remain, and the effects of sin have
reference to both these. Being then reconciled unto God through Jesus Christ,
by the not imputing of our sins, we see that the temporal afflictions and
grieuances of this life, are still continuing and lying upon us. Hereupon the
question is, our sins being forgiven, in what nature they continue? We say; not
as satisfactions to the wrath of God, in respect of the guilt of sin, but as
cautions and provisions of his love for the destroying of the corruption of it.
The guilt of sin is the foundation of satisfaction; and where no guilt is,
there is no satisfaction to be demanded. When therefore forgiveness has taken
away the guilt, there can be no requiring of satisfaction, and the afflictions
thenceforth lying upon us are of another nature, and to other ends and uses,
then that either we should be said thereby to satisfy God, or that God should
be said thereby to satisfy himself of us. The uses thereof the Scripture
notes Romans 6.6.
the destroying of the body of sin, Heb. 12.10.
the making of us partakers of his holiness, 2. Cor. 4.16.
the renewing of the inner man from day to day, Col. 1.12.
the making of us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. 1. Cor. 11.32.
We are chastened of the Lord when we are judged, that we should not be
condemned with the world. Aug. de Trin. lib. 13. cap. 15. Prosunt ista mala
quae fideles pie perferunt vel ad emendanda peccata, velad exercendam
probandamque iustitiam, vel ad demo^stranda^ vitae huius miseria^ vt illa vbi
erit beatitudo vera atque perpetua and desideretur ardenrius and instantius
inquiratur. Vide in Joan. tract. 124.
They serve, says Austine for the reforming of our sins, for the exercise and
trial of our righteousness, for the setting forth of the misery of this life,
that that life where shall be true and everlasting bliss, may both more
fervently be desired, and more instantly sought for. These reasons he gives,
why the punishments of sin as touching the matter of them continue still in
this life after the forgiveness thereof, but of satisfaction not a word. Yea,
being occasioned to speak directly to the point by the Pelagians, obiecting to
him, that Aug de peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 2. ca. 33. Qui dicunt, si
peccat^ mors accidisset, non vtique post remissione peccatoru^moreremur; non
intelligunt quomodo res quaru^ reatu^ ne post hanc vitam obsint Deus soluit;
tamen eat ad certamen fidei sinit manner, vt per illas erudiamur and exerceamur
proficientes in agone iustitiae.
if death had come by sin, then after forgiveness of sins we should not die,
he answers thus, They understand not that God suffers the things, the guilt
whereof he releaseth, that they may not hurt after this life, yet to remain
(in this life) for the fight of faith, that thereby we may be instructed and
exercised, profiting and growing in the fight of righteousness. The guilt of
death then and of all other temporal calamities, is taken away, but yet these
things continue, not as matters of satisfaction, but as means of instruction
for the framing of us unto God. He goes on, and says, that it may be as well
said, if for sin it were said to man, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou
eat thy bread, and the earth shall bring forth unto thee briars and thorns,
why after forgiveness of sins does this labor remain, and why does the
ground of the faithful bring forth briars and thorns? Again, if for sin it
were said to the woman, In pain and sorrow thou shall bring forth, how is it
that after forgiveness of sins faithful women still bring forth with the
same pains? All these cases and the like he clears in this sort: Ibid. cap.
34. Respondemus dicentes, ante remissionem esse supplicia peccatoru^. post
remissionem autem certamina exercitationesque iustorum.
We answer, that before forgiveness they are the punishments of sins, but
after forgiveness, they are the fights and exercises of the just. Where we
see that being drawn to answer precisely to this matter, he denies them after
forgiveness to be punishments of sin, howsoever both he and we are wont in
common speech to term them so, because originally and naturally they are so.
Therefore is there commonly that difference made betwixt the afflictions of the
faithful and the unfaithful, that Origin. in Genes. hom. 16. Quod iustu
exercitiu^ virtutis est, hoc iniustis pena peccati.
that which is to the just the exercise of virtue, as Origin says, is to the
unjust the punishment of sin; that Tertull. Apologet. ca. 41. Omnes
seculiplage nobis forte in admonitione^, vobis in castigatione^, a Deo
obueniunt.
the plagues of the world, as Tertullian says, are to the one for punishment,
to the other for admonition and advertisement. So can Thomas Aquinas say when
occasion serves, that Thom. Aquin. 12. q. 114 art. 10. ad 3. Temporalia mala
infliguntur impijs in paenam, inquantum per ea non adiuuantur ad consecutione^
vitae aeternae, justice autem qui per huiusmodi mala iuua^tur ne^ sunt paenae
sed magis medicinae.
temporal evils are inflicted upon the wicked for punishment, for that they
are not thereby helped for the obtaining of eternal life, but to the just who
are thereby helped, they are not punishments, but rather medicines. So then
they are not punishments, they are no satisfactions where sins are forgiven,
but they are referred to other end. If they be satisfactions, the proper and
only use of them in that nature is ex part ante, in respect of time past, to
give recompense for offense formerly committed; and whatsoever else is
alleged, is merely accidental, but the proper and only use of afflictions
where sins are forgiven, is ex part post, in respect of time to come, to
keep us from sin, and to help forward our sanctification toward God. But
M. Bishop hudleth and confounds all together, and by terms of the true uses
of afflictions delivered in the Scripture, deceiptfully colors his matter of
satisfactions devised beside and against the Scripture. Let him speak
distinctly as the Scripture does, and then he must say, that that which
concerns the guilt of sin, and belongs to satisfaction, is laid wholly
upon Christ, that it may be true which the Prophet says, Esa. 53.5.
The chastisement of our peace was laid upon him, and by his stripes we were
healed; but that which is laid upon us after forgiveness by Christ, is only
de futuro, to weaken and wear away the power of sin, and in death which is
the last of these afflictions, utterly to destroy it. Now therefore whereas he
says that we must be conformable unto Christ as members to our head, he
notably abuses the pretense thereof to the singular dishonor of Jesus Christ.
He has told us before that we must be Of Merits. Sect. 16.
like unto Christ in meriting, and here he tells us that we must be like unto
Christ in satisfying: but what? must we be like unto Christ in those things
wherein consists his being Christ? wherein stands his being our Redeemer,
our Savior, our high Priest and Mediator unto God? By meriting and satisfying
for us, it is that Christ is our Christ, our Jesus and Savior. If therefore we
be like unto him in meriting and satisfying, what hinders but that as he is
in common Jesus, and a Savior for all, so we also should be said every man to
be a Jesus and Savior for himself. Which because it is impious to affirm,
and cannot be avoided, if it be true which he says, let him learn to know
that we are to be like unto Christ in his image, not in his office; in act of
conversation, not in effect of satisfaction and redemption; in that that he is
simply according to himself, not in that that he is by dispensation for us. We
must suffer as he has suffered, but not suffer for our selves, or one for
another, as he has suffered for us. We must walk in obedience to God as he
has walked, but not to merit by our obedience for our selves, as he by his
obedience has merited for us. These are lewd and Antichristian devices,
serving to iustle Christ out of his place, by a pretense of conformity betwixt
him and us. M. Bishops conclusion therefore is without any ground, that Christ
having satisfied the eternal punishment of sin, has left a temporal
satisfaction thereof to be performed by us. As for the words of the Apostle
which he cites for some proof thereof, Gal. 6.5.
Every man shall bear his own burden, it had been his part to make it plain,
first that the burden there spoken of is to be understood of temporal
afflictions. Secondly, if it be so to be understood, he should again have told
us how it follows, that those afflictions must necessarily be taken to be
satisfactions. Thirdly, if they be satisfactions, it would have been considered
how this place stands with the doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome,
which, the Apostle saying, Every man shall bear his own burden, that is, if
we believe M. Bishop, shall satisfy for himself, does notwithstanding appoint
one man to bear the burden and satisfactions of another. If every man bear
his own burden, why does the Pope pretend by his Pardons, to impart to one man
the satisfactions of another? or if the Pope do thereby impart the
satisfactions of Saints and Martyrs to the help of those that want, why does
Master Bishop tell us that of temporal satisfactions it is said, that every
man shall bear his own burden? But thus he is wont to cite texts at all
adventure; be they with him or against him all is one; they help to fill up a
book, and that is enough for his purpose. But the meaning of those words
plainly appears out of the circumstance of the place. The Apostle laboring
to withdraw men from judging and condemning others, and from justifying
themselves by measuring and comparing themselves to them whom they condemned,
wishes every man to consider himself in himself, to make trial of his own
work, not to content himself, for that he seems to himself to be preferred
before another, but to endeavor without comparison to others to be approved in
himself. To this meaning are these words; (...). ^
Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself and not in another. For reason hereof he adds, for every man shall
bear his own burden, as if he should say: It concerns not one man what
another is: the burdening of another shall be no disburdening of thee: what is
amiss in him, he shall answer for himself, but look thou to thine own
burden, for whatsoever it is thou shall answer to God for it. The burden then
which the Apostle speaks of is, as Thomas Aquinas says, Tho. Aquin. in Gal.
cap. 6. lect. 1. Onus reddendae rationis, etc. in die iudicij.
the burden of our reckoning and account to be made unto God at the day of
judgment, and his words are to the very same meaning, as elsewhere he says:
Romans 14.12.
Every one of us shall give accounts of himself to God. So that M. Bishops
argument falls out in the end to be this; Every man at the day of judgment
must give reckoning to God for himself. Therefore Christ has left us to make
temporal satisfaction to God for our own sins. Thou must take it as it is,
gentle Reader, for he can make it no better then it will be: deny his
argument, and he has no more to say.

3 W. BISHOP.
Nay (says M. Perkins) we must then be new Christ's, and Redeemers, and
Priests of the same order with himself. Nothing so, but having grace from him,
we may in virtue thereof satisfy, not for the crime it self, or everlasting
punishment, which is linked with it: because that would require an infinite
virtue: but for the te^porall pain of it, one endued with grace may satisfy,
for the measure of stripes must not exceed the rate of the fault, the
punishment then resting unsatisfied being limited, a creature may pay it. And
that the Reader may better perceive what we mean by the temporal pain, let
him consider that in sin are two things, the one is the turning away from God,
whom we offend, the other is the turning unto the thing, for the love of which
we offend: as for glory, lust, lucre, or such like, the sinner transgresses:
now when he is by the grace of God converted, his turning away from God, both
the sin and the eternal pain due unto it, are freely through Christ pardoned,
but for the pleasure which he took in the sin, the man himself is to
satisfy: and so according unto the greatness of that his pleasure, he is to
do penance.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins gave argument and reason of that which he said; but M. Bishop like
a reasonlesse man without giving any reason, affirms that again, against
which M. Perkins argued. He rightly alleges, that no part of the Priesthood
of Christ can be said to have passed from him to us, that to make satisfaction
for sins whether temporally or eternally is a part of the Priesthood of
Christ, and therefore that it is not a thing passed from him to us to make
satisfaction for our sins. Again, to attribute that to us, for which and by
which Christ is Christ, our Redeemer and high Priest, is to make us Christ's,
Redeemers and Priests for our selves. But to attribute to us to make
fatisfaction for sins either temporally or eternally, is to attribute that to
us, for which and by which Christ is Christ, our Redeemer and high Priest. It
is therefore the same, as to affirm us to be Christ's, Redeemers and Priests
for our selves. M. Bishop answers ridiculously and childishly, Not so, but
Christ has satisfied for the eternal punishment which required an infinite
virtue: as for the temporal pain it may be satisfied by us. But what is here
for exception to our collection, that since the name and office of Christ, of a
Redeemer and Priest stands in satisfying for sin, therefore if we be said
to satisfy temporally for our selves, then as Christ is our Christ, Redeemer,
and Priest, in respect of satisfying for the eternal punishment of our sins,
so we are Christ's, Redeemers, and Priests for our selves, in respect of making
temporally an atonement for our selves. But that it belongs to the
Priesthood of Christ, to make atonement for temporal punishments, is plain
in the law, where we read that the plague being begun, the high Priest in
figure of our high Priest Jesus Christ, makes atonement for the staying of
it. Numb. 16.46.
Take the censer, says Moses to Aaron, and put fire therein of the Altar, and
put therein Incense, and go quickly to the Congregation, and make an atonement
for the^; for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun. He
did so, and the plague was staid. The like we see in the plague that followed
upon David's numbering of the people, 2. Sam. 24.25.
he offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, and the Lord was appeased
toward the land, and the plague ceased from Israel. And hereby we understand,
that all the sacrifices of the law, wherein August. Enchirid. cap. 33. Singular
sacrificium (Christi) cuius erant vmbrae omnia sacrificia legis and prophetarum.
Christ was always set before them, had a respect of appeasing the wrath of
God, not only for everlasting punishments in the world to come, but also for
the temporal afflictions and punishments that are incident to this life. It is
therefore a great impiety in the Church of Rome, to take away this part of
Christ's office from him, and to make every man thereof partaker to his wrong.
But now whereas M. Bishop says, that it would require an infinite virtue to
satisfy for the everlasting punishment of sin, we would gladly know of him
how it stands, that a greater virtue is required to satisfy for the
everlasting pains of hell, then there is to merit and purchase the everlasting
joys of heaven. He says, the grace of Christ gives force to our works to
deserve the one; but if that be true, by what reason does he deny that the
grace of Christ gives force to our satisfactions to quit the other? His own
confession in the one condemns his assertion in the other, and because he
denies that our merits of satisfaction can release from hell, he must deny
that our merits of purchase are of sufficient value to deserve heaven, because
the grace of God must be holden to be of the same power and virtue on both
sides. Again it is untrue which he says, that the temporal punishment being
limited may be satisfied for by a mere creature, because the satisfaction is
not to be esteemed according to the quantity of the temporal punishment, but
according to the majesty of him to who^ the offense is done, who being the
same in punnishing, whether temporally or eternally, can have none of
sufficient worth to deal with the one, who is not the same for the other also.
He cannot in any sort merit any thing at Gods hands, who is not in worth and
power answerable to his infinite greatness. And this Thomas Aquinas saw, who
to make good humane satisfaction, attributes unto it Thom. Aquin. suppl. q.
13. art. 1. ad 1. Sicut offensa habuit quandaem infinitate^ ex infinitate
diuinae maiestatis^^ta etiam satisfactio accipit quanda^ infinitatem ex
infinitate diuinae misericordiae proui est gratia informata per quam acceptum
redditur quod homo facere potest.
an infinity, in respect that it is informed by grace, and accepted thereby,
whereby we may see how well these men accord in the grounds of their defense.
But Thomas Aquinas saw it to be an absurd fancy which M. Bishop here follows
in designing a rate, as he calls it, of sins to be answered by a measure of
temporal stripes, whereas the infiniteness of sin can bear no such
limitation, nor be bounded in any sort within the compass of temporal
revenge. But yet M. Bishop will make us believe that he has a device whereby
to make good this rate and measure. He tells us that in sin two things must
be considered; the one is the turning away from God whom we offend; the other
is the turning to the thing for the love of which we offend. Our turning from
God, both the fault and the eternal punishment due unto it, he says, are
freely pardoned by Christ, but man forsooth must satisfy for the pleasure that
he took in turning to the creature. But this idle Sophisme of his is rejected
also by the same great Rabbine of theirs, Thomas Aquinas as a thing of naught.
Jbid. Quidam dicum quod habet infinitate^ ex part auersionis and sic gratis
dimittitur, sed ex part co^uersionis finita est and sic pro ea satisfiers
potest. Sed hoc nihil est, quia satisfactio non respondet peccato nisi secundum
quod est offensa Dei quod no^ habet ex pa^^^ conuersionis sed ^x (...)
^^^sionis. (...) 22. Ci^ (...) bene^^ (...) dine^^ist (...) muliaeute^ (...)
pertur^ato
Some say, says he, that sin has an infinity in respect of auerting or
turning away from God, and so it is freely pardoned, but that in respect of
conversion or turning to creatures it is finite, and so may be satisfied for.
But this is nothing, because satisfaction answers not to sin, but according
as it is an offense to God, which it has not of converting to other things,
but of auerting and turning from God. There is a love of the creatures which is
according to God, and stands with the love of God.f The creature because it
is good, it may be loved aright, says Austin, and it may be loved amiss:
aright if order be kept; amiss if order be perverted. Therefore virtue and
righteousness is not a denial of the love of the creatures, but it is, as he
says, Ibid. Definitio breuis and vera virtutis ^rdo est amoris.
an order in loving. The act of sin then consists in disordered love, in that
the love of the creature implies an auersion and turning away from God. Now
then seeing satisfaction is to be made by us in respect of auersion from God,
and the punishment that belongs to auersion from God, is the eternal
punishment of sin, as M. Bishop also says, he must acknowledge by the doctrine
of their own Schools, that we are to make satisfaction for the eternal
punishment of sin, and then let him tell us what exception he has yet given,
that their doctrine of satisfactions does not make us Christ's, and Redeemers
of our selves, and Priests of the same order with the Son of God. But we are
yet further desirous to know, upon what ground M. Bishop would have us to
believe, that only temporal punishments should belong to the pleasures and
delights of sin, or in what sort we should conceive the same pleasures of sin
severed from auerting and turning away from God? These are such strange
devices, howsoever he sets them down, as special tricks of wit, as that he
should think him to have written them in a dream, but that he utters so
many of them, as that then we must imagine him to live in a continual dream.
Must we think that the Apostles were acquainted with this nice conceit of
his? Did they mean that Christ suffered and died for our sins quantum ad
auersionem, so far as concerns turning from God, but that he left us to
suffer for our own sins, and one for another sins quantum ad conuersionem, so
far as concerns turning to the pleasures of our sins? Surely the Prophet
says, quantum ad auersionem: Esa. 53.6.
All we like sheep have gone astray, and quantum ad conuersionem, we have
turned every man to his own way, and adds concerning both; And the Lord has
laid upon him the iniquities of us all. But M. Bishop has learned another
lesson of their schoolmen, who have exercised their wits to mock the word of
God, for the coloring of those lewd and blasphemous novelties, which the
Romish Apostasy has brought in, to the wrong and derogation of the cross of
Christ.

4 W. BISHOP.
But Christ (says M. Perkins) said on the Cross, It is finished: Wherefore all
satisfaction was at Christ's death ended, as well temporal as eternal.

Answer. That those words have a far different sense: To wit, that Christ had
then ended his course, and fulfilled all prophecies, and endured all such
torments, as it pleased God to impose upon him for the redemption of mankind:
of satisfaction temporal there is no mention, neither can any thing be drawn
thence against it: No more can be out of this other: Christ made sin for us:
2. Cor. 5.
that is, the punishment of sin, as M. Perkins gloseth it: but the learned
say, an host or sacrifice for sin. But we grant that he suffered the
punishment for our sin, and say consequently: that all sin is pardoned
freely for his sake, and the pain of hell also, which is punishment of sin:
but not other temporal pains, such as it has pleased the justice and
wisdom of God to reserve unto every sinner, to bear in his own person. And
after this sort, and no other was God in Christ, reconciling the world to
himself. And that Saint Paul understood well, that Christ's sufferings did not
take away ours, may be gathered by these his words: Colos. 1.
I rejoice in suffering for you, and do accomplish those things that want of
the Passions of Christ, in my flesh for his body, which is the Church.

But of this point more, when we come unto the Arguments for the Catholic
part.

R. ABBOT.
What our Savior meant by saying in the very instant of his giving up the
ghost, John. 19.30. (...).
It is finished, we may conceive by the Apostle, making as it seems
application of that word when he says, Heb. 10.14.
With one oblation he has (...).
consummated or made perfect for ever the^ that are sanctified. By that one
oblation he performed whatsoever was necessary for our full and perfect
satisfaction and reconcilement unto God. And therein he fulfilled all
prophecies that were written of atonement and peace to be made betwixt God and
man, the effect whereof S. Peter expresses saying, Act. 10.43.
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name all that believe
in him shall receive remission of sins. Ephe. 1.7.
In him we have redemption, says S. Paul, through his blood even the
forgiue^e^ of sins. Now as the author to the Hebrews infers, Heb. 10.18.
where remission of these things is, there is no more offering for sin, so may
we infer, where remission of sins is, there is no more satisfying for sin,
because sacrifice and satisfaction have one and the self same respect to sin.
Seeing then Christ has done that that yields us perfect forgiveness of sins,
it must follow that there remains no further satisfaction to be performed for
sin. And thus much is contained in M. Bishops words, but that like Caiphas he
says well and understands not what he says. Christ, says he, endured all
such torments as God would impose upon him for the redemption of mankind. And
what is redemption, but a payment of full and perfect satisfaction? Tho. Aquin
p. 3. q. 48. art. 4 in corp. Quia passio Christi sufficient and superabu^dant
suit satisfactio pro peccato and reatu poenae humani generis, eius passio fuit
quasi quodda^ pretium quo liberati sumus ab viraque obligatione. Na^^ ipsa
satisfactio qua quis satisfacit sieve pro se sieve pro alio, pretium quoddam
dicitur quo seipsum vel alium redimit a peccato and poenae, Christus autem
satisfecit dando seipsum pro nobis, and ideo passio Christi dicitur esse nostra
redemptio.
Because the passion of Christ, says Thomas, was a sufficient and
superabundant satisfaction for the sin of mankind and guilt of punishment, his
passion was as it were a price or payment, by which we were set free from
obligation both those ways. For the satisfaction whereby a man satisfies
either for himself or for another, is called a price by which a man redeemeth
(or buieth out) himself or another from sin and punishment. Now Christ, says
he, has made satisfaction by giving himself for us, and therefore the passion
of Christ is said to be our redemption. If then the passion of Christ be
therefore our redemption, because he has paid a sufficient and superabundant
satisfaction to free us from obligation of guilt and punishment, how can it
stand that after Christ's redemption the obligation should still remain, and
that there should be yet a further satisfaction to be made? Either it must be
said that Christ has not made a full redemption; or else it must be
acknowledged, that Christ has taken away all temporal satisfaction. But Christ
in saying It is finished, testifies that in his death he fully finished our
redemption. Therefore he testifies that he has left no place for any further
satisfaction. This cannot be shifted off. A perfect redemption takes away all
obligation of further satisfaction, or else it cannot be called absolutely
perfect. Christ's redemption therefore being simply and absolutely perfect, must
necessarily infer a denial of temporal satisfaction. Albeit the very name
of temporal satisfaction in this case is absurd, because the guilt of sin being
only infinite and eternal, and in no fort temporal, cannot be brought within
any compass of temporal satisfaction as before was said. In a word, we do not
believe that Christ played the Sophister upon the cross, to say quantum ad
auersione^, It is finished, that is, the satisfaction of sin is fully paid, but
quantum ad conuersionem, all is not yet fully finished, but there remains
some further satisfaction to be made. No more do we believe that the Apostle
when he said, 2. Cor 3 21.
Christ was made sin for us, did play fast or loose, as meaning that if we
understand sin quantu^ ad auersione^, then it is true that he was made sin for
us, that is, the punishment or sacrifice for sin, but that quantum ad
conuersionem we are made sin for our selves, or one man for another. Or that
when it is said, 1. Pet. 3 13.
He suffered for sins once, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God, the meaning is that in part he suffered for our sins to bring us to
God, but left us in part to suffer for our own sins, to bring our selves to
God. We cannot be persuaded that that was the meaning of the Apostle when he
said, 2. Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, because he defines
that reconcilement to consist in the not imputing of our sins, and how are
our sins not imputed if we be still holden in any sort to make satisfaction
for the^? But these things though they be apparently blasphemous and wicked,
and do expose the Gospel of Christ to mockery and contempt, yet M. Bishop
labors to color with a sentence of S. Paul, which for more the^ a thousand
years after the time of Christ and his Apostles, never any man understood or
expounded to that meaning whereto he applies it. Col. 1.24.
Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and do fulfill or accomplish (those
things that want, says M. Bishop, but the word is (...)) the remainder, those
things that are yet behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his
bodies sake, which is the Church. M. Bishop by translating those things that
want of the passions of Christ, and applying the place to their satisfactions,
gives us to understand that blasphemy of theirs, which he will seem otherwise
to deny, that for satisfaction somewhat is wanting to the passion of Christ,
so that the passion of Christ is not taken with them to be a full and perfect
satisfaction and redemption. He will say, the old interpreter so translateth,
but because the old interpreter made not that use of these passions in the
words following, as M. Bishop does, therefore to our meaning only, and not to
his, he translateth in that sort. The afflictions and sufferings of the
faithful are very often in the Scripture termed 2. Cor. 4.10. Phil. 3.10. 1.
Pet. 4.13.
the afflictions and sufferings of Christ. Christ is the head; we are the body.
Aug. in Psa. Caput and corp^^ vnus est Christus.
The head and the body, says S. Austine, make one Christ. He has made us one
with himself, and therefore under one name of Gal. 3.16.
Christ, he comprehends both himself and us. Whatsoever then is done either
to the head or to the body, the same is done to Christ. Christ the head has
s^ffered in himself whatsoever was needful for the redemption and purchase of
that body, whereof he was to be the head. He therefore suffered and died for
sin as a Redeemer; we as redeemed are by suffering to be conformed unto him,
that in suffering we may be still dying, and in death it self may fully and
for ever be R^^ 62.11.
de^d to sin. Now because the afflictions of the body and members of Christ,
are reckoned to be the afflictions of Christ, therefore so long as there is any
part of the body still remaining to be afflicted, so long there is somewhat
wanting, or yet behind of the afflictions of Christ. Thus S. Austine says,
Aug. in Psalm. 61. Si in memoris Christi es, quicquid pateris ab eu qui n n sunt
in ^^e^oru Christi deerat passionibus Christi,
If thou be a member of Christ, whatsoever thou suffer of them who are not
the members of Christ, it was wanting to the passions of Christ. And thus S.
Paul as a member of Christ professes, that for his part he fulfilled the
remnant, or that that was yet to be sustained of the afflictions and sufferings
of Christ. But he adds, for his bodies sake which is the Church, and upon
these words specially the question depends. In what meaning is it that he
says he suffers for the Churches sake? M. Bishop will have us think that it
was to add somewhat for his part to the common treasury of satisfactions,
whence relief and succor might be yielded to men by the Popes indulgences, to
supply the want of their own satisfactions. We must think that somewhat was
wanting to the sufferings of Christ, to set us free from temporal punishments,
and toward that S. Paul paid his shot, and having suffered enough for his
own discharge, would add somewhat to serve in common to ease the burdens of
other men. But against this wicked and blasphemous fancy, the Apostle himself
instructs us, when he says, 1. Cor. 1.13.
Was Paul crucified for you? If we believe M. Bishop, Paul also was crucified
for us, but Paul himself denies himself to have been crucified for us.
Therefore he teaches us to say, Gal. 6.14.
God forbid that I should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ:
not in the cross of Paul, not in the cross of Peter, but only in the cross
of Jesus Christ. If M. Bishop say true, we have to rejoice in the cross of
Peter, and in the cross of Paul, and in the crosses of the rest of the Saints,
as having redeemed us from Purgatory, and from temporal pain^, but we are
taught to rejoice in nothing but in the cross of Jesus Christ, that it may be
true which he has said, Esa. 63.3.
I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all people there was none with me.
Therefore Ambrose says; Ambros. in 1. Cor. cap. ^. St Christus pro nobis
mortuus est, quomodo gra^a^ and lexeficiu^ etia hominibus imputamus ad e^us
iniuriam?
If Christ have died for us, why do we impute his grace and benefit to other
men to his wrong? Very fitly to this purpose says Leo Bishop of Rome: Leo
epist. 81. Qua^tris multorum san^torum pretiosa in conspectu Domini mors
fuerit, null^^s tament^sontis o^^^sio mu^di fuit propitiatio. Accepere iusti,
non dedera^t coronas, and de fortitudine fideliu^ nata sunt exempta patientiae,
no^ dona iustitiae. Singulares quipp^ in singulis mortes fuere nec alterius
quisqua^ debitum suo fine persoltus, quum inter filios homi^^m vnus Dominus
noster Jesus Christus extiterit in quo omnes crucifixi, omnes mertu^, omnes
sepulti, omnes sunt etiam suscitati.
Albeit the death of many Saints has been precious in the Lords sight, yet the
killing of no Saint has been the propitiation of the world. The just received
crowns, but gave none, and of the fortitude of the faithful have grown
examples of patience, no gifts of righteousness. Their deaths were several in
every of them, neither has any man by his death paid the debt of another man,
seeing amongst the sons of men it was only our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
all were crucified, dead, buried, and raised again. This was the ancient
doctrine of the Bishops of Rome, but now Master Bishop tells us out of their
Romish learning, that one man is the propitiation and atonement for another,
that some men do pay debts, and make satisfactions for others, because Paul
says that he suffers for the Churches sake. But S. Austine tells him
again: Aug. in Joan. tract. 84. Etsi fratres pro fratribus mor^amur, tamen in
fraterneru^ peccatorum remissione^ nullius sanguis marty^is funditur, quod
fecit ille (Christus) proneb^ nec in hoc quid imitaremur sed quid gratularemur
co^tulit nobis, etc. Quo isi quisqua^ se pote^tia Christi co^parabit alie. u^sc
puta^do sanare peccatu^, muliu^ est ad illu^, non capit tantu^, etc. Dives est
qui nec haereditario nec proprio vnqua^ deb^to obnoxious and ipse iustus est and
alios iustificat Christus. Noli co^tra eu^ te extendere, intantum pauper vt
remis^ionis p^ccatorum appate^^ quo^idianus in oratione me^dicus.
Albeit we as brethren die for our brethren, yet no martyrs blood is shed for
the remission of the sins of the brethren, which Christ has done for us, and
in that has yielded us not any thing to imitate and follow, but what to
rejoice of. For if any man will compare himself to the power of Christ, in
thinking himself to heal the sin of another man, it is too much for him; he
is not capable thereof. He is the rich man, says he, who being not subject to
any debt either hereditarie or of his own, is both just himself, and
justifies others, even Jesus Christ. Do not advance thy self against him,
being so poor as that thou appearest in thy prayer daily a beggar of the
forgiveness of sins. There is no forgiveness of sins then by the blood of
Martyrs; there is no ableness in one man to heal the sin of another, or to
pay another debt: every man is poor, every man a beggar, craving from day to
day the release and remission of own debts. This was S. Paul's case; thus he
prayed daily as Christ had taught him, and why then does Master Bishop make
him so rich, as that he should be able to make payment of our debts, that he
should purchase a release of the punishment of our sins, that he should take
upon him Tho. Aquint. supplem. q. 12. art. 2. ad 1. Satisfactio est quaeda^
illatae iniuriae reco^pensatio. Et q. 14. Ablatio offensae. art. 1. in corp.
to make recompense for the wrongs that we have done to God, and to take away
our offense toward God, or Gods offense and displeasure toward us, as their
name of Satisfaction does import? It was a far other matter that the Apostle
intended, in that he says that he endured afflictions for the Churches sake.
It was to confirm unto the Church the truth of the Gospel of Christ; to cause
the greater opinion of that doctrine which he preached, in that he yielded
himself for the testifying thereof, to hazard and bestow his temporal life;
to encourage and comfort the faithful to continue constant in the faith of
Christ, according to the example that they had seen in him; to embolden other
men to preach the word, notwithstanding the opposition that was made against
it. And thus does the Apostle express the ends and uses of his afflictions,
Phil. 1.7.
the confirmation of the Gospel, Ver. 12.
the furthering of the Gospel, Ver. 17.
the defense of the Gospel, Ver. 20.
the magnifying of Christ. 2. Cor. 1.6.
If we be afflicted, says he, it is for your consolation and salvation, which
is wrought in the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer. Not
then as to purchase any thing toward their salvation by his afflictions, but
as to hearten and comfort them to the patient bearing of afflictions, in the
enduring whereof God had intended to bring their salvation to effect. Thus
Thomas Aquinas, where his eyes were open, conceived both of this text, and of
that to the Colossians which is here in question, who writing upon the words of
the Apostle, Was Paul crucified for you? uses these words: It Is. Aquin in 1.
Cor. cap. 1 lect. 2. Hoc proprium est Christo, vt sua passio^e and morte
nostram salutem operatus fuerit, etc. Sed contra hoc esse v. letur quod
Apostolus dicit, Gaudeo in passionibus meis pro vobis, etc. Sed dicendum quod
passio Christi fuit n^bis salutifera non solum per modum exempli sed etia^ per
modum meriti and efficaciae, inqua^tu^ eius sanguine redempti and iustificati
sumus, etc. Sed passio aliorum nobis est salutifera solum per modu^ exempli,
secundum. 2 Cor. 1. Sine tribulamur, etc.
This is proper to Christ, that he by his passion and death has wrought our
salvation. But it seems to be against this which the Apostle says: Col. 1.
Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, etc. But we are to say, that the
passion of Christ was the cause of our salvation, not only by way of example,
but also by way of merit and effectual working, in that by his blood we are
redeemed and justified; but the sufferings of others is furthering to our
salvation only by way of example, according to that 2. Cor. 1. If we be
afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation, etc. Again in another place
propounding by way of objection, that Idem p. 3. q. 48. art. 5. arg. 3. Non
solu^ cassio Christi sed etiam alioru^ sanctorum preficua fuit ad salutem
nostram, vt Col. 1 Gaude^ in passionibus meis pro vobis, etc. Dicendum quod
passiones sanctoru^ proficiunt Ecclesiae, non quide^ per modum redemption^^,
sed per modum exempli and exhortationis; secundum illud 2. Cor. 1 Sine
tribulamur. etc.
not only the passion of Christ, but also of other Saints was helpful to our
salvation, according to the saying of the Apostle. Col. 1. Now rejoice I in my
sufferings for you, etc. and therefore that Christ only cannot be called our
Redeemer, but also other Saints; he answers thus: We are to say that the
passions of the Saints are helpful or profitable to the Church, not by way of
redemption, but by way of example and comfort (or encouragement) according to
that 2. Cor. 1. If we be afflicted, etc. So where the Apostle says, 2. T^m.
2.10.
I suffer all things for the elects sake, that they may also obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus, he asks, In ^. Tim. 2. lect 2 Sed nunquid
sufficit Christi passio? Dicendu^ quod si^ effecti^^; sed passio Apostoli
dupliciter expiediebat. Primo quia dabat ex^mplum perfistendi in fide Se^undo
quia confirmabatur fides, and ex hoc ind^cebantur ad salutem.
what, was not the passion of Christ sufficient? Yes, says he, as touching the
working of salvation; but the Apostles suffering was two ways expedient.
First, because he gave example thereby of continuing in the faith. Secondly,
because thereby the faith was confirmed, and by that means they were induced
and drawn on to salvation. Thus then we have example, confirmation, comfort,
encouragement in the sufferings of the Apostles and Saints, but we cannot find
any satisfaction for our sins. And that M. Bishop may know that we speak
this from better authority then only Thomas Aquinas, let S. Ambrose tell in
what sense the Apostles suffered for the Church. Ambros^n Psalm. 43. Petrus pro
Ecclesia multa tolera^^it. Multa etia^ Paulus raeterique Ap^stoli pertulerunt
cum caederentur v^rgis, cum lapidarentur, cum in carceres truderentur. Illa
enim tolerantia amurtaru^ and vsu periculorum Do^^ni fundatus est populus, and
ecclesia incrementum est consec^^, cum caeteri ad martyrium festinarent
vilentes per illas passiones nihil Apost^lorum decessisse virtutibus sed etia^
propter hanc bre^em vitam immortalitatem esse quaesitam.
Peter, says he, suffered many things for the Church. Many things also S.
Paul and the rest of the Apostles suffered when they were scourged, when they
were stoned, when they were imprisoned. For by that bearing of wrongs and
experience of dangers, the Lords people was founded, and the Church received
increase, for that other hastened to martyrdom, when they saw that by those
sufferings there was no impeaching of the Apostles virtues, and moreover that
for this short life immortality was sought (or gotten) thereby. In the like sort
does he expound the words of the Apostle which here we speak of: Idem in
Colos. ca. 1. In tribulationibus quas patiebatur exultare se fatetur, quia
profectum suum videt in fide credentium. Non est cuim^inants tri^^^atio quando
cum pro quo patitur acquirit ad vitam.
He professes himself to rejoice in the troubles which he endured, because he
sees his success in the faith of them that believe: for his trouble is not in
vain when he gains him to life for whom he suffered. No other thing does
Cyprian gather out of those words: Cypria. de dupl. Mart. Quemadmodum ille
mirabili testimonio clarifi. auit Patrem in ho. mundo, a^que etiam in coelisma
testimon^um illius quodammodo co^summatur testimonio Sanctoru^, quasisit vna
passio Domini and seruorum. Id nequis exiflimet parum religiose dictum beatus
Paulus nobis patrocinatur, na scribens. etc. Quis enim nescit quam vberem
prouentum effudit Ecclesiae seges Apostolorum and caeterorum Martyrum sanguine
irrigata? Quo plus sanguinis effusum est, hoc magis ac magis esstoruit mu^titis
do fidelium. hoc latius sparsit suas propag nes illa beata vitis a Christo
stirpe surgens and necupans orbem vniuersum, etc.
Even as Christ, says he by his admirable testimony glorified the Father in
this world and also in heaven, so his testimony is after a sort consummated or
made perfect in the testimony of the Saints, as if the passion of the Lord and
of the servants were all one. And that no man may think that irreligiously
spoken, S. Paul warranteth the same to us thus writing to the Colossians; I
now joy in my sufferings for you, and fulfill those things which are yet
wanting or behind of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake,
which is the Church. For who knows not how plentiful increase the corn
field of the Church has yielded, being watered with the blood of the Apostles
and other Martyrs? The more blood was shed, so much more and more the multitude
of the faithful flourished; so much the wider that blessed vine spread her
branches, arising from Christ her stock, and possessing the whole world.
Afterward going forward to show that Testificatus est se esse pastorem bonum,
quia animam suam posuit pro euibus, nobis exemplum praebens, vt qui pro nostra
qualicunque portione vices illius gerimus, parati simus, and ipsi pro grege
dominico sanguinem fundere, nisi malumus videri mercenarij quam pastores.
Domini verbis congruunt verba discipul^ Cum enim dixisset se gaudere, etc.
perpetiens and ipse pro corpore Christi, quod est Ecclesia, qualia pas^us erat
Dominus causam adiecit cur ea libenter pateretur Cuius, inquit mi^^^ier factus
sum, etc. vt impeam verbu^ Dei Sicut ergo mortibus Martyrum consummantur
passiones Christi, ita sanguine pastoru^^^^ firmantur pr^m ssa Christ^. Nul^u^
enim instrumentum in dubitabilius quam quod tot Martyrum sanguine signatum est.
Hoc ^^mtrum si ^mp^ere vertum Dei, hoc est, replere Euangelium.
Christ testifying himself to be the good shepherd, because he gave his life
for the sheep, has therein given example to those that are the pastors in his
stead to be ready to shed their blood for the Lords stock, unless they will be
taken for hirelings rather then for pastors, he says, that thereto the words
of the Apostle accord, who saying, that for the body of Christ which is the
Church, he suffered the like things as the Lord suffered, he adds, The cause
why he suffered those things willingly, whereof (says he) I am made a minister
according to the dispensation of God, which is given to me that I should
fulfill the word of God. For as by the deaths of the Martyrs, the sufferings of
Christ are perfected, so by the blood of the Pastors the promises of Christ are
confirmed. For there is no instrument more undoubted then that which is sealed
with the blood of so many Martyrs. This is indeed to fulfill the word of God,
this is to fulfill the Gospel. In the like sort does S. Austin make
construction of the words of S. John: 1. Ioh 3.16.
He laid down his life for us, therefore ought we also to lay down our lives
for the brethren: namely, August. in Joan. tra. 47. Sic and nos debe^^os ad
aedificandam plebem, ad fidem asserendam aminas pro fratribus ponere.
for the edifying of Gods people, for the auouching of the faith. Thus it was
said, that Tertul. Apol. cap. 45. in fine. Semen est sanguis Christianorum.
the blood of Christians was like seed, that August. in Psalm. 58. Sanguine
seminata seges Ecclesiae fertilius pullulauit.
the field of the Church being sowed with blood, did more fruitfully spring and
grow, whilst Idem Epist. 50 Laudatur Dominus qui donare dignatus est, vt serui
eius passionibus suis lucrarentur fratres suos.
the Lord did grant that his servants by their sefferings did win their
brethren, but that the blood of Christian Martyrs was any satisfaction for the
rest of the Church of Christ, or any redemption of the punishments of their
brethren, it was never heard of in those times. They knew nothing then of the
Popes storehouse of Supererogations and Satisfactions: they knew nothing of
that marting, and chopping, and changing of merits which these presumptuous
Romish hypocrites now maintain, in whom it is much more verified then it was in
the Donatists, which S. Austin says: Idem Epist. 51. Tantam sibi arrogant
iustitiam vt came iactent se non solum habere, sed etiam alijs hominibus dare.
They arrogate unto themselves so great righteousness, as that they brag not
only that they have it themselves, but also give it unto others. But to
conclude this point, let M. Bishop know, that both he and his fellows are very
impudent and shameless men, thus to wrest the words of the Apostle, to the
defense of a doctrine which for above a thousand years was never heard of in
the Church, and which have out of the ancient Church according to the
Scriptures a very manifest and clear exposition another way.

5 W. BISHOP.
Now to M. Perkins second reason. In sundry places (says he) of Scripture, we
are said to be redeemed, justified, and saved freely: but this word freely
imports, that we are saved without doing any thing our selves in that matter
of salvation.

Answer. Not so good Sir, for even in your own doctrine, it is necessary that
ye believe, and bring forth the fruits of repentance, and that now and then,
ye make some short prayers, and receive the Communion, and do many other odd
things in that matter of salvation: wherefore the word freely does not exclude
all our working and suffering in that matter.

R. ABBOT.
Those odd things, as this odd companion terms them, which we require as
necessary in the matter of our salvation, are no other but either occasions and
affections of seeking and desiring, or means of our apprehending and receiving
that salvation which is freely and only by Jesus Christ. We do not pray to be
saved for our prayers sake, nor believe to be saved for our faiths sake, nor
receive the Communion to be saved, or to have our sins forgiven by virtue of
our receiving, but we pray and believe to have our sins forgiven us, and to
be saved freely for Christ's sake, and do receive the Communion for the
strengthening of our faith in this belief, Christ by the Sacrament offering
himself unto us with the whole benefit of his passion, to be received and made
ours by faith. As for repentance consisting in the true feeling and
acknowledging of our sins, whereby we see our selves in our selves to be lost
and cast away, it is the motive and occasion of seeking this salvation in
Christ, and freely for his sake, and the fruits of repentance which we require
are but the way, as has been before showed, to the full attainement and
possession of salvation, which we receive by him. And further, we acknowledge
that our repentance, our faith, our prayer, and whatsoever else is in us
toward God, is wholly and altogether of the gift of God, purposing salvation
unto us of his own free mercy, and therefore of the same mercy bestowing
upon us those things which he has appointed as preparations thereunto: but to
our selves, as of our selves, we can challenge no part nor parcel of any of
these things. Therefore on our part nothing hinders, but that we are said to
be redeemed, justified, and saved freely, that is, Rhem. Testam. explication of
words in the end.
for nothing, as Master Bishops Masters of Rhemes do give the signification of
the word gratis. But if Master Bishop himself had meant to deal here truly
and honestly with his Reader, he should not have dodged in this sort, by
talking of us without answering for himself, but should have made it appear,
how that which he affirms can stand with that which the Scripture teaches.
If we be not saved but by interposing our merits for the purchase thereof, how
is it said, that we are saved freely, that is, for nothing? how can our sins be
freely forgiven, that is, for nothing, when they are not forgiven but upon
condition of satisfaction? Satisfaction is the payment of a price, as we have
seen before out of Thomas Aquinas. Now to do a thing freely and to do it for
price and payment cannot possibly stand together. Therefore M. Perkins argues
rightly: If we satisfy in our own persons, then are we not saved freely, and
if we be saved freely, then we make no satisfaction at all. M. Bishops leisure
served him not to answer this point. We know he wanted no good will, but in have
he was, and must needs be gone, because indeed he knew well, that he could say
nothing, but that every child would see his doubling and shifting, and descry
him to be a very vain and wilful man.

6. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins third reason. We pray daily, Forgive us our sins: now to plead
pardon, and to satisfy for our sins, are clean contrary.

Answer. If our sins be mortal, we crave pardon both of the sin, and the
eternal punishment annexed, and do willingly withal satisfy for the
temporal pain: as the man who is convicted of high treason, and having both
his life, honor, lands and goods, pardoned and restored unto him, does very
joyfully indure-three months imprisonment, and any reasonable fine set on his
head. If our sins be venial, then that prayer is a special mean, both to
obtain pardon of the fault, and release of all the pain, In Enchir c. 71
as witnesses S. Augustine, saying: That for the daily, short, and light
offenses, without which this life is not led, the daily prayer of the faithful
does satisfy. And that is not true which M. Perkins adds, that we are taught
in that prayer, wholly and only to use the plea of Pardon. For in the same
petition, we are taught also to pardon others, even as we will look to be
pardoned. Again, if there were only a plea of pardon, it would not serve M.
Perkins purpose. For who would say, that within the compass of the Pater
noster, all things necessary to salvation be contained: besides, prayer is one
part of satisfaction, as shall be proved hereafter: and so by often praying for
pardon, we may well satisfy for much temporal punishment.

R. ABBOT.
I pray thee, gentle Reader, that with M. Perkins argument here propounded and
M. Bishops answer to it, thou will compare that which M. Bishop himself before
has said: Of original sin. Sect. 1.
Does not a Pardon (says he) take away from the fault pardoned, all bond of
punishment due unto it, and consequently all guiltiness belonging to it? Who
can deny this, unless he know not or cure not what he say? Hereby then
understand, that M. Bishop here either knows not, or cares not what he
says: for that as a man having forgotten himself he would make us believe,
that the pardoning of a fault does not take away all bond of punishment due
unto it. That which he said before is sensible and clear to every man's sight,
but that which he says here is senseless and absurd, even in that very
instance whereby he seeks to make it good. The man who for high treason is
but adjudged to short imprisonment and fine, is never said to be pardoned. The
prince deals graciously with him in not calling him further into question,
but to give him a pardon should be to cut off both imprisonment and fine. And
who was there ever in the world before the time of these rank witted
Sophisters, that made that construction that M. Bishop does of our prayer which
we make to God, Forgive us our trespasses; as that our meaning therein should
be to say to him, Forgive us the sin, and the eternal punishment, but as
touching the temporal punishment, we are willing and ready to make thee
satisfaction for it. When we lie groaning under the burden of temporal
calamities and afflictions, do we not say unto God, Forgive us our trespasses,
and beg of him remission of sins, to the intent that by forgiveness of
sins we may be eased of the same burden? The voice of Christ to the sick of
the palsy: Mat. 9.2.
Thy sins are forgiven thee, does it not give him present release from the
bond thereof? David says, Psalm. 32.3.
Whilst I held my tongue (from acknowledging and confessing my sins) my
bones were consumed in my mourning all day; for thy hand was heavy upon me day
and night, and my moisture was turned into the drouth of Summer, I acknowledged
my sin unto thee, and did not hide mine iniquity. I thought, I will confess
against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
punishment of my sin. By which words he gives us to understand, that the
forgiveness of his sins upon his repentance and confession thereof, was the
taking away of the grievous malady wherewith he was so sore afflicted, and upon
experience hereof utters those words in the beginning of the Psalm, Ver. 1.
Blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered: Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin, as to note that one
part of that blessing is to be released from the temporal punishments that are
due to sin. Yea and to that purpose he adds also after: Ver. 6. Aug. Pro
hac. Pro qua hac? pro ipsa venia peccatoru^.
For this, that is, says S. Austin, for forgiveness of sins, shall every
one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou may be found,
surely in the ouerflowing of many waters they shall not come near him. Where
by many waters he understands the manifold crosses and afflictions of this
life, wherewith we are tossed to and fro by reason of our sins, and signifies
that the godly man by obtaining forgiveness of sins, obtains deliverance
and freedom from the punishment thereof. Forgiveness of sins then is not
understood with reservation of temporal satisfaction, neither does any thing
remain in the nature of punishment to him that by repentance and faith
becomes partaker of that mercy. As for his distinction of mortal and venial
sins applied to the petition of forgiveness of sins, we know no such,
neither is any such to be approved, as Of Justification. Sect. 41.
before has been showed. By Gods hearkening to our prayer all sins become
venial; if God hear not our prayer for forgiveness of sins, all sins
continue mortal. Our Savior Christ knew no such difference as M. Bishop
makes, that God when he hears us crying unto him, Forgive us our trespasses,
does forgive us some sins wholly, and othersome but in part, or that our
prayer should be a special mean in some sins, to obtain pardon of the
fault, and release of punishment, and in othersome not so. No, neither did S.
Austine ever dream, that God did forgive sins with a reservation of the
punishment thereof: he knew well that forgiveness alters the case and nature
of afflictions, as has been before showed. Master Bishop cites him saying,
that Aug. Enchir. cap. 71. De quotidianis, breuibus, leuibusque peccatis sine
quibus haec vita non ducitur, quotidiana oration fidelium satisfacit, etc. Delet
omnino haec oration minima and quotidiana peccata. Delet and illa a quibus vita
fidelium scelerate etiam gesta sed poeniten ^^in melius mutata discedit, si
quemadmodum veraciter dicitur, Dimitte nobis, etc. ita veraciter dicatur, sicut
and nos, etc. id est, si siat quod dicitur.
For the daily, short, and light offenses, without which this life is not led,
the daily prayer of the faithful satisfies. But as he says so of these daily
and light offenses, so he says of other also in the next words: It blotteth
out also those from which the life of the faithful wickedly led, but by
repentance changed to better is departed, if as it is truly said, Forgive us
our trespasses, so it be truly said, As we forgive them that trespass against
us, that is, if it be done which is said. So then as it satisfies for the one,
so it satisfies for the other also: as for the lesser, so for the greater, and
for both obtains pardon at Gods hands. But Master Bishop here does merely
abuse his Reader by an equivocation of the name of satisfaction. For
Satisfaction with Saint Austine, as with all the ancient Ecclesiastical
Writers, imports the means whereby we are to entreat and obtain of God
pardon and forgiveness of our sins: but with Master Bishop and his fellows
it imports a punishment still remaining for sins past, and already
pardoned, to be endured either in this life, or after death in Purgatory, as
he has before expressed in the beginning of this Chapter. Saint Austines
meaning then is, that the daily prayer of the faithful suffices to obtain
pardon at Gods hands for our daily and common trespasses, yea and for greater
offenses also when by repentance and amendment of life we forsake them: but no
meaning has he either that the saying of the Lords prayer, should be a
recompense to God for our trespass, or that our trespass being pardoned,
there should still remain a satisfaction to be performed for it. Now here
Master Bishop further denies, that in the Lords prayer we use only plea of
pardon: for (says he) we are taught also to pardon others even as we will
look to be pardoned. And what then? what, because we are taught freely to
pardon others, shall we hereupon conceive, that God is hired by our pardoning
others to give pardon unto us? Our Savior Christ notes thereby the affection of
them to whom it belongs to use the plea of pardon: he says not any thing to
be construed to the impeachment and derogation of the freeness of the pardon.
Meekness and readiness to forgive, is Gal. 5.22.23.
a fruit of the spirit Romans 8.15.
of adoption, by which we cry Abba Father, in the voice of which spirit only
it is, that God hearkeneth unto us. Aug. Enchir. cap. 71. Eoru^ est dicere,
Pater noster, etc. qui iam tali patri regene rati sunt exaqua and Spiritu
sancto.
It is for them to say, Our Father which art in heaven, says Saint Austine,
who now are regenerate and borne again to such a Father of water and of the
holy Ghost. If we speak not by this spirit, our voice is as the voice of
strangers, and God gives no regard unto it. Therefore our forgiveness of
others is not alleged as the cause for which God is moved to forgive us, but
we present it to him as the mark of his spirit, which he has set upon us, and
as the token that we are his children, to who^ he has assigned it for a
portion to be made partakers of the forgiveness of sins, and to who^ Christ has
ministered comfort and boldness so to pray. His 2. exception is very vain also:
for although the Lords prayer contain not all things necessary to salvation,
yet the Lords prayer is the direction of all prayers necessary to salvation.
Therefore Tertullian calls it as he in his manner speaks, Tertul. de fuga
in persecut and li. de Orat.
legitimam orationem, the prayer that serves us for a law of praying; and
Austin also says: August. Epi. 121. cap. 12. Si per omnia precationum
sanctaru^ verba discurras, quanium existimo nihil inuenies quod non ista
dominica contineat and concludat oration.
If thou go over all the words of holy prayers, thou shall find nothing (as I
think) which this Lords prayer contains not. Yea Tertullian doubted not
further to affirm, that Tertul. de Ora. Breuiarium totius Euangelij.
it is the brief sum of the whole Gospel. Now therefore if in the Lords
prayer we ask forgiveness of sins only by plea of pardon, then it cannot
be that we should be taught elsewhere to ask forgiveness upon tender of
satisfaction, which wholly overthrows the name and nature of forgiveness.
And surely M. Bishops understanding might afford him to conceive, that
although the Lords prayer contain not all things necessary to salvation, yet
that that is there contained, receives no check from any thing spoken
otherwhere. As for his last exception it is most absurd, that the prayer by
which we entreat God not to urge us to satisfaction, should it self be
accounted a satisfaction, as if we said unto God, Forgive us our trespass, O
Lord, and yet we do not wish thee to forgive us altogether freely, and for
nothing; for even by our praying we make thee amends for our trespass.
Satisfaction is defined with them to be Thom. Aquin. Suppl q. 15. art. 15. in
corp. Opus satisfactorium oportet quod sit poenale.
a punishment, and because prayer as M. Bishop tells us, is one part of
satisfaction, we must understand that with them it is a punishment to pray, and
M. Bishop having received the penitents confession, and inioyning him a number
of Pater nosters, does enjoin him so many punishments, and makes him in
effect to say unto God again, O Lord forgive me my sins, and that I may
deserve that favor at thy hands, I here make thee satisfaction and recompense,
by enduring this punishment of praying to thee. Nay, it is scant so well: I
pray thee, gentle Reader, to mark well the contriuing of this matter. The
penitent comes to M. Bishop, who upon his confession gives him absolution of
all his sins, enioyning him for satisfaction and penance thus and thus to pray.
So then he says, O Lord, my sins be forgiven me already, but yet for a
punishment, and by way of satisfaction I say unto thee, Forgive us our
trespasses. These are the mysteries of the fornications of the whore of
Babylon, things reasonlesse, witless, senseless, mere witcheries and
enchantments of men's minds, and the untimely fruits of a barren strumpet, such
as the very common instinct of Christianity should teach all men to detest; to
discover them, is sufficient to confute them. But of this M. Bishop tells us
we shall hear more hereafter.

7. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins fourth Argument is taken out of certain odd fragments of ancient
writers.

Guiltiness being taken away, the punishment is also taken away. Tertul. de
Bapt.
True: he that is guilty of nothing, cannot justly be punished: for guiltiness
is a binding up to punishment (as M. Perkins defines, Page 28.
) then if the band to punishment be cancelled, the party is freed: but all this
is nothing to the purpose for guiltiness of temporal punishment does remain
after the sin and guilt of eternal be released.

Augustine says, Christ by taking upon him the punishment, De verb. Apost.
ser. 37.
and not the fault, has done away both fault and punishment. Just: the
eternal punishment which was due to that fault, not the temporal: as S.
Augustine himself declares: In Enchir. cap. 70.
God of compassion does blot out our sins committed, if convenient
satisfaction be not on our parts neglected.

To that other sentence out of him: When we are gone out of this world, there
will remain no compunction or satisfaction, it is easy to answer without the
help of any new edition: for it will be too late then to repent, and so there
is no place left to compunction, that is, contrition of heart: neither
consequently to confession or satisfaction: as if he had said, before we go out
of this world there is place for both compunction and satisfaction: and so that
place is rather for us.

Now to Chrysostom, who says, Tom. 10. hom. 5. Prem. in Esa.
That God so blotteth out our sins, that there remains no print of them: which
thing befalls not the body: for when it is healed, there remains a scarre;
but when God exempteth from punishment, he gives thee justice. All this is most
true, and much against M. Perkins doctrine of the infection of original sin,
but nothing touching satisfaction: for we hold, that the soul of a sinner when
he comes to be justified, is washed whiter then snow: so that there is no
stain or print left in it of the filth of sin. It is also freed from all
eternal punishment, but not from some temporal. Now gentle Reader, prepare
thy self to behold a proper piece of cosinage. Ambrose says, I read of
Peter's tears, but I read not of his satisfaction. Luke 22.
The color of the craft lies in the ambiguitie of this word satisfaction,
which is not always taken for the penance done to satisfy for the former
fault, but is sometime used for the defense and excuse of the fact. So speaks
S. Paul, Act. 24 10.
Bono animo pro me satisfaciam, with good courage I will answer in defense of
my self, 1. Pet. 3.
or give you satisfaction: in like manner Ready always to satisfy every one
that asks you reason of that hope which is in you. In this sense does S.
Ambrose use the word, as is most plainly to be scene to them that read the
place, and confer it with the very like of his, Lib. 10 in Luc.
I find not (says he) what Peter said, but I find that he wept: I read his
tears but I read not his satisfaction: but that which cannot be defended, may
be washed away. So that nothing is more manifest, then that satisfaction in
this and the like places is taken for defense and excuse of his fault, which
Peter used not, but sought by tears and bitter weeping to satisfy in part for
it: for this bewailing of our sins is one special kind of satisfaction, as
S. Ambrose testifies, saying, Lib. 2. de poenit. cap. 5.
That he who does penance, must with tears wash away his sins. The other
place cited out of S. Ambrose, De bono mortis, let us adore Christ, that he may
say unto us, fear not thy sins, nor the wa^^es of worldly sufferings, I have
remission of sins, is rather for us then against us: for if by adoring and
serving of God we may be put out of fear of our sins and the punishment of
them, then does it follow, that prayers and such like service of Christ, does
acquit us of sin, and satisfy for the pain due to them.

In Psalm 31.
Hierome says, The sin that is covered, is not seen; not being seen, it is
not imputed; not being imputed, it is not punished.

Answer. To wit, with hell fire: which is the due punishment of such mortal
sin whereof he speaks: or sin may be said to be covered, when not only the
fault is pardoned, but all punishment also due unto it is fully paid.

Lib. 2. de punit. cap. 5.
So does S. Ambrose take that word covered, saying, The Prophet calls both
them blessed, as well him whose iniquities is forgiven in Baptism, as him
whose sins are covered with good works: For he that does penance, must not
only wash away his sins with tears, but also with better works cover his
former sins, that they be not imputed unto him.

Now we must back again unto Chrysostom, belike he had forgotten this when
he cited the other, Hom. 44. sup. Math.
or else this was reserved to strike it dead. He says, Some men endure
punishment in this life and in the life to come: others in this life alone:
others alone in the life to come: other neither in this nor in the life to
come: there alone as Dives, here alone as the incestuous Corinthian: neither
here nor there, as the Apostles and Prophets, as also Job and the rest of this
kind, for they endured no sufferings for punishment, but that they might be
known to be conquerers of the fight.

Answer. Such excellent holy personages sufferings as are mentioned in the
Scriptures, were not for their sins; for they committed but ordinary light
offenses, for which their ordinary devotions satisfied abundantly. The great
persecutions which they endured, were first to manifest the virtue and power of
God, that made such frail creatures so invincible: then to daunt the
adversaries of his truth, and withal to animate and encourage his followers.
Finally, that they like conquerers, triumphing over all the torments of this
life, might enter into possession of a greater reward in the kingdom of
heaven. All this is good doctrine, but nothing against satisfaction, that their
surpassing sufferings were not for their own sins. And thus much in answer
unto M. Perkins arguments against satisfaction.

R. ABBOT.
Against his answer to the words of Tertullian, I must urge his own words in
the section before alleged, Does not a pardon take away from the fault
pardoned all bond of punishment due unto it, and consequently all guiltiness
belonging to it? Who can deny this, unless he know not or care not what he
say? Now then put these together. Tertullian says, Tertul. de haptismo.
Exempto reatu eximitur and poena.
The guilt being taken away, the punishment is also taken away. But the
pardoning of a sin, says M. Bishop, takes away all guiltiness belonging to
it. Therefore consequently it takes away all the punishment: for where there
is no guilt, no punishment can be. Yes says M. Bishop, guiltiness of
temporal punishment does remain after the sin and guilt of eternal be
released. But then a pardon does not take away all the guiltiness of sin, as
before he says it does. Oportet mendacem esse memorem: A liar must bear a
brain. Again, we would know some ground whereupon we may be assured that
sin has two kinds of guilt; for we conceive but one only guilt whereby the
sinner is guilty of all, both temporal and eternal punishments. Otherwise we
may with as good warrant affirm guilt of infinite sorts; one whereby a man is
guilty of burning, another whereby he is guilty of drowning, another for the
gowt, another for the palsy, and for every several punishment a several guilt;
and that there may be a remitting of one of these guilts, and yet a retaining
of the other. If M. Bishop take this to be absurd, he must give us leave to
take him for an absurd man in thus seuering the guilt of temporal and eternal
punishments. Yea and this assertion of his is the denying of that that in the
ground of this question is supposed and confessed. For if the sin be past and
pardoned, as he says at first, how remains there any guilt: for what is the
pardoning of a sin but the remitting of the guilt? The guilt is a bond,
whereby we stand bound to punishment; the forgiving of the sin, what is it
but the releasing or loosing of this bond? If the bond be released, why does he
affirm that we are bound still? or if we be still bound, why does he affirm
the loosing of the bond? If he will say that the bond is partly released, and
partly stands still, then let him say, the sin in part is pardoned, but not
wholly, and then let him show us what warrant he has, that God in that sort
forgiueth sins by patches and pieces, which because he cannot do, let him give
us leave to take him for that that he shows himself to be.

The words of Austine are merely deluded with the same shift. Aug. de verb.
Dom. ser. 37 Suscipiendo poenam and non suscipiendo culpam et culpam deleuit
and poenam.
Christ (says he) by taking upon him the punishment, and not taking upon him
the fault, has done away both the fault and the punishment. Just, says M.
Bishop, the eternal punishment, not the temporal. But how does he warrant
this limitation in the one part of the sentence which cannot be justified in
the other? Where it is said that Christ has taken upon him the punishment, it
is understood of our punishment both temporal and eternal, though that which
should have been eternal to us, by the infinite power of his Godhead was
overcome and made temporal to him. Was it S. Austins meaning then to say, that
Christ having taken upon him our whole punishment, has delivered us only from
a part, and left the rest to be satisfied by our selves? Surely what Christ
took upon him for us, from the same he delivered us. He took upon him our
temporal punishments: therefore he has taken away our temporal punishments,
so that they remain not in the nature of punishments but of medicines, to them
that have obtained forgiveness of sins by faith in him. That the mediation
of Christ extends to the remitting of temporal punishments, I have showed
Sect. 2. and 3.
before, and therefore need not stand here any longer to confute this improbable
and unlikely gloss. As for the place of Austine which he alleges for
coloring hereof, it has his answer in the former section, being the next
words to those that are cited there. August. Enchirid. cap. 70. Nemini dedit
laxamentu^ peocandi, quamuis miserando deleat ta^ facta peccata, si non
satisfactio congrua negligatur.
God has given to no man a freedom to sin, albeit the sins that are
already committed he in mercy blotteth out, if convenient satisfaction be not
neglected. Here is satisfaction first, and thereupon the blotting out of sin,
but M. Bishop tells us of the blotting out of sin first, and of a
satisfaction required after. Why does he wilfully abuse his Reader, to make
show of proving that to which he alleges nothing? The thing that he should
prove is, that God remitting the sin and the eternal punishment, does
reserve the making of a temporal satisfaction, and he brings in Austine
requiring convenient satisfaction for the remitting of the sin. His argument
then if we will frame it, must be this; We must use convenient satisfaction
unto God for the obtaining of the forgiveness of our sins. Therefore after
that our sins be forgiven us, we are still to make a temporal satisfaction
unto God; which if it be not a good one, we may take him to be stark naught.
Of the name of satisfaction I shall speak further in the last section; here it
is enough briefly to observe, that the convenient satisfaction spoken of by
Saint Austine, is no convenient argument for Popish satisfaction. The other
place cited from him, is a flat denial of satisfaction after this life. Homil.
5. Cum de hoc seculo transierimus, nulla compu^ctio vel satisfactio remanebit.
Some read, vel aliqua satisfactio, which must be resolved thus, Non vlla
compunctio vel satisfactio aliqua remanebit, or else the division leaves place
to compunctio^ and repentance after this life, which opinion Austine there
inueyeth against, and M. Bishop himself here disclaimeth.
When we are gone out of this world, there will not remain any compunction or
satisfaction. M. Bishop says, that there remains satisfaction though there
remain no compunction; but S. Austine says, there remains neither
compunction nor satisfaction. But although M. Bishops whole drift tend to that
that I have said, yet I wish thee gentle Reader, to observe here how pretily he
circumuenteth himself. After this life (says he) there is no place left to
compunction, that is, contrition of heart, neither consequently to confession
or satisfaction. If because there is no place for compunction in this life,
therefore there be no satisfaction after this life, why does he tell us in the
beginning that after this life there is satisfaction to be made in purgatory if
we die before we have fully satisfied here? why do they make men believe, that
for the dead satisfaction may be made by them that are alive? There is
satisfaction, he says, after this life, and he says there is no satisfaction
after this life, and thus indeed knows not what to say. But yet he tells
us, that S. Austin thereby acknowledges that before we go out of this world,
there is place both for compunction and satisfaction, and so that place (says
he) is rather for us. Well, but what he gains in the scabberd, he loses
double in the dagger. If Purgatory sink into hell, they are in a woeful case.
It is Purgatory satisfaction specially that they have their living by. Now
against Purgatory satisfaction he gives us this argument: where there is no
place for compunction, there is no place for satisfaction. But in Purgatory
there is no place for compunctio^. Therefore there is no place now left for
Purgatory satisfaction. As for satisfaction in this life, in such sort as S.
Austin speaks of it, we deny it not. Satisfaction is nothing else with him
but true repentance, as shall be showed hereafter; and we preach repentance,
not according to the illusions of Popery, but according to the truth of the
word of God.

The next words are cited out of Chrysostom, for which is noted Prooem. in
Esaiam. Others citing the same work, do set down what they cite, as ex
Hypomnemate in Esaiam. But the words are by my copy in his third homily de
Poenitentia, and they do indeed irrefragably overthrow M. Bishops
satisfactions. Chrysostom. de poenit. hom 3. Neque mihi dixeru, permultum
peccau^, quomodo salu^ri possum? Tu nequ^ sed Dominus tuus potest, atque ita
potest, vt tua deleat peccata. Sicenim delet peccata Deus, vt neque eorum
vestigium maneat. In corporibus qu^dem id non est ita, sed quanqua^ millies
conetur medicus creatrix remanet Deus autem sic delet vt neque cicatrix neque
cicatricis supersit indi iu^, non vestegium quodqua^, sed post poenae
liberatione^ and iustitiam inserit, and peccante^ coaequalem facit non
peccanti. Extinguit enim peccatum atque id non esse facit nec fuisse.
Say not unto me, I have sinned: how shall I be freed from so many sins? Thou
can not, but thy God can: yea and he will so blot out thy sins, that there
shall remain no print of them. Which thing befalls not the body, for when it is
healed, there remains a scarre, but God so blotteth out sins, as that there
remains no scarre nor token of scarre, no print or sign at all, but after
deliverance from punishment he gives thee justice, and makes the sinner
equal to him that has not sinned: for he extinguisheth sin, and makes it
not to be, yea as if it had never been. Which words are apparently spoken of
actual sins* Aug. de nupt. and concup. lib. 1. cap 26. Eorum peccatorum quae
manner non possunt, quoniam cum fiunt praetereunt, reatus tamen manet, etc.
Reus est donec reatus ipsius indulgentia remittatur.
The act whereof is past, as S. Austine says, with the time wherein they are
done, but the guilt remains, till by pardon it be remitted. Now God so
remitteth it, says Chrysostom, as that no print thereof remains. If no print
thereof remain, if it be as if it had never been, how does M. Bishop then tell
us, that after forgiveness there remains still a guilt of temporal
punishment? This is the point; why did he not answer to it? why does he turn
his speech from actual sins whereof the place is meant, to original sin
whereof it cannot be meant? because though he tell us that original sin
remains not, yet he cannot deny but that some scar or sign thereof
remains in the concupiscence of the flesh. But Chrysostom denies the
remaining of any scar or sign, which can no otherwise be true but only in
actual sins, whereof nothing but the guilt remains, and which by remission
is perfectly done away. But that original sin, though the guilt be remitted,
yet as touching the corruption continues still, has been sufficiently showed
before in the handling of that question.

As touching the place of Ambrose, I will not gainsay that which M. Bishop
answers. Ambrose says as M. Perkins alleges, Ambr. in Luc. lib 10. cap.
22. Lachrymas eius lego, satisfactionem non lego.
I read of Peter's tears, but his satisfaction I read not: but satisfaction
is not there taken in that meaning whereof we speak. He means indeed that he
used no apology, no excuse or answer for himself, but yielded himself with
tears to the acknowledgement of that that he had done amiss. The word of
satisfaction is here very improperly used, and therefore may very easily be
mistaken, without any purpose of cosinage or fraud. I might as well object
cosinage here to M. Bishop, who taking upon him to make good his answer by
another place of Ambrose, alleges for another place the very same which M.
Perkins cited. But Ambrose has the words indeed in another place in one of his
Ser. 46. Lachrymas eius lego, satisfactionem non lego; Recte plane Petrus
fleuit and tacuit quia quod defleri solet, non solet excusari.
sermons, and therefore we will not charge M. Bishop here with cosinage, there
being otherwise every while occasions enough to discover him to be a cosiner.
As for that which he says, that Peter sought by tears and bitter weeping to
satisfy in part for his fault, we take him to deal very absurdly in that he
should go about to make the Apostle so absurd, as to think the shedding of a
few tears to be any part of the redemption of so great a sin. The Apostles
tears were no part of Popish satisfaction, but the tokens of true repentance,
lamenting the wound, but seeking the cure only in the satisfaction of the
cross of Christ. As for that which he alleges from Ambrose, that De poenit.
lib. 2 cap. 5. Qui poenitentiam agit, non solum diluere lachrymis debet
peccatum suum, sed etiam, etc.
he that repents must with his tears wash away his sin: he needed not for
that phrase to have gone so far, he might have found it in the places In Luc.
lib. 10. cap. 22. Lauant lachrymae delict^ quod voce pudor est confiteri: and
idem habet ser. 46.
before alleged. But he spoke therein as we many times do, not as thinking the
tears of the body to be the washing away of the sins of the soul, but as
to note that the weeping and tears of faith do obtain of God the washing away
of our sins in the blood of Jesus Christ. In the other place S. Ambrose says
thus: Debono mortis. cap. 12. Nos eum in temporu^ fine quaeramus, et
complectamur pedes eius, and adoremus eum, vt d^cat and nobis, Nolite timere,
id est, nolite timere a peccatis seculi, nolite timere ab iniquitatibus mundi,
nolite timere a fluctibus corporalium passionu^; ego sum peccatorum remissio.
Let us seek Christ in our times, let us embrace his feet, and worship him,
that he may say unto us, Fear not: that is, fear not for the sins and
iniquities of the world; fear not for the waves of bodily sufferings, I am the
forgiveness of sins. So long as there is necessity of punishment,
especially such a Bellar. de poenit. lib. 4. cap. 1. Poena illa quae luenda
restat post culpae remissione^ est illa ipsa poena sensus qua^ in gelienna pati
debuisset peccator, remota solum a^ernitate.
hellish punishment as they say is in purgatory, so long there is just cause
of fear. But S. Ambrose tells us here, that Christ by forgiveness of sins
takes away all occasion of fear; that in our sins and iniquities he leaves
us nothing to be afraid of. It follows therefore, that after forgiveness of
sins there is no further punishment, no further satisfaction to be made. Here
M. Bishop again puts off his Reader with a dodge: If (says he) by adoring
and serving of God we may be put out of fear of our sins and the punishment
of them, then does it follow that prayers and such like service of Christ does
acquit us of sin, and satisfy for the pain due to them. Which is as leaden
an answer as if a man should say, If by entreating and praying the Physicion I
obtain of him a medicine whereby I am cured, then my entreating and praying is
the very medicine it self by which I am cured. For what do we seek Christ,
worship him, embrace him, desire him, pray unto him, but to be relieved,
succored, comforted and saved by him, that in him we may have satisfaction and
remission of our sins? What madness is it then to make our seeking, our
worshipping, our praying, to be themselves the satisfaction that we profess to
seek in him? But such madness do they run into, who will not submit their
right minds to the obedience of the faith of Christ. In the next place
follows Hierome. Hieron. in psalm. 31. Quod regitur no^ videtur: quod non
videtur, non imput^tur: quod non imputatur nec punietur.
That which is covered, is not seen; that which is not seen, is not imputed;
that which is not imputed, is not punished. He speaks it for exposition of
the words of David, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered; blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Now if the forgiving
of sin be not the imputing of sin, then where sin is forgiven, there is
no punishment, because there is no imputation of that to which the punishment
is due. That which is not imputed, is not punished. To wit, says M. Bishop,
with hell fire. But that answer will not serve his turn: for if it be any way
punished, it cannot be said not to be imputed: for whence arises the
punishment but from the imputation of the sin? Now of not imputing, S.
Austine tells us, that August. in Psalm. 118. Siquid a deuiante committitur,
propter viam non imputatur, and tanquam non fuerit operatus accipitur.
when sin is not imputed, a man is taken as if he had never done it. So says
S. Bernard, that Bernar in Can. ser. 23 Omne quod mihi ipse non imputare (...)
decreuer^t, sic est quasi non fuerit.
whatsoever God has determined not to impute, it is as if it had never been.
If it be as if it had never been, if a man be taken as if he had never done it,
how then does M. Bishop tell us, that there is still a satisfaction and
punishment to be endured for it? But therefore he brings us another answer,
such as for which be deserves to be admited for a wise and well learned man.
Sin may be said to be covered when not only the fault is pardoned, but also
all punishment due unto it is fully paid. So then whereas in brief Hierome
says, The sin that is, covered, is not punished: his meaning must be, that
it is not covered till it be fully punished: nay he is made directly to
contradict himself, and to say, The sin that is punished, is not punished.
Would not a man think him to be out of his right wits that makes such wrong
constructions of plain words? As for the words of Ambrose which he brings
in, what is there in them concerning punishment after the pardon of the fault?
He speaks of covering former sins with better works, but of covering them
with punishment he says nothing. And as for that which he says, though at
large it may be construed well enough, yet according to the exact truth of
Scripture it is untrue, namely that sins are understood there to be covered
with good works, as is plain by that the Apostle witnesses, that the Prophet
in that place describes Romans 4.6.
the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without
works. But the true covering of sin is that which S. Bernard speaks of,
when in one place he says that Bernar. in Can. ser. 23. Charitas patris
ipsorum cooperit multitudinem peccatorum.
the love of the Father, and in another place that Jbid. sermon. 61. Iustitia tua
in me operit multitudinem peccatorum.
the righteousness of Christ covers the multitude of our sins. And of
those words of David, it shall be worth the while to hear what Saint Austine
says, and to consider how well M. Bishops answer accords therewith. August.
in Psalm. 31. Quia totum gratiae imputatur non meritis nostris, beati quoru^,
etc. Non in quibus non sunt inuenta peccata, sed quorum tecta sunt peccata.
Cooperta sunt, tecta sunt, abolita sunt. Si texit peccata Deus, noluit
aduertere; si noluit aduertere, noluit animaduertere; si noluit animaduertere,
noluit punire: noluit agnoscere, maluit ignoscere.
Because all is imputed to grace (says he) and not to our merits, blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered. Not in whom no
sins are found, but whose sins are covered. They are covered, they are
hidden, they are abolished. If God have covered sins, he looks not on
them; if he look not on them, he minds them not; if he mind them not, be
will not punish them: he will take no knowledge of them, he chooses rather to
forgive them. If forgiveness of sins be such, as that God thenceforth
looks not on them, minds them not, takes no knowledge of them, punishes
them not, lets us know that that which M. Bishop says is an untruth, that he
still reserueth sharp and severe punishment both in this life and in the life
to come to be inflicted for them.

The force of the saying of Chrysostom which is the last, stands in this,
that he denies that the Apostles, and Prophets, and holy men endured their
sufferings for punishments, but that they might be known to be conquerers in
the fight. The place shows that the afflictions of the righteous and
faithful have not the nature of punishments, but lie upon them for other
respects, and therefore not being in the nature of punishments, they cannot be
accounted for satisfactions. M. Bishop answers, that they were no punishments
for their own sins. And why? for they (says he) committed but ordinary
light offenses, for which their ordinary devotions satisfied abundantly. A very
dapper, but a very fond speech of a remoislesse man, whose heart yet has never
felt what the burden of sin is. Good Lord, how lightly does he trip over with
ordinary light offenses? Surely the redeeming of those light offenses required
the shedding of the blood of the Son of God; and is it so lightly to be
skipped over, for which the Son of God shed his most precious blood? Tush,
says M. Bishop, their ordinary devotions did abundantly satisfy for their
sins. Belike they were proud hearted as he is: they would not be beholding to
God, they would not die in his debt; what they owed him they would pay
themselves for themselves, being rich enough, and well able to discharge all.
But will he make those holy men as very fools as himself, that they neither
knew God or themselves, but would think their ordinary devotions to be
sufficient satisfaction for their sins? No, no, they knew well that after all
their devotions they stood in need of Gods mercy, that they had still to cry,
Forgive us our debts, Enter not into judgment with us: that all their merits
were but dross, and all their satisfactions were but dung if they were opposed
against the judgment of God, as to shield them from their sins. But M. Bishop
yet adds more: It is nothing against satisfactions, that their surpassing
sufferings were not for their own sins. And why? because we must understand
forsooth, that though they were not satisfactions for their own sins, yet
they were so for other men's, and in that respect are called surpassing, as
namely exceeding the measure of their own sins. This is that impious monster
of Romish apostasy, whereby they have put the Saints in Christ's place, and
taught men to seek for that redemption in them which they should seek for and
find in him alone. But we would gladly know of M. Bishop, where those
surpassing sufferings of Job and of the Prophets and other holy Saints of old
were laid, before the storehouse was built at Rome? what use were they put to?
who was the dispenser and disposer of them? What, was there a Pope then also to
send pardons flying about the world to fetch one soul out of Purgatory for the
surpassing sufferings of another? Or shall we think that they lay idle all that
while, that the whole harvest of the^ toward the end of the world might be
brought together into the Popes barnes? The high Priest of the Jews was
ouerseene, that he did not take upon him to be Pope of Jerusalem, for of these
surpassing sufferings he might have raised much thrift. Wicked caitiues, that
thus delude men with blasphemous tales and lies, who thus defile the innocent
blood of the Son of God, by mingling with it the leprous and corrupted blood
of sinful men. They all thought wholly and only to be redeemed by Christ, and
must we think now in part to be redeemed by them? They knew themselves by
their sins guilty of eternal suffering, and must we now think their
sufferings to be beyond their sins? But against this blasphemy, sufficient
has been said before; albeit it is in it self so grossly impious and loathsome,
as that the very mention of it is enough to make all Christian hearts to detest
them that are the teachers of it.

8. W. BISHOP.
Now to the reasons which he produces for it. And albeit he like an evil
master of the camp, range our arguments out of order, placing that in the
forefront of our side, which Calvin presses out against us, Lib. 3. instit.
cap. 4. number. 29.
yet will I admit of it, rather then break his order.

1. Leuit. 4.56.
Moses according to Gods commandment prescribed several sacrifices for the
sins of several persons, and ordained that they should be of greater and lesser
prices, according unto the diversity of the sins. Whence we argue thus:
These men's faults upon their true repentance, joined with faith and hope in
Christ to come were pardoned: Therefore their charges in buying of sacrifices
to be offered for them, their pains and prayers in assisting, during the time
of the sacrifice, being painful works done to appease Gods justice, were works
of satisfaction.

M. Perkins answers many things, as men do commonly when they cannot well
tell what to say directly to the purpose: First, that those sacrifices were
types of Christ's suffering on the cross: what is this to the purpose?
Secondly, that those sacrifices were satisfactions to the congregation: and
what needed that, when they had offended God only, and not the congregation,
as in many offenses it happens? Again, if satisfaction must be given to the
congregation, how much more reason is it that it be made to God? Read those
Chapters, and you shall find that they were principally made to obtain
remission of God, as these words also do witness: Leuit. 4. ver. 20.
And upon that sacrifice, the sin shall be forgiven them. So that sacrifices
were to satisfy God, who thereupon forgave the sin, and all pain due to it.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop belike had no great conceit of this argument of theirs, and
therefore was angry that M. Perkins should disgrace them by putting it in the
first place. Ilfauouredly it is propounded, and ilfauouredly maintained, but
yet such learning it is, as he with great pains has brought from Rome. The
foundation that he lays is a lie, and the building that he sets upon it, a
ridiculous consequence. He tells us, that Moses prescribing by the
commandment of God several sacrifices for several persons, did ordain that
they should be of greater and lesser prices, according the diversity of the
sins. But where is that ordinance? why does he not exemplify that which he
says? where do we find in Moses law, that for such or such a sin, greater or
less, shall be offered a sacrifice of such or such greater or lesser price?
Surely he is little acquainted himself in Moses law, and some Register or
other gave him a gudgeon at Rome, and made him believe that the Popes Taxa
poenitentiaria, whereby every sin is rated at a certain price, was framed
according to the same law of Moses, and according to the prices of the
sacrifices prescribed therein. We read there indeed of diverse sacrifices, as
in sins of ignorance Leuit. 4.3.
for the Priest a young bullock, Ver. 14.
for the whole congregation the same; Ver 22.23.
for a ruler a he goat; for any of Ver. 28.
the people a she goat; Chap. 5.15.
for any consecrate thing by error withholden a ram of two shekels; Ver. 18.
for other trespass against holy things ignorantly done, the same; for Chap.
6.6.
sin wittingly committed, the same also; for the high Chap. 16.3.
Priests yearly offering for himself and his house, a bullock and a ram; and
for the whole people Ver. 5.
two he goats and a ram. This diversity we read, and some few other such
like, but of sacrifices of greater or lesser price, according to the diversity
of the sins, we read nothing, it is a thing that Moses and Aaron never knew.
Well, let that go, let us see what argument he has framed against us. These
men's faults (says he) upon their true repentance, joined with faith and hope
in Christ, were pardoned. Therefore their charges in buying of sacrifices,
their pains and prayers in assisting during the time of the sacrifice, being
painful works, done to appease Gods justice, were works of satisfaction. O
what pains here was for the appeasing of Gods justice, to stand by and pray
whilst the sacrifice was offering. Such cruel pains does M. Bishop impose
upon his penitents for their sweet sins, that a man may swear they are the
worse for it all their life after. Vain man, was this a pains to be spoken
of, for the satisfying and appeasing of the justice of God for sin? But to
let this pass, if Of the certainty of salvation. sect. 2.
the honest man, of whom M. Bishop has spoken before, should out with a little
Latin, and tell him here, M. Doctor, negatur argumentum, how foully would he be
grauelled, and so set at a Nonplus, that he could not tell which way to turn
him. What, because they that offered the sacrifice with true repentance in the
faith of Christ were pardoned, does it therefore follow that their charges and
their pains were the satisfaction for their sins? The honest man would tell
him, Good sir, you err by assigning a wrong cause; for it was not for his
charges and his pains that he was pardoned, but for his faith in Christ. He
laid not his hand upon himself, as to lay his sin upon himself, but Leuit.
1.4.
he laid it upon the head of the dumb beast, as in figure of Jesus Christ, Esa.
53.6.
upon whom the Lord would lay the iniquities of us all. Therefore his
sacrifice, if he offered it aright, was only a profession of the hope of
redemption by Christ, and he was thereby instructed in him alone to expect full
satisfaction and forgiveness of his sins. Now thus in effect M. Perkins
answered him, and he reciting the answer by halues, asks, What is this to the
purpose? Very much it is against his purpose, if in the sacrifices themselves
there were nothing else but a direction to seek satisfaction in Jesus Christ.
Heb. 10.1.
The Law had the shadow of good things to come, and not the (lively or
substantial) image of the things themselves. Therefore no satisfaction indeed,
but only a shadow of satisfaction to come was to be found therein. For Ver. 4.
it was impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sin. And
therefore the Law was Chap. 7.18.
abolished for the weakness and unprofitableness of it. How should it be said
to be weak, or why should it be called unprofitable, if satisfaction for
sins were to be found in it? Albeit in some meaning M. Perkins acknowledges
in them a satisfaction, not to God, but to the Church of God, as testimonies of
their repentance, and of their desire to be reconciled to God and men. What
needed that, says M. Bishop, when they had offended God only, and not the
congregation, as in many offenses it happens? I answer him, that because all
men are sinners, every man was by these sacrifices to give acknowledgement
thereof as touching himself, and to show his care to be reconciled to God,
either for public or private offenses, whereby he had with Achan provoked Gods
wrath against his people as well as against himself. Upon the doing whereof,
men were accounted to the Church and with men, as sanctified and cleansed from
their sins, and no exception was to be taken against their joining themselves
to the Church. And therefore for warrant of this distinction the Scripture
teaches, that those sacrifices did Heb. 9.13.
sanctify as touching the purifying of the flesh, that is, outwardly to men,
but Ver. 9.14. and chap. 10.1.2.
to sanctify the conscience, to acquit the conscience of sins, it reserueth
as a thing peculiar to the blood of Christ. But, says M. Bishop, if
satisfaction must be given to the congregation, how much more reason is it that
it be made to God? True, but what are we sinful wretches, that we should think
that any thing that we can do should be a satisfaction to him for sin? But
much more absurd are we to think, that the offering of a brute creature
should be any part of the redemption thereof. Our satisfacton therefore is not
any thing that we do or can do, but it is only the pleading of a satisfaction
paid for us in the blood of Christ. Yet he still urges, that sacrifices were
to satisfy God, because it is said, that upon the sacrifice the sin shall be
forgiven. But I have already answered him, that it was forgiven not for the
sacrifice sake, but for Christ's sake, whom the offerer was to understand
therein. And we know, that of Sacraments usually those effects are spoken which
properly belong to those things whereof they are sacraments. It is rightly said
by Tertullian, that God in these sacrifices Tertul contra Marc lib. 3. Non quae
siebant exigens sed propter quod fiebant.
required not the things which were done, but that for which they were done.
And therefore as Origin says, as touching the high Priests standing forth to
appease the wrath of God, when the Angel was gone forth to be the executioner
thereof, Orige^. in Number. hom. 9. Neque enim indumenta Po^tificis purpura and
Lina and bysso contexia erubuisset Angelus ille vastator, sed ista quae futura
erant indume^ta magni Pontificis intellexit and ijs cessic.
The destroying Angel would not have bashed at the high Priests garments, made
of purple, and wool, and silk, but he understood those garments that should
be of the great high Priest (Jesus Christ) and to them he yielded: even so we
are to conceive that the wrath of God was no whit nor in any sort pacified by
those sacrifices for the things themselves that were done therein, but he
respected in them the blood and sacrifice of his only begotten Son, and
thereto was content to yield himself satisfied and appeased toward them that
offered with faith in him.

9. W. BISHOP.
The reason for us (which indeed is the very groundwork of satisfaction) may
thus be framed: many after pardon obtained of their sins, have had temporal
punishment laid upon them for the same sins, and that by Gods own order:
wherefore after the forgiveness of the sin, and the eternal punishment of it
through Christ's satisfaction, there remains some temporal pain to be
endured by the party himself for the same sin, which is most properly that
which we call satisfaction. They deny that any man has been punished
temporally for any sin which was once pardoned: we prove it first by the
example of the Israelites, whose murmuration against God, was at Moses
intercession pardoned; Numb. 14.
yet all the elder sort of them, who had seen the miracles wrought in Egypt
for their deliverance, were by the sentence of God deprived of the sight of the
land of promise, and punished with death in the wilderness for the very same
their murmuration. The like judgment was given against Moses himself and
Aaron, Numb. 20. Deuteronomy. 32.
for not glorifying God at the waters of contradiction: both of them had their
sin pardoned, yet were they both afterward for the same debarred from the
entrance into the holy land.

To this M. Perkins answers, first, that a man must be considered in a two
fold estate, as he is under the law, and as he is under grace. In the former
estate, all afflictions were curses of the Law: in the latter, they are turned
unto them that believe in Christ, from curses into trials, corrections,
preuentions, admonitions, instructions, and into what you will else, saving
satisfaction. Now to the purpose. Whereas God (says he) denied the believing
Israelites, with Moses and Aaron, to enter into the land of Canaan, it cannot
be proved that it was a punishment or penalty of the law laid upon them: the
Scripture has no more but that it was an admonition unto all ages following,
to take heed of like offenses, as Paul writes, 1. Cor. 10.
All these things came unto them for examples, and were written for our
admonition.

Reply. He that will not be ashamed of this audacious assertion, needs not to
care what he says. Has the Scripture no more of their fact, then that it was
an admonition to others? Turn to the original places, where the whole matter
in particular is related: First their murmuration, then Moses intercession for
them, and the obtaining of their pardon, and lastly after all the rest, Gods
sentence of deprivation of them from entering into the land of promise for that
their murmuration. Again, Aaron shall not enter into the land, Numb. 14. Number.
20. ve. 24. Deuteronomy. 32.51.
because he has bin disobedient to my voice: and of Moses, Because he has
trespassed against me at the waters of strife. So that nothing is more clear,
even by the testimony of the holy Ghost, then that their days were shortened,
and their hope of entrance into the land of promise cut off, in punishment of
those offenses, which were before forgiven them. And these things being
recorded, as S. Paul testifies, for our admonition and instruction, we are to
learn thereby, that God so deals daily with all those sinners that he
calls to repentance.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop here makes a hot and a long harvest, and all his corn will not
yield him so much as one morsel of bread. He tells us that the argument
which he here handles is the very groundworke of satisfaction: now if the
goundworke fail, we may be well assured that the building cannot stand. We
deny indeed that any affliction or judgment of God has lien upon any faithful
man in the nature and condition of a punishment after the forgiveness of his
sin. The things themselves, which in their own nature are punishments, and
at the first are inflicted in that nature, yet the sin being forgiven, lose
that nature, and become only trials, preuentions, admonitions, instructions;
neither do we therein conceive Gods anger against us, but his fatherly
goodness, and providence and care to keep us to himself, that he may make us
partakers of eternal life. Thus carnal concupiscence being of it self a
punishment of sin, though according to the guilt it be taken away by
remission of sins, yet according to the thing it self remains in the
faithful, not now for a punishment, but for the humbling and exercising of us,
to make us to know our selves, to draw us to trust and confidence in God, to
sharpen our desire and love of that righteousness for which we fight in fighting
against it. So death of it self the wages of sin, becomes to the faithful as
a poison broken into a medicine, and as a serpent that has lost his sting:
Bern. in Cant. Ser. 26. Iam non stimulus sed iubilus. I am cantando moritur
homo and moriendo cantat. Vsurparis ad laetitiam matter moeroris, vsurparis ad
gloriam gloriae inimica: vsurparis ad introitum regni porta inferi and fouea
perditionis ad inuentionem salutis.
There is no sting but song, says S. Bernard, man now dies singing, and
sings dying. O thou mother of mourning, says he, thou art turned to joy;
thou enemy of glory do now serve to give glory; thou gate of hell art used
for an entry to the kingdom of heaven, and thou pit of destruction for the
finding of salvation. S. Austin says thereof, that Aug. de pec. mer. and
remis. li. 2. cap. 34. Morte^ cerporis propter peccatum homini Deus inflixit,
and post peccatorum remissionem propter exercendam iustitiam non ademit. Et
paulo prius: eam fidelibus euenire, vt eius timore vince^do exerceretur
fortitudo iustitiae
God inflicted death for the punishment of sin, and after forgiveness of sins he
still left it for the exercising of righteousness: that, says he, the
fortitude of righteousness might be exercised in ouercoming the fear thereof.
The like has been noted out of him Sect. 2.
before concerning other judgments laid upon mankind in the beginning, by
reason of sin. Now as of these, so of all other afflictions after
forgiveness of sins, we resolve that they forgo their former condition and
property, and cease to be reuengements and punishments for sin, but have
other respects and uses for which they are continued. The examples so strongly
urged by Master Bishop make nothing against this. First, the Israelites
murmr, God to Moses threateneth wholly to destroy the^, promising to make of
him a mighty people. Moses prays unto God to withhold that wrath from his
people, and to forgive the trespass. God says, Number. 14.20.
I have forgiven it according to thy request: but he adds, Notwithstanding as
I live all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord: for all those
men which have seen my glory and my miracles which I did in Egypt and in the
wilderness, and have tempted me these ten times, and have not obeyed my voice,
certainly they shall not see the land whereof I swear unto their fathers. Here
is the forgiveness of a sin, says M. Bishop, and yet a punishment ensuing
after. But we answer him, that this example alters the question, and comes
not within the compass of that whereof we speak. For it is one thing to speak
of the forgiveness of a sin to the whole body of a people, and another thing
to speak of forgiveness to one particular man. Forgiveness of a sin to a
whole people is not absolute, but only in a respect: it is not simply the
taking away of a sin, but the taking of it away in some sort, and therefore
though it be the excluding of one punishment, yet nothing hinders but that it
may leave place for another, yea and though in common there be a forgiveness,
yet in particular there may still remain an imputation of the sin, even as
amongst this people were many reprobates and cast-awayes, who though they were
forgiven and freed in respect of the destruction then threatened, yet being
void of repentance and true faith, found otherwise spiritually no benefit at
al of this forgiveness. God says not here simply, I have forgiven it, but I
have forgiven it according to thy request. Moses request was according to Gods
threatening; Gods threatening was wholly to destroy that nation. In this
respect God said, I have forgiven it, namely so, as not at once to destroy this
people according to my wrath and indignation conceived against them. And this
Lyra very well observed: Lyra in Number. ca. 14. Been dicit iuxta quod non
totaliter dimisit, sed quantum ad hoc quod non deleret totum populum simul.
He says well (says he) according to thy request, because he did not wholly
pardon it, but only as touching the not destroying of the whole people at
once. Now albeit in this respect he did forgive it, because he did not wholly
forgive it, therefore he voweth to glorify himself throughout all the earth,
by making them an example of his judgment upon unthankful men, with whom no
sights nor sayings can prevail to make them obedient to the voice of God.
Therefore he would forbear to destroy them in that sort, and to their seed he
would make good the promise of the land of Canaan, but as for them he would
wear out the whole multitude of them, that not one of them should have the
enjoying or sight thereof. This he laid as a judgment in common upon that
generation of men, which had so infinitely from time to time provoked him, as
that they made him Psalm. 95.12.
to swear that they should not enter into his rest. But yet in the bosom of
that multitude we cannot doubt but many there were, who truly repented and
obtained forgiveness both of this and of all their other sins, and yet together
with the rest were deprived of entrance into that holy land. For God does not
except particular men from general and common plagues, and when he strikes a
nation with famine, sword, pestilence or other calamity; both one and other,
good and bad are subject unto it, Cyprian. contra Demetr. Intrae vnam domum
boni and mali interim co^tinemur: quicquid intrae domum euenerit pari sort
perpetimur, donec, etc.
We are shut up together in one house, says Cyprian, and whatsoever befalls
within the house we suffer it all alike. Only he so orders, that what is to
a nation in common for revenge and punishment, becomes in particular to the
repentant and faithful a help and furtherance of salvation. And so was it with
the believing Israelites, who though by a common judgment they were excluded
corporally from the Sacrament and sign, yet were thereby spiritually edified,
and learned with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob so much the more to meditate, to
desire and long for the spiritual and everlasting rest. Albeit in respect of
the faithful also it is to be understood that Gods chastisements oftentimes
lie upon them after forgiveness of sins, though not for punishments to
themselves, yet for exemplary admonitions to others, Tho. Aquin. 12. q. 87.
art. 6. ad 3. Vt edifice^tur in poena, qui sca^d^lizati sunt in culpa.
that (as Thomas Aquinas speaks, they may be edified by the punishment that
were scandalized by the sin. And thus S. Austin rightly says, that Aug in
Joan. tr. 124. Productior est poenae quam culpa, ne parua putaretur culpa, si
cum illa finiretur and poena.
the punishment is continued longer then the sin, lest the sin should be
esteemed but small, if the punishment should be ended together with it. And
this M. Perkins well observes in general concerning that example of the
Israelites, that God though his judgment proceeded not one way, yet would have
it to be seen another way, though not for punishment to them that repented and
believed, yet for example to future times to take heed of cutting themselves
off by unbelief and disobedience from the heavenly rest, as these had done
from the seal and Sacrament thereof, the Apostle to that purpose saying: 1.
Cor. 10.11.
These things came to them for ensamples, and are written to admonish us upon
whom the ends of the world are come. Now as we conceive in general of the
faithful of that people, so we do in particular of Moses and Aaron. M. Bishop
urges it set down, that therefore they entered not, because they trespassed,
because they were disobedient. And who makes doubt, but that their trespass
and disobedience was the original cause of the debarring of them? But still we
say, that the cause of this debarring of them being forgiven, the effect still
continued for other use: which in them was not only moral, but also mystical,
God willing thereby to give to understand, that the Law, which was given by
Moses, and the Priesthood that was executed by Aaron, could not bring us to
that eternal inheritance which was figured by the land of Canaan but only
Jesus, who was figured by Iosuah, could yield unto us the possession thereof.
Thus S. Austin makes mystical and spiritual application thereof, affirming
that August. contra Faust. Man. lib. 16. cap. 19. Non introducebat populum in
terram promissionis, ne videlicet lex per Mosen non ad saluandum sed ad
conuincendu^ peccatorem data introducere putaretur. Ita Tertula^iuer Marcionem
l^b. 3.
Moses did not bring the people of Israel into the land of promise, lest the
law which was given by Moses not to save, but to convict the sinner, should be
thought to bring us into the kingdom of heaven. But fully to answer this
point, and to stop M. Bishops mouth, let us take that which the same S. Austin
says in another place: Idem in Psa. 98. Quaerimus vindictam in Moyse, prope
nullam habet nisi quod ad extremu^ a^t illi Deuteronomy, Ascend in montem and morere.
A^t seni, Morere, tam peregeras ^etates suas: nunquid nunquam erat moriturus?
Quaelis illa vindicta? Ostendit ibi vindictam suam, vt diceret, Non intrabis in
terra^ promissionis, qua^ intraturus erat populus. Quanda^ figuram quorundam
gerebat Moses. Nam qui in regnum coeloru^ intrauit magna illa poena crat
adie^ram illam non venire qua ad tempas erat promissa vt vmbram osteude ret and
transi^e^^ Nonne mulit perfi^^ntrauerunt in illam terram? Nonne in illa terra
viuentes multa mala feceru^t and Deum offenderunt? Nonne and idolotriam secuti
sunt in terra illa? Magnum erat non dedisse terram istam Moysi, sed Moses
voluit gestare figuram eorum qui sub lege erant quia per Moysen data est lex,
and ostendit eos qui sub lege esse vellent, and sub gratia esse nollent non
intraturos interram promis^ionis. Ergo illud quod dictum est Moysi figura erat,
non poena. Se^ mers quae poena? Non intrare in illam terram quae poena quo
intrauerunt indigni?
We seek Gods punishment in Moses, says he, and he had in a manner none, but
that God at last says to him, Go up into the hill and die. He says to an old
man, Go die: he had now finished his years; what, should he never die? what
punishment is this? He showed him there his punishment, in that he said: Thou
shall not enter into the land of promise, to which the people was to enter.
Moses did here bear a figure of some: for he being to enter into the kingdom
of heaven, was it a great punishment not to come to that land which was
promised, for a time to carry a shadow, and so to pass away? Did not many
unfaithful men enter into that land? did not they that lived in that land
commit many evils and offend God? did they not follow idolatry in that land? A
great matter it was not to give this land unto Moses: but Moses was to bear a
figure of them which are under the law, because the law was given by Moses, and
he shows that they which would be under the law, and would not be under
grace, should not enter into the land of promise. Therefore that which was said
to Moses was a figure, not a punishment: what punishment was it to an old man
to die? what punishment was it, not to enter into that land, into which
unworthy men did enter? Here then it is plain, that the not suffering of Moses
to enter into the land of Canaan, was not a matter of punishment, but a matter
of figure. God took the occasion thereof of his trespass, but the trespass
being remitted, it was turned from being a punishment to him, to be a mystery
of faith both to him and us. But it were worth the while here to question with
M. Bishop, how he should make the not entering of all these into the land of
Canaan, to be any satisfaction for their sins? what did they or suffered they,
that might carry the name of a satisfaction? Did any thing herein befall them,
but what befell to many just and godly Fathers before that time? He says,
their days were shortened, but how were the days of Moses and Aaron
shortened, when the one lived to Deuteronomy. 34.7.
120. and the other to Numb. 33.39.
123. years, almost double to that number of years which Moses noted for the
ordinary time of the life of man, Psalm. 90.10.
The days of our age are threescore years and ten. Yea Moses was so old, as
that he said, Deuteronomy. 31.2.
I am a hundred and twenty year old: I can no more go in and out. Again, we
wonder, whereas M. Bishop has told us before, that such excellent holy
personages by their ordinary devotions satisfied abundantly for their sins,
how it came to pass, that all Moses devotions for the space of Deuteronomy. 2.14.
eight and thirty years after, could not satisfy for that one sin of his,
but that it still hindered him from entering into the promised land? Surely, M.
Bishop cannot well tell us how these things hang together. But to conclude this
point M. Perkins had set down by the words of the holy Ghost, the use of Gods
chastisements toward his children, and M. Bishop as loath to be acquainted
therewith, says nothing of it. 1. Cor. 11.32.
When we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. The occasion thereof is our sin: Ver. 30.
For this cause many are weak and sick amongst you, and many sleep: but the
use thencefoorth is not for satisfaction but for salvation, that we may not be
condemned with the world.

10. W. BISHOP.
Now to the next example, which M. Perkins makes our third reason. King David
was punished for his aduoultrie after his repentance, for the child died, 2.
Re. 12.
and was plagued in the same kind of incest by Absolon: and when he had numbered
the people, 2. Re. 24.
he was after his own repentance, punished in the death of his people.

M. Perkins answers, that the hand of God was upon him after his repentance:
but those judgments which befell him, were not curses to him properly, but
corrections of his sins.

Reply. What dotage is this, to grant the very same thing, which he would be
thought to deny: but yet in other terms, that the simple (whom only he can
beguile) may not perceive it: if the hand of God were upon David correcting him
for his sin, and that after his repentance: did not David then suffer temporal
punishment for his sins before forgiven? which is most properly to satisfy
for them. Yea over and beside this punishment inflicted by God, he of his own
devotion performed far greater satisfaction, by putting on sackcloth, lying
on the bare ground, by watering his couch with tears, and making ashes his
food, and in this most pitiful plight, he made most humble supplication unto
God, to wash him more and more from his iniquity: he never dreamed that this
his satisfaction should be any derogation unto the satisfaction of his Lord and
Savior: Psalm. 50.
but in the Psalm says: that such an humble and contrite heart, is a sweet
sacrifice unto God. We deny not but the punishing of one, is a warning and
admonition unto another, to take heed of the like: so may not they deny, but
that correction is to the party himself, as an admonition to beware afterward,
so a correction and punishment of the fault past. Psalm. 50.
Which S. Augustine upon this verse of the Psalm, Thou have loved truth,
teaches most plainly, saying: Thou have not left their sins whom thou did
pardon, unpunished: for thou before did so show mercy, that thou might
also preserve truth: thou do pardon him, that confesses his fault, thou
do pardon him, but so as he do punish himself: and by that means both
mercy and truth are preserved.

R. ABBOT.
This matter concerning David was answered long ago by S. Austin against the
Pelagian heretics, who having set down for a rule of the chastisements and
afflictions of this life, that August. de peccat. mer. and remis. lib. 2. ca.
34 supra Sect. 2.
before forgiveness they are punishments of sins; after forgiveness the
combats and exercises of the just, as before was said, brings for example
thereof this that M. Bishop here obiecteth concerning David. Tale aliquid nobis
insinuatu^ est de Patriarcha David ad quem cum Propheta missus esset, eique
propter peccatum quod commiserat eue^tura mala and iracundia Dei comminaretur,
confessione peccati veniam meruit, and tamen consequuta sunt quae Deus fuerat
comminatus vt sic humiliaretur a filio, etc. Cur dimisso peccato quod erat
minatus impleuit? Respondebitur remissionem peccati factam ne homo a
percipienda vita impediretur aeterna, subsecutum vero illius comminationis
effectum, vt pietas hominis in illa humilitato exerceretur atque probaretur.
Such a matter, says he is insinuated unto us concerning the Patriark David,
to whom the Prophet being sent, and threatening unto him the evils, that by the
wrath of God should befall unto him for the sin that he had committed, by the
confession of his sin he obtained pardon, and yet those things followed which
were threatened, that he should be so humbled by his son. Why did God fulfill
that, when he had forgiven the sin? We are to answer, that the sin was
forgiven, lest the man should be hindered from eternal life: but the effect of
the threatening followed, that the piety of the man might be exercised and
proved in that humiliation. Here was just occasion given to Saint Austine to
have mentioned Master Bishops satisfaction if he had known it, but he knew it
not, and therefore said nothing of it. He denies David's afflictions after
forgiveness to be punishments: he makes the use of them to be thencefoorth
only for combat and exercise and trial of his piety and faith. Therefore in
calling them corrections as from a father in respect of time to come, not
punishments as from a Judge in respect of time past, we say nothing but what
Saint Austine says. As for David's mourning afterward, expressed in the one
and fiftieth Psalm, it was the testimony of his true repentance, the
expressing of his desire to be disburdened of his sin, and to be established
by the grace of God, that he might not in such sort fall again. His 2. Sam.
12.16.
fasting and lying on the earth, were to entreat the Lord for the sparing of
the child's life: but in nothing that he did do we find any dreaming of
satisfaction. He knew well that it was a derogation to the satisfaction of
Christ to seek in himself that satisfaction that was to be sought for in
Christ alone. He knew, that Psa. 51.17.
a broken and contrite heart is a sweet sacrifice to God, but yet he knew it
not to be a sacrifice propitiatory for the sin of man. It is not it self a
satisfaction for sin, but only the disposition of him who seeks to find
satisfaction in the Son of God. And this broken and contrite heart grieuing
and sorrowing for sin, is that punishment whereof Saint Austine speaks in
the words which Master Bishop cites, and which he calls the punishing of a
man's self, and is the affection wherewith we are to seek forgiveness at Gods
hands. Which when we are careless of, God strikes us with his rods and
punishments to work it in us, and to make us seek the forgiveness of our
sins. This the Apostle gives to understand when he says, 1. Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord, as if he
should say, that because we judge not our selves therefore does the Lord judge
us, that thereby we may be taught to judge our selves. Thus our sin is
punished that it may be forgiven, but after forgiveness thereof Saint Austine
denies (as we have heard) that any thing remains as a punishment for sin,
neither does this place import any thing otherwise. As for the other instance
that he uses concerning the plague inflicted for the numbering of the people,
it was more for the punishment of the people, then of David himself for the
numbering of the people, though by David's numbering of them God would take the
occasion of it. Therefore the story says: 2. Sam. 24.1.
The wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moned David against
them, in that he said: Go number Israel and Judah. Here therefore necessary it
was, and standing with the glory of God by David's prayer, that the sin of the
people should be forgiven as well as David's sin. David prayed for them. He
offered a burnt offering as it were to tender unto God the mediation of Jesus
Christ, that for his sake he might be merciful unto them. Upon this it is
said: Ver. 25.
The Lord was appeased toward the land, and the plague ceased from Israel.
This makes plainly against M. Bishop, because it proves directly, that the
forgiving of the sin was the staying of the plague, not that the plague
continued after the forgiveness of the sin.

11. W. BISHOP.
Our fourth reason: The Prophets of God, when the people were threatened with
Famine, the Sword, the Plague, or such like punishments for their sins, did
commonly exhort them to works of penance, as fasting, prayer, haire-cloth, and
the like, to appease Gods wrath justly kindled against them: which being
performed by them, God was satisfied. So (for example sake) the Ninevites at
Jonas preaching, doing penance in sackcloth and ashes, turned away the
sentence of God against them.

M. Perkins answers, that famine, the plague, and such like scourges of God,
were not punishments of sins, but corrections of a Father.

Reply. This is most flat against a thousand express texts of the Scripture;
which declare, that for the transgressions of Gods commandments, he has sent
those punishments upon the people of Israel. And what is the correction of a
father, but the punishing of a shrewd son for some fault committed, yet in a
mild sort? Or does the Schoolmasters (which is Caluins example) whippe the
scholar, or strike him with the Ferula, but to punish him for some fault? So
that great Rabbis seem not to understand what they say themselves, when they
admit those scourges of God to be the corrections of a Father, but not the
punishment for a fault. As though fathers used to correct those sons who
never offended them: or masters to beat such scholars as commit no faults.

But says M. Perkins, these punishments be tending to correction, not serving
for satisfaction: what senseless ryming is this? by due correction of the
fault, the party is satisfied in justice: and when he that has offended does
abide such punishment as the grieuousnesse of his offense did require, there is
both due correction of the offender, and due satisfaction unto the party
offended.

M. Perkins finally flies unto his old shift of imputative satisfaction: that
forsooth our sufferings do not satisfy, but the party punished by faith lays
hold on the satisfaction of the Messiah, and testify the same by their
humiliation and repentance.

Reply. As we first grant that all satisfaction has his virtue from the grace
of God, dwelling in us, which is given us for Christ's sake: so to say that
Christ's satisfaction takes away all other satisfaction, is just to beg the
principal point in question, and therefore an old triuants trick, to give that
for a final answer, which was set in the beginning to be debated: look upon
the forenamed example of the Ninevites, of who^ it is not certain that they
had any express knowledge of the Messiah, and therefore were far enough off
from laying hold on his satisfaction. But most certain and evident it is in
the text, that God upon the contemplation of their works of penance, took
compassion on them, and was satisfied; as by turning away the threatened
subversion, is most manifest.

R. ABBOT.
It is an old saying, Tertul. adu. Marc. lib. 4.
Propter quod venimus, hoc age; Do that that we come for. M. Bishop builds
here beside his groundworke. He propounds a Satisfaction to be made for
sins past and pardoned, that is, after the forgiveness of the sins, and
brings us arguments to prove a satisfaction for the obtaining of that
forgiveness. But we will take them as they come, though by their own grounds
they be worth nothing, there being no satisfaction to be made by a man, as we
shall see hereafter, so long as he continues in mortal sin, and still
continuing in it, until by forgiveness it be blotted out. The Prophets
denounce famine, sword, pestilence. M. Perkins should not have made any
question, but that they denounce them as the punishments of sin, as fruits
and effects of Gods curse according to the law. So did God accordingly execute
them in fury and wrath, for just reuengement upon a rebellious and unthankful
people. The point of question stood not in this, neither needed M. Bishop to
bestow so much pains for the proving of it. Yet it is to be observed, that
although God in general denounced and executed the same by way of revenge and
punishment, yet in particular he had always a respect to the calling and
saving of his elect, turning those common judgments to be unto them occasions
of repentance, and turning unto God to obtain of him remission of their sins
and everlasting life. To them therefore upon their repentance the nature of
punishments was altered, and they became means either to receive them
presently to endless bliss, or to further them in the way wherein they were
to walk for the attainement of it. Of this enough has been said already; but
the matter here is this, The Prophets denouncing such plagues, do withal call
the people to repentance, to fasting, to praying, to putting on sackcloth and
ashes. This being performed, says M. Bishop, God was satisfied. Therefore he
will have us to understand, that the doing of these things was a satisfaction,
that is, the payment of a just price unto God, by which they merited the
turning away of his fearful and heavy wrath. But this argument of his
follows not, because we know, that a man in favor may hold himself
satisfied toward another upon his humbling of himself, who yet receives not
a satisfaction, that is, a just and sufficient recompense for the debt that is
owing him, or the wrong that is done unto him. The servant that ought his
master Math. 18.24.
ten thousand talents, when he was called to payment, fell down at his
Masters feet, and besought him for patience. His Master herewith was
appeased and satisfied, and forgave him all the debt; and will any man hereupon
say that he made his Master satisfaction for the debt? So is the case betwixt
God and us. We humble our selves before him, we pray, we entreat him to forgive
us. He is herewith satisfied, that is, contented and appeased, and remitteth
the trespass. Shall we now hereupon say, that our humbling of our selves, our
entreaty and prayer to forgive us, is the payment of our debt? This is a mad
conclusion as we take it, but such pretty knots will serve at Rome to tie the
Popes trinkets together, and they hold fast enough there, because no man must
meddle with the untying of them. But this matter as Master Bishop handles it,
would require somewhat further to be considered of. We are therefore to
understand, as in some part has been signified before, that we are to put
difference betwixt outward and temporal forgiveness, respecting only a
temporal and earthly benefit, and that inward and spiritual forgiveness,
which serves for the acquitting of the conscience, to the obtaining of
eternal life. That outward and temporal forgiveness, is not indeed to be
called a forgiveness of the sin, but only a forbearing of the punishment.
And this forbearance God yields not only to true and faithful repentance,
but also to the external signs and tokens thereof, proceeding only from
worldly sorrow, upon fear of temporal plagues and punishments either imminent
or incumbent. For we must know that God orders the administration and
government of the world, not only for the bringing of his elect unto eternal
life, but so also as serves for maintenance of public order, and state, and
society amongst men. Such is the wickedness of man's nature and pronenesse to
mischief and violence, to lasciviousness and filthiness, and all kind of
iniquity, as that the state of men would grow intolerable, if God did not
take course both to restrain men from that enormitie and excess of sin
whereto nature tends, and to give encouragement to those courses, which serve
for the common good and benefit of mankind. To which purpose Cyprian very
rightly says, Cypr. cont. Demeir. Si no^ intercederet rebus humanis diuina
censura, quanta esset in hominibus audacia facinorum impr^nitate secura?
If Gods censure and judgment did not interpose it self amidst the doings of
men, how great presumption would there be, growing secure and careless by the
impunitie of of sin? Now therefore when men grow to outrage and extremity, he
sends amongst them his Ezech. 14.21.
sore judgments, the sword, the famine, the pestilence, which are Tertul. de
anima cap. 14. Reuera lucs and fames and bella, etc proremedi^ deputanda,
tanquam consura insolescentis generis humani.
as it were the lopping and pruning of mankind, when they grow too proud and
rank, and hereby he redresseth the insolences and disorders that are found
amongst them. But when men understanding the wrath and judgment of God, do
show their dread and fear thereof, and yield themselves, though but ciuilly to
be reclaimed, he shows himself outwardly appeased and satisfied, and puts
up the sword which he had drawn against them. Thus though the Ninevites were
heathens and infidels, yet when upon the preaching of Jonas they put on
sackcloth and ashes, and showed tokens of repentance, God did forbear the
destruction that he had proclaimed against them. So when Ahab hearing by the
message of Elias the fierce wrath of God conceived against him, did show
himself moved thereat by 1. Kings. 21.27.29.
rending his clothes, and fasting, and lying in sackcloth, though he were a
most wicked man, yet the Lord somewhat relented from the sentence that he had
denounced, and deferred the execution thereof from the father to the sons
time. In like sort the people of Israel when they every while by idolatry
departed from God, yet upon humbling of themselves at the feeling of Gods heavy
hand, found mercy and deliverance from the tyranny of their oppressors, though
by the sequel it still appeared, that they did it with a faithless and false
heart. Thus God yields temporal benefit to outward discipline and conformity
to his laws, and shows his regard thereof for the course of this life, even
in them toward whom he has no purpose of everlasting life. Now although
toward infidels and hypocrites upon outward submission, God show himself
outwardly satisfied and contented, and do yield thereto the remitting of
temporal punishments, yet M. Bishop will not hereupon conclude, that they have
made a satisfaction to God for their sins, because they themselves teach,
that no man living in mortal sin of impenitencie or infidelity, can perform
any work of satisfaction unto God. So he himself here tells us, that all
satisfaction has his virtue from the grace of God dwelling in us, which is
given us for Christ's sake; whereupon it follows, that where the grace of God
dwells not by the faith of Christ, there can be no virtue of satisfaction in
any thing that is done. The more unshamefast man he, within four lines after
to bring the Ninevites for a proof of their satisfaction, of whom he himself
says, that it is not certain that they had any express knowledge of the
Messiah (he should have said, it is certain that they had none) and therefore
were far enough off from laying hold on his satisfaction, and consequently
were far off from the participation of the grace of God. But all is one with
him it carries a show, and that serves his turn, making no conscience at all
of abusing the ignorance or unadvisedness of his Reader, and only regarding
to uphold a side. But now as touching spiritual forgiveness of sins, for
the acquitting of the conscience inwardly to God, all that mourn and weep,
that rend their clothes and lie in sackcloth and ashes, that is, that perform
outward tokens of repentance, are not partakers thereof. The reason whereof is,
because these works of themselves do spiritually yield no satisfaction or
contentment unto God. Then do they obtain true forgiveness and remission of
sins, when they are used only as affections, wherewith we plead to the throne
of the mercy of God the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, that not for the things
which we do, but for his sake, and Math. 3.17.
in him, according to his promise he may be well pleased toward us. In his
name, not in our own we come unto God; for his merits, not for own we beg
of him to be merciful unto us; testifying by our repentance the feeling and
grieuance of our wounds, but professing to expect in him only the medicine for
the cure. Neither do we herein beg the point in question, as M. Bishop
alleges, but we give him plain and current answer. We deny that which they
affirm, that works of penance are true satisfactions to God for sin. They
seek to prove it, for that God upon the doing hereof is appeased, and
forgiueth sins. We answer, that where God upon the doing hereof, gives
forgiveness of sins, it is not for the works sake that is done, but for that
the doer by faith seeks and finds the washing away thereof in the blood of
Jesus Christ, it being he only of whom we are taught, that Col. 1.14.
in him we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our
sins. There are that do those works, and yet have no forgiveness; and
therefore that other in the doing thereof obtain forgiveness, it is not to be
attributed to the works themselves, but to somewhat else that is respected
therein. And what is all our repentance, but a bootelesse sorrow, a blind
horror and anguish of mind, wherein there is nothing but darkness and fear,
but only as it receives light and comfort in the blood of Christ, for the
mitigating and asswaging of it? If it self for it self can give no comfort,
it is no satisfaction in it self: and therefore in all our repentance our
satisfaction is in him only, who as S. Austine says, Aug. in Psalm. 31. Soluit
quod non debebat, vt nos a debito liberaret.
Paid that which was no debt of his, to free us from our debt. These things are
spoken by due and just course, and therefore M. Bishop must take here again
the triuants trick, in that he would with so bare a shift slip over a direct
and formal answer.

12 W. BISHOP.
Our fifth reason: Daniel gives this counsel to Nabuchodonosor: Daniel. 4.
Redeem thy sins with alms, and thy offenses with mercy on the poor. If by
such good deeds our sins may be redeemed, as holy writ does testify, then
it follows that such works yield a sufficient satisfaction for them, for
redemption signifies a full contentment of the party offended, as well as
satisfaction.

M. Perkins answers, The skillful in the Caldey teach, that the word
imports rather a breaking off, then redeeming.

Reply. To Authors in the air, without pressing of the propriety of the word
no answer can be given: but let us admit that it be broken off; his sin not
being covetousness, but pride and lack of acknowledging all kingdoms to
depend upon God, as the text it self does specify, To break off this sin
by alms, and compassion of the poor, is nothing else but by such works of
charity, in some sort to satisfy Gods justice, thereby to move him to take
compassion of him. And that by almes-deedes we are cleansed from our sins,
Luke 11.
our Savior himself does teach, saying: Give alms, and behold all things are
clean unto you.

R. ABBOT.
This objection serves much for the clearing of that that has been said in
the former section, and to open a way to the true understanding of many
phrases, which by the Papists are abused to the maintenance of their absurd
position of humane satisfaction. We are to consider, what the person is to whom
they are spoken, and in what respect the Prophet spoke them. Nabuchodonosor was
a heathen King, void of the grace and spirit of God, having no knowledge, nor
yielding any acknowledgement of God, but what God by miracle wrested from him,
and yet thenceforth drowning that also in pride, oppression, cruelty, tyranny,
and all kind of iniquity and injustice. Now therefore by the doctrine of the
Romish Schools, he was not in case to do any work of satisfaction. For M.
Bishop tells us, as we have seen before, that all satisfaction has his
virtue from the grace of God, and Thomas Aquinas says, that Thom. Aquin.
suppl. q. 14. art. 2. in corp. Sine charitate opera facta non sunt
satisfactoria.
works done without charity, have no power of satisfaction, and therefore where
grace and charity are not, no satisfaction can be done. If then Nabuchodonosor,
were not capable in their meaning, to do a work of satisfaction, how
impudently do they deal to allege that that was said to him, to the
maintenance of their doctrine of satisfactions? How should he be advised
according to their meaning to redeem his sins, from whom by their own rules
nothing could proceed, that might in their meaning be a redemption for his
sins? Again, here is nothing intended as touching the true forgiveness of
sins, wherein consists the spiritual reconcilement of man to God, but only
as touching the avoiding of a threatened outward judgment, and the preservation
of temporal and earthly state, which God yields even to civil and moral
change of former evil courses, as before was said. Daniel had threatened unto
him from God the loss of his understanding, and the casting of him forth to
the company of brute beasts. He advises him yet to alter his former doings,
by which he had drawn that sentence upon himself, to try whether happily God
would be moved thereby to revoke the judgment which he had pronounced. Theod.
in Dan. 4 Un clementiae fructum percipere? Hanc eande^ erga eos oste^dito qui
vnam tecu^ sortiti sunt naturam: ita enim iudici persuadere poteris vt minas
extinguat neque sinat eas ad exitum perduci.
Will thou, says he, as Theodoret resolves the speech, receive the fruit of
mercy? show the same then to them who have obtained the like condition of
nature with thy self, for so thou may persuade the Judge to put away his
threatenings, and not to suffer them to be brought to effect. Where Hierome
conceiueth, that Hieron in Da^. 4. Fecit iuxta Danielu consiliu^, miserecordias
in pauperes, and idcirco vsque ad me^sem duodecimu^ in eum dilata est
sententia. Sed quia postea ambulans in aula Babylonis gloriatur, etc. bonum
miserecordiae perdidit malo superbiae.
Nabuchodonosor according to Daniels counsel, did show mercy to the poor, and
therefore for twelve months the sentence was deferred, until upon glorying in
his Babel, by sin of pride he lost the benefit of mercy. So then we see the
forbearing of the punishment granted to a mere outward reformation, and yet
the King being an infidel, there was no remission of the sin. There could
therefore be no satisfaction, because satisfaction cannot be without remission;
whereof it follows, that since Daniels words had their effect without any
satisfaction, therefore there can no satisfaction be concluded thereof. For
further confirmation hereof, we are to note what Origin says as touching this
matter, who observing, that Orige^ in Mat. trac. 35. Operis boni aliud est quod
facimus propter homines vel secundum homines: aliud aute^ quod propter Deum vel
secundum Deu^, etc. Vt puta been quis facit homini naturali iust^tia motus, no
prepter Deu^, quom^do faciebant interdum and gentes and multi faciunt homines.
Opus illud ol^um est vulgar, non magnio doris, and tamen acceptabile apud
Deum, sicut Daniel significat dicens ad Baltasar Deum non cognoscentem, Audi,
etc. Tale aliquid dicit and Peirus apud Clementem, quoniam opera bona quae
siunt ab infidelibus in hoc seculo eis prosunt, non and in illo ad consequend^m
vita^ aeternam Et conuenienter quia nec illi propter Deum faciunt, sed propter
naturam humanam. Qui autem propter Deum faciunt, idest, fideles, non solum in
hoc seculo proficit eis, sed in illo, magis autem in illo.
of good works there is one sort which we do for men or according to men;
another which we do for God or according to God, for example thereof says: A
man does good being moved by natural justice, and not in respect of God, even
as heathens many times did and many men do. This work, says he, is but common
oil, and of no great savor, and yet it is acceptable with God, as Daniel
signifies, saying to a King that knew not God, Hear my counsel, O King, and
redeem thy sins with alms. Some such matter Peter also says in Clement,
that the good works which are done by infidels, do benefit them in this world,
but not in the world to come, for the obtaining of eternal life; and that very
rightly, because they do them not for Gods sake, but only as of the nature of
man. But they which do these things in respect of God, that is the faithful,
have benefit thereby, not only in this world, but also in that, yea specially
in that that is to come. Here is the true condition of Nabuchodonosors works
set forth unto us; he was an infidel, he knew not God; that which he did, he
did it only by natural instinct; God respected it no further but only for this
world, and only in that respect did Daniel say unto him, Redeem thy sins
with alms, and therefore it must needs be granted, that the word of redeeming
is very improperly used, and can have no such meaning as M. Bishop intends by
it. Now therefore albeit it be true which M. Perkins observes out of the
learned in the Chaldee tongue, that the word which is by the vulgar interpreter
translated to redeem, does properly signify to break off, yet he needed not
to have rested upon that answer, but should rather have taken the common
translation, thereby to euict that the name of redemption has use with
ecclesiastical writers, without any intendment of Popish satisfaction.
Forwords are not always to be racked to their native and proper use, but from
it are borrowed many times to import somewhat else, which in some respect may
seem near unto it. Redemption properly imports the payment of a just price,
for the setting of a captive or bondsman free. In this meaning it is used of our
Savior Christ, who gave himself for a price for us, to set us free from death
and sin, and to reconcile us unto God; but in this meaning to attribute unto
our selves any power or worth to pay any price, or to yield any valuable
recompense unto God for our sins, is a blasphemy intolerable, and a great
impeachment of the sufficiency of Christ's redemption. Yet notwithstanding the
term of redeeming is otherwise many times used, when one thing is made
consequent to the doing or forgoing of another, as the freedom of the bondsman
is to the payment of the price. In this case the one is said to be redeemed by
the other, not because it is a worthy price for the purchase, but because it is
an opportunity for the obtaining or gaining of it. Thus Nabuchodonosor formerly
said to his soothsaiers: Dan. 2.8.
I know certainly that ye redeem the time, that is, that ye use your talk for
the prolonging of the time. So are we said by forgoing the vanities and
pleasures of the world, Ephe. 5.16. Col 4.5.
to redeem the time, because thereby we take the opportunity thereof to bestow
it to the Lords use. Thus the heathen King was willed by almes-deedes to
redeem his sins, not as though his almes-deedes were any satisfaction to God
for his sins, which by the doctrine of Popery could not be, but because God
for the common benefit of mankind, has vouchsafed to yield good for the only
outward forsaking of evil ways, howsoever inward regeneration find no place
at all. Thus a man is said with his goods to redeem his soul, not for that
worldly goods are a price for the saving of a soul, God forbid; but for that
by forgoing his goods, he finds means and opportunity of being saved by
Jesus Christ. And in this sort ecclesiastical writers are wont sometimes to
attribute to works of repentance and charity the redemption of our sins, not
for that they took them in themselves to be any price, for the worth whereof
God should be appeased toward us, but only because to the faithful doers
thereof for Christ's sake, in whose name they are done, God has made the
promise of forgiveness of sins and everlasting life. Now by that that has
been said, we see that M. Bishops argument is fallen into this frame:
Nabuchodonosor an infidel and heathen King, never partaker of forgiveness of
sins, and not capable by the doctrine of the Church of Rome of doing any
satisfaction for sin, is willed to redeem his sins with almes-deedes;
therefore after forgiveness of sins, there remains yet a satisfaction to
be made for the sins that are forgiven. He that shall deny his argument,
shall do him a shrewd turn; for how to prove it, he cannot tell. As for the
place which he cites out of S. Luke, it must import somewhat further then the
words sound. For infidels as we have seen of Nabuchodonosor do give alms, and
yet all things are not clean unto them, for Tit. 1.15.
to unbelievers nothing is clean, but even their minds and consciences are
defiled. The Pharisees also to whom Christ there speaks, Math. 6.2.
gave alms, and yet they were not cleansed thereby. Yea, the Apostle S. Paul
gives us to understand, that 1. Cor. 13.3.
a man may give all his goods to feed the poor, and yet being without charity
and love, it profits him nothing. But by the occasion of the words, the
meaning of them will appear. He has said before, Luke 11.39.
Indeed ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter,
but (...).
that which is within you, is full of ravening and wickedness. Hereupon he
adds for reproof; Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without,
make that which is within also? Then for correction and exhortation he brings
in the words which M. Bishop alleges by halues; (...).
Yea, rather give for alms those things that are within, and behold all things
shall be clean unto you. Where presupposing as we may conceive, that they did
give alms, or otherwise exhorting them so to do, he withal directs the true
manner of the giving thereof, consisting not only in reaching a gift with the
hand, but in giving the heart and affection, and Esa. 58.10.
pouring out the soul, as the Prophet speaks, to the hungry; in showing
judgment, and mercy, and fidelity to our brethren, for the want whereof he
takes exception against them in the next words, Math. 23.23.
as Saint Matthew expresses the particulars thereof. Therefore he admonishes
them by these words, that as they were careful outwardly to cleanse their cups
and platters, so they should much more be careful to cleanse their hearts, to
void themselves of hypocrisy, covetousness, briberie, cruelty, and to put
on charity, compassion, mercy, justice, and faithfulness, and then not only
their dishes and vessels, but their almes-deedes, their meats and drinks now
defiled with rapine and covetousness, yea all things should be clean unto
them. It is not for alms then that Christ says, Behold all things shall be
clean unto you, for alms it self may be defiled and unclean, but for 1. Tim
1.5.
love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. So that
in effect the words of Christ are but the same with that which the Apostle
says, Tit. 1.15.
All things are clean to them that are clean, that is, to them who in heart
and conscience are purified and cleansed. And because Acts. 15.9.
by faith the heart is purified, therefore he says in effect, to them that
believe all things are clean. So then Master Bishop reasons thus, To them
that give alms in true faith and a good conscience, all things are clean;
therefore by almes-deedes we are redeemed and purged from our sins. We deny
the argument, because it is not by alms it self that all things are clean
unto us, but alms it self receives purity and cleanenesse from faith and a
good conscience, without which it is in Gods sight defiled and unclean.

13 W. BISHOP.
Math. 3. Luke 3.
Our sixth. Bring forth the worthy fruits of penance. That is, do such works
as become them who are penitent: Which (as S. Chrysostom expounds) are: He
that has stolen away another man's goods, Hom. 10. in Math.
let him now give of his own: he that has committed fornication, let him
abstain from the lawful company of his own wife, and so forth: recompencing
the works of sin, with the contrary works of virtue. The same exposition
gives Saint Gregory, Hom. 10. in Euang. In Psalm. 4.
and to omit all others, venerable Bede interprets them thus. Mortify your
sins by doing the worthy fruits of penance, to wit, by afflicting your
selves so much for every offense, as worthy penance does require, which will be
a sacrifice of justice, that is, a most just sacrifice.

To this M. Perkins answers, that this text is absurd, for the word repent,
signifies, only change your minds from sin to God, and testify it by good
works.

Reply. His answer is most absurd, for we argue out of these words (Worthy
fruits of penance:) and he answers to the word going before, repent: which
we use not against them; and for his gloss or testifying our repentance, is
sufficiently confuted by the Fathers before alleged.

And Saint John expressly makes them the means to escape the wrath of God:
saying, that the Axe was set to the root of the Tree, and unless by worthy
fruits of penance they appeased God, they should be cut up, and cast into hell
fire: and seems to confute the laying hold on Christ's satisfaction by faith:
saying, it will not help you to say that ye are the Sons of Abraham, who
was father of all true believers: as much as if he had said, Trust not to your
faith, hand off ye generation of vipers. For notwithstanding ye be the sons
of the faithful, unless ye amend your lives, and for the evil works which
ye have done heretofore, make recompense, and satisfy the justice of God with
good, ye shall be cast into hell fire.

R. ABBOT.
This argument is like his fellows that are gone before. We must do such
works as become those that are penitent, therefore the works that we do are
satisfactions for our sins. A man would think that Master Bishop should
have more discretion, then to bring such light stuff in so weighty a cause.
Though Master Perkins had alleged it out of some of their books, yet reason
would have required, that he in the reuiew should have better advised of it.
But we see, Trigge and Trugge will not part company; what his fellows have
said, be it good or bad, true or false, he will say it to the death. Only his
memory fails him a little, where he says, that they use no argument against
us from the words going before, Do penance, as they say; Repent, as we
translate it; having forgotten that his masters of Rhem. Testam. Annot. Math.
3.2.
Rhemes made a stout argument from thence in behalf of penance and
satisfaction. Very impudently they dealt therein, because it is contrary to
their own doctrine, to urge penance and satisfaction upon them that are to be
baptized, and Thomas Aquinas affirms it to be an injury to the blood of
Christ, as I have Of Justification. Sect. 20.
before showed; and therefore by their own doctrine, the words of John Baptist
cannot be understood of any such matter. But yet they were feign for a shift to
take hold of that, because they had nothing else so colourably to serve turn
in that behalf. It was out of M. Bishops head what they had said, or else
without doubt he would have said the like. But M. Perkins has rightly told
him, that the Greek word (...) there used by S. John, signifies the
alteration and change of the mind from sin to righteousness. It imports no
acts of penance, but inward reforming of our affections for the amendment of
our lives. And therefore does Athanasius say, that repentance has it name from
thence, Athanas. quaest. 162. Ideo poenitentia resipiscentia dicitur quod
mentem a malo in bonum transferat.
for that it transferreth or remoueth the mind from evil to good. M. Bishop
will not stand upon this; he urges the other words, worthy fruits of penance.
Howsoever he translate them absurdly, yet we approve his exposition of them, do
such works as become them that are penitent; but what follows hereof for
him? Surely we teach men to do such works as become them that profess
repentance, to recompense former works of sin with contrary works of
virtue; former neglect and carelessness, with due circumspection and
watchfulness over their ways and conversation. We teach that in grievous
sins our grief and affliction of mind should be the more, and that both
inwardly it is so, and outwardly appears so to be, where true repentance is,
even as greater wounds cause greater feeling and pain, and make men more
earnest to seek remedy and cure. But in all this we can find no
satisfaction, in all this we cannot find that our affliction and sorrow is the
thing it self that works the cure. It is the humbling of our selves to seek
mercy at Gods hands, for the washing away of our sins in the blood of Jesus
Christ, but we know not how it self should be taken for a water to vvash us
from our sins. But yet M. Bishop will prove it so to be, because John Baptist
says, Ver. 10.
Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree: every tree therefore that
brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire.
Which is even as much to the purpose, as if he had said just nothing. We say
also that every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down
and cast into the fire, but still we say, what is this to satisfaction? We
still require his proof, that for the virtue and worth of these fruits it is
that God is appeased toward us. But that cannot be; for a man cannot bring
forth good fruit, except first of all he be made a good tree; for Chap. 7.17.
an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. And if he must first be a good
tree that he may bring forth good fruit, then God must first be appeased
toward him, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, Romans 3.25.
whom God has set forth to be our reconciliation or atonement through faith
in his blood. Our good fruits then are not the causes, but the effects of Gods
being appeased toward us. If we have none, we are sure that we are in state of
judgment and damnation; and the sentence of Saint John takes hold of us; but
if we have them, we are not to account them the redemption of our sins, but
testimonies of the remission and forgiveness thereof. Yea but Saint John,
says M. Bishop, seems to confute the laying hold on Christ's satisfaction by
faith. Where, or in what words? Marry because he says, Say not in your hearts,
we have Abraham to our father. We may imagine that he had a vizard on his face
when he wrote this, that the paper might not see him blush. Why, what is there
in these words against the laying hold on Christ's satisfaction by faith?
Forsooth he says to them, it will not help you to say that ye are the sons
of Abraham, who was father of all true believers. Well, but what is this yet to
laying hold on Christ's satisfaction by faith? It is as much, says he, as if
he had said, trust not to your faith; hand off ye generation of vipers. This is
a strange construction, that say not in your hearts, we have Abraham to our
father, should be as much as to say, Trust not to your faith. But it grew at
Rome, and we know that things far fetched are wont to be very strange. As
for us we conceive in our simplicity that John's meaning was to reprove them
for flattering themselves, for that carnally they were the seed of Abraham, as
if that were sufficient security for them toward God, when as in the mean
time they neglected the repentance, and faith, and works of Abraham. The true
children of Abraham are they Romans 4.12.
who walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, and John. 8.39.
do the works of Abraham, which they not regarding, could not be accounted the
sons of Abraham, whose offspring was reckoned according to the spirit, not
according to the flesh. Thus does our Savior testify of them that they
believed not; saying unto them: Math. 21.31.
Publicans and harlots shall go before you into the kingdom of God: For John
came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not, but
Publicans and harlots believed him; and ye, though ye saw it, were not moved
with repentance afterward that ye might believe him. Now is it not a wonder,
that whereas it is apparent that they had no faith, yet John Baptist should say
unto them, Trust not to your faith? Well, all this is nothing, he cannot serve
the Popes turn that will not notably cogge and lie. The rest of his
commentary accords with this, where he foisteth in the satisfying of Gods
justice, there being nothing in the words of S. John, that foundeth to that
effect.

14. W. BISHOP.
Cor. 7.10.
The 7. objection with M. Perkins, Paul sets down sundry fruits of
repentance, whereof one is revenge, whereby repentant persons punish themselves
to satisfy Gods justice, for the temporal punishment of their sins.

M. Perkins answers. A repentant sinner must take vengeance of himself, and
that is, to use all means to subdue the corruption of nature, and to bridle
carnal affections, which kind of actions are restrainments properly, but no
punishments; directed against the sin, but not against the person.

Reply. I never saw any writer so contradict himself, and so dull, that he
does not understand his own words. If this subduing of our corrupt nature, be
restrainments only from sin hereafter, and not also punishments of sin past,
how then does the repentant sinner take vengeance of himself, which you
affirm that he must do? Revenge as every simple body knows, is the requital
of evil past: We grant that all satisfaction is directed against sin, and
not against the person, but for the great good of the man, albeit that for a
season it may afflict, both his body and mind too, as Saint Paul's former
Epistle did the Corinthians, but this sorrow being according unto God, does much
benefit the person, as the Apostle declares. For besides this revenge taken on
himself to appease Gods wrath, it breeds (as it is in the text following) in
our corrupt nature that loves not such chastisement, A fear to return to
sin, least it be again punished, for where there is no fear of pains, and
much pleasure, thither our corruption will run headlong. It stirs up also
in us, Indignation against sin, and all the wicked instruments of it, A
defense and clearing of our selves, with the honester sort, And an emulation,
and desire to fly as far from sin as other our equals, and consequently A
love of virtue and honest life, which freeth us from that sorrow and all other
troublesome passions, all which are plainly gathered out of the same text of S.
Paul.

R. ABBOT.
The Greek fathers Chrysostom Theophylact, Oecumenius, and Hierome amongst
the Latins, do refer the revenge there spoken of by the Apostle to the
punishment of the incestuous man, whereby they maintained the authority and due
regard of the laws of God. But we further very willingly yield, that by
revenge is also meant a wreaking of a man's anger, as I may term it, upon
himself; being offended and grieved at himself for the sin that he has
done, and therefore bending himself to cross and thwart those desires by
which he was led unto it. This the Scripture teaches us by the terms of Math.
16.24.
denying our selves, Col. 3.5.
mortifying our earthly members, 1. Pet. 4.1.
suffering in the flesh, Gal. 5.24.
crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts of it, and Romans 6.6.
destroying of the body of sin. Thus men occasion requiring, give themselves
over to fasting, and weeping, and mourning, and forbearing of accustomed
delights, yea and to open rebuke and shame with men, having by public offense
made themselves a scandal to the Church. This revenge we deny not; we say
that hereby we testify both to God and men the displeasure and offense that we
have taken against our selves; we teach others to take heed, and carefully to
shun those occasions whereby we have fallen; we labor hereby that the
temptations of sin may no more in the like sort prevail against us; but we are
still to seek of that use which M. Bishop makes of it, that this anger of
ours against our selves is a price of satisfaction for the appeasing of Gods
anger. To this being the very point, he says never a word; he tells us of
revenge, but he proves not that this revenge is a matter of satisfaction. We
say that to this revenge of true and faithful repentance God grants
remission of sins, but we say he grants it, because we seek it, not in
the merit of our revenge, but only in the blood of Jesus Christ.

15 W. BISHOP.
Lastly, says M. Perkins: They make three works of satisfaction, Prayer,
Fasting, and Almes-deedes.

For the first, it is mere foolishness to think, that a man by prayer can
satisfy for his sins, it is all one as if you had said, that a beggar by
asking an alms can deserve the alms, or a debtor by requesting his creditor
to pardon his debt, should thereby pay his debt.

That Prayer does appease Gods justice, and obtain pardon, God himself is
witness, Psalm. 49.
saying: Call upon me in the day of tribulation, and I will deliver thee.
Prayer cannot be made without faith in Gods power, and hope in his goodness,
and therefore must needs be pleasing in Gods sight: by prayer we humble our
selves before God, and acknowledge his ^mnipotencie, and our infirmity. By
prayer we lament with bitter tears our own ingratitude, folly, and wickedness,
and bewail the grieuousnes of our sins: such prayer made King David (as his
Psalms do testify) water his couch with tears, making them his food day and
night: and by them he satisfied for his former offenses. So did a far greater
sinner then he, ^ Paral. 33.
King Manasses: who falling into tribulation, prayed unto the Lord his God, and
did great penance before the God of his fathers, and prayed, and entreated
earnestly, and God heard his prayers, and brought him back again to Jerusalem
into his Kingdom. Now to M. Perkins Similes. A beggar does not deserve his
alms, because he makes not this former kind of prayer, but the short slight
one of the Protestants from the lips outward. The like we say of a debtor,
whose creditor being a needy man, will not be paid without money, but God who
needs none of our goods, highly esteems of an humble and contrite heart,
grieved much for having sinned in the sight of God, and humbly suing unto him
for pardon. Math. 18.
To such a one he said: Did I not forgive thee all thy debt, because thou
besoughtest me?

R. ABBOT.
Master Bishops arguments are like the foxes whelps, never a one better then
other and all stark naught. It is strange to see what shuffling and shifting
he uses to make some good show of a bad cause. The question is, whether prayer
be a work of satisfaction, that is, a work of that worth and price, as that
by the merit thereof we make God a just and sufficient recompense for the
offense that we have done. For the proof hereof he alleges the sentence of
the Psalm: Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee. So then his reason
is this, God has promised to hear us when we pray unto him, therefore prayer
is a work of satisfaction. As much as if he should say, the prince promises a
traitor upon his submission and entreaty to give him his pardon: therefore
his submission and entreaty is a sufficient recompense for his treason. We may
see how maruellously the Roman religion sharpeneth men's eyesight, that they
can see man's satisfaction there, where God only signifies his own merciful
disposition. Yea but God does thereby witness, that prayer does appease Gods
justice and obtain pardon. Yea but what need a pardon when the sin is already
pardoned? for prayer is made a work of satisfaction after the forgiveness of
the sin, as I have showed before. A very ridiculous device, that God first
remitteth the trespass, and we afterward for a punishment: and to make God
amends and satisfaction, must say, Forgive us our trespasses. Therefore when he
speaks of obtaining pardon, he does but seek by words of truth to color
absurd dotages of falsehood and error. The use of prayer is indeed not to make
satisfaction, but to crave pardon. It appeaseth Gods justice by the entreating
of his mercy, whilst we beseech him to hear us, not for our prayers sake,
but for Christ's sake; not by the merit of our satisfaction, but by virtue of
his intercession; not for the works sake which we do, but for his truths sake,
for that he has promised so to do to them that call upon him. By our prayer we
request him to forgive us, that is, not to urge us to satisfaction, and is it
not an absurd fancy to affirm prayer it self to be a satisfaction? And what
do men in this case, but mock and dally with God, in asking him forgiveness,
when in the mean time they think to make him a full and just requital of his
wrongs, so that there shall be nothing to be forgiven? For what remains to be
forgiven where there is yielded a sufficient recompense for the offense done?
M. Bishop goes on and tells us, that prayer cannot be made without faith. It
is true, and by faith it is that our prayer obtains all things at Gods hand.
But of faith it is true which S. Ambrose says, that Ambros. de Poenitent. lib.
2. cap. 8. Tanquam ex syngrapha fides impetrat, no^ tanquam ex debito.
it obtains as by deed of gift, not by way of debt. It looks not to our
satisfaction, but to the promise of God through the mediation of Jesus Christ.
Further, he alleges idly and impertinently, that prayer is pleasing unto
God: that by it we humble our selves before him, acknowledging his
omnipotency, and our own infirmity; that thereby we lament and bewail the
grieuousnesse of our sins. He mentions king David watering his couch with
tears, and making them his food day and night: and Manasses greatly humbling
himself, as the text says, ( not doing great penance as he translateth) and
entreating the Lord, so as that the Lord heard him, etc. Now all these things
are according to the Proverb, Pro rastris ligones; we call for rakes, and he
sends us mattocks; we demand one thing, and he answers another. We say that
prayer is pleasing to God; we confess all these uses and effects thereof, but
what is all this to the proouing of satisfaction? how does he make it appear
that that which David and Manasses did, they did it with opinion or purpose to
make satisfaction for their sins? I would ask him here with what face he
could thus set himself to delude his Reader with empty shadows and shows of
vain discourse, but that I see his whole book in a manner is made of such
delusions. But here to show the absurdity of this assertion of theirs, that
prayer is a matter of satisfaction, M. Perkins had said, that it is all one as
if they should say, that a beggar by asking of alms should deserve his alms,
or that a debtor by requesting his creditor to pardon the debt, should thereby
pay the debt. See now what a scholerlike answer M. Bishop has returned. To the
first he says, A beggar does not deserve his alms, because he makes not this
former kind of prayer, but the short slight one of the Protestants from the
lips outward. Thus full simply he gives a gird at the Protestants prayers,
to shift himself from answering for their own. But what if the beggar do make
that kind of prayer, and with much lamentation crave an alms, is he thereby to
expect it as deserved and due unto him? has he hereby any just right and title
to that which he craves? Surely, if it be due unto him, it is no alms, or if
it be an alms, then it is not due unto him. Why could not Master Bishop
conceive the instance as well of the earnest and hearty request of the beggar,
as of that short slight one from the lips outward, but that he was put to his
shifts, and was glad thus in a cloud to steal away? But it is some further
matter that he has respect unto. For we Protestants are content to pray simply
as Christ has taught, not thinking any virtue to consist Eccles. 5.2.
in multitude of words, nor imagining that by the length of our prayers we are
to prevail with God, or that by the often saying of them he is the more
affected with them, but measuring prayer by the intention and affection of the
heart, uttering it self according to the motion of it self, either by few or
many words. We pray not by rule, nor offer our devotions to God by task and
tale, knowing it to be but August. Epist. 121. cap. 10. Multum loqui est rem
necessariam superfluis agere v^rbis.
babbling to move a necessary matter to God with superfluous and needless words
But the new Catholics are like the old heathens, who thought themselves to be
the better Math. 6.7.
heard for their much babbling and often repeating, and therefore they say their
prayers by number and stint, as if they would make thereof a charm or
enchantment to bind God to their will. A man for a penance must say so many
Pater nosters, and so many Auemaries, and so many Creedes, and when he has so
done, he is man good enough, he has made satisfaction for his sins. In one
of their books there are seven short prayers before which there is this
Rubricke: Horae beatae Mar. Virg. secundum vsum Sarum. Quicunque instatu
gratiae existens deuote dixerit septem Orationes sequentes, cum 7. Pater
noster, and 7. Aue Maria ante imaginem pietatis, mer^bitur 56 millia annorum
indulgent. etc.
Whosoever being in the state of grace, shall devoutly say these seven prayers
following before the Crucifixe, with seven Pater nosters, and seven Auemaries,
he shall obtain six and fifty thousand years of pardon; fourteen thousand
granted by Saint Gregory, fourteen thousand by Nicholas the fifth, and those
doubled by Sixtus the fourth. O what a horrible virtue there is in the number
of Seven, when it comes to prayers and Pater nosters, and Auemaries! what a
foul rule would he make in Purgatory, that should use every day to say these
prayers? He should have so many thousand years to spare from himself as that
he might rid a great murth of souls out of that cruel prison. Such a like
foolerie do we find in their Jesus Psalter in the end of the Manual of
meditation, etc
Jesus Psalter, commended for that the glorious name of Jesus is therein called
upon four hundred and fifty times: in which there are fifteen principal
petitions, which must be said every one by themselves ten times, and you may
say them upon your ten fingers, (to be sure to keep just reckoning) or else
upon ten beads, and in every of these ten times the name of Jesus is
thrice repeated, thirty times in every petition, as for example: 1 Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus, mercy. 2 Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, mercy. 3 Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, mercy. etc.
The second petition.
1 Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, help me. 2 Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, help me. 3 Jesus, Jesus,
Jesus, help me, etc.
The third petition.
1 Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, strength me. 2 Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, strength me. 3 Jesus,
Jesus, Jesus, strength me, etc.
till in every ^^e ye make up the number often. Now I trow the short, slight
prayers of the Protestants be not comparable to these devotions: no marvel if
both heaven and hell be coniured at so often repeating of the name of Jesus.
What Circe might be thought likely to bewitch men so far, as to give any
regard to such drunken fancies? What Prophet, or Apostle, or Father, or Martyr,
or Confessor has given the^ any example of praying in this sort? Or if they
have no example of it, why do they thus lewdly entangle simple souls with an
opinion of devotion in that wherein there is nothing but absurd and heathenish
superstition? These now are the prayers of satisfaction, by which M. Bishop
will have us to understand, that there is a difference betwixt Catholics and
beggars; for Catholics say their prayers often over, and thereby they merit
much. And yet we see, that an importunate hungry beggar will stand long, and go
over his beggars dittie, as often as M. Bishops poenitent does his Pater noster
and his Creed, who for all that, can claim nothing as due unto him for the
pains that he has taken. And if a beggar by his instance and earnestness can
merit nothing at a man's hands, shall we think that a Catholic beggar by his
instance can merit and deserve at the hands of God? Believe it that list: as
for us we know that prayer craves by way of alms, and therefore by way of
merit can expect nothing.

His exception to M. Perkins second comparison is as ridiculous and vain as
the former: The like we say of a debtor, says he, whose creditor being a needy
man will not be paid without money. But what if the creditor be not a needy
man, but will be content without any money to remit the debt? What, are all
creditours needy men, and are there none found that forgive debts? does M.
Bishop know never a Catholic that shows so great compassion upon a poor
man, humbly entreating him in that behalf? If he do not, we suspect their
charity: if he do, we suspect his honesty, who would mock his Reader with
such a paltry shift, telling us an idle tale, what it is wherewith the creditor
is paid, when our speech is of entreaty to remit the debt? But in this case
it is clear, that as it is absurd to say, that the debtors entreaty for the
forgiving of his debt, may be called a satisfaction for the debt: so it is
absurd to say, that our prayer to God for the forgiveness of our sins, may
be called a satisfaction for our sins. There is no disproportion whence he
may take any advantage against the force of this exception. But yet further he
makes God by this means like unto his needy creditour. For as the creditour
must be appeased by money, so must God by merit, and on both parts satisfaction
is required. What it is wherewith the satisfaction is made it skilleth not, be
it to God one way, and to the creditor another way; but on both sides there
must be just and worthy satisfaction. He would make us believe, that God freely
forgiueth nothing, but either we must by merit purchase our release, or else we
must lie by it, till we have paid the uttermost farthing. Yea and that must be
many times for money also: for although God himself take no money for Pardons,
yet the Vicar of Rome does for him. An humble and contrite heart will not serve
the turn, he must pay for it that will be pardoned. Thus M. Bishops shifts
fall out amiss on every side, and he can say nothing to serve his turn.
Better were it for him to yield to the truth, then thus to shame himself by
fighting so childishly against it. In a word we tell him, that God indeed
esteems an humble and contrite heart, grieuing for sin, and suing for
pardon, but he esteems the same as suing for pardon, not as presuming of
satisfaction. A strange suter is he, that thinks suite to be satisfaction, or
that by requesting a pardon he justly deserves to be pardoned. He alleges
that it is said, Mat. 18.32.
Did not I forgive thee the debt, because thou besoughtest me, but yet he does
not find that it is said, I forgave thee the debt, because by beseeching me
thou made me a full recompense and satisfaction for the debt. If he had made
satisfaction thereby, then it should not have been said afterward, which M.
Bishop should have remembered: Verse. 34.
His master was wroth, and delivered him to the iaylers till he should pay all
that was due unto him. There could nothing remain due, where just satisfaction
had been made.

16. W. BISHOP.
Secondly, says M. Perkins: Fasting is a thing indifferent of the same nature
with eating and drinking, no more conferring to the kingdom of heaven, then
eating and drinking does. What an Epicurian and fleshly doctrine is this? Why
then did the Ninevites fast, put on sackcloth, and lie on the ground (all
which bodily afflictions are reduced to fasting) rather then eat, and drink,
and presume of Gods mercy, if the one had been as acceptable to God as the
other? Why is S. John Baptist commended for his rough garments and thin diet,
if cherishing the flesh please God as well as punishing of it? Christ says
expressly: That if we fast in secret, his heavenly Father will repay us
openly: will he reward eating and drinking so liberally? but of fasting we
shall have a whole Chapter hereafter. Therefore brieflly I here conclude, that
this doctrine tends to the establishment of the kingdom of Atheists and
Epicures, whose sweet speech is: Let us eat, and let us drink, for after
death there is no pleasure: true, for such belli-gods and their followers.

R. ABBOT.
That fasting of it self is a thing indifferent never wise man made any doubt.
No man ever yet in a right mind thought it to be a matter of virtue to keep a
man's belly empty. Surely, if to fast be a virtue, then to eat and drink is a
vice, because whatsoever is contrary to virtue is vice. If fasting of it self
be a good work, a man may do a good work against his will, because a man may
be made to fast, when he has more will to eat. But it might please his
wisdom to understand, that some things simply and of themselves are good:
other some things simply and of themselves are evil: othersome of themselves
are neither good nor evil, but yet are instruments and may be used either to
good or evil. Of this last kind are riches, health, strength, walking,
sitting, waking, sleeping, marriage, virginity, and such like, by which for the
things themselves a man is neither the better nor the worse, but by a good man
they may be applied to good, and by an evil man to evil. Of the same nature
are eating, drinking, fasting, for none of which can a man be called better
then another man, because they are things indifferently common both to good and
evil, although by a good man they may be used to good. And therefore as John
Baptist came Mat. 11.18.1^
neither eating nor drinking, so the son of man came both eating and
drinking, to give to understand, that neither eating nor fasting of themselves
do make us any whit the more accepted in the sight of God. Neither did our
Savior Christ by eating and drinking cherish the flesh in such sort as it is
unlawful to cherish the flesh, which is meant of the vices, not of the
substance of the flesh, by wantonness, intemperancie, and excess, not by
moderate and sober feeding and diet: in which respect let him remember what the
Apostle says, that Ephesians. 5.29.
never any man hated his own flesh, but loves and cherishes it, even as the
Lord does the Church: thereby noting them to be unnatural monsters rather then
men, of whom he speaks in another place, who place Col. 2.23.
religion in not sparing the body, and not having it in any honor to satisfy
the flesh. As for the Ninevites, if they had but only fasted, they had done as
good as nothing, what had they done more then their cattle did? But they fasted
to humble themselves to God, and to show their fear of his judgment, and for
these things God vouchsafed to respect their fast. And thus he that Mat.
6.17.18.
fasteth in secret, not to fast, but Tertul. de poen. leiunijs preces a al^re.
by fasting to cherish prayer; not to afflict the body, but to affect the
soul: that is, that uses the one not for it self, but for the other, not for
1. Tim. 4.8.
bodily, but for spiritual and godly exercise, him the Father sees in secret,
and will reward him openly. It is not simply fasting, that God requires, but
humiliation and prayer; he requires fasting accidentally, only as a support
and help thereof. Therefore the doctrine of Popery is most absurd and
senseless, which makes fasting distinctly by it self, and for it self, not
only an act of Gods worship, but also a matter of merit, such as whereby we
make satisfaction to God, and purchase of him the remission of our sins. M.
Bishop alleges somewhat concerning fasting, as we see, but concerning this
use of fasting, though it were the matter in hand, he had nothing at all to
say. As for his cauils they are handled before in Sect. 18.
answer to his Epistle to the King. The kingdom of Atheists and Epicures in the
whole world does not flourish more then in the Court and Church of Rome, and I
do almost persuade my self, that M. Bishop in his own conscience is persuaded
that it is so. I doubt not but he would tell a pretty tale in this behalf
concerning their masters the Jesuits, but that now his tongue is tied up, and
he must say no more, he has been taught what it is to tell us tales out of
their school.

17. W. BISHOP.
Lastly, he says, that almsdeeds cannot be works of satisfaction for
sins: for when we give them as we ought, we do but our duty, and we may as
well say, that a man by paying one debt, may discharge another, as to say by
doing his duty, he may satisfy Gods justice for the punishment of his sins.
A man might suppose, that this man were pretily well seen in Carolo Buffone,
that thus ruffleth in grave matters with his simple Similes.

That almsdeeds redeem our sins, purge us from them, and make all things
clean unto us, has been already proved out of holy Scriptures, I will join
thereunto this one testimony of that holy Martyr S. Cypria^: Our frailty could
not tell what to do, Sermon. de opere and eleemos.
unless the goodness of God by teaching us the works of justice and mercy,
had showed us a certain way of preserving our salvation, which is, that with
alms-deeds we might wash clean away the filth of sins, which we had
contracted after Baptism. The holy Ghost speaks in the Scripture, and says:
Sins are purged by almsdeeds and faith.

Now to M. Perkins Simile. We deny that a man is bound to give all the alms
that he can: we are bound to give that which we may well spare, when there is
great want: but alms (which is a part of satisfaction) is not given out of our
superfluity, but spared from our necessary uses, and is many times bestowed,
when there is no such great need, upon building Schools, Colleges, Hospitals
and Chapels. And this may serve to answer M. Perkins Similes against these
three works of satisfaction. If any man desire to know why we make special
reckoning of these three works, it is principally for two causes: First, we
being to satisfy, must perform it with such things as be our own, which be
of three sorts, either they belong to our soul, or to our body, or to our
external goods. The goods of our mind we offer to God by prayer, by fasting,
and other reasonable bodily discipline, we exhibit unto him a living host,
Rom 12.1.
holy and pleasing God. By almesdeeds we make him an agreeable present of our
goods. Secondly, all sin as S. John teaches, 1. Epist. 2.
may be reduced into three principal heads. The concupiscence of the flesh,
that is lechery, which is cooled by fasting and such like afflicting of the
body: Concupiscence of the eyes, covetousness, which is purged and chased away
by almesdeeds: and pride of life, which is suppressed by humble prayer, and
often meditation of our own miseries.

R. ABBOT.
Simple similes, says M. Bishop. Now he may be taken for a very simple man,
who to answer simple similes is forced to use such simple shifts. We may wonder
at the blindness of these arrogant and presumptuous hypocrites, who thus stand
upon their terms with God, of doing more for him then they are bound to do,
more then by duty they owe unto him. Every man of common ordinary piety and
devotion confesses, that whatsoever we are, or whatsoever we have, either
within us or without us, we owe all to God, Act. 17.28.
In him we live, and move, and have our being. Of his bounty we receive, and
by his mercy we enjoy whatsoever we enjoy. So little interest have we in any
thing in his sight, as that at his commandment we are to leave whatsoever we
have. In all the gifts therefore which we give in his name and for his sake, we
are to say and to acknowledge, Tua ex tuis tibi offerimus, Of thine own we
offer unto thee that which is thine own, and nothing but thine own. And
although God have not determined unto every man all particular uses of those
benefits wherewith he has endowed them, yet he has taught every man to
remember himself to be the Lords steward for that portion which he has, and
that to him he shall give account of the disposing of it. He has given every
man leave to use the same according to the state and calling whereunto he is
called, and for the lawful upholding and increasing of it, and accordingly to
have respect of those that are his, 1. Tim. 5.8.
for whom he that cares not to provide, has denied the faith, and is worse
then an infidel; but yet so, as that he otherwise also Tit. 3.14.
learn to do good works for necessary uses, that he be not unfruitful; that
as he is a member of the body of Christ, so he employ that which he has as
occasion requires, to the public benefit and use of the same body. And this
is one part of the thanks that we ow unto almighty God, not to think much
when there is cause to bestow some part of that which we have to the honor and
service of him at whose hands we have received all. Which, he that neglects
to do, and turns all to private use, and to the building of his own house,
brings upon himself the judgment denounced by the Prophet, and commonly
verified before our eyes, Habac. 2.9.10
He that coueteth an evil covetousness to himself, that he may set his neast on
high to escape from the power of evil, consulteth shame to his own house. Now
seeing all that we have is Gods, and we can no way sufficiently recompense the
mercy that he has showed in bestowing the same upon us, what extreme madness
is it to imagine, that thereout we can yield him a just and worthy price of
redemption and satisfaction for our sins? Spare we never so much from our
necessary uses, and give we never so much as it were out of our own bellies,
yet our consciences should tell us that it is not the thousandth part of that
which God has deserved of us; and shall we be so witless as to think that
that we do may be a sufficient recompense for the wrongs that we have done
unto him? It is worthy to be noted which the Apostle teaches us, that 2. Cor.
8.1.3.
to be willing beyond our power to minister to the Saints is a grace of God
bestowed upon us. It is the fruit of Gods love toward us to carry this mind
toward those that are his. What strange men then are they, who of that which
is the effect of Gods love and mercy toward us, will make a matter of our
merit and desert toward God? In a word, M. Bishops answer is a most idle
dream; and because we can do nothing but what we owe to God, and all
infinitely too little to show forth our thankfulness toward him, we must say
as M. Perkins does, that in giving alms as we ought, we do but our duty; and
that to say that by almsdeeds we may satisfy for our sins, is the same as
to say, that a man by paying one debt may discharge another. But yet it
concerns them to stick hard for the maintaining of this device, for in all
the ports of Rome there is not a ship that has brought in more rich lading
then this has done. For hereby they have had the commandment of men's purses,
their goods and lands; and whilst they have borne them in hand, that from
necessary uses they must take somewhat for the redeeming of their sins, they
have made them rob their wives, their children, posterity and friends, to
bestow upon holy Church, as they called the gifts which they craved for
themselves. By this pretense, like Exodus 10.15.
the Grasshoppers of Egypt, they devoured all that was green upon the earth:
whatsoever was delightsome and pleasant they found means to make it theirs.
And hence came those rich endowments of religious houses, men upon conscience
of sin sparing no cost, in false hope to find some comfort thereby, as Answer
to the Epist. Ded. sect. 31.
before was said. And this point of satisfaction was so much the more willingly
entertained, because they that were loath to trouble themselves with fasting and
prayer, yet found help enough hereby, for that Thom. Aquin: supple^ q. 15.
art. 3 ad 3. Eleemosyna aliorum vices supplere potest inquantum alia
satisfactionis opera per eleemosynam quisque sibi mercatur quodammodo in ijs
quibus eleemosynam tribuit.
alms may supply or serve in steed of the rest, inasmuch as by it a man in
some sort buyeth for himself the other works of satisfaction in them to whom
he gives alms. This is the wonderful virtue of the alms that is enjoined by
a Popish Priest, that when a man neither fasteth nor prays, yet it makes
other men's fastings and prayers serve the turn for the remission of his sin.
And this was the notable cosening device of those holy votaries, to make men
believe (as before has been mentioned) that they had a faculty to transport
their merits and satisfactions to the use of them that were beneficial unto
them, verifying in themselves that which the Apostle S. Peter had prophesied of
them, 2. Pet. 2.3.
Through covetousness with fained words they shall make merchandise of you.
But M. Bishop here in malice to the Jesuits, quite passes by religious houses,
as if the alms of satisfaction did not belong to them. Howsoever he be
outwardly pacified, yet manet alta mente repostum, it is neither forgotten nor
forgiven, if he knew which way to work his will. As for Schools, Colleges,
Hospitals, Chapels, the building of them (if it be in the true faith of
Christ) is a gracious and godly work, but when they are so done, they are done
as testimonies of our thankfulness and duty to God, not as satisfactions for
our sins. Now although he have hitherto proved nothing as touching
satisfaction, yet presuming that he has so done, he joins to that supposed
proof the testimony of Cyprian, saying that Cypr. de Eleem. Nec habebat quid
fragilitatis humanae infirmitas atque imbecillitas faceret nisi iteru^ pietas
diuina subueniens iustitiae and misericordiae operibus ostensis viam quandam
tuendae salutis aperiret, vt sordes post modum quascunque contrahimus
eleemosynis abluamus.
our frailty and weakness could not tell what to do, unless the mercy of God
helping us had by showing us the works of justice and mercy, opened us away
for the preserving of our salvation, that by almsdeeds we cleanse or wash away
whatsoever filth of sin we contract after baptism. Which words of Cyprian, if
we construe them in rigor as they sound, do contain a most dangerous and
unchristian assertion, and such as all men rightly minded do abhor, that by
Christ all our sins are forgiven in baptism whatsoever we have done, but that
whatsoever we sin afterward is to be purged and cleansed by our selves.
Whereof it must follow, that we who are baptized in infancy have no further
benefit of Christ's redemption, but that we receive then for the freeing of us
from the bond of original uncleanness. Yea and if the way whereby after
baptism we are to be cleansed from our sins be alms, in what case must they
be who only receive alms, and have none to give, and therefore want that
means for the forgiveness of their sins? But the true doctrine of the
Gospel sets Christ before us, not only in baptism, but afterward also to
be Ioh 1.29.
the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. S. John being
baptized, speaks of himself amongst others, and says it to them that are
baptized, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just,
and he is the propitiation for our sins. The true confession of which point
of faith S. Austin delivers, in saying that August. cont. 2. epis. Pelag. li.
3 ca. 6. Caro Christi veru^ est and vnicum sacrificium pro peccatu, non solum
his quae vniuersa in baptismate diluuntur; verumetiam his quae post ex huius
vitae infirmitate surrepu^t, propter quae quotidie vniuersa in oratione ad Deu^
clamat Ecclesia, Dimitte nobis, etc. et dimittutitur nobis per singular
sacrificiu^ pro peccatis.
the flesh of Chrst is the true and only sacrifice for sins, not only those
which altogether are washed away in baptism, but those also which afterward
steal upon us by the frailty of this life, for which the whole Church cries
daily in prayer to God, forgive us our trespasses, and they are forgiven us by
that only sacrifice for sins. We learn here another manner of lesson then
Cyprian there teaches, that after baptism, not the sacrifice of our alms,
but the only sacrifice of the body of Christ is the remission of our sins.
M. Bishop must give us leave rather to believe Austine speaking according to
the Scripture, then Cyprian speaking directly against the Scripture. And
therefore we answer him as the same Austine did the Donatists, when they
alleged an Epistle of Cyprian against him, Cont. Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 31 Nos
nullam Cypriano facimus iniuria^ cu^ eius quaeslibet literas a canonica
diuinarum Scripturarum authoritate distinguimus, etc. Et cap. 32. Ego huius
epistolae authoritate non teneor, quia liter^s Cypriani non vt canonica^
haebeo. sed eas ex canonicis considero, and quod in eis diuinaru^ scripturaru^
authoritati congruit, cum laud eius accipio, quod autem non conguit, cum pace
eius respuo.
We do Cyprian no wrong to distinguish any writings of his from the authority
of holy Scripture. We are not bound to the authority of this epistle (or
sermon) because we account not Cyprians writings as canonical, but consider
them by the Canonical Scriptures, and what therein agrees to the authority
of holy Scripture, we receive it with his praise, but what agrees not, by his
leave we refuse it. Albeit because we find Cyprian elsewhere acknowledging in
the name of all the faithful, that Cyprian. de orat. Dom. Ipsum habemus apud
Patre^ Aduocatu^ pro peccatis nostris.
we have Christ with the Father to be the Advocate for our sins, thereby
confessing the effect of Christ's redemption to be extended to the whole course
of our life, we dare not conceive, howsoever his words be very harsh, that his
meaning was so bad as thereby it may seem to be. And to justify himself to
conceive no otherwise but that the washing and cleansing of us from our sins
amidst all our alms and devotions consists not in that which we do, but in
the blood of Christ, he says in another place, Idem ser. de ablut. pedum.
Clementissime magister quoties ego doctrinae tuae transgressus sum regulas;
quoties edicta tua Domine sancte contempsi, and cum diceres mihi, Reuertere,
non sum reuersus: cum minareris, non tim^^: cum bonus esses and lenis,
exasperans fui. Vltra septuagies septies in coelum and coram te peccaui. Quis
tot sordes abluet? qui^ abradet stercora co^globata? Quicquid dicat Petrus,
necesse est vt ipse nos abluas; neque enim lauare nos possumus, sed in omnibus
quae agimus indulgentiae tuae lauacro indigemus, etc. Apud te fons vitae est,
et miserationum quae a seculo sun^ profunditas infinita; abluisti nos baptismo,
lauasti sanguine tuo, semper lauas quotidiana peccata donando.
O merciful Lord, how often have I transgressed the rules of thy doctrine; how
often (O holy Lord) have I despised thy commandments, and when thou said
unto me, Return, I have not returned; when thou threatnedst, I feared not;
when thou wast good and gentle, I have provoked thee: beyond seventy times
seven times I have sinned against heaven and before thee. Who shall wash away
so much filth? who shall take away the mucke that is thus grown together? Let
Peter say what he will (in refusing to be washed) we have need that thou wash
us, for we cannot wash our selves, but in all things that we do, we stand in
need of the washing of thy pardon and mercy. With thee is the well of life,
and the infinite depth of mercies which have been from everlasting: thou have
washed us in baptism, thou have washed us in thy blood, thou always washest
us by forgiving our daily sins. By these words he gives plainly to
understand, that he did not think the washing and cleansing of us to consist in
the merit of our alms, but in the forgiveness of our sins. He confesses that
in all that we do, we stand in need of pardon, and therefore cannot be imagined
to think that any thing that we do is a satisfaction for our sins. In the
other words therefore we must conceive his purpose to be only to note and set
forth the acts and affections of them who truly and faithfully seek remission
of their sins by the mercy of God in the blood of Jesus Christ, albeit being
instant and earnest, as men are wont to be to press that that he had in hand,
he runs into inconvenient phrases and speeches, which otherwise stand not
with the rule of Christian says. Those works of mercy and compassion toward
our brethren, are the true fruits and effects, the consequents and companions
of that contrite and broken heart, that repentance and faith to which God has
made the promise of his mercy, and therefore because in the doing thereof we
find mercy, he so speaks thereof as if by the works themselves we obtained
that mercy, when yet it is not for the works sake that God accepts us, but
for Christ's sake, whom by our works we show that we unfeignedly seek, and do
truly believe in him. And as for the place of Scripture which he alleges,
though by error of the scribe perhaps it be, that there is noted in the margent
the fourth of Tobie, yet these words not being found in Tobie, and the words
that are in Tobie being cited afterward, he therein alludeth undoubtedly to a
saying of Solomon in the Proverbs; but forcing the text, and putting in alms
and faith in steed of mercy and truth. Which words of Solomon, if a whining
adversary by instance and importunity will urge upon us to expound of the
mercy and truth of man, it must be read and construed according to the same
meaning which is already expressed, Prou. 16.6.
In mercy and truth iniquity shall be forgiven, that is, where mercy and
truth are, there is forgiveness of sins, as to note the conditions of the
persons whose sins are forgiven, not the thing by virtue whereof they are
forgiven. But we have no warrant of any other Scripture in any other meaning to
tie it to our mercy and truth, and therefore must understand it of the mercy
and truth of God, of which the Prophet David speaks, when having signified
the forgiveness of the sins of Gods people, and the nearness of his
salvation to them that fear him, he adds for the cause thereof, Psalm. 85.10.
Mercy and truth are met together. Of which also the Evangelist S. John says,
John 1.17.
Grace and truth, that is, mercy and truth come by Jesus Christ. Thus then by
mercy and truth iniquity is forgiven; not by any merit or work of ours, not
by any satisfaction that we can make, but by the mercy of God, truly
performing the promise that he has made of the remission of sins by the
blood of Jesus Christ. As for the book of Tobie noted as I said in the
margent, and from whence Cyprian afterward alleges other words of alms
delivering from death and purging all sin, it is not of sufficient authority
to prove unto us any matter of faith, the ancient Church testifying of it, and
the rest of the same sort, as Hierome and Ruffinus have recorded, that Hieron.
prolog. galeat. Igitur sapientia Solomonis and Jesu filij Sirach liber, and
Judith and Tobias non sunt in Canone. Sic Ruffin. in expos. Symb.
they are not canonical, and S. Austine affirming that August. deciuit. Dei.
lib. 17. ca. 20. Aduersus contradict^resno^ tanta firmitate proferuntur qua
scripta non sunt in Cano^e Iudae^rum.
the writings which are not in the Canon of the Jews (as none are but what
they had written in their own tongue) are not with so great authority
alleged in matters of question and contradiction. Albeit we will not disauow
those words in that meaning, as I have before expressed, that almesdeeds
deliver from death and purge us from sin, as arguments for proof that we are
delivered from death and purged from sin, not as causes effecting and working
the same purgation, or if we will use the name of causes, as causes to our
apprehension and knowledge, not as causes of the essence and being of the
thing. But take all these speeches how we will, it shall appear (God willing)
in the next sectio^ that they make nothing at al for M. Bishop, and that they
are impudently wrested to that purpose for which he alleges them. In the
mean time for the conclusion of this section he tells us a reason why they
make special reckoning of these three works for satisfaction, but the ground
of his reason fully overthrows all the assertion thereof. Being to satisfy
(says he) we must perform it with such things as be our own. But say we, we
have nothing of our own, but whatsoever we have is his, Romans 11.36.
of whom, and through whom, and for whom are all things. Therefore as before
has bin concluded, we cannot satisfy at all. Whether they be goods of the
mind, or of the body, or external goods, we owe all unto him, and we do but
pay him with his own. His applying of the words of the Apostle to fasting is
absurd. Reasonable bodily discipline, says he; whereas the Apostle by Romans
12.1.
reasonable service means that that is mental and spiritual, and thereby
agreeable to God, who is John 4.24.
a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, not any 1. Tim. 4.8.
bodily exercise which profits little, as the same Apostle speaks. So the
other words of a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, are misapplied
to a particular act of fasting, having a general reference to the whole course
of a Christian life and conversation. I omit the rest of his words as idle.

18. W. BISHOP.
But now to knit up this question: let us hear briefly what the best learned
and purest antiquity has taught of this satisfaction done by man; and because
M. Perkins began with Tertullian, omitting his ancients: let us first hear
what he says of it in his book of penance. How foolish is it (says he) not
to fulfill our penance, and yet to expect pardon of our sins, this is not to
tender the price, and yet to put out a hand for the reward: for God has
decreed to set the pardon at this price: he proposes impunitie to be redeemed
with this recompense of penance.

His equal in standing, and better in learning, Origin thus discourses: See
our good Lord tempering mercy with severity, Hom. 3. in lib. Judic.
and weighing the measure of the punishment in a just and merciful balance: he
delivers not up a sinner for ever. But look how long time thou know thy
self to have offended, so long do thou humble thy self to God, and satisfy
him in the confession of penance.

That glorious Martyr, and most learned Archbishop S. Cyprian, is wonderful
vehement against them that would not have severe penance done by such as fell
in persecution: Lib. 1. ep. 3.
saying: That such indiscreet men labor tooth and nail, that satisfaction be
not done to God, highly offended against them. Lib. 3. ep. 14.
And says further, That he who withdraws our brethren from these works of
satisfaction, does miserably deceive them, causing them that might do true
penance, and satisfy God their merciful Father, with their prayer and works,
to perish daily, and to be more and more seduced to their further damnation.

Orat. in illa verba, attend tibi. Idem Ambr. ad virg. lap cap. 8.
S. Basil sath: Look to thy self, that according to the proportion of thy
fault thou may hence also borrow some help of recovering thy health. Is it a
great and grievous offense? it has then need of much confession, bitter
tears, a sharp combat of watching, and incessant and continued fasting: if
the offense were light and more tolerable, yet let the penance be equal unto
it.

Orat in sanct. lum.
S. Gregory Nazianze^ says: It is as great an evil to pardon without some
punishment, as to punish without all pity. For as that does loose the bridle
to all licentiousness, so this does strain it too much.

Jdem de paup. amor.
By compassion on the poor and faith, sins are purged, therefore let us be
cleansed by this compassion, let us scour out the spots and filth of our souls
with this egregious herb that makes it white, some as wool, others as snow,
according to the proportion of every man's compassion and alms.

De Helia and Ieiun.
S. Ambrose says, We have many helps whereby we may redeem our sins: have
thou money? redeem thy sin, not that our Lord is to be bought and sold, but
thou thy self art sold by thy sins, redeem thy self with thy works, redeem
thee with thy money. And, Epist. 82.
how could we be saved, unless we washed away our sins by fasting?

S. Hierome makes Paula a blessed matron say, My face is to be disfigured,
which against the commandment of God I painted: my body is to be afflicted
that has taken so great pleasure: my often laughter is to be recompensed with
continual weeping: my silks and soft clothing is to be changed into rough
hair. Read another Epistle of his to the same Eustochium, Ad Eustoch. de
obitu Paulae.
about the preserving of her virginity, and see what penance himself did,
being a most virtuous young man.

S. Augustine says, He that is truly penitent, Epist. 54.
looks to nothing else then that he leaves not unpunished the sin which he
committed: For by that means, not sparing our selves, he whose high and just
judgment no contemptuous person can escape, does spare us.

And he shows how that a penitent sinner does come to the Priest, and receive
of him the measure of his satisfaction. Lib. 50. hom. Hom. 50. cap. 11. Cap. 15.
And says directly against our Protestants position, That it is not sufficient
to amend our manners, and to depart from the evil which we have committed,
unless we do also satisfy God for those things which we had done.

S. Gregory says, That sins are not only to be confessed, Lib. 6. in 1. Reg.
but to be blotted out with the austeritie of penance.

I will close up these testimonies with this sentence of our learned countriman
venerable Bede: Delight (says he) or desire to sin, Jn Psalm. 1.
when we do satisfaction is lightly purged by almesdeeds and such like: but
consent is not rubbed out without great penance: now custom of sinning is not
taken away but by a just and heavy satisfaction.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop knitteth up the question, but he knitteth it (gentle Reader)
with a bow-knot; if thou have but skill to pull the right string, thou shall
presently loose all that he has knit. Ask him, and let him tell thee the true
state of the question here disputed, and thou can presently discern, that of
these so many testimonies by him alleged, there is none, not so much as one
that carries any show or semblance to that for which he cites them. Such is
the notable imposturage and cosinage of these false harlots, in laying together
huge companies of the places of the Fathers to blind the eyes of simple men,
who are not able to discern whether they be applied right or wrong. I have
pointed at this matter before, but it comes here more fully to be declared.
M. Bishop in the beginning tells us thus: We are not here to treat of that
public penance which for notorious crimes is done openly, but of such private
penance which is either enjoined by the Confessor, or voluntarily undertaken by
the penitent, or else sent by Gods visitation to purge us from that temporal
pain which for sins past and pardoned we are to endure either in this life or
in Purgatory, etc. Mark that which he says, gentle Reader, that satisfaction
is not here meant of public penance for notorious offenses, but only of private
penance, and that for sins past and already pardoned. That thou may the
better understand this secret of theirs, thou art to observe that in sin they
affirm two things, Bellar. de paen. lib. 4. cap. 1. Cum homines in Deu^
peccant, amicitia^ simul and iustitia^ violant. Ac pro amicitia reformanda, no^
potest homo Deo satisfaceremam satisfactio hominis erga Deum acceptatione
ipsius Dei necessari^ indi^^get: acceptatio autem amicitia^ praesupponit. Et
praeterea vt satisfactio sit aliquo modo ad aequae^^tatem, oportet vt sicut
offensio habuit infinitatem quanda^ ex part obiecti, sic habeat satisfactio
infinitate^ aliquam ex part principij satisfacientis. Proinde requiritur vt
opera satisfactoriae fiant a spiritu Dei homine^ inhabitante, sieve ab ipso
homine vt membro Christi ac filio Det iam per gratiam and charitate^ effecto.
etc.
the violation of amity betwixt God and us, and the violation of justice. For
the renewing of amity, they say that a man cannot satisfy, because
satisfaction must have acceptance with God, and acceptance presupposes amity
and friendship. Again, satisfaction must have some kind of equality, in
respect of the offense for which the satisfaction is made. That there may be
such an equality, it is necessary that as the offense has a kind of infinity
in respect of the object (which is God) so the satisfaction have a kind of
infinity in respect of the original whence it has beginning. It must
therefore proceed from the spirit of God dwelling in man, or from man made by
grace and charity the member of Christ and child of God. When therefore a man
by mortal sin has expulsed from himself grace and charity, he must first
upon his contrition and confession be reconciled and have his sin forgiven,
and afterward must make satisfaction for the same sin. For they will have us
think that though God be content to be friends with us, and in that respect to
forgive the sin, yet he will have satisfaction made to his justice for the
wrong and trespass that we have done him. Thou may not wonder that they be
very earnest in the assertion of this matter, because upon this ground
Purgatory stands, and consequently the whole revenue of the Popes pardons,
and of all their obsequies and devotions for the dead. Now this being the point
of their defense, that God having forgiven and pardoned the sin, there
remains a satisfaction to be made by temporal punishment, which of all the
Fathers by him alleged, speaks any thing to that effect? He has taken them
all out of Bellarmine, but therein see the honesty and fidelity both of
Bellarmine and him: peruse them, and consider of them again and again, and what
do thou find sounding to the proof of their assertion? The Fathers speak
of a satisfaction for the obtaining of the forgiveness of sins, but of a
satisfaction to be made when the sin is forgiven, they say never a word, yea
they never imagined any such thing. The church of Rome denies that to be
properly a satisfaction, which the Fathers call by the name of satisfaction,
and knew no other but that, and yet that satisfaction they allege for the
proof of their new devised satisfaction. Yea Bellarmine himself confesses,
that Bellar. de poen. lib 4. ca. 1. Si veteres Patres interdu^ actionibus
humanis tribuere id videntur vt Deu^ ex inimico amicum reddant atque adeo pro
expianda culpa satisfaciant, interpretandi sunt d^ satisfactione ex congruo,
non ex condigno.
where the Fathers do seem to attribute to the actions of men to restore
amity with God, and to satisfy for the remission of the sin, they must be
expounded of satisfaction ex congruo, not ex condigno. So had he said before,
that with the Fathers in that case, the words of Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 12. Vbi
poenitentia dicitur meritum, pretium, sati^factio, redemptio pro peccato, de
merito, etc. ex congruo accipienda sunt.
merit, price, satisfaction, redemption, must be taken in that sort. And yet
whereas all these Fathers alleged speak of price, satisfaction, redemption,
for the remission of the sin, he himself brings them to prove Lib 4. cap. 9.
satisfaction de condigno, after the remission of the sin. To speak of them
briefly in order as he reports them, the first testimony out of Tertullian,
concerns public penance, the whole book being written thereof, as Beat.
Rhen. in argum. lib. Tert. de poenit.
Beatus Rhenanus shows in the argument of the same book, and as by the
author himself appears in that he speaks of such a repentance as is Tertul
de poen. Quicquid mediocritas nostra ad poenitentia^ semel capessendam and
perpetuo continenda^ suggerere conata est, omnes deditos Domino spectat.
but once to be had after baptism, which was so ordered by the Church in
public penitencie, but in private never, neither would M. Bishop plead so hard
for it, if it were so. Now public penitency was a satisfaction to obtain
forgiveness, and so here Tertullian plainly expresses, calling it Ibidem. Quam
stultu^ poenitentiam non adimplere and veniam delictorum sustinere? hoc est,
pretiu^ non exhibere, ad merce^ manu^ emittere. Hoc enim pretio Dominus veniam
addicere instituit, etc.
a folly not to fulfill penance, and yet to expect pardon, affirming the one to
be the price for the other, and that God has set the pardon at this price.
This then being a price for the pardon, comes not within the compass of our
question, which is of a satisfaction when the sin is pardoned. Origens purpose
in the same place alleged, is by the example of the deliverance of the
Israelites when they called upon the Lord, to show that the Lord delivers a
man to adversary powers Origin. in lib. Iudic. hom 3. Vt humiliet cum qui nimis
fuerat exaltatus, vt affligat, vt conterat do nec resipiscat and quaerat
dominum, etc. Abijciatur superbiae odor iste teterrimus. etc. ^e forte
irascatur Dominus and tradat nos, etc. and humilitatem quam in scientia Christi
docere debuimus, in correptionis nostrae tribulatione discamus: sed vide
benignum Dominum misericordiam cum seueritate mis^entem and ipsius poenae modum
iusta and clementi libratione pensantem.
to humble him that was exalted, to afflict him, to break him until he repent
and seek the Lord; exhorting to put away pride least the Lord be angry and
give us up into the hands of the enemy, that by the trouble of correction we
learn that humility which we should have taught in the knowledge of Christ.
Hereupon he infers that advertisement of Gods tempering mercy with
severity, waighing the measure of his punishment by a just and merciful
consideration, namely in that sort as he has before delivered, Tradidit
humilia^dos vt salubri medicinae ratione contraria contrarijs curarentur.
that in manner of a wholesome medicine, one contrary may be cured with
another. Therefore he says that Non in perpetuum tradit delinquentes, sed
quanto tempore errasse te nosti, etc. tanto nihilominus tempore humilia teipsum
Deo et satisfacito ^t in confessione poenitentiae, etc. quia si te ipse
emendaueris, si te ipse correxeris, pius et misericors est Deus qui vindictam
temperet ab eo qui illam poenitendo praeuenit.
God does not give over a sinner for ever, as to note that all that he does is
but to bring a man to repentance; which being done, he is satisfied. Whereupon
he gives advice to a man, that according to the time that he knows himself
to have erred or offended, so he humble himself, and satisfy God in the
confession of repentance; because (says he) if thou reform and amend thy
self, God is gracious and merciful to withhold punishment from him who
preuenteth it by repentance. Now what is all this but that which the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord? He
exhorts to prevent Gods judgment, to humble our selves, to repent, to cast
away our pride, to seek God, to satisfy him by confession and acknowledgement
of our sins, that God being gracious and merciful may forbear to punish us,
but we find nothing of that that we seek for, that having humbled our sins,
and being reconciled to God, and having obtained forgiveness of sins, we
shall remain bound to punishment and satisfaction for our sins. The words
cited out of Cyprians epistles, concern them who in the time of persecution
had fallen and denied Christ, whom he would not have to be restored to the
communion of the Church until they had publicly lamented their grievous fall,
and given good tokens of their true and faithful repentance. Therefore he
blames them that too lightly and easily received them again, hereby causing
Cyprian. lib. 1. epi. 3. Proponitur sacrilegis atque dicitur, ne ira cogitetur
Dei, non timeatur iudiciu^ Domini, ne pulsetur ad Ecclesia^ Christi, sed
sublata poenitentiae nec vlla exomologesi criminis facta pax a non veris
presbyteris verbis fallacibus praedicetur, etc.
that they conceived not the wrath of God, that they feared not the judgment of
the Lord, that they knocked not at the Church of Christ, but without repentance
and open confession of their sin had false peace preached unto them with
deceitful words. Here is therefore no speech of satisfaction after peace and
reconcilement to God, but only for the obtaining of this peace. And this is
evident by the very words cited by M. Bishop, wherein Cyprian blames them that
withheld men from Ibid. Elab^rant ne indignanti Deo satisfiat.
satisfying God being angry; and he applies them against us, for denying
satisfaction when God is pleased. In the other place Cyprian says, that Lib.
3. epist. 14. Possunt agentes poenitentiam veram Deo Patri ad misericordia
precibus and operibus suis satisfacere.
showing true repentance they might by their prayers and works satisfy God to
the procuring of mercy: and M. Bishop alleges it to prove a satisfaction when
men have already procured mercy. Cyprian speaks of a satisfaction, for want
whereof men Jbid seducuntur vt magis pereant and qui se erigere possunt plus
cadant.
perish, and as M. Bishop translateth, are seduced to their further damnation,
and M. Bishop applies it to a satisfaction, for want whereof men perish not
nor are damned, but must make it up in Purgatory fire. The words of Basil are
as impertinent as the rest. He says nothing but what we say, that the greater
wound should cause the greater pain, the greater sin the greater sorrow, that
we may so much the more earnestly seek reconcilement to God, by how much the
further we have departed from him; but no shadow is there of satisfaction to be
made after that we are reconciled unto him. The last of his words contain the
sum of all the rest: Basil. orat. in illud, Attend tibi. Adaequetur peccato
poenitentia.
Let the repentance be equal or proportionable to the sin. To the like
sentence of Ambrose he refers us in the margent; Ambr. ad virg. lapsam.
Grandi plagae alta and prolixa opus est medicina; grande scelus grandem habet
necessaria^ satisfactionem.
A great wound had need of a very effectual and long cure: a great sin had
need of great satisfaction. The words immediately going before are these:
Peccator si sibi non pepercerit a Deo illi parcitur, etsi futuras poenas
gehennae perpetuas in hoc paruo vitae spacio compensauerit, seipsu^ ab aeterno
iudicio liberat.
If the sinner spare not himself, then the Lord will spare him; and if in the
short space of this life he shall recompense the everlasting pains of hell that
are to come, he freeth himself from eternal judgment. It is apparent therefore
that he speaks of a satisfaction whereby to obtain forgiveness of sins
for the avoiding of the eternal pains of hell, not of a satisfaction after
forgiveness, for the avoiding of the temporal pains of Purgatory. He writes
it to a virgin that had yielded her self to be defiled and corrupted, and
calls her to public and perpetual penance, denying her any remission or
pardon in this world. Ibid. Inhaere poenitentiae vsque ad finem vitae, nec tibi
praesismas ab humano die posse veniam dari quia decipit te qui hoc tibi
polliceri voluerit. Quae enim proprie in Dominii peccasti, ab illo solo te
co^uenit in die iudicij expectare remedium.
Continue in thy penance or repentance even to the end of thy life, and do not
presume that of man's day any pardon can be granted thee, for he deceives thee
that will promise that unto thee. For thou which have sinned properly against
the Lord, must of him alone expect remedy at the day of judgment. A hard
censure, and unworthy of Ambrose, and so contrary to that which otherwhere he
has written, as that we may well question whether it be his or not; but it
being plainly denied her to have forgiveness, how deceitfully is this example
brought to prove satisfaction after forgiveness. With as great fraud he
alleges Gregory Nazianzen, who in that place inueigheth against the Nouatian
heretics, denying repentance to them that fell after baptism, according to
the censure now mentioned under the name of Ambrose. Against that rigor he
says, that Greg. Nazian. ora. 39. in sancta lumina. In eode^ vitio sunt ta^
effraenata et omni animaduersionis meus soluta licentia, qua^ saeua, nec vlla
cleme^tia temperata condemnatio; illa omnes habenas vitijs laxans, haec
vehementiori astrictione praefocans.
in like sort are to be blamed both unbridled license freed from all fear of
punishment and cruel condemning, not mingled or tempered with clemency and
mercy; the one loosing the bridle to all vices, the other stifling men with
overmuch straightness. Nicetas in his co^mentary thus expresses it, Nicet.
ibid. in comment. Parem ^^ea sententiae reprehensionem poena^que mere^^ur qui
v^l p^cc^ ^s nulla p^ ^^ciu^t (...) ^mnes hab^^ ^mit. (...) qui eos (...) ^nant
v^ (...) consequ^ (...) ^iae sp^ ^^^u relinq^^^^.
They alike deserve to be reproved and punished, who either punish not
offenders at all, but give them wholly the bridle, or do so condemn them as
that they leave them no hope to obtain pardon. He speaks of the external
government and discipline of the Church, wherein he blames that men should be
left at liberty to offend without fear of punishment; and again blames such
extremity and rigor, that offenders when they repent, should be excluded from
hope of pardon: and what is this to prove that men being pardoned by God, must
notwithstanding yet make him a satisfaction for their sins pardoned? No man I
suppose is so blind, but that he sees the falsehood of this citation. The other
out of the same Father is of the same condition. He speaks of mercy and
compassion, as means Ora^. 27. de amore pauperum. Miseratione purgemur,
animique labes et inquinamenta egregia illa herba detergamus, etc.
to purge sins, to scour out the spots and filth of our souls; but he says
nothing of satisfaction to be made after that those spots and filth are purged
and scoured. Of the saying of Solomon which he alleges, I have spoken in the
former section: only it may be added, that whereas he for mercy and truth
reads Misericordia and fide peccata purgantur.
By mercy and faith sins are purged, or iniquity is forgiven, which the Hebrew
text bears very well, we may understand it of Gods mercy in giving, and our
faith in receiving the forgiveness of sins, the promise thereof being made to
them that believe in him. Again he brings us Ambrose speaking of Ambr. de
Heliae and ieiun. cap. 20. Habemus plura subsidia quibus peccat^ nostra
redimamus. Habes pecuniam: redime peccatum tuum, etc. Et ep. 82. Quae nobis
salus esse potest nisi teiunio eluerimus peccata nostra?
redeeming our sins with our money, and washing away sins with fasting; but we
hear nothing of satisfaction or redemption after the forgiveness of our sins.
Yea when he says that the Lord is not to be bought and sold, he gives us to
understand, that he means not that by our money we purchase or merit at Gods
hands, and therefore can not be said thereby to make him satisfaction for our
sins. That which he says of redeeming, he will have it understood of freeing
our selves from the cords or bonds of our sins, that we may not be holden by
the custom of them, whilst by well doing we resist and cross the practice
and lusts thereof, that they may not continue to bring us unto death. Ibid. Non
venalis est Dominus. sed tu ipse venalis es. Peccatis tuis venundatus es.
Redime te operibus tuis: redime te pecunia tua, etc. Venenum veneno excluditur.
Veneno mors repellitur, vita seruatur.
The Lord (says he) is not to be bought and sold; but thou art so. Thou art
sold to thy sins. Redeem thy self by thy works: redeem thy self by thy
money. By one poison another poison is excluded: by the poison (of the Mammon of
iniquity) death is repulsed, life is preserved. Here is a redemption for the
excluding of sin, not to pay a satisfaction for it; to set us free from the
bondage of committing sin, not to purchase the forgiveness of it. Nay of
that he has said immediately before, Ibid. Confugiamus ad medicia^ qui vulnera
superiora curauit, et siquid superest acerbitatis medela non decrit. Etsi quid
iniuriae fecimus memor no^ erit qui semel donauit. Etsi graeuia deliquimus,
magnu^ medicu^ inuenimus, magnam medicinam gratiae eius accepimus Magna enim
medicina tollit peccata magna.
Let us fly to the Physician who has cured our former wounds, and if any
bitterness be remaining, there shall not want a medicine. And if we have done
wrong, he will forget it who has once pardoned. Albeit we have greatly
offended, we have a great Physician, we have received the great medicine of his
grace: for a strong or great medicine takes away great sins. That which is
next alleged out of Hierome concerning Paula, signifies her lamentation of
her former life, and sets out her repentance of her sins, Hieron. epitap.
Paulae. Jtaleu^a peccata pla^gebat vt eam graussimorum criminu^ crederes ream.
which being but small, as Hierome says, she so bewailed, as that a man would
have thought her guilty of grievous offenses; but that proves not that she
meant to make satisfaction hereby for pardoned sins, neither does he say any
thing to that effect. No more does he as touching himself in the other epistle
to Eustochium, where he shows what hardness he endured at the first in the
wilderness to subdue the heat and lust of youth, having as he says, Hieron.
ad Eustoch. Ob gehennae metum tali mecarcere ipse damnaueram.
for the fear of hell condemned himself to that prison, but not so much as
any word that he did any thing there for penance or satisfaction for his
sins. This is so wisely applied, as that we may well think M. Bishop put it
in of his own head, there being nothing either in words or in matter likely to
serve the turn. As little help has he in the next citation which is out of
S. Austine, who tells Macedonius the Lieutenant concerning them who being
condemned to death, had their lives and pardon begged by the Bishops, that
August. ep 54. Quosdam qu^r^^ manifesta sunt crimina a vestra seueritate
liberatos a societate remouemus altaris, vt poenitendo placare possiut quem
peccando contempserant seque ipsos puniendo.
they kept many of them whose crimes were manifest from the participation of
the sacrament, that by repentance and punishing themselves they might appease
him whom in their sins they had despised. Hereupon he infers: Na^ nihil
aliud agit quem veraciter poenitet nisi vt id quod mali fecerit impunitu^ esse
non sinat. ^o quippe modo sibi non parcenti ille parcit cuius altu^ iustumque
iudiciu^ nullus co^tempt^^ euadit.
For he which truly repents, labors nothing else but not to suffer that
evil which he has done to be unpunished: for by that means when he spares
not himself, he is spared of him whose secret and just judgment no despiser
shall escape. Which words being plainly delivered of that repentance whereby
God is appeased that he may not punish, what do they make to the proof of a
punishment which they say God inflicteth when he is appeased? Concerning this
punishing of our selves, I refer thee to that which before has bin said by
occasion of another sentence of S. Austine in the tenth section. The other
place is manifestly spoken of public penitency, S. Austin exhorting every man
in the guilt of those sins of which the Scripture teaches, that Gal. 5.21.
they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God, August. hom.
50. Cum in se protulerit seuerissimae medicinae sententia^ veniat ad Antistites
per quos illi in ecclesia claues ministrantur, and acciptat satisfactionis suae
modu^ vt in offerendo sacrificio cordis contribulati denotus and supplex id
tamen agat quod non solum illi prosit ad recipiendam salute^, sed and caeteris
ad exemplum, vt si peccatum eius non solum in graui eius malo sed etiam in
scandalo est aliorum, atque hoc expedire vi^litati ecclesiae videtur antistiti
in notitia multorum veletiam totius plebis agere poenitentiaem non recuset.
to pronounce sentence against himself of a sharp medicine, to come to the
Priests by whom the keys of the church are ministered unto him, and of them to
receive the manner or measure of his satisfaction, that being devout and humble
in offering the sacrifice of a troubled or contrite heart, he may yet do that
which may not only do him good for the receiving of salvation, but others also
by example, that if his sin be not only to the grievous hurt of himself, but
also to the scandal of others, and it so seem to the Priest or Bishop expedient
for the profit of the Church, he refuse not to do penance in the knowledge of
many or of the whole church. This is again a repentance for the receiving of
the forgiveness of sins and salvation, but no other satisfaction, required not
only for the good of the offender, but also for the good of other men and of
the whole church, whereas M. Bishops satisfaction concerns only the man
himself to be delivered from Purgatory pains. To the same effect is that
which he cites further out of the same Homily: Ibid. Non sufficit mores in
melius commutare, and a factis malis recedere, nisi etia^ de his qua factae
sunt satisfiat Deo per poenitentiae dolorem.
It suffices not to amend our manners and to depart from evil doings, unless
for those things which we have done we satisfy God by sorrow of repentance. To
what end that satisfaction is used, he shows presently after: Non enim dictu^
est tantum vt abstineatis a peccatis, sed and de praeteritis, inquit, Dominum
deprecare vt tibi dimittantur.
For it is not said only that we should abstain from sins, but pray to God
also says he (namely Ecclesiasticus) for the things that are past, that they
may be forgiven thee. Here is all still for forgiveness of sins, but nothing of
satisfaction when sin is forgiven. So when Gregory says, that Greg in 1. Reg
lib. 6. Non solum confitenda sunt pec^ata, sed etiam poenitentiae austeritate
delenda
sins are not only to be confessed, but also to be blotted out by austeritie of
penance or repentance, he speaks of a penance for the blotting out of sin,
not of penance when the sin is already blotted out. So does Beda expressly apply
his speech to the purging, the blotting out, the pardoning of sin. Beda in
Psalm. 1. Delectatio seu voluntas peccandi quando ad satisfactionem venitur
leuiter eleemosynis and alijs talibus purgatur; consensu^ vero non nisi graut
poenitentia deletur; consuetudo autem nonnisi recta and ponderosa satisfactione
absoluitur.
Delight or desire to sin when we come to satisfaction is lightly purged with
almsdeeds and such like; but consent is not blotted out by great repentance;
but custom of sin is not pardoned but by just and weighty satisfaction. Thus
(gentle Reader) of all that M. Bishop has cited, yea and of all that
Bellarmine has cited, there is not one that speaks to the point in question,
as touching satisfaction after forgiveness of sins. No, it is a late device of
the Schoolmen, which when they had set it abroch, they desired to color and to
give it taste by citing sentences of the Fathers as touching satisfaction, when
as the Fathers speak of satisfaction in one meaning, and they apply them in
another. But I suppose I have not yet given thee full satisfaction, unless I
further add somewhat as touching the ancient Fathers using of this term of
satisfaction. It is therefore to be understood, that the same was first applied
to that public penance, whereby open and notorious offenders did satisfy the
Church, that is, give sufficient and approved testimony and assurance of their
true and unfeigned repentance for their sins. When any in the time of
persecution had fallen by renouncing the name and faith of Christ, or had
otherwise committed any great and scandalous trespass to the grieuance of his
brethren, to the obloquie of religion and slander of the Church, but
especially to the offense of almighty God, and provoking of his wrath both
against himself, and them also with whom he lived, he was by the public
censure of the Church secluded from the Communion, and cut off from the
society of the faithful and godly, as unworthy to be reckoned a member of
Christ, or partaker of the hope that is by him. But yet there was always hope
of restitution remaining to them who upon convenient trial were found penitent
and grieved for the evil which they had done. To this purpose therefore they
were enjoined See hereof Tertul. de poenitentia, and the collections of Beatus
Rhenanus in the argument of that book.
public confession of their sins. They had their place appointed them in the
Church, where they stood lamenting and mourning, and with weeping and tears
cast themselves to the ground, praying to God for themselves and commending
themselves to the prayers of the assembly. It was prescribed them by watching,
by fasting, by course, and uncouth apparel to afflict and humble themselves,
that every way their grief and sorrow might be seen. Which being duly
performed the Church was satisfied, and taking compassion on them restored them
again to brotherly society, and to the communion of the Church, and hereof
first was the name of satisfaction taken up. It was not therefore a
satisfaction whereby they meant to make God a just recompense for their sins,
or as by paying a price of worth and value to merit and purchase their own
pardon, but only a satisfaction whereby the Church would be certified of their
true repentance toward God, as not enduring that any man should be accounted a
member amongst them, who by sin had made himself a stranger to God, until
they saw reason to be persuaded that God would be pleased to be reconciled to
him again. They could not look into the heart to see any man's repentance and
sorrow, but by men's devout submitting themselves to the ordinances of public
censure and discipline they would be induced to the persuasion thereof, and
being thereof persuaded, they received him again whom before they had
rejected. Hereof Saint Austin says very plainly to show the the end of it;
Aug. Enchir. cap. 65. Cor concritum and humiliatum Deus no^ spernit. Verum quia
plerunque dolor alterius cordis occulius est alteri, neque in aliorum notitia^
per verba vel quaecunque alia signa procedit, cum sit eoram illo cui dicitur,
Gemitus met^ a te non est absconditus, r^cte constituuntur ab ijs, qui
Ecclesiae praesunt temporae poenitentiae, vt fiat etiam satis Ecclesiae in qua
remittuntur ipsa peccata; extra came quippe non remittuntur.
A contrite and humbled heart God despises not, but yet because commonly the
grief of one man's heart is secret to another, and comes not by any words or
signs to the certain knowledge of others, being in the sight of him to whom
it is said, My groaning is not hid from thee, therefore rightly are there
appointed certain times of penance, that the Church also may be satisfied
wherein sins are forgiven, because out of it there are none forgiven. Here is
the true use of those public satisfactions. It is true that God yields to
the contrite and broken heart remission and forgiveness of sins, but in
scandalous trespasses he will have the knowledge thereof to be taken in the
forgiveness of the Church. A man in that case sins not against God only,
but also against the Church, in provoking Gods anger, as before was said, not
only against himself, but also against them, in corrupting others, so much as
in him lies, by his evil example, in causing adversaries by that occasion to
speak evil of the Church. God therefore would that as the Church is
interested in the wrong, so it should also be interested in the forgiveness
thereof, so as that in this case no man is to presume of forgiveness with God,
who is not so much as in him lies, reconciled to the Church of God. This our
Savior Christ has confirmed in the Gospel: Mat. 18.18.
Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. John 20.23.
Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; whose sins ye retain, they are
retained. So then the forgiveness of the Church is to be accounted as it were
an admission to forgiveness with God, and a man takes the one to be to him a
confirmation of the other. Now the Church is to forgive according to the same
rule as God forgiueth, only him that is penitent and grieved for his sin,
and therefore in such sort, as has been said, requires satisfaction for
certificate and assurance of such repentance. And this is specially that
satisfaction which is so much spoken of in the writings and records of the
ancient Church. But yet will M. Bishop say, the matter is not sufficiently
cleared, because howsoever the name of satisfaction might have original from
hence, yet we find them to have applied the same to God also, and to have
taught men by such and such works to satisfy and appease the wrath of God. And
we deny not indeed but that so they have done, but yet we say, that they never
spoke of satisfaction in any such meaning as the name of it now imports in
the Church of Rome. Far were they from having any thought, that any thing
they did could be a satisfaction, that is, a just and sufficient, and worthy
recompense for their sins: but yet they called repentance by the name of
satisfaction, as to note that it is the thing wherewith God is satisfied, that
is, contented and appeased, not for the thing it self, but for that he has
promised to accept those passions and tears, and works which are the issues
and streams of a broken and contrite heart, carefully seeking his mercy, and
humbly craving remission and pardon in the name of Jesus Christ. In this sense
they translated the name of satisfaction from the Church to God, and from
public to private repentance, never imagining, that any man would be so mad as
to conceive merit there where they taught the sinner to ask mercy, where they
taught that the whole effect of that that is done consists in Gods mercy,
through the merit of Jesus Christ. Hesych. in Leuit. 7 lib. 2. Christus nobis
propitiatio factus est, ergo in ipso omne poenitentiae sacrificium ministratur
and agitu^ and omne quod ex poenitentia quis consequitur ad eum refertur.
Christ is made our atonement, says Hesychius: therefore all the sacrifice of
repentance (or penance) is administered and done in him, and all that a man
obtains by repentance is referred to him. It is not then for our repentance
sake, but for Christ's sake, that in repentance we obtain that mercy that we do
obtain. And to that purpose very notably serves that which Chrysostom,
moving question in the name and behalf of a sinner, and making answer thereto,
very learnedly and religiously speaks in this sort: Chrysostom. de poenit. hom.
3. Sieve in Hypou^uemate in Esaiae^, Cum omnem vitam in peccatis detriuerim, si
me poenituerit, fiamne saluus? Prorsus fies. Vnde hoc liquet? Ab ipsa Domini
tui benignitate, non ex tua poenitentia mihi sumo fiduciam. Poenitentia enim
tua non praeualet tantam abstergere malorum eluutem. Poenitentia si sola
fuerit, merito tibi metuendum est, sed quoniam poenitentiae Dei clementia,
Deique pietas iuncta est, confide.
I have spent all my life in sin, and if I repent, do thou think I shall
be saved? Yea verily, says he. But how shall I be certain of that? or what
persuasion can induce me to think so? I take assurance hereof from the mercy
of the Lord, not from thy repentance. For thy only repentance avails not to
wash away so great filth of sin. If there be thy only repentance, thou art
justly to be afraid, but because Gods mercy and compassion is joined with
repentance, therefore be of good cheer. Here is nothing attributed to
repentance for it self, but only to the mercy of God vouchsafing to yield
favor and forgiveness to the repentant. Therefore do they hang the whole
fruit of repentance upon faith: for Aug. de vera and falsa poen^t. cap. 2.
Fides fundamentum est poenite^tiae, etc. Poenitentia itaque quae ex fide non
procedit, vtilis non est.
says, says S. Austin, is the foundation of repentance, and the repentance
which proceeds not from faith is unprofitable. Ambros. de poenit. lib. 1. ca.
8 Ergo and agenda^ poe^^t^n^am and tribuend^m veniam credere nos conuenit, vt
veniam tamen ta^quam ex fide speremu^, non tanquam ex debito.
We are so to believe, says Ambrose, both the doing of penance, and the
yielding of pardon, as that notwithstanding we hope for pardon, as by faith and
not as of debt. Here is then no popish opinion of penance and satisfaction
expecting remission by way of debt and duty as a thing deserved, but in the
midst of our repentance or penance, we are taught to hope for pardon only by
the faith of Jesus Christ. Therefore S. Bernard says, that Bernard. de verb.
lib. Job. In sex tribulat. Sola nim^ru^ secundi Adae tribulatio purgat, quos
contaminauit offensio sola prioris; non quod propriae cuiqua^ sufficere possit
satisfactio. Quid est enim omnis poenite^tia nostra, nisi quod si non
compatimur, omnino non possumus conregnare.
it is the only suffering of the second Adam, that purges us whom the only
offense of the first Adam did defile; I say not (says he, alluding to that
which before he has said concerning repentance and mortification) that any
man's own satisfaction can suffice him: for what is all our repentance, but
only that if we suffer not with him, we cannot reign with him. By our
repentance then which he expresses before in weeping for our sins, in
bearing our cross, in mortifying our members, in offering our selves a
sacrifice to God, herby he says we become like unto Christ in suffering, and
so are fitted to reign with him, but yet the purging of us from sin he
denies to these things, and reserueth it to Christ alone. For we may ask as
Ambrose does: Ambros. in Psalm 118. Ser. 20 Quibus laboribus, quib^s iniurijs
possumus nostra leuare peccata?
By what pains or by what sufferings (or bearing of wrongs) can we abate or
ease our sins? By which question he plainly declares, that they did not
hold the pains and sufferings of repentance or penance to be properly any
purgation or satisfaction to take away sins. And this appears by Saint
Austine when he says: Aug. in Psalm. 129 Quae propitiatio ista nisi
sacrificium? Et quod est sacrificium nisi quod pro nobis oblatu^ est? Sanguis
innocens fusus deleuit omnia peccata nocentium.
What propitiation is there but sacrifice? what sacrifice but that which was
offered to us? The innocent blood being shed, has blotted out all the sins
of offenders. To which purpose elsewhere he says, that Jdem contra aduers.
Leg and Proph. lib. 1. cap. 18. Singulari and solo vero sacrificio pro nobis
Christi sanguis effusus est.
for the singular and only true sacrifice, the blood of Christ was shed for
us. But most religiously and Christianly is that spoken which he says yet in
another place: Idem contrae 2. Epist. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 5. Omnium piorum sub
hoc onere corruptibilis carnis and in huius vitae infirmitate gementium spes
vna est, quod aduocatu^ habemus. etc.
It is the one only hope of all the godly groaning under this burden of
corruptible flesh, and in the infirmity of this life, that we have an advocate
with the Father Jesus Christ the just, and he is the propitiation for our
sins. If there be no propitiation, that is, no satisfaction, but only
sacrifice, and no sacrifice, but the bloodshed of the Son of God; if our only
hope with God be this, that we have with him Christ for our advocate and
atonement for our sins: if by all our pains and sufferings we cannot ease our
selves as touching our sins, but only the suffering of the second Adam be
the purgation thereof; if amidst all our penances we are to hope for pardon by
faith, that is, by favor and not by debt, not trusting to any merit of our
repentance, but to the mercy of God, and referring all the fruit thereof to
Jesus Christ, then farewell Popish satisfaction; the Fathers that speak of
satisfaction say nothing for that satisfaction: but at Rome this brat was
borne, and we must leave it to be buried there. The Fathers have spoken of
redeeming our sins, purging our sins, washing our sins, blotting out our
sins by prayers, by almsdeeds, by fasting, by good works, but amidst this
improprietie of words they have retained, as we see, a faithful
acknowledgement of the true Christian faith. Albeit, why do I speak of
improprietie of words as in them, when we our selves upon occasion forbear not
to speak as they have spoken? For which of us is there that makes question to
say, It is a satisfaction to God, when a sinner turns from his evil way:
repent thee of thy sins, amend thy wicked life, humble thy self before God,
ask mercy and forgiveness and God is satisfied. Redeem thy former cruelty
with mercy, thine oppressions with almsdeeds, and let the Mammon of
iniquity serve thee for the saving of thy soul. Wash away the filth of thine
uncleanness with bitter tears, and with fasting and mourning blot out that
guilt which the delights and pleasures of sin have written against thee. Thou
have hitherto been retchlesse toward God, make him recompense hereafter both
in thine own devotion and care, and in seeking the recovery of other men.
Thus we speak, and who does not thus speak, both in this kind and in other
sort also, when yet we impute not to those things which we commend, any virtue
of cleansing or washing of us from our sins, but only intend to note the
affections and dispositions which are the fruits and testimonies of that true
faith and repentance, whereby we seek the washing away of out sins only in
the blood of Jesus Christ. And if we sometimes doubt not thus to speak, how
much more securely would the Fathers use such phrases, when yet there was no
fear of those misconstructions of heresy and Apostacy, which have since
prevailed in the Church of Rome? We have seen Bellarmine before acknowledging
out of their principles, that the Fathers in these phrases imported only merit
of favor and grace, not merit of worth and purchase, and therefore setting
aside the name of merit, let us not doubt but that they meant in all their
speeches to uphold the grace and favor of God by the mediation of Jesus
Christ. They taught men amidst all their devotions to ask pardon of Gods
mercy, and therefore could not be thought to teach them, that by the same
devotions they did deserve it. In a word I conclude this point, with a speech
or two of Chrysostomes, which I wish thee gentle Reader to compare with the
doctrine which M. Bishop here has brought us from Rome: Chrysostom. de beato
Philogonio. Ego testificor ac fide iubeo quod si quisqua^ nostrum qui peccatis
obnoxij sumus, ex animo vereque promittat Deo se postea nu^quam ad illa
rediturum, nihil aliud Deus requirat ad satisfactionem viteriorem.
I testify (says he) and give thee warrant, that if any of us who are subject
to sin, (or guilty of sin) do heartily and truly promise unto God never to
return to the same again, God does require no further satisfaction. Again,
upon the words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves we should not be judged of the Lord, he says
thus: Jdem in 1. Cor. hom. 28. Non dixit, si puniemus, si suppliciu^ de nobis
sumemus sed, si dijudicaremus, hoc est, si nostra tantum voluerimus peccata
cognoscere, si condemnare n^sipsos, liberaremur vtique and ab huius and a
futuri seculi supplicijs.
The Apostle says not, If we would punish our selves, if we would take revenge
of our selves, but If we would judge our selves, that is, if we would only
acknowledge our sins, if we would condemn our selves, we should be delivered
both from the punishments of this world, and of the world to come. Here we see,
that after true repentance, there is no further satisfaction: that after true
acknowledgement and confession of our sins, there is no reservation of
punishment, but by the mercy of God we are set free both from the punishments
of this world and of the world to come, whereby all that M. Bishop here has
built, is utterly overthrown.

19 W. BISHOP.
And if you please in few words, to hear the Protestants works of penance and
satisfaction: in stead of our fasting, and other corporal correction, they
fall to eating, and that of the best flesh they can get, and take in the Lord
all such bodily pleasure, as the company of a woman will afford. In lieu of
giving alms unto the poor, they pill them by fines and unreasonable rents:
and by usury and crafty bargains, are not ashamed to cosen their nearest
kin. Finally, in place of prayer, and washing away their own sins by many
bitter tears, they sing merrily a Geneua Psalm, and rail or hear a railing
at our imagined sins, or pretended errors. And so leave, and lay all pain
and sorrow upon Christ's shoulders, thinking themselves (belike) to be borne to
pleasure and pastime, and to make merry in this world.

R. ABBOT.
A shrewd wench hearing her mother at angry words with her neighbor, and well
knowing her mothers desert, gave her this counsel, Call her whore first,
mother, for fear lest she call you whore. M. Bishop knew very well, that there
is sufficient cause for us to call his mother whore, and to vpbraid the Church
of Rome with the poisoned and abominable fruits which their doctrine of
satisfactions brings forth. Therefore he thought it good policy in her
behalf to follow the counsel of the unhappy girl, and to call whore first,
that by laying some slanderous imputations of evil behavior upon us, he might
break and abate the odiousness of those unclean and filthy corruptions
which he knew were justly to be objected against them. He knew well, that if we
should paint them out from top to toe, we should make the Church of Rome to
appear a monster, most ugly and deformed, such as that all men may thereby
take just occasion to detest her. To give him some taste of their good fruits,
let him remember that of the Court of Rome it was said long since: Math. Paris.
in Henrico 3.
Eius auaritiae totus non sufficit orbis
Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis.
The world too little is their couetise to satisfy,
No harlots are enough to serve their filthy lechery.
Ibi. Manifest comperium est Ecclesia^ Romana^ Dei indignationem incurrisse.
Ipsius enim magistratus and rectores non populi deuotionem, sed marsupia plena
quarunt denariorum; non animas Deo lucrifacere, sed reditus capere and pecunias
congregare, religiosos opprimere, poena, vsura, simonia and alijs diuersis
argumentis alienae vsurpare. Non curatur de iustitiae and honestate, etc. Adeo
inualuit Romanae Ecclesiae in satiabilis cupiditas confundens fasque nefasque
quod deposito rubore veluti meretrix vulgaris and effrons omnibus venalis and
exposita vsuram pro paruo, si^oniam pro nullo inconuenienti reputauit, ita vt
alias prouincias sua contagione macularit, etc. Foetor Curia Papali^ vsque ad
nubes fumum teterrimum exhalauit.
It is manifestly found, says Matthew. of Paris, that the Church of Rome has
incurred the indignation of God. The governors and rulers thereof do not seek
the devotion of the people, but the filling of their own purses; not to gain
souls to God, but to take rents and to gather money, to oppress them that are
religious, by penalty, usury, symonie, and diverse other devices to get other
men's goods into their hand; there is no care of just and honest dealing. The
insatiable covetousness of the Church of Rome is grown to that pass
confounding right and wrong, as that being past blushing, like a common and
shameless harlot, setting her self to sale, and being exposed to all men, she
accounts usury for a small inconvenience, and simonie for none: so as that
with her contagion she has defiled other countries. The stinch of the Popes
Court has breathed out a most noisome fume even to the very clouds. Of those
times Abbas Vrspergensis speaks in this sort: Abbas V^spergensis in Chr. Tunc
coeperunt multiplicars ma^a interris. Ortae siquidem sunt in hominibus
simultates, doli, perfidiae, tradit^ones vt se inuicem trad^nt in mortem and
interitu^. Rapinae, depraedationes, depopulationes, terraru^ vastationes, inte^
diae, seditiones, and bella and rapinae, sieve in stratis, sieve in latrocinijs
iustificatae sunt, vt omnis homo ia^a sit periurus, and praedictis faci^^r^bus
implicatus, vt vix excusari possit quin sit in his sicut p^pulus sic and
sacerdos.
Then began mischiefs to be multiplied upon the earth: for there arose amongst
men discords, deceits, trecheries, treasons, so as that they betrayed one
another to death and destruction. Spoiling and preying one upon another,
destructions and wastings of countries, burnings, seditions, wars and
rapines, whether in the streets, or in places of robberies were justified, so
as that now every man is guilty of perjury, and wrapped in these foresaid
wicked acts, and it cannot be excused, but that as the people is in these
things so is the Priest. Platina the Popes Secretary breaks out in passion
thus: Platin. de vit. Pontif. in Marcellino. Quid futurum nostrae aetati
arbitramur, qua vitia nostra eo creuere vt vix apud Deum misericor diae locum
nobis reliquerint? Qu vitae sit auaritia Sacerdotu^, quanta libido vndique
conquisita, quanta anabitio and pompa, quanta superbia and desidia, qua^ta
ignoratio tum s^^psius tum doctrinae Christianae quam paerua religio and
simulatae potius quam vera, quam corrupti mores, vel in prophanis hominibus
quos seculares vocant detestandi, nihil attinet dicere, cum ipsi ita aperte and
polam peccent acsi inde laudem quaererent.
What do we think shall befall in this our age, wherein vices are grown to
that, that they have scant left any place of mercy with God. How great the
covetousness of Priests is, especially of them that are in place of
government, how great their licentiousness affected every way: their ambition
and pomp, their pride and sloth, their want of knowledge both of themselves
and of the doctrine of Christ, how little devotion and that more counterfeited
then true, how corrupt their manners are, to be detested even in profane and
secular men, it skilleth not to say any thing, for that they sin so
apparently and openly, as if they sought to be commended for it. And in another
place thus: Idem in Stephano 3. Nunc adeo refrixit pietas and religio, non dico
nudis pedibus, sed caligati and cothurnati vix supplicare dignantur. Non
flentinter eundum, vel dum sacrificatur, sed rident and quidem impudenter: de
his etiam loquor quos purpura insigniores facit. Non hymnos canunt, id enim
servile videtur: sed ^ocos and fabulas ad risum concitandum inter senarrant.
Quo quis dicactor est and petulantior, eo maiorem in tam corruptis maribus
laudem merciur. Seueros and graves viros reformidat hic noster clerus.
Now is piety and devotion waxen so cold, as that I say not barefooted, nay
hosed and booted, they scant vouchsafe to pray. They weep not as they go, or
when they are at the sacrifice: but they laugh and that impudently, I speak
even of them whom their purple garments grace above other men: they sing not
the Hymns, for that seems a base matter, but they tell one another tests and
tales to make each other laugh. The more prating and saucy a man is, the more
is he thought in this corruption of manners worthy to be commended; our Clergy
brooketh not stayed and grave men. In Gregor. 4. Adeo in omnem luxum and
libidinem sese effundit Ecclesiasticus ordo.
The ecclesiastical state has given it self over to all luxury and wanton
lust. Matthew of Paris said of the time wherein he lived, Mat. Paris. in Henr.
3. anno 125^. Qui his temporibus malus non est, optimus reputatur: Jniquus cum
laedere cessat, prodesse iudicatur.
In these times he that is not a bad man, is thought to be very good; the just
man when he forbeareth to hurt, is deemed to do good. Yea, and Machiauell one
of the fathers of the Romish generation yet did not doubt to say further, that
Machiauel. disput. de rep. l. 1. cap. 12. Nusqua^ minus vel pietatis vel
religionis est, quam in ijs hominibus qui viciniores Romae habitant.
no where was there less piety or religion, then in those that dwelt nearest
to Rome. I do here but point at some few things that come next to hand, but he
that would discourse this matter as it deserves, and would gather the flowers
of Romish conversation out of their own stories, or set forth the sanctified
behauiours that are to be seen at Rome, at Venice, in Italy, Spain,
Portugal, France, amongst this Catholic generation, yea or discover the
pretty tricks of many of our Catholics here at home, should make it clear
enough that M. Bishop does but play the hypocrites part, in offering to Mat. 7
3.
pluck a mote out of his brothers eye, and not seeing the great beam that is
in his own eye; it would appear that he has small cause to brag of the
fruits of their doctrine of Pardons and satisfactions. Marsil. Patau. de sens
pacis part. 2. cap. 26. Veniae promissio perniciosa and insana doctrina and
seductio animarum, a Christianis omnibus contemnenda and cauenda.
A mad and pernicious doctrine, as Marsilius Patauinus called it long ago,
the beguiling of souls, worthy to be despised, and fit to be taken heed of of
all Christian men: by which the Germans complained, Cent grauam. German. art.
3. Profligata Christi pietas and extincta, quando quilibet pro modo pretij quod
in merces illas expendit peccandi impunitatem sibi pollicetur. Hinc stupra,
incestus, adulteria, periuria, homicidia, furta, rapinae, foenora and to^a
malorum semel originem traxerunt. Quod enim malorum amplius iam horrebunt
mortales quando sibi peccandi licentiam and impunitatem nedum in hac vita, sed
and post obitum aere licet immodico comparari posse persuasum habet.
that the religion of Christ was abandoned and extinguished with them, for that
every man for a sum of money bestowed upon pardons promised to himself a
liberty to sin without any punishment. Hence whoredoms, say they, incests,
adulteries, periuries, murders, thefts, robberies, usury, and the whole sink
of mischiefs have had their beginning. For what will men fear any longer,
when they be persuaded, that for money, though it be much, not in this life only,
but after death also they may get a license and impunity of sin. And indeed
it is true which Hierome says, that Hieron. in Mat. 19. Facilius sacculus
contemnitur quam voluptas.
men more easily set light by their money, then they do by their pleasure,
Cyprian. lib 2. epist. 2 Quod redin^^ potest, non timetur.
neither does any fear that which he may redeem or buy out for money, as
Cyprian speaks. Therefore when they persuaded men that they might satisfy
for their sins, and that alms was the most special work of satisfaction,
and did supply the want of other satisfactions, as before was said, they that
were of ability to give alms liberally, that is, to stop the mouths of
begging Friars, were hereby thrust forward to all manner wickedness, which
either by secrecy they could conceal, or wherein by power they could uphold
themselves, that humane laws might take no hold of them. These things are more
apparent both by story and by sight, then that M. Bishops wit can serve to
color or hide them. It is nothing therefore that he tells us of their
fasting, and alms, and prayers, inasmuch as they do these things to purchase
themselves liberty to sin freely, and to take their pleasure otherwise. And
whatsoever he can otherwise allege hereof, he is to remember that Chrysostom
says, that Chrysostom. Op. imper. in Mat. hom. 19. Quae sunt vestimenta ouilia?
Species videlicet simulatae religionis; eleemosyna simulata, oration simulata,
ie iunium simulatum, and caeterae speci^s pietatis quibus se vestiunt lupi
rapaces.
counterfeit alms, and fasting, and prayer, are the sheep clothing that
serve to cover ravening wolves. With these sheep garments the Pharisees of
old covered their biting and destroying of souls. They were Acts. 26.5.
Epiphan. haer. 16. de Pharisaeis.
a most strait sect, they fasted twice a week, they lay some upon thorns,
other some upon stones, other some upon boords of small breadth, that they might
easily fall beside, by this means to afflict themselves with watching, that
they might attend to praying, they vowed continency, some for four, some for
eight, some for ten years. By these dissembled devotions they crept into the
minds of the people, they seduced and beguiled them, and held them bound to
their traditions, and Mat. 23.14.
devoured widows houses under pretense of long prayers. By the same pretenses
M. Bishop and his fellows 2. Tim. 3.6.
creep into houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins, and led
with diverse lusts, and make them their instruments for the Tit. 1.11.
subuerting of the husbands and whole houses, and intangling of them, with the
superstitions and abominations of the man of sin. Albeit being more cunning
then the Pharisees, they take such good course with their fasting and corporal
afflictions, as that they neither abate their flesh nor their filthy lust, but
by practice of shrift and confession, they insinuate themselves into the
affections and secrets of the same women, and thereby take advantage against
them to gain them to their will. He twiteth us with taking pleasure in the
company of a woman, but they by not being tied to the lawful company of one,
do reserve to themselves a liberty of abusing many. And no marvel that such
good fruits proceed from them, with whom it is a position, that Coster.
Enchirid. cap. 15. propos. 9. Sacerdos si fornicetur aut domi co^cubinam
foucat, tametsi graui sacrilegio se obstringat, grauius tamen peccat si
contraehat matrimoniu^.
it is greater sacrilege for a Priest to marry, then to commit fornication or
to keep a concubine, yea Campeg. apud Sleidan. Co^men^. lib. 4. Si sacerdotes
mariti fiant multo esse grauius peccatu^ quam si plurimas domi meretrices alant.
that by keeping many harlots he sins not so much. As for us we live in
marriage as did Abraham, Rom 4.11.
the father of all that believe, as Isaac, Jacob, the Patriarchs, the Priests,
the Prophets, and other righteous men, and as the first Christians did, who all
pleased God, and were accepted in his sight. We know there is no offense in
marriage, because it is the ordinance of God, but we detest their vowed
virginity, by pretense whereof they wickedly defile themselves with the
uncleanness of the devil. He tells us again of eating the best flesh that
can be gotten, but we eat whether fish or flesh as laws permit, what the
providence of God does yield us, giving God thanks, neither are we so
scrupulous therein as he and his fellows, who whether in fish or in flesh
being forsooth ghostly fathers, take it in scorn not to be entertained with
the best. Whereas he mentions their alms, we find it in former times which
they brag of, not to have been such, but Math. Paris. in Henr. 3. anno. 1258.
Deficiente annona pauperu^ multitud innumerabilis mortua est, and inue^ta sunt
passim eorum corpora tumida praefame and liuentia, quina vel sena in porcarijs,
ster. quilinijs and lutosis plateis, etc.
that in a time of dearth innumerable poor people have died like dogs upon
dunghils, and in swine-sties, and in the streets, without any compassion taken
for their comfort and relief. And no marvel, because alms was reduced by
them to the maintenance of idle lozels in religious, houses, as now it is to
their nightwalking and wandering Circumcellions, but as for the true alms for
the relief of the poor and needy, we doubt not but it is more faithfully
exercised by us, then it was or is by them. Of racking poor men by fines and
unreasonable rents, he shall see examples enough amongst their Catacatholike
disciples, of whom there be some, who for the coloring of their impious
cruelties, do allege concerning their tenants, living in due obedience to
their Prince according to the laws of God, that they are heretics, and
therefore that it skilleth not how they deal with them, not knowing that
though their religion were the truth, yet it should concern them which the
Apostle says; Gal. 6.10.
Whilst we have time let us do good to all men, though specially to them that
are of the household of faith. Concerning usury, let him remember what Matthew
of Paris reported of old concerning the Pope, Math: Paris. in Henr. 3. anno.
1247 Papa qui forma and exemplum totius teneretur esse religionis vsurarius est
man^fectus.
The Pope, says he, who should be the pattern and example of all religion, is
an open usurer. He had here in England his bankers who were termed Jdem anno.
1235. Caursini mercatores Papales.
Ca^rsini, who did use that trade of merchandise in his behalf. Again for
craft and cosening, let him remember how the same Matthew describes the Popes
Anno 1234. Argumentosas extortiones excogitans. Excogitata muscipulatione
pecun^am emungere edoctus. Verba elegantissima quae corda hominum lapidea
viderentur penetrare nisi facta humilitati ac iustitie luce clarius aduersantia
sequerentur.
extortions cloked with arguments and reasons, his mousetraplike devices his
goodly words, such as might move hearts of stone, but that his deeds followed
very clearly repugnant to humility and just dealing. Anno 1240. Absurdum
videbatur etiam simplicibus quam diuersis muscipulis simplicem Dei populum
substantia sua moliebatur Romana curia priuare, nihil petens nisi aurum and
argentum.
It seemed absurd, says he, even to simple men, to see by how diverse traps the
Court of Rome craving nothing but gold and silver, practiced to rob the poor
people of God of their substance. Now therefore M. Bishop gains no credit to
his doctrine of satisfactions, by charging these enormities upon us, inasmuch
as they are found much more intolerably in the Pope himself, and therefore
much more in them who are the members of so bad a head. Whosoever amongst us do
sin in these kinds, and cause the people of God to grieve, and his enemies
to blaspheme his truth, we teach them, and they shall find, that 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
God is the auenger of such things, and his judgment shall in due time find
out their sin. Of the ridiculous absurdity of their satisfactorie prayers I
have spoken before. His words of bitter tears are but formal; Catholic eyes
are too tender to be made red with bitter tears, and the form of their
prayers fitteth not thereto. Our singing of Geneua Psalms as he calls them,
indeed David's Psalms, though many of them happily turned into English meeter at
Geneua, is a devotion prescribed by the holy Ghost, saying by the Apostle, Col.
3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously, in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing your own selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing with a grace in your hearts to the Lord. If being merry in good sort we
thus sing Psalms, we therein follow the rule of S. James, James 5.13.
Is any man merry? let him sing. Yea, and we hold it for a notable token of the
apostasy of the Church of Rome, that it has so abandoned this point of
Christian exercise and devotion, from all both public and private use. We do
not rail but perform the office of careful pastors and teachers in noting
their sins and errors not imagined only, but very sensible, nor only
pretended, but proved by the testimony of him who is truth, and cannot err.
As for that which he says of laying all pain and sorrow upon Christ's
shoulders, it is true that we do so indeed, as touching satisfaction for
sin, but otherwise God wants not means to lay pains and sorrows upon
those that are his, to make them know that they are not borne to pleasure and
pastime, but to Act. 13.36.
serve the counsel of God, and to glorify his name. The Church of Rome
swarmeth, as before has been noted, with Atheists and Epicures, that carry the
show of that persuasion, but amongst the true professors of the Gospel, there
are no such found.

CHAPTER 7. OF TRADITIONS.
1 W. BISHOP.
Master Perkins. Traditions are doctrines delivered from hand to hand, either
by word of mouth or writing, besides the written word of God.

His first conclusion as touching our consent. Concl. 1.
We hold that the very word of God was delivered by Tradition from Adam to
Moses, who was the first Penman of holy Scripture. Item, that the History of
the new Testament (as some for eight, not eighty, or as other think for twenty
years) went from hand to hand by Tradition, till penned by the Apostles, or
being penned by others, was approved by them. Hitherto we agree (but not in
this which he enterlaceth) that in the state of nature, every man was
instructed of God immediately in both matters of faith and religion: for that
God the^ as ever since used the ministry as well of good fathers, as godly
masters; as Enoch, Noe, Abraham, and such like, to teach their children and
servants the true worship of God, and true faith in him; otherwise, how should
the word of God pass by Tradition from Adam to Moses, as M. Perkins affirms,
if no child learned any such thing of his father, but was taught immediately
from God? but M. Perkins seems to regard little such petty contradictions.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins meaning is plain enough without any contradiction. God in the
beginning revealed his will unto our father Adam, not by writing, but
familiarly by word of mouth. He left it not thenceforth merely to pass from
man to man, but as he first gave this light by immediate revelation from
himself, so afterward he continued, renewed, and confirmed the same, raising
up some in all times to be near unto him, to whom Heb. 1.1.
in diverse manners, by speech, by visions, by dreams, by sundry illuminations
and inspirations, he imparted the knowledge of himself, and endued them with
eminency of gifts and authority, to be 2. Pet. 2.5.
preachers of righteousness both to their own families, and to other whom the
Lord would call. It is not true then which M. Bishop would so gladly fasten on,
that the doctrine of faith passed by tradition, in such sort as the question of
traditions stands betwixt them and us. They pretend that Christ taught his
Apostles diverse and sundry doctrines which he would have wholly left without
writing to the custody of the Church, and to be reported successively from man
to man to the worlds end. But God did not in those first ages leave his word in
any such sort wholly to the memory and report of men, as trusting to their
fidelity for the successiue delivering of that which at first had been
received, but he himself took upon himself the custody of his own
tradition, and continued still to report what he had first taught, knowing the
chanel of humane conceit to be more corrupt, the^ that the stream of divine
truth can long run pure and clear therein. And this may sufficiently
persuade us, that our Savior Christ would not leave any part of his religion
to so uncertain and doubtful course, and so subject to the corruptions of
humane devices. If God would ever have had his truth to pass altogether from
hand to hand, undoubtedly he would have taken that course in the beginning,
when men living so long, might be likely to confirm and settle in their
posterity what they should believe. But he saw there would be no safety,
unless he himself still continued to be an instructour unto them. He knew how
subject men are to alteration and change, how easily one man mistaketh that
which is rightly delivered by another, how readily men sometimes come short,
sometimes go too far; how one man's fancy conceiueth one way, and another man's
another way, and that we can never keep any straight and even path, so long as
instruction is no otherwise had, but from man to man. Therefore where God
himself attended not to keep the fire burning which he had kindled, it soon
went out: where men were left only to tradition, they soon degenerated from
that service of God, wherein they had been brought up under just and righteous
parents. There is no likelihood therefore that God finding so little safety in
tradition in the beginning, would leave his Church now to be guided by
tradition in the end. Nay, when he thought good somewhat to withdraw himself
from that familiar conference and dealing with men, he would otherwise supply
the want thereof, and provide for the safety of his people, by appointing a
standing oracle of a written law, to which all men at all times might resort to
be informed as touching duty and service toward God. And as in the creation of
the world, howsoever the light were at first sustained and spread abroad by the
inco^prehensible power of God, yet when he created the Sun, he conueighed the
whole light of the world into the body thereof, so that though the Moon and
stars should give light, yet they should shine with no other light, but what
they received from the Sun, even so in the constitution of the Church,
howsoever God at first preserved and continued the knowledge of his truth, by
immediate revelation from himself to some chosen men, by whose ministry he
would have the same communicated to the rest, yet when he gave his word in
writing, he conueighed into the body of the Scriptures the whole light of his
Church, so that albeit there should be Pastors and teachers therein, to shine
as stars to give light to others, yet they should give no other light, but
what by the beams of the written law was cast upon the^. Which beams albeit
they shined not then altogether clear and bright, many things being lapped up
in obscure and dark mysteries, and rather signified by figurative ceremonies,
then expressed in plain words, yet were they not to walk by any other light,
nor to go without the compass of the written word; only what was obscure
therein, God by his Prophets from time to time made more and more apparent,
until by Jesus Christ in the writings of his Apostles and Evangelists, he set
up a most full and perfect light. Now then in M. Perkins meaning it is true,
that from Adam to Moses the word of God passed from man to man by tradition,
that is, by word only and not by writing, and thus as M. Bishop alleges,
good fathers and godly masters taught their children and servants the true
worship of God, and true faith in him. But it is true also which he signifies
in the second place, that they who^ God thus raised up to be teachers and
instructours of others, received not the word only by tradition from others,
but had revelation and confirmation thereof immediately from God himself.
Therefore there is no argument to be taken hence to give any color to Popish
tradition, nay we may justly argue, that if God would have had the religion of
Christ to be taught in any part without writing, he would have taken the course
which he did then by immediate revelation, to continue and preserve the
integrity and truth thereof.

2. W. BISHOP.
His 2. Concl. We hold that the Prophets, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles,
spoke, and did many things good and true, which were not written in the
Scriptures, but came to us by Tradition: but these were not necessary to be
believed: For one example he puts; that the blessed virgin Mary lived and died
a virgin: but it is necessary to salvation to believe this, for Helui dius is
esteemed by S. Augustine an Heretic for denying it. De haeres. ad Quod. hae.
84.


R. ABBOT.
It is necessary to salvation to believe that our Savior was conceived and
borne of a virgin. We persuade our selves also according to the common
judgment of the Church, that she so continued and died, but yet we deny it to
be any matter of salvation so to believe. We say as S. Basil does, that Basil
de human. Christi generat. Hoc nunc suspicionem generat ne forsan posteaquam
puritate sua generationi dominicae per spiritu^ sanctu^ administratae seruiuit
tum demu^ nuptialia opera viro Maria no^ negauerit. Nos vero licet nihil hoc
doctrinae pretatis ^ffi^eret (nam donec dispensabatur Christi generatio
necessaria erat virginitas, quid vero postea sit factu^ ad mysterij huius
doctrinam non anxie co^^ungendu^ est) v^runtame^, etc.
it should be no whit prejudicial to the doctrine of faith, that the virgin
Mary after that she had in her virginity served for the generation of Christ,
should perform the office of a wife to her husband. Her virginity was
necessary till the birth of Christ was accomplished, but what was afterward
done, is not too scrupulously to be adioined to the doctrine of this mystery.
But yet that no man might to the scandal and offense of devout persons,
affirm rashly that she ceased to be a virgin, he shows that the places of
the Gospel, which seem to give suspicion thereof, do not euict it, but may
well be construed otherwise. And therefore Heluidius for moving an unnecessary
question hereof, to give occasion of public disturbance, and for affirming
rashly, that which he had no warrant sufficiently to prove, was justly
condemned and rejected by the Church, neither can we approve any that shall do
as he did.

3. W. BISHOP.
His 3. Concl. We hold that the Church of God has power to prescribe
ordinances and Traditions touching time and place of Gods worship: And touching
order and comeliness to be used in the same (mary with these four caneats:)
First, that it prescribe nothing childish or absurd. See what a reverent
opinion this man carries of the Church of God, governed by his holy spirit,
that it nevertheless may prescribe things both childish and absurd. But I must
pardon him, because he speaks of his own Sinagogue, which is no part of the
true Church. Secondly, that it be not imposed as any part of Gods worship: This
is contrary to the conclusion, for order and comeliness to be used in Gods
worship, which the Church can prescribe, is some part of the worship. Thirdly,
that it be severed from superstition, etc. This is needless; for if it be not
absurd, which was the first prouiso, it is already severed from superstition.
The fourth, touching multitude may pass; these be but mere trifles: That is
of more importance, that he terms the decree registered in the 15. of the Acts
of the Apostles, a Tradition: whereas before he defined Traditions to be all
doctrine delivered, besides the written word. Now the Acts of the Apostles is a
parcel of the written word, as all the world knows: that then which is of
record there, cannot be termed a Tradition.

R. ABBOT.
The cautions set down by M. Perkins are material and necessary against the
usurpations of the Church of Rome, which having forsaken the direction of the
spirit of God in the word of God, is now led by 1. Kings. 22.23.
a lying spirit, by 1. Tim. 4.1.
spirits of error; and therefore in her ordinances and traditions swarueth
from the gravity and wisdom of the holy Ghost. The ceremonies of the Mass
are apish and ridiculous toies; whereby in that which Christ instituted for a
most sacred and reverend action, they make the Priest more like to a iugler or
to a vice upon the stage, in his duckings and turnings, his kissings and
crossings, his lifting up and letting down, his putting together the
forefinger and the thomb, and another while ioining both his hands; his putting
to the right eye and then to the left, with a number of such other absurd and
foolish devises. The like absurdity have I noted before, that when the Priest
has pronounced absolution and forgiveness, they appoint a man for penance to
say, Forgive us our trespasses, and again, that they make their prayers like a
charm, which to work their effect, must be said over thus or thus many times.
I remember I have read some where, that one of the Popes would have ordered
that the Pope and his Cardinals should ride upon Asses in token of humility,
and for imitation of Christ, riding into Jerusalem upon an Ass. The Cardinals
thought that the fool rid the Pope, and took this for a childish and idle
fancy. Now if the Pope the head of their Church, could be possessed with so
childish and vain a toy, why should we doubt but that against their Church
there is cause of the first caution, that the Church is not to prescribe any
thing that is childish or absurd? The second caution is, that nothing be
imposed as any part of Gods worship. This, says M. Bishop, is contrary to the
conclusion. And why so? For order and comeliness to be used in Gods worship,
says he, is some part of the worship. But who taught him that deep point of
Philosophy, that an accident is a part of the subject, that the beauty or
comeliness of the body is a part of the body? Order and comeliness are
matters of ceremony, not of substance; of outward ornament, not of inward
devotion, properly and immediately respecting men, but by consequence only
reduced to God, and therefore can be no parts of the worship of God. The third
caution is, that what the Church prescribes, be severed from superstition and
opinion of merit. Of opinion of merit M. Bishop says nothing, which is a case
that in high degree touches the Church of Rome, which of her own traditions
has made meritorious works, and has bewitched the people, to think that by
the observation thereof they may purchase and deserve heaven. As touching
superstition, he says the caution is needelesse, for if it be not absurd,
says he, which is the first prouiso, it is already severed from superstition.
Which indeed is rightly spoken according to the truth of the thing, because in
truth all superstition is absurd, and therefore there should need no
distinction betwixt that that is superstitious, and that that is absurd, but
yet the distinction here has use in respect of the opinion of men, because
many things are superstitious, which yet with men are hardly deemed absurd, for
that Col. 2.23.
they have a show of wisdom, as S. Paul says, in voluntary religion and
humbleness of mind, and in not sparing the body, so that they many times blind
the eyes of the^ that seem to be of very good sight. And this is the case of
many Popish traditions, wherein as there are many things so absurd, as that
they are feign to use their wits to devise couers and excuses, that they may
not appear to be so gross as they are, yet many other there are which are so
fairly varnished with colors of piety and holiness, as that by the means
thereof Satan first prevailed to bring the^ into the Church, dazeling the eyes
of me^ that they saw not the mischief that in time he should work thereby to
the religion and faith of Christ. The last caution is, that the Church of God
be not burdened with the multitude of traditions. A thing whereof S. Austin
complained in his time, that August. epist. 119. Tam multis praesumptionibus
sic plena sunt omnia, etc. Ipsa^ religionem qua^ pancissimu and manifestissimis
celebrationu^ sacramentis miserecordia Dei esse liberam voluit scruilibus
oneribus premunt vt tolerabilior sit co^ditio Iudaeoru^, qui etiamsi tempus
libertatis non agnouerint, tame^ legalibus sarcinu, non humanis
praesumptionibus subijciunti^.
all was full of manifold presumptions, and that the religion which the mercy
of God would have to be free, by having but a very few and very manifest
sacraments and observations, was so oppressed with servile burdens, as that the
state of the Jews was more tolerable the^ it; who though they knew not the
time of liberty, yet were subject to the burdens of Gods laws, not to men's
presumptions. This cautio^, M. Bishop says may pass, but in this the Church
of Rome has more deeply offended, then did those times whereof S. Austin
complained, having infinitely entangled the consciences of men, with the
multiplicity of her witchcrafts and sorceries, and endless variety of
superstitious observations. These things now M. Bishop tells us, are but
mere trifles, but the reason is, because he wants understanding to conceive
the weight and importance of the^. And from that want it proceeds, that he
alleges a triflle indeed as a matter of more importance. That is that M.
Perkins calls the decree registered in the fifteenth of the Acts by the name
of a tradition, having before defined traditions to be all doctrines delivered
beside the written word. But if his sight had served him, he might very readily
have seen, that in the first place M. Perkins had defined traditions as they
are in question betwixt us and them, and refers the same only to matters of
doctrine, in which sort we admit of no traditions, but that here he speaks of
traditions more generally, in such sort as we grant traditions, as he
expresses, which are the positive and temporary ordinances and co^stitutions
of the Church. The decree then of the Apostles was no tradition in that meaning
wherein we question traditions, because it was no matter of doctrine, but only
of conversation and temporary observation, but in the general use of the name
of traditions, it was a matter of tradition, because all ordinances of the
Church are imported by that name.

4. W. BISHOP.
The Difference. Catholics teach, that besides the written Word, there be
certain unwritten traditions, which must be believed and practiced, as both
profitable and necessary to salvation. We hold that the Scriptures contain in
them all doctrine needful to salvation: whether it concern faith or manners,
and acknowledge no traditions for such, as he who believes them not, cannot be
saved.

Before we come to the Protestants reasons against Traditions, observe that we
divide Traditions into three sorts: the first we termed Divine, because they
were delivered by our blessed Savior, who is God: the second, Apostolical, as
delivered by the holy Apostles: the third, Ecclesiastical, instituted and
delivered by the Governors of the Church, after the Apostles days. And of
these three kinds of traditions, we make the same account, as of the writings
of the same Authors: to wit, we esteem no less of our Saviors traditions,
than of the four Gospels, or any thing immediately dictated from the holy
Ghost. Likewise as much honor and credit do we give unto the Apostles doctrine
unwritten, as written. For ink and paper brought no new holiness, nor gave
any force and virtue unto either Gods or the Apostles words; but they were of
the same value and credit uttered by word of mouth, as if they had been
written. Here the question is principally of divine traditions, which we hold
to be necessary to salvation, to resolve and determine many matters of greater
difficulty. For we deny not but that some such principal points of our Faith
(which the simple are bound to believe under pain of damnation) may be
gathered out of the holy Scriptures: as for example; that God is the Creator of
the world, Christ the Redeemer of the world, the holy Ghost the sanctifier: and
other such like Articles of the Creed.

R. ABBOT.
Traditions says M. Bishop, are of three sorts, Divine, Apostolical, and
Ecclesiastical. Which distinction in some meaning stands good, but as he
expresses the meaning of it, it is absurd. For if Apostolic traditions be
expounded of doctrines, as he expounds them, what warrant has he to put
difference betwixt divine and Apostolic traditions, when the Apostles for
doctrine delivered nothing but what they themselves had received from God? Our
Savior limited their commission in this sort, Mat. 28.20.
teaching them to do whatsoever I have commanded you. Accordingly they
professed to do. 1. Co^. 11.23.
I have received of the Lord that which I have delivered unto you, says Saint
Paul. 1 Thessalonians. 4.2.8.
We gave you commandments by the Lord Jesus, and he that despises these
things, despises not man but God. Gal. 1.11 12.
The Gospel which was preached by me, I received it not of man, nor was taught
it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Therefore Tertullian says of them,
that Tertul. de praescript. Nec ipsi (Apostoli) quicquam ex suo arbitrio quod
inducerent elegeru^t, sed acceptam a Christo discipl^nam fideliter nationibus
adsignauerunt.
they did not upon their liking make choice of any thing to bring in, but
faithfully assigned to the Nations the doctrine which they had received of
Christ. So that if Traditions be understood of doctrine, there is no reason to
make any difference betwixt the traditions of Christ, and the traditions of the
Apostles, because they are both one. But if we will make difference betwixt
them, we must call Apostolic traditions, only such ordinances whether written
or unwritten, as the Apostles prescribed for ceremony and usage in the Church,
as the observation of the memorial of the nativity, death, and resurrection of
Christ, the alteration of the seventh day from the Jews Sabbath to the day of
Christ's resurrection, the precept of the Apostle of preaching bareheaded, and
such like. And in these traditions we may note that they were sometimes subject
to diversity according to diversity of places, as was at first the feast of
Easter sometimes subject to alteration and change, where there might be reason
of any such alteration, as were Jude verse. 12.
the feasts of charity first used by the Apostles, and afterward abolished for
the abuse of them, and as that order of the Apostle for preaching bareheaded,
it being by the custom of that time a sign of honor and authority so to do,
whereas since it is become a matter of authority to preach with the head
covered. The observation of Acts. 20.7. Apoc. 1.10.
the Lords day we hold perpetual and unchangeable, because we find it noted in
the Scriptures to have been from the Apostles, and there can be no reason of
reuersing or altering what they ordered therein. If thus M. Bishop will speak
of Apostolic traditions, we acknowledge the name of the^, but Apostolic
doctrines we know none but such as are also to be acknowledged for divine. Thus
therefore the question is of divine traditions, that is, doctrines of faith and
of the worship and service of God, which we deny to be any, but what are
comprised in the written word of God. Now of divine traditions, he tells us
some parabables, which it seems he himself did not well understand. We hold
them, says he, to be necessary to salvation, to determine matters of greater
difficulty. Be like then they are not necessary for themselves, but only to
determine matters of greater difficulty, and those that are not necessary for
the determining of matters of greater difficulty, are not necessary to
salvation. By this means a number of their traditions must fall, Purgatory,
prayer for the dead, invocation of Saints, Popes Pardons, worshipping of idols
and images, and the rest, because no matters of difficulty are determined
thereby. Again, we deny not, says he, but that some such principal points of
our faith, which the simple are bound to believe under pain of damnation, may
be gathered out of the Scriptures. It seems then that the simple are not
bound under pain of damnation, to believe the rest that cannot be gathered out
of the Scriptures, and if he say they be so bound, then that clause of his was
very idly and impertinently inferred. But we must pardon him; it seems he
wanted sleep the night before, and therefore being very drowsy, could not
well consider of that he wrote.

5 W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins goes about to prove by these reasons following, that the
Scriptures contain all matter of belief necessary to salvation. Testimony,
Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Thou shall not add to the words that I command thee, nor take any thing there
from. Therefore the written word is sufficient for all doctrine pertaining to
salvation. If it be said, that this is spoken as well of the unwritten as
written word; for there is no mention in the text of the written word: then M.
Perkins adds, that it must be understood of the written word only, because
these words are as a certain preface set before a long Commentary made upon
the written Law.

Answer. Let the words be set where you will, they must not be wrested beyond
their proper signification. The words cited signify no more, then that we must
not either by addition or subtractio^, change or pervert Gods commandments,
whether they be written or unwritten. Now to infer, that because they are as
a preface unto Moses law, that therefore nothing must be added unto the same
law, is extreme dotage. Why the^ were the books of the old Testament written
afterward, if God had forbidden any more to be written or taught, besides that
one book of Deuteronomie? Shall we think that none of the Prophets that lived
and wrote many volumes after this, had read these words; or that they either
understood them not; or that understanding them well, did wilfully transgress
against the^? one of these the Protestants must needs defend, or else for very
shame surcease the alleging of this text for the al-sufficie^cy of the written
word.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishops allegations are too simple and childish to move the Protestants to
surcease the opposing of that text of Moses against unwritten traditions and
doctrines. Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Ye shall put nothing to the word that I command you, says Moses, neither
shall ye take ought there from, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord
your God which I command you, thereby giving to understand, that every putting
too or taking fro, is a breach of the commandment of the Lord. Against the
exception which M. Bishop uses, that these words may be understood of
commandments as well unwritten as written, M. Perkins answers, that these
words are as a preface to a long co^mentary or exposition of the written law,
and therefore do import, that to the written law nothing is to be added, nothing
to be taken from it, but that only was to be done, which is contained therein.
Now howsoever M. Bishop dote, yet the case is plain, that because Moses spoke
thus in respect of the written law, therefore the Israelites were to admit of
nothing but what was written in the law. But says he, why then were there
books of the old Testament and of the Prophets written afterward, if God had
forbidden any more to be written or taught, but that one book of Deuteronomy?
Behold a cosening Sophister, who sees well, and knows, that save only by
falsehood and deceit he avails nothing. We say not that of the book of
Deuteronomy only, but of the whole written law Moses said, Ye shall put
nothing to it, etc. Again we do not say, that God did forbid any more books
to be written or taught, but that no matter of doctrine, of faith, or of the
worship of God, should be received, or written, or taught, but what was derived
from the written law. Now then I wish thee gentle Reader to observe how the
wise man in his own answer circumuenteth and overthrows himself. Moses
says, Ye shall put nothing to the word which I command you, nor take ought
therefrom; now tell us M. Bishop of what word did he say this? He tells us,
that we must understand it of the word whether written or unwritten. Be it so,
but you will confess then, that to the word of God delivered by Moses, written
or unwritten nothing is to be added, because the words of Moses plainly
express so much, and how then came it to pass, that so many books were
written afterward? We hope you will not deny but that Moses therein taught the
Israelites whatsoever was necessary to salvation: how then does it stand, that
the rest of the Prophets added so much more in writing? To use your own words,
shall we think that the Prophets read not these words, or understood them not,
or did wilfully transgress them? We would gladly hear whether of these you
will say. The man is mute, and he has nothing to answer: if he answer as he
must, his answer fully serves our turn, for defending the only written law
of Moses, that the books that were after written by the Prophets, serve to
explane and declare the law, and to show the experiment and practice of it, but
add no point of doctrine, nor teach any article of religion toward God but
what Moses has written in the Law. But for the further strengthening of this
argument, it is to be noted that Moses testifies of himself, that Exodus 24.4.
he wrote all the words of God. In another place it is said, Deuteronomy. 31.9.10
Moses wrote this law, and delivered it to the Priests and to all the Elders of
Israel, and commanded them saying, Every seventh year thou shall read this
law before all Israel. The law then which he gave them, he gave them in
writing, that they might read it, and it might be read unto them. It could not
have been said Moses wrote this law, if he had written but a part of it, and
left another part unwritten. Nay, it is said further afterward; Ver. 24.
When Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law in a book until
he had finished them, then Moses commanded the Levites saying, Take the book
of this law, and put it in the side of the Arc, etc. It is apparent then that
Moses gave not over writing the words of the law, until he had finished them,
that is, until he had written all the words of the law, so that there was no
word of the law, but that that was written in the book of the law. And
therefore that which is set down by Moses, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this law to do them, is thus
related by the Apostle, Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the law to do the^; thereby to show, that all the words of the law are
written in the book of the law, and nothing left unwritten that was any part
or parcel thereof. Thus when God would give direction to Iosuah, Iosuah. 1.7.
to observe and do according to all the law which Moses had commanded him,
giving him charge according to the instruction of Moses here spoken of, not to
turn away from it to the right hand or to the left, either by putting too or
taking fro, to show what he meant by all the law he adds, Let not this book
of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that
thou may observe and do according to all that is written therein. Here
again it is plain, that to observe all the law of Moses, is to observe all
that is written in the book of the law. And out of this place Cyprian being
urged by Stephanus Bishop of Rome with tradition, argues against the receiving
of unwritten traditions; Cyprian ad Po^petum. Vnde est ista traditriot Virumne
de dominica and Eua^gelica authoritate descendens, an de Apostolarum mandatis
atque epistolu veniens? Ea enim fa^ienda esse quae scripta sunt, Deus testatur,
and protonit Jesus Naue diceus, No^ recedet, etc.
Whence is this tradition, faith he? Whether descends it from the authority
of the Lord and of the Gospel, or comes it from the commandments and
epistles of the Apostles? For that those things must be done which are written,
God testifies, saying to Iosuah, The book of this law shall not depart out of
thy mouth, etc. Where he plainly shows that out of these words he intends
this conclusion, that concerning faith and devotion toward God, as we are to
do the things that are written, so what is not written we are not to do. And
this now is clear by the place that we have here in hand: for if all that
Moses commanded were written, and nothing was to be added to that that Moses
commanded, then nothing was to be added to that that was written, and those
things which were written afterward were no additions, but only declarations
and confirmations of those things which he had before written. And thus did the
ancient Fathers understand that that is said of adding or diminishing as
touching the written word. Tertul aduers. Hermog. Adoro scripturae plemdinem
etc. Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina: si non sit scriptum timeat vae
illud adijcientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum.
I reverence the fullness (or perfection) of the Scripture, says Tertullian,
Let the school of Hermogenes show me that that which he says is written; if
it be not written, let him fear the woe that is appointed to them that add or
take away. And so Basil says, that Basil. ser. de fide. Manifestus est fidei
lapsus and liquidum superbia virium vel respuere aliquid eorum quae Scriptura
habet, vel inducere quicquam quod scriptum non est, cum Dominus dicat, Oues
meae vocem meam audiunt; alienum aut^m non sequuntur, and Apostolus per humanum
exemplum veheme^ter prohibeat aliquid in diuinis scripturis vel addere vel
demere, cum dicit, Hominis quidem Testamentum, etc.
it is a manifest falling from faith, and an apparent sin of pride, either to
refuse any thing that the Scripture has, or to bring in any thing that is not
written, seeing our Lord Jesus Christ says, My sheep hear my voice, they do
not follow a stranger; and the Apostle by a humane example greatly forbids
in the holy Scriptures either to add any thing, or take away, when he says, A
man's testament when it is confirmed, no man refuses or adds any thing to it.
Hereby then it is plain, that the forbidding to add or take away, has
reference to the written word of God, and therefore that the doctrine of faith
and religion is to be taken from thence only, and nothing therein to be
admitted but what has the warrant of the holy Scriptures.

6. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins His 2. testimony: Esa. 8.20.
To the law and testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is,
because there is no light in them: Here the Prophet teaches (says M.P.) what
is to be done in cases of difficulty: men must not run to the Wisards and
Southsayers, but to the law and to the testimony, commending the written word
as sufficient to resolve all doubts whatsoever.

Answ. By the law and testimony in that place, the 5. books of Moses are to be
understood: if that written Word be sufficient to resolve all doubts
whatsoever, what need we then the Prophets? what need we the Evangelists and
the Epistles of the Apostles? what Wizard would have reasoned in such sort? The
Prophet wills here, that the Israelites who wanted wit to discern whether it
be better to fly unto God for counsel, then unto Wizards and Soothsayers, do
see what is written in the law of Moses concerning that point of
consulting-Wizards: which is there plainly forbidden in diverse places. Now
out of one particular case, whereof there is express mention in the written
word, to conclude that all doubts and scruples whatsoever are thereby to be
decided, is a most unskillful part, arguing as great want of light in him as
was in those blind Israelites.

R. ABBOT.
If M. Perkins had thought himself to be so wise as M. Bishop does himself,
we should certainly have condemned him for a wizard; what we think of M.
Bishop in the mean time, we leave it to him to consider of. The Prophet in the
place alleged, dehorteth the faithful from yielding to the wicked motions and
counsels of hypocrites and unbelievers, who casting away all trust and
confidence in God, and relinquishing the yoke of obedience to him, sought by
other helps and means to secure and establish themselves against the dangers
which they imagined to themselves: who as they had given themselves over to
idolatry, so followed the course of idolaters in this behalf, and for advice
and direction in such things as concerned the^ for their safety, they sought
and taught one another to seek to Southsayers, and such as used familiar
spirits, and took upon them to call up the souls of dead men to give answer
to such things as should be demanded of the^. By them they would be instructed
what to do, and what course to take for their own good, and hereby were
hardened in their abominations and apostacy from God, to the further
provocation of his wrath against themselves. He therefore aduertiseth the
faithful and godly not to join with them in any such doings, but when they
should persuade them to enquire of any such wicked persons, rather to answer
them Esa. 8.19.
Should not a people enquire at their God? Every nation seeks to their own
God. The Lord is your God, will ye not seek to him? will ye go for the living
to them that are dead? Hereupon he adds the words here questioned: Verse. 20.
To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them. Wherein he gives to the people of God
a general direction to go to the law and to the testimony, to be instructed
what ways they ought to walk in, and to hearken to none, to follow none but
only such as speak unto them according to that word. The Prophets of God
called men one way; false Prophets, wizards and Southsayers called men another
way; he teaches them therefore a sure way to know to whom to commit
themselves, by considering who spoke according to that word. Now to this the
wizard gives us a wizard like answer, that the Prophets willed them to see
what was written in the law of Moses concerning that point of consulting
wizards. So then there is no more here said but this, that if the wizards do
not say unto the^, that they are not to consult with wizards, it is because
there is no light in them, and who but a wizard would have made such a
construction of the place? The Prophet teaches them in general to seek to
the law of God for advice and answer of such things as touching which they went
to consult with wizards and southsayers; to be directed thereby in seeking to
provide for their own safety; thence to take resolution of their doubts; and
to take it for certain, that they led them in darkness, whosoever should draw
them to other ways then could be warranted thereby. Basil. in Esa. cap. 8.
Vnaquaeque natiorem ambagiosam and quaestionem de quae cupiebat edoceri suo
proporebat Deo dissoluenda^. Quos supponeba^t esse Deos, his offerebant
diluendas inquisitiones suas
Every nation, says Basil upon that place, did propound to their God the doubt
and question whereof they desired to be taught, to have resolution thereof: whom
they took to be gods, to them they offered their questions to be answered.
Therefore he shows that the people of God for answer of their doubts, should
go to God in going to the law and to the testimony Aducit Deus legem velut
manuductionem viam tibi praemumentem. Vis certo persuaderi quae sint futura?
Provide sedulo vt quae tibi lex facienda praescripsit, opere expleas
diligenter, and certus opperitor iucundissima^ fruitionem repositoru^ tibi
bonoru^, etc. Bonis perfru^ siquidem desideres, quae praescripta sunt mandata,
opere exequitor.
which God has given, as to guide us by the hand, and to direct us the way.
Will thou then, says he, be certainly persuaded what shall hereafter befall
thee? Provide diligently to do the things which the law commands thee to do,
and wait assured of the most joyful fruition of the good things which are
provided for thee. If thou desire to enjoy good things, perform the
commandments that are prescribed unto thee. By Basils judgment then it is
plain, that the words have further meaning, then to refer the^ to the law
concerning that one particular of consulting wizards. But Hierome goes yet
further, and tells us the meaning of the Prophet in this sort: Hieron. in Esa.
cap 8. lib. 3. Si de aliquo dubitaris, etc. si vultis nosse quae dubia sunt
ma^gis vos legi et testimonijs tradite scripturarum.
If ye doubt of any thing, if ye would know the things that ye doubt of,
refer your selves to the law and to the testimonies of the Scriptures. What
will M. Bishop say now, will he call Hierom a wizard as he has done M.P. for
saying the Prophets meaning to be, that the Scripture, the written word should
resolve the^ of all that they doubted toward God? Yea and the law it self
sufficiently warranteth us so to conceive. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it, says Moses, thou shall put
nothing thereto, nor take ought therefro^. Those words M. Bish. vulgar Latin
expounds thus: Quod praecipio tibi hoc tantum facito Domino.
What I command thee, that only do to the Lord, thou shall put nothing
thereto, etc. Now we have seen before, that Moses committed to writing
whatsoever he commanded. If then nothing were to be done to the Lord but what
Moses commanded, and all that Moses commanded was written, then by the written
word all doubts were to be resolved as touching those things that were to be
done to the Lord, and nothing to be done but that that was written. But says
M. Bishop, what need we then the Prophets? what need we the Evangelists and the
Epistles of the Apostles? I have answered him before, but yet let me tell him
here, that Faustus the Maniche denying God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
to be the author of the old Testament, when he was urged that Christ approves
the same in saying, I came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it, replied,
that it could not be that Christ should say so, because the author of the Law
had said, that nothing should be added to the law, nor taken from it. Saint
Austine answers him, that August. cont. Faust. Manich. lib. 17. cap. 6. Venit
legem adimplere non vi legi adderentur quae decrant, sed vt fierent quae
scripta erant, quod ipsa eius verba iestantur; Non enim ait, Jo^a vnum aut vnus
apex non transiet a lege donec addantur quae desunt, sed donec omnia fiant.
Christ came to fulfill the Law, not as that any thing should be added which
was wanting to the law, but that the things should be done which are written
therein, as his words (says he) do show: for he does not say, Not one jot or
title of the law shall pass, till the things be added which are wanting, but
till all things be done. Hence therefore we answer M. Bishop once again, that
the Prophets writings were no additions of doctrine, but only explanations of
the law, and so likewise that the writings of the new Testament do add nothing
to the law, but only do further declare, and withal set forth the
accomplishment of those things that were foreshewed and prophesied in the law.
And therefore Paul in preaching the Gospel, professes Act. 26.22.
to say no other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should
come: so that to use the distinction that Vincentius Lyrinensis upon other
occasion uses, though the Evangelists and Apostles spoke in a new manner, yet
they spoke Vincent Lyr. Eadem quae didicisti doce, vt cum dicas noue non dicas
noua.
no new matter, or to allude to Saint Austines words, though they varied in the
tense, yet they differed not in the signification of the word, but in both
times, or in all times the same doctrine was preached, the same faith
continued, the latter affirming nothing but what was confirmed by the writings
of them that went before.

7 W. BISHOP.
3. Testimony, Ioh. 20.31.
These things were written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ:
and in believing, might have life everlasting. Here is set down the full end of
the Gospel, that is, to bring men to faith, and consequently to salvation: to
which, the whole Scripture alone is sufficient without Traditions.

Answ. Here are more faults then lines: first, the text is craftily mangled,
things being put instead of miracles. For S. John says, Many other miracles
Christ did, etc. but these were written, etc. Secondly, S. John says not, that
for faith we shall be saved, but believing we should have salvation in his name,
which he clipped off: thirdly, remember to what faith S. John ascribes the
means of our salvation, not to that whereby we apply unto our selves Christ's
righteousness, but by which we believe Jesus to be Christ the Messiah of the
Jews, and the Son of God, which M. Perkins also concealed.

Now to the present matter, S. John says, that these miracles recorded in his
Gospel, were written, that we might believe Jesus to be the Son of God; and
believing, have salvation in his name, etc. Therefore the written word
contains all doctrine necessary to salvation.

Answ. S. John speaks not a word of doctrine, but of miracles: and therefore to
conclude sufficiency of doctrine out of him, is not to care what one says. But
M.P. foreseeing this, says, it cannot be understood of miracles only; for
miracles without the doctrine of Christ, can bring no man to life everlasting:
true, and therefore that text speaking only of miracles, proves nothing for
the sufficiency of the written Word. Christ's miracles were sufficient, to
prove him to be the Son of God, and their Messiah: but that proves not S.
John's Gospel to contain all doctrine needful to salvation: for many other
points of faith must be believed also. And if it alone be sufficient, what need
we the other three Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, or any of their Epistles,
or the same S. John's Revelations? Finally, admit that S. John's Gospel were
all-sufficient, yet should not Traditions be excluded; for Christ says in it in
plain terms, Ioh. 16.
that he had much more to say unto his Apostles, but they as then being not
able to bear it, he reserved that to be delivered unto them afterward: of
which high mysteries S. John records not much in his Gospel after Christ's
resurrection; and so many of them must needs be delivered by Tradition
unwritten.

R. ABBOT.
More faults then lines, says M. Bishop, but very slender proof does he bring
of any fault. First, he cauilleth that the text is mangled, and things put in
instead of miracles. The words are thus: Ioh. 20.30.
Many other signs also did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are
not written in this book: but these things are written that ye might believe
that Jesus is Christ the Son of God, and that in believing ye might have life
through his name. Where we translate the Greek relative (...), being in the
neuter gender, these things, because it has not reference only to miracles
mentioned in the former verse, but to the matter of the whole book, S. John
here intending to set forth the end and purpose of all that he has written.
For being Hier. Proem in Matthew. Cum esset in Asia and tam tunc haereticorum
seminae pullularent, Cerinthi, Hebionis, and caeteroru^ qui negant Christum in
carne venisse, coactus est ab omnibus pene tunc Asiae Episcopis and multaru^
Ecclesiarum legationibus de diuinitate saluatoris altius scribere
in Asia, as Jerome says, and the seeds of heretics beginning to grow, of
Cerinthus, Ebion and others denying Christ to have come in the flesh he was
forced by almost all the bishops of Asia, and by messages from other churches,
to write more deeply then the other Evangelists had done, of the divinity of
our Savior Christ. Here then he signifies that he has so done: these things
(says he) are written, that ye may believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of
God. Therefore Cyrill says hereof: Cyril. in Joan. lib. 12. cap 61. Quasi
repetendo quae scripsit intentionem Eua^gelij manifestat.
As it were repeating or recounting the things which he has written, he
manifests the intent of his Gospel. The first fault then pretended by M.
Bishop is no fault, because the relative implies generally what the Evangelist
has written according to the intent and purpose of his Gospel. The second
fault is ridiculously alleged; for when M. Perkins collecteth that by faith we
be saved, how does he mean it, or how does any man mean it, but Acts. 3 16.
by faith in the name of Christ? As touching the third point, it has been Of
Justification. Sect. 18.
before declared, that to believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God,
imports the applying unto us of the merit and righteousness of Christ. For as
a man may Thom. Aquin. 22 q. 2. art. 2. ad 3. Credere D^u^ non conuenit
infidelibus sub ea ratione qua ponitur actus fidei. Non enim credunt Deum esse
sub his conditionibus quas fides determinat.
believe that there is a God, or that God is, and yet be still an infidel,
wanting that belief thereof which is properly the act of faith, as Thom.
Aquinas notes, so a man may in some sort believe that Jesus is Christ the Son
of God, and yet not so believe it as the Scripture names it for the act of
justifying faith, because he believes it not under such conditions as are
determined by the doctrine of faith. If it be taken only for an act of
understanding as the Papists take it, a man may believe it without any fruit,
because the devils so believe: but the belief of the heart which the Scripture
intends, imports affiance, and trust, and inward feeling, and comfort of
that which it believes, whilst thereby we apply unto our selves the benefit of
the merit and passion of Christ, expecting thereby the remission of our sins.
But now from noting of faults M. Bishop comes to a final answer, that because
S. John speaks of miracles, not of doctrine, therefore these words prove
nothing for the sufficiency of the written word. Where M. Perkins exception
still stands unremoved, that because by miracles without doctrine we cannot
attain to that faith whereby we believe that Christ is the Son of God: therefore
the words of the Evangelist cannot be restrained to miracles only. For others
did miracles, as great, yea Ioh. 14.12.
greater then Christ did, as by example we see when Act. 5.15.
by the shadow of Peter, and by Chap. 19.12.
napkins and handkerchifes from Paul's body the sick are healed, which we
read not of Christ himself. By miracles therefore Christ is not discerned,
unless by doctrine acco^panying the same he be made known unto us, and
therefore the words of the Evangelist must be referred to the doctrine also
whereby he teaches to make use of the miracles of Christ. So S. Austin
refers the words both to those things which Christ did and said; Aug. in
Joan. tract. 49. Sanctus Euangelista testatur multa Dominum Christum and
dixisse and fecisse quae scripta non sunt. Electa sunt aute^ quae scriberentur
quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur.
The holy Evangelist testifies, that Christ both did and said many things
which are not written, and for the overthrowing of M. Bishops answer, and
justifying of our assertion he adds: but those things were chosen to be
written, which seemed sufficient for the salvation of them that believe. Cyril
speaks more expressly: Cyril. in Joan. lib. 12. cap. 68. Non omnia quae
Dominus fecit conscriptasunt, sed quae scribentes sufficere putarunt tam ad
mores quam ad dogmata, vt recta fide and operibus and virtute rutilantes ad
regnum coeloru^ perueniamus.
Al things which Christ did are not written, but what the writers thought to be
sufficient as well touching conversation as doctrine, that shining with right
faith and virtuous works, we may attain to the kingdom of heaven. It is not
then our collection only, but thus these ancient Fathers conceived, that of the
miracles and doctrine of Christ so much was written as is sufficient to
instruct us to faith, to the attainment of everlasting life. And this is
plainly delivered in the words of S. John, who could not say, These things are
written that ye may believe, and believing may have eternal life, if there be
not that written by the belief whereof we may obtain eternal life. Therefore
as touching Saint John's Gospel containing all things needful to salvation, we
answer him first, that indeed we affirm that there is no article of faith
necessary to salvation, which is not to be taught and learned out of the
Gospel of S. John. Secondly, there is no cause so to restrain the words, as
if Saint John would mean only in his Gospel to comprehend all that should be
needful for the instruction of the Church. Nay he has a plain reference to
those things which were before written by Moses and the Prophets, who all
prophesied of the Messiah, the Christ and anointed of the Lord, in whom God
should be God with us, who should procure our peace with God, the remission of
our sins, and everlasting bliss. Romans 1.2.
In their writings the Gospel was promised, Cap. 3.21.
they testified the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, to all,
and upon all that do believe: Act. 10.43.
they gave witness that through his name every one that believes in him
should have forgiveness of sins: by them the doctrine of salvation was from
time to time published to the Church. The perfection and accomplishment of this
hope depended upon the incarnation, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
These things in the Gal. 4.4.
fullness of time God made good; he sent his Son made of a woman, and made
under the law, to redeem them that were under the law: who to that end 1. Cor.
15.3.
died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and was buried, and arose the
third day according to the Scriptures. It remained now that it should be
known, that this was he whom the Father had sealed and sent for the working of
our redemption. Therefore S. John to that effect says, These things are
written, that ye may believe that this Jesus is that Messiah, that Christ Ioh.
1.41.45.
of whom Moses in the law and of whom the Prophets did write, the hope of the
Fathers, the light of the Gentiles, the glory of Israel, that so believing ye
may according to the promise of God have life through his name. Albeit
therefore he has in his Gospel comprehended the sum of all that we believe,
yet we may conceive that he uses those words not so much to set forth the
fulness of that that he himself has written, as to signify that he has
sufficiently set forth the accomplishment of those things which were written
by Moses and the Prophets, in the belief whereof consists the obtaining of
everlasting life. And yet thirdly without impeachment of any thing already
said, it is very likely that S. John writing his Gospel last of al, and
co^piling together the 4. Gospels, spoke these words not only as touching that
which he himself had written, but also of all written by the rest of the
Evangelists, to signify the use thereof in such sort as I have said, to which
Cyrils words before mentioned seem to have respect. But howsoever we will
conceive thereof, we cannot doubt but that S. John would give to understand,
that by the written Gospel and word of God, we are sufficiently instructed to
that faith in Christ whereby we attain to live with him. As for M. Bishops
question, if S. John's gospel alone be sufficient, what need the other three
gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, etc? it is but his cuckoes song, which he
has sung before. And he may even as well say, what needed any Evangelist to
write any story which another had before written? when S. Matthew had written
the passion of Christ, what needed the rest to mention again any thing that he
had written? When S. Paul in the Epistle to the Galathians had first handled
the question of justification, what need was there that he should handle it
again in his Epistle to the Romans? When David's thanksgiving for deliverance
from his enemies was set down in the 18. Psalm, what needed the same to be
mentioned again in the 2. Sam. 22.1.
second book of Samuel? A number of such idle questions he might make of diverse
things set down in diverse places in the very self same words, and of an
infinite number of sayings which have other to answer the^ to the very same
effect. But the wisdom of God has thus thought good to provide for our
salvation, not only sufficiently but abundantly, by the consent of diverse
persons writing diversely in diverse places and and at diverse times, to confirm
us so much the more in the belief of those things that are written, to give us
often occasion to remember and consider the same things, to exercise our
meditation and study in comparing those things that are diversely set down, to
sharpen our diligence in searching out the accord of those things that seem to
differ, to set forth in the variety of his words the riches of his wisdom,
that there may be therein both to edify the simple and weak, and yet to busy
the heads and understanding of the learned, that it may neither be abhorred by
the one nor contemned by the other. For these and other causes it has pleased
God that what is written sufficiently by one, should yet be written by other
also. But M. Bishop in the end howsoever the matter go, provides sufficiently
for himself. For he tells us finally, that although S. John's gospel were
all-sufficient, yet should not traditions be excluded. And why so? for Christ
says in it in plain terms (says he) that he had much more to say unto his
Apostles, but they as then being not able to bear it, he reserved that to be
delivered unto them afterward. And how then must we think that he delivered
those things? Marry of those high mysteries S. John records not much in his
gospel after Christ's resurrection, and so many of them must be delivered by
tradition unwritten. Here thou see (gentle Reader) a budget large enough to
receive all the Popes traditions: we shall not need to doubt now but that he will
prove what he list: if it be for his turn without question it was one of those
things that the disciples could not bear til after Christ was risen from the
dead, and then he left it to them by tradition. But I would have thee to observe
what a note S. Austin gave long ago concerning that speech of Christ: August.
in Ioa^. tract. 97. Omnes insipientissimi haeretici qui se Christianos vocari
volunt au dacias figmentorum suoru^ quas maxim exhorret sensus humanut hac
occasion Euangelicae sententiae colorare conatur, vbi Dominus au, Adhuc multa,
etc. quasi haec ipsa sint quae tunc discipul^ portare non poterant.
t All foolish heretics who yet desire to be called Christians, do seek to
color the presumptions of their devices, eue^ such as humane sense abhors,
by the pretense of that sentence of the Gospel where Christ says, I have many
things yet to say unto you, but ye are not yet able to bear them; as if these
were the things which the disciples then were not able to bear. M. Bishop then
by alleging this place for the making good of their traditions, has gained
thus much, that we must now account him, as also his fellows, in the like case
amongst foolish heretics, who affirming wicked and abominable devices which
they cannot prove, will make us believe that they are things which Christ had to
say to his disciples, and they were not able to bear them. But if Christ had
left any such matters to be delivered by tradition, then it should undoubtedly
be known which and what they were. We desire then by M. Bishop to be
advertised particularly thereof, and to know what those high mysteries were
which the disciples could not bear. What, shall we think that Christ spoke of
that trash which they deliver unto us under the name of traditions? But S.
Austin again cutteth him off from all answer in that behalf: Ibid. tract. 96.
Quae cum ipse tacuerit, quis nostrum dicat, ista vel illa sunt? aut si dicere
audeat vnde probat? Quis enim est tam vanus aut temerarius qui cum dixerit
etia^ vera quibus voluerit, quae voluerit, fine vllo testimonio diuino affirmet
ea esse quae tu^c dominus dicere noluit? Quis hoc nostru^ faciat and non
m^xima^ culpam remeritat^ incurrat in quo nec Prophetica nec Apostolica
excellit authoritas.
Seeing Christ himself has bin silent of those things, who of us can say, they
are these and these? or if he dare to say it, how does he prove it? For who is
there so vain or so rash, who though he say things that are true, will affirm
without any testimony from God that those are the things which Christ would not
say? Which of us should so do, and not incur a note of great presumption, not
having any authority either of a prophet or an Apostle? Now if it cannot be
known what those things were of which Christ spoke, then M. Bishop can have no
proof for their traditions hereby, because whereas his words import that S.
John in his gospel records somewhat hereof, though not much after the
resurrection of Christ, we see nothing in that which he records, but that the
matter of all the rest may be contained in the rest of his and the other
Apostles writings. But for the more full clearing of this matter, it is to be
noted, that our Savior before has said to his Apostles: John 15.15.
All things that I have heard of my Father, have I made known to you. And
again in his prayer to the Father, Chap. 17.8.
I have given unto them (says he) the words which thou gave me, and they
have received them. If Christ delivered all the words of God to his disciples
before his death, then it must needs follow that he delivered no other words
unto them after his resurrection. Therefore those many things which he had to
speak unto them, are not to be understood of any other things then he had
taught them before, but of a more full and perfect revelation, for the more full
and perfect apprehension and understanding of the same things. To which purpose
we are again to note against M. Bishops fraudulent collection, that our Savior
here says not, that he would declare those things unto them himself after his
resurrection, but deferreth the same to the coming of the Spirit, saying, Chap.
16.13.
Howbeit when he is come which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you into al
truth. Now how he should lead them into all truth, he has before showed. Chap.
14.26.
He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance which
I have told you. He should teach them all things, not by teaching them other
things, but by bringing all things to their remembrance which they had bin
taught by Christ himself. Therefore here Christ says further: for he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak. Whereby he
imports, that the holy Ghost should speak according to his example, and he
still professes that chap. 7.16.17
he speaks not of himself, that Chap. 8.28.
he does nothing of himself, but as the Father has taught me (says he) so I
speak these things. Christ spoke Chrysostom. de sanct. and adoran. spiritu. Non
discessit a lege, non discessit a Prophetis, etc. Non locutus est ex seipso sed
ex Prophetis, etc. A seipso enim loqui, extra lege^ loqui est.
not of himself, as Chrysostom notes, because he spoke out of the Law and the
Prophets: for to speak of himself, is to speak without or beside the Law. So
then the holy Ghost shall not speak of himself, but as Christ spoke according
to the words of the Father in the law and the Prophets, so the holy Ghost
should speak according to the words of Christ, and therefore according to
those things that are written in the Law and the Prophets. Therefore those many
things which Christ had to speak unto them, and into the truth and knowledge
whereof the holy Ghost was to lead them, were no other things but what were
contained in the written word of the Law and the Prophets, whereof as yet they
were not capable, because as yet they did not so well John 20.9.
know the Scripture, nor could do, until he should Luke 24.45.
open their understanding that they might understand the same. Origin
understands the words spoken to the Apostles Origin. contra Cells. l. 2.
Fortassis vt Judaeis and in litera legis Mosaicae educatis Apostolis habebat
dicendu^ quae sit vera lex, etc. Vide^s perdifficile esse ex animo reuellere
pene conata et vsque ad grandem aetate^ coalita dogmata, adeoque pro diuinis
habita vt amouere illa videretur imptum, etc. Jdeo dictum, Deducet vos in omnem
veritate^, id est, in omnem veritatem earu^ rerum in quatu^ figuris versantes
putabatis vos vero cultu Deu^ colere.
as Jews brought up in the letter of Moses law, our Savior seeing that it was
very hard to pull out of their minds the opinions which had grown up with the^
to those years which were taken to be of God, so as that it should seem
impious to remove them. Therefore where Christ says, The spirit shall lead
you into all truth, it is (says he) as if he had said, Into all the truth of
those things in the figures whereof ye have bin conversant, thinking thereby
truly to worship God. Here is then no warrant at all for M. Bishops unwritten
mysteries: here is nothing as Origin conceiueth, but that the spirit should
afterward instruct them of the abolishing of the ceremonies of Moses law,
which they were not yet well able to conceive. And therefore against all
illusions of heretics pretending for their unwritten traditions and doctrines
the holy Ghost, as the Church of Rome does, Chrysostom taking it for granted,
that what Christ spoke is set forth unto us in the writings of the Apostles
and Evangelists, gives this most notable rule: Chrysostom vt supra. Si quis
eoru^ qui dicuntur habere spiritum sanctu^, ex seipso loquitur, non ex
Euangelijs, non credit. Venit Manes, and dicit, Ego sum Paracletus, etc. Vbi
audisti in Euangelio quod Sol and Luna opifices sunt, etc. Vbi legisti haec^ Ex
quo non legit haec scripta, sed a seipso loquitur, manifestum est quod non
habet spiritum sanctu^.
If any of them who are said to have the holy Ghost, do speak any thing of
himself, and not out of the gospels, believe it not. Manes comes and says, I
am the comforter which Christ promised to the Apostles. Yea but where do
thou hear in the Gospel that the Sun and the Moon are creators? etc. Where
read thou these things? Because he reads not these things written, but
speaks of himself, it is manifest that he has not the holy Ghost. He then
that speaks that that is not written, speaks of himself; and herby it is
manifest unto us that it is not by the spirit of God, but by a false and lying
spirit, that M. Bishop and the church of Rome do tell us of high mysteries
delivered by Christ, which are not written in the Gospel of Christ.

8. W. BISHOP.
This place of S. John, M. Perkins patcheth up with another of S. Paul: Gal.
1.8.
If we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any thing besides that which we
have preached, let him be accursed: And to this effect he blames the^ that
taught but a diverse doctrine to that which he had taught. 1. Tim. 1.3.


Answ. Now we must look unto this gentleman's fingers: there were three
corruptions in the text of S. John, here is one, but it is a foul one. In
steed of preaching unto the^ another gospel, he puts preach unto the^ any other
thing: when there is great difference between another Gospel, and any other
thing. The Gospel comprehends the principal points of faith, and the whole
work of Gods building in us: which S. Paul like a wise Architect 1. Cor. 3.12.
had laid in the Galathians: others his fellow-workmen might build upon it,
gold, silver, and precious stones, with great merit to themselves and thanks
from S. Paul. Marry if any should dig up that blessed and only foundation,
and would lay a new one, him S. Paul holds for accursed. So that that
falfication of the text is intolerable: and yet when all is done, nothing can
be wringed out of it to prove the written word to comprehend all doctrine
needful for salvation: for S. Paul speaks there only of his Gospel, that
is, of his preaching unto the Galathians, and not one word of any written
Gospel: no more does he in that place to Timothy, and so it is nothing to
purpose.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop has a quick nose to smell a fault in the citing of a text, where
he can see none. The Greek word (...), we translate to preach, because we have
no English word that does more nearly express the signification of it; and by
preaching we always understand the declaring of the Gospel and word of God.
The Rhemists according to their foolish manner, translate it to euangelize, but
make English thereof, and let it be, to preach for Gospel, and then the words
as they translate them are thus: Gal. 1.8.
Although we or an Angel from heaven preach for gospel to you beside that
which we have preached to you for gospel, accursed be he. As we have said
before, so now I say again, if any preach to you for gospel beside that which
you have received, accursed be he. Now then M. Bishops correction, any other
Gospel, is not found at all; but that which M. Perkins translateth, any other
thing, is necessarily understood: for what is it to say, If any preach to you
for gospel beside that which you have received, but if any preach to you for
gospel any thing beside that? But here he will tell us what the Gospel is,
and that he does according to that wise manner as he is wont to do. The Gospel
(says he) contains the principal points of faith, and the whole work of
Gods building in us. Where we would ask of him why he only says the
principal points of faith, when presently he adds, the whole work of Gods
building in us? Surely if the Gospel contain the whole work of Gods building
in us, then it contains not only the principal, but all the points of
faith. Thus his pen still outrunnes his head, and gives him not leave well
to advise of that he says. But the Apostle by these words gives us to
understand, that he had preached unto the^ the whole doctrine of the Gospel,
and that this Gospel which he had preached unto them, is inco^patible of any
doctrine as any matter of the Gospel and doctrine of Christ beside it self. S.
Austin well notes that the Apostle does not say August. in Joan. tract. 98. Non
ait plusqua^ accepistis, sed praeter quod accepistis.
more then ye have received, but beside that which ye have received, as leaving
them to increase more and more in that doctrine which they had received, but
not to admit of any other doctrine beside that. Therefore Vincentius Lyrinensis
hereof says, Vincen. Lyrin. Annuntiare aliquid Christianu Catholicu praeter id
quod acceperunt nunquam licuit, nunquam licet, nunquam licebit; and anathemare
eos qui ad^untient aliquid praeterqua^ quod semel acceptum est, nunquam non
oportuit, nunquam non oportet, nun quam non opertebit.
To preach to Catholic Christians any thing beside that which they have
received, it never was lawful, it is never lawful, it never shall be lawful;
and to accurse them who do preach any thing beside what was once received, it
was always behouefull, it is always behouefull, and always shall be
behouefull. What, will M. Bishop here challenge Vincentius Lyrinensis for
falsification, because he says any thing beside that? If he will not, then let
him acknowledge his own folly in blaming M. Perkins where there was no cause
of blame. Yet Chrysostom will offend him somewhat more: Chrysos. in Gal. cap.
1 Neque dixit. fi contraria annuntiauerint aut totum Euangeliu^ subuerterint,
veru^ si vel paulum eua^gelizauerint praeter Euangel u^ quod accepistis, etiam
si quiduis, labefactarint, anathema sint
Paul does not say, says he, if they preach contrary things, or if they
subvert the whole Gospel, but if they preach but even a little beside the
Gospel which ye have received, if they weaken but any thing, accursed be they.
But yet he excepteth that S. Paul speaks only of his Gospel, that is, of
his preaching to the Galathians, and not one word of any written Gospel, and
therefore that nothing can be wringed out from hence to prove that the written
word comprehends all doctrine needful to salvation. I answer him by the
words of Irenaeus, Jren. a^is. haeres lib. 3. cap. 1. Non per alios
dispositionem salutis nostrae cognouimus quam per eos per quos Euangelium
peruenit ad nos quod quide^ tunc praeconiauerunt, postea vero per Dei
voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tr^diderunt fundamentu^ and columnam fidei
nostrae futurum.
We have not known the means of our salvation by any other but by them by
whom the Gospel is come unto us, which they verily preached then (at first)
but afterward by the will of God delivered it unto us in the Scriptures, to be
the foundation and pillar of our faith. This was the ancient opinion and
persuasion of the Church, that what the Apostles first preached, they
afterward committed to writing, esteeming that to be the safest and Phil. 3.1.
surest way, that hereby the Church might be armed against the practices of all
deceitful and wicked heretics that would go about to bring in their own
devices, under color and show of the Apostles names. Because therefore
whatsoever doctrine the Apostles preached is written, and by the ancient Church
was holden so to be, they made no doubt to apply these words to the written
Gospel, and to understand them to be accursed that preach any thing for
doctrine of the Gospel, which is not thereby warranted unto us. Therefore
Chrysostom says upon these words, that Chrysostom. in Gal. 1. Paulus etiam
Angelis de coelo descendentibus praeponit Scripturas, idque valde congruenter:
siquidem Angeli quamlibet magni, tamen seruisunt ac ministri: caeterum omnes
Scriptura, non a seruis sed ab vniuersorum Domino Deo venerunt ad nos.
Paul here prefers the Scriptures before Angels coming from heaven, and
that justly, says he, for Angels albeit they be great, yet are but servants
and ministers, but all the Scriptures came unto us not from servants, but from
God the Lord of all. But let S. Austine briefly conclude this point, and show
us to what these words are to be referred. August. cont. lit. Petil. li. 3. ca.
6. Sieve de. Christo sieve de eius ecclesia, sieve de quacunque re alia quae
pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram no^ dica^ nos nequaquam comparandi ei qui
dicit, Licet (...) nos, sed omnino quod secutus adiecit, Si Angelus de coelo
vobis annunciauerit praeterquam quod in Scripturis legalibus et Euangelicis
accepistis anathema sit.
Whether concerning Christ, or concerning the Church of Christ, or concerning
any thing that pertains to our faith and life, we will not say, if we, but
even as he going forward adds, If an Angel from heaven shall preach unto you
but what ye have received in the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospel,
accursed be he. The words of the Apostle to Timothy, of 1. Tim. 1.3.
commanding (...).
not to teach any other doctrine, sounding to the same effect as the other do,
do yield us the like collection, as we have seen in them.

9. W. BISHOP.
The fourth testimony. 2. Tim. 3.16.
The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct to righteousness, that the man
of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto every good work. In these
words are contained (says M. Perkins) two arguments to prove the sufficiency
of Scripture: The first, that which is profitable to these four uses, to teach
(all necessary truth is not in the text) to confute errors, to correct faults
in manners, to instruct ( all men in duty, is M. Perkins his addition to the
text) that is sufficient to salvation. But the Scriptures serve for all these
uses, etc.

Answer. This text of holy Scripture is so far from yielding our adversaries
two arguments, that it affoordeth not so much as any probable color of half
one good argument. In searching out the true sense of holy Scripture, we must
observe diligently the nature and proper signification of the words, as M.
Perkins also notes out of S. Augustine, in his sixth objection of this
question; which if the Protestants did here perform, they would make no such
account of this text: for S. Paul says only, that all Scripture is
profitable, not sufficient, to teach, to reprove, etc. How are they then carried
away with their own partial affections, that cannot discern between
profitable and sufficient. Good timber is profitable to the building of a
house, but it is not sufficient without stones, mortar, and a Carpenter. Seed
serves well, yea is also necessary to bring forth corn; but will it suffice of
it self, without manuring of the ground, and seasonable weather? And to fit
our purpose more properly, good laws are very profitable, yea most expedient
for the good government of the commonwealth: but are they sufficient without
good customs, good gouerners and judges, to see the same laws and customs
rightly understood and duly executed? Even so the holy Scriptures (S. Paul
affirms) are very profitable, as containing very good and necessary matter,
both to teach, reprove, and correct: but he says not, they are sufficient, or
that they do contain all doctrine needful for these four ends. And therefore
to argue out of S. Paul, that they are sufficient to all those purposes, when
he says only, that they are profitable to them, is plainly not to know, or not
to care what a man says: and to press such an impertinent cauil, so often and
so vehemently as the Protestants do, is nothing else but to bewray unto the
indifferent Reader, either their extreme ignorance, or most audacious
impudency, that think they can face out any matter, be it never so
impertinent. The same answer I make unto M. Perkins his second argument out of
the same place, that the holy Scriptures be profitable to make the man of God
absolute, but not sufficient.

I say moreover, that M. Perkins does falsely English these words (...) into the
whole Scriptures, when it signifies all Scripture, that is, every book of
scripture, and is there put, to verify that the old Testament only serves to
instruct to salvation: for in the words next before, S. Paul shows, how that
Timothy from his infancy had bin trained up in the knowledge of the holy
Scriptures, which (says he) can instruct thee to salvation: and annexeth, as
the confirmation thereof the text cited, All Scripture inspired of God, is
profitable to teach, etc. Now in Timothies infancy no part of the new Testament
was written, and therefore all Scripture which is here put to prove that
Scripture which Timothy in his infancy knew, cannot but by unreasonable
wresting signify more then all the books of the old Testament. So that there
are three foul faults in this the Protestants Achilles: The first in
falsification of the text, that it might seem to be spoken of the whole, which
is spoken of every part. The second, in applying that which is spoken of the
old Testament unto both the old and new. The third, in making that to be
all-sufficient which S. Paul affirms only to be profitable. And this is all
they can say out of the Scripture, to prove that the written word contains al
doctrine needful to salvation: whereupon I make this invincible argument
against them, out of their own position.

Nothing is necessary to be believed, but that which is written in holy
Scripture. But in no place of Scripture is it written, that the written word
contains all doctrine needful to salvation, as has been proved.

Therefore it is not necessary to salvation to believe the written word to
contain all doctrine needful to salvation.

R. ABBOT.
Here is a long discourse and a little answer, and gladly M. Bishop would wind
out of this sentence of the Apostle, and it will not be. The whole words of the
Apostle entirely set down, will make the Reader plainly to understand that he
has taken a great deal of pains, and said just nothing. Speaking to Timothy
he says, 2. Tim. 3.15.
Thou have known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee
wise unto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. The whole
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, being perfectly instructed to every good work. The first part of
which words do sufficiently infer that which we affirm; for if the
Scriptures be able to make a man wise unto salvation through the faith which is
in Christ Jesus, then they are sufficient to instruct a man in all things
necessary to salvation. If they be not sufficient to instruct a man in all
things necessary to salvation, then can it not be said, that they are able to
make a man wise unto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. The
force of these words cannot be deluded: every eye can see that if the
Scriptures be able to make a man wise unto salvation through the faith which is
in Christ Jesus, then all doctrine necessary to faith and salvation is
contained in the Scriptures. Now for confirmation hereof the Apostle adds,
The whole Scripture is inspired of God, and is profitable to teach (the truth)
to improve (false doctrine and error) to correct (vice and sin) to instruct
in righteousness. From hence then we must infer that which before is said, that
because the Scripture is able to direct a man in truth and righteousness,
therefore it is able to make him wise unto salvation by faith in Christ: for in
the embracing and following of truth and righteousness, consists the
attainment of everlasting life. If any man will except and say, that though it
teaches the truth, yet it teaches not all truth necessary to salvation, he
wholly overthrows the Apostles confirmation. For if it do not teach all
truth necessary to salvation, then it is notable to make a man wise to
salvation. It may be said to help toward it, but it cannot be said to be able
to do it, if it contain not all things belonging to that wisdom that
concerns us for the obtaining of salvation. But the Apostle tells us that
it so does the things by him mentioned, as that the man of God may be absolute
or perfect, (...).
being perfectly instructed, or being furnished and prepared to every good
work. The man of God is well known by the phrase of Scripture to import the
minister of God, in which sort the Apostle has before said to Timothy, 1.
Tim. 6.11.
But thou O man of God fly these things, etc. Here therefore he gives to
understand that the Scripture is so able to make wise unto salvation, so able
to instruct in truth and righteousness, as that therein the man of God, the
minister of God finds enough to make him perfect, and to prepare and furnish
him to every good work. And if there be enough for the perfection of the
minister of God, then surely it must needs follow that much more is it able to
perfect every other man to that faith and righteousness that should bring us
unto God. But here M. Bishop puts us off with three wise answers, by which
he would feign persuade us that we altogether err in the citing of these words.
First he charge us with falsification of the text, because we read, the
whole Scripture, whereas we should say, all Scripture, the Greek words being
(...), not importing as he says the whole Scripture, but every part. But why
is this on our part a falsification, more then it is in the Rhemists, to
translate according to their vulgar interpreter, Math. 8.32.
(...), the whole heard; Ver 34.
(...), the whole city; Ephesians. 4.16.
(...), the whole body: and in their Latin Heb. 2.15.
(...), per totum vitam, through their whole life, which they English, through
all their life. If there be no falsehood in these translations, why must there
needs be a falsification in ours? Yea and when it is all one with them to say,
their whole life, and all their life, why must it be a fault in us to say, the
whole Scripture, where they say, all Scripture. Surely but that malice blinds
it self, and will not see that that it does see, they would conceive that all
Scripture in this place can no otherwise be taken but to signify the whole
Scripture, even as elsewhere by Acts 20.72. (...).
all the counsel of God we understand the whole counsel of God: in like sort
as where it is said, Genesis 18.25.
Qui iudicas omnem terram, Thou which iudgest all the earth, that is, the whole
earth: Chap. 35, 2.
Conuocata omni domo, calling together all his house, that is, his whole house:
Exodus 12.41.
Egressus est omnis exercitus Domini de terra Aegypti, All the army of the Lord
departed out of the land of Egypt, that is, the whole army: Chap. 17.1.
Profecta est omnis multitudo filiorum Israel, All the multitude of the
children of Israel went out of the desert of Sin, that is, the whole multitude:
Leuit 8.3.
Congregabis omnem coetum Israel, Thou shall gather together all the
congregation of Israel, that is, the whole congregation: with infinite other
examples of the like sort. And seeing the Apostle, when in the proposition, the
Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation, must needs be understood
to mean collectiue, the whole Scripture, because it cannot be said of every
part of the Scripture that it is able so to do, what is it but wilful dotage
to understand all Scripture as meant otherwise in the proof? Especially when
it is so apparent, that that which the Apostle affirms in the proof, fitteth
to the whole Scripture, and so infers that which is propounded to be proved,
but cannot agree to every part of the Scripture, because every part of the
Scripture is not profitable to all those uses, to teach, to improve, to
correct, to instruct in righteousness. He will say that those uses are not all
jointly to be understood, but by disjunction, every part is profitable either
to teach, or to improve, or to correct, or to instruct in righteousness,
though it be not profitable to all these. But in thus saying he quite
overthrows the Apostles confirmation, for it does not follow, that because
every part of the Scripture is profitable either to teach, or to improve, or to
correct, or to instruct in righteousness, therefore the Scriptures are able to
make a man wise to salvation, because that may be said of the first chapter of
Genesis, or any other like, that it is profitable either to teach, or to
improve, or to correct, or to instruct in righteousness, that is, to one or
other of these uses, and yet it cannot be said, that it is able to make a man
wise to salvation through the faith which is Christ Jesus. Therefore the words
of the Apostle must be understood of the whole scripture, which being able to
teach, to improve, etc. is consequently able to make a man wise unto salvation
through faith in Christ. And hereby his other cavil is taken away, that we
make that to be all-sufficient which S. Paul affirms only to be profitable.
For the Apostle names not profitable as to diminish any thing from
sufficiency, but reckoning it to be profitable to all those uses that he
expresses, he leaves it plainly to be understood, that it is sufficient to
that that he would conclude thereby. For unless it be in such sort profitable,
as that it be sufficient to teach, to improve, to correct, to instruct, it
cannot be able to make a man wise to salvation through the faith which is in
Christ Jesus. Therefore Athanasius alluding as it seems to this place, says,
Athan. contra Gentes, sieve cont. idola. Sufficient quidem per se sacra and
diuinitus inspiratae Scriptura ad veritatis instructionem.
The Scriptures being holy and inspired of God, are by themselves sufficient to
the instruction of truth. M. Bishops instances therefore are frivolous and
vain. Timber is profitable for the building of a house, but it is not
profitable for all those uses that concern the building of a house, and
therefore is not sufficient. But the Apostle notes the Scripture to be
profitable for all those uses that concern the building of the house of God;
and because it is so, therefore it is sufficient for that building. The second
is against himself, for although there must be one to sow the seed, yet the
seed it self is sufficient wherewith to sow the ground: and even so, although
there must be one to teach, to improve, to correct, to instruct, yet the holy
Scripture is sufficient wherewith to do all these. Thirdly, good laws are
profitable (says he) for the good government of the Commonwealth, but they
are not sufficient without good gouerners and judges. And be laws never so
sufficient for the commonwealth, yet they avail nothing without gouerners and
judges serving to put them in execution. Even so we say, that albeit the holy
scriptures do sufficiently instruct us what doctrine is to be taught, yet all
is vain if there be none to teach it. But what a witles cavil is this, that
when question is of the doctrine of the Scriptures, whether it be so sufficient
as that they which teach are to teach no other, they object that the doctrine
of the scripures is not sufficient without one to teach? We tell him therefore
again, that, as where laws are sufficient to govern by, good gouerners and
judges being necessary for execution thereof, are to judge and govern only by
laws; so the doctrine of the holy Scriptures being sufficient to teach by,
though teachers be necessary for the teaching thereof, yet they are to teach
nothing but only by the Scripture, and therein only is it that we affirm the
sufficiency of the Scripture. But in humane laws that sufficiency is never
found, they never fit all occasions and uses of the common wealth, never meet
with all inconveniences and mischiefs, never determine all controversies and
causes, never provide so perfectly for the right, but that it proves to some
man's wrong, and therefore though they be profitable, yet they are not
profitable every manner of way. In the holy Scripture the Apostle teaches us
it is otherwise, it serves us for all occasions toward God; there is nothing
that concerns us, but either by teaching or reproving, or correcting or
instructing, it applies it self unto us: Cypria^. de dupl. martyr. Nullus est
animorum morbus cui non praesens remediu^ diuina scripturae suppeditat.
There is no sickness of the mind (says Cyprian, referring himself to these
words of the Apostle) to which the holy Scripture yields not a present
remedy: Chrysostom in 2. These. hom. 3. Omnia clara su^t and manifesta ex
scripturis diuinis; quaecunque necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt.
All things are evident and clear (says Chrysostom) by the holy Scriptures,
whatsoever things aye necessary they are manifest. The scriptures therefore are
in such sort profitable, as that they are sufficicient also fully to instruct
us as touching the means of obtaining eternal life. As for customs, they may
have their place and use amongst the laws of men, but amongst the laws of God
they have no place. Cypr li. 2. ep. 3. Si solus Christus audiendus est, no^ est
attendendum quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes
est Christus prior fecerit. Neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed
Dei veritatem.
Because Christ only is to be heard (says Cyprian) we are not to regard what
any before us has thought fit to be done, but what Christ first did, who is
before all: for we are not to follow the custom of men, but the truth of God.
Tertul. de verla^. virg. Christus veritatem se, non consuetudinem cognominauit.
Christ (sath Tertullian) called not himself custom but truth. M. Bishop
therefore deals but idly to allege the exorbitant and lawless customs of
co^monwealths, as a color for traditions in the church of Christ. His last
exception is, that the Scriptures here spoken of which Timothy knew from his
infancy, could be no other but the scriptures of the old Testament, because no
part of the new Testament was then written, and therefore that that is here
said cannot but by unreasonable wresting signify more then the old Testament,
charging us hereupon with falsification in applying it to both the old and new.
Where the vain man does not see that he exceedingly strengthens the argument
against himself; for if S. Paul could say that the scriptures of the old
Testament were able to make a man wise unto salvation by the faith of Christ,
how much more is it true of the scriptures now that they are able so to do,
when as by the new Testament so much light is added for the clearing of the
old? The doctrine which the Apostles preached in the new Testament, they
confirmed by the old. They taught no other faith but what was contained
therein, only the faith was more plainly and clearly delivered by them,
because as S. Austin says, August. de catech. rud. In veteri testame^to est
ocultatio noui: in nouo testamento est manifestatio veteris.
in the old Testament the new is hidden, and in the new Testament is the
manifesting of the old. Idem in Joan. tra. 45. Tempora variata sunt no^ fides,
etc. Eadem fides vtrosque contungit.
The times (says he) are diverse, but the faith is one. Seeing then the old
Testament was sufficient to instruct men to the faith of Christ, and the
instruction thereof notwithstanding is much more manifestly delivered in the
new, and no other faith is taught in the new Testament then is contained in the
old, who does not see that the conclusion stands strong on our part, that
much more the scripture now contains all doctrine necessary to instruct us to
the faith of Christ? Albeit it is not true which M. Bishop says, that S. Paul
means here only the scriptures of the old Testament. For although when
Timothy was a child, there were no other scriptures but only of the old
Testament, yet when Paul wrote these words to Timothy, the greatest part of the
books of the new Testament were extant. He wrote this epistle newly before his
death, as appears by that he says, 2. Tim. 4.6.
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand. He had
then written all the rest of his epistles, as we may easily conceive, neither
is it likely but that the gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke, with the Acts of
the Apostles, were written before that time, the first by S. Matthew being
testified to be written at the time of Paul's first imprisonment at Rome, and
Jren. li. 3. ca. 1. Matthew. Hebraeis in ipsoru^ lingua scriptura^ edidit
Euangelij cum Petrus et Paulus Romae euangelizarent, et fundarent Ecclesiam.
founding the Church there, where S. Luke makes an end of the history of the
Acts of the Apostles, after which being not long after the beginning of the
reign of Nero, the Apostle lived for the space of 12. or 13. years, being put
to death in the Func. Chronol.
14. year of the same Nero. Of S. Marks Gospel it is also manifest, because he
died Hiero^. in Catal. Mortuus est 8. Neronis anno, and sepultus Alexandriae.
in the 8. year of Nero, as Hierome testifies, six years before S. Paul's
death, and therefore before the writing of this epistle. The like also is plain
of the former epistle of S. Peter, as appears for that his second epistle was
written about the same time that S. Paul wrote this second epistle to Timothy,
S. Peter being put to death at the same time as S. Paul was, and saying as he
does in the same second epistle: 2. Pet. 1.14.
I know that the time is at hand that I must lay down this my tabernacle. Now
therefore so many of the books of the new Testament being extant at that time,
who can doubt but that the Apostle naming all Scripture did speak of those
books, unless he will be so mad as to say, that at that time they were no
Scriptures? And as when we say that a man has known the laws from a child, we
do not mean to restrain his knowledge only to those laws which were when he
was a child, but will signify his knowledge also of such laws as have bin
since made: even so when the Apostle says, that Timothy had known the
Scriptures from a child, he would give to understand, that he was conversant
not only in the Scriptures that then were, but also in such other as from time
to time thenceforward were written for the same use. Nay who would make
question, but that the Apostle setting down by the direction of the holy Ghost
this commendation of all Scripture, would hereby give us to understand what to
conceive of other scriptures also that were to be published afterward?
Therefore M. Bishop has hitherto answered nothing, to take away the evidence
of the argument taken out of the words of the Apostle, and the Protestants
Achilles is stronger then that he may take upon him the part of Hector to
encounter therewith. But yet well fare a good stomach, for though he have said
as good as nothing, yet he sets a good face upon the matter, and concludes
this point with an invincible argument, like the invincible navy of Spain:
Nothing is necessary to be believed but that which is written in holy
Scripture. Very true. But in no place of Scripture is it written, that the
written word contains all doctrine needful to salvation, as has been proved.
But that is not true: the proofs that it does so, are pregnant and clear; but
his proofs to the contrary are childish and vain, and therefore his
conclusion cannot hold. In steed therefore of his presumed and invisible
argument, we wish him to consider of this, Whatsoever the written word teaches
us of it self, that is necessary to be believed. But the written word teaches
us concerning it self, that it is able to make us wise to salvation through
the faith which is in Christ Jesus. It is necessary therefore for us to
believe that it can so, and therefore to reject all doctrine that cannot be
approved and warranted thereby.

10. W. BISHOP.
And by the same principle I might reject all testimony of Antiquity as
needless, if the Scriptures be so all-sufficient as they hold. Yet let us
hear what testimony M. Perkins brings out of antiquity in favor of his
cause.

Tertullian De resur. carni^
says, Take from heretics the opinions which they defend with the Heathens,
that they may defend their questions by Scripture alone, and they cannot stand.

Answ. Here Scripture alone is opposed (as every one may see) unto the writings
of heathen authors, and not to the traditions of the Apostles: and therefore
makes nothing against them. Again, says M. Perkins out of the same author:
We need no curiosity after Jesus Christ, nor inquisition after the Gospel,
when we believe it, we desire to believe nothing besides it: for this we must
believe, that there is nothing else which we may believe.

Answer. By the Gospel there is understood all our Christian doctrine written
and unwritten, and not only the written word of the four Evangelists, else we
should not believe the Acts of the Apostles, or their Epistles, no more then
traditions: which Christian doctrine written and unwritten, we only believe by
divine faith; to all other authors we give such credit as their writings do
deserve. If any man desire to see Tertullians judgment of traditions, let him
read his book of prescriptions against heretics, where he auerreth that
traditions serve better then the Scriptures themselves to confute all heresies,
heretics always either not allowing all the books of Scripture, or else
perverting the sense and meaning of the Scriptures. And in his book de Corona
militis, he formally proposes this question, whether traditions unwritten are
to be admitted or no? and answers by many instances, that they must be
received, concluding thus: For these and the like points if thou require law
out of the Scriptures, thou shall find none: but Tradition is alleged to be
the author of them, Custom the confirmer, and Faith the obseruer. So that
nothing is more certain then that Tertullian thought unwritten Traditions
necessary to be believed.

R. ABBOT.
It follows not that antiquity is needless, though all doctrine needful to
salvation be contained in the scriptures, because antiquity gives us many
good and profitable helps for attaining to the understanding of many places
and stories of the scripture, when yet it teaches us to admit of no doctrine
but what is proved thereby. The first testimony alleged by M. Perkins is out
of Tertullian, Tertul. de resurr. carn. Aufer haereticis quae cu^ Ethnicis
sapiunt (sieve vt alias legitur, quaecunque Ethnici saepiunt) vt de scripturis
solis quaestiones suas sistant and stare no^ poteru^t.
Take from heretics what they conceive like the heathen, or what the heathen
conceive, that they may determine their questions only by the Scriptures, and
they cannot stand. M. Bishop tells us for answer, that Tertullian opposes
Scripture alone to the writings of heathen authors, not to the trrditions of
the Apostles, and therefore makes nothing against them. But Tertullian speaks
not any thing there of heathen authors, but of heathenish reasons and fancies
whereby heretics plead against the mysteries of faith, as there he gives
example by the resurrection of the dead. He requires them to forgo these, and
to bring their questions only to the Scriptures, or to the Scriptures alone.
Now to say that he opposes not Scripture alone to the traditions of the
Apostles, is a ridiculous evasion, when as by calling them thus to only
Scripture, he gives to understand that he knew no such traditions belonging to
matters of doctrine and faith, for determining of questions that might arise
thereof. For whether he oppose the same to heathen authors or to heathenish
reasons, we may well take it to be absurd, that he should require heretics to
be brought only to Scripture, if it be as M. Bishop tells us, that questions
cannot be determined only by the Scriptures, or if he thought any other means
to be as necessary as the Scriptures for the determining of the^. But this
sentence has not so much strength by it self, as it has by that that is
cited together with it: Idem de Praescript. Nobis non est opus curiositate post
Christu^ Iesum, nec inquisitione post Eua^gelium. Cum hoc credimus, nihil
desideramus vltra credere. Hoc enim prius credimus non esse quod vltra credere
debemus.
We need no curiosity after Christ Jesus, nor inquiry further after the
Gospel: when we believe that, we desire to believe no more: for this we
believe, that there is nothing further for us to believe. Where when M. Bishop
says, that by the Gospel is to be understood all our Christian doctrine, so
far he says truly, but when he adds, written or unwritten, he beggeth the
question, and his Commentary goes without the compass of Tertullians text.
He should by plain example or reason have given us to understand, that
Tertullian by the Gospel imports any doctrine unwritten: otherwise he may
well think that we scorn his interpretation, having no warrant of it but his
own word. Tertullian spoke of the Gospel as the Apostle does, who says, Romans
1.2.
that God before promised it by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures, and that
it was Cap. 16.26.
opened and published amongst all nations by the Scriptures of the Prophets. We
have heard before out of Irenaeus, that Sect. 8.
the Gospel which the Apostles first preached, they afterward committed to
writing, to be the foundation and pillar of our faith, and out of Chrysostom,
that Sect. 7.
to speak any thing that is not written, is to speak of himself, and not out
of the Gospel. So does Basil of the word of God and Scripture, make one and
the same thing, and denies that there is any word of God beside the Scripture,
saying: Basil Ethic. reg. 80. Si quicquid ex fide non est, peccatum est, sicut
dicit Apostolus, fides vero ex auditu, auditus autem per verbum Dei, ergo
quicquid extra diuinam Scripturam est, cum ex fide non sit, peccatum est.
If what soever is not of faith be sin, and faith come by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God, then whatsoever is beside the holy Scripture,
because it is not of faith is sin. If there be no Gospel but written, no
word of God but Scripture, then surely Tertullian when he says that we need no
inquiry further after the Gospel, takes away Traditions, and leaves no
place for doctrine unwritten. Whereas he says, that by the Gospel is not
understood only the written word of the four Evangelists, he talks idly,
because no man understood it so. The doctrine delivered in the Acts and
Epistles of the Apostles, is no less the doctrine of the Gospel, then that
that is recorded by the four Evangelists. But here to see Tertullians
judgment of traditions, he refers his Reader to the same Tertullians book
of Prescriptions against heretics. Now this sentence alleged by M. Perkins
was taken out of that book, although he quoted not the place, which M. Bishop
knew not, because indeed he had never read the book. Therefore this that he
here faith, he says it only by hearesay, and for ought he knows Tertullian
may as well speak against Traditions, as any thing for them. And the truth is,
that Tertullian speaks no otherwise for Traditions, then does Irenaeus whom
he cited before in his Epistle to the King, whom I have showed to make nothing
at all for M. Bishops purpose. The occasion of both their speeches was the
same, having to do with wicked and blasphemous heretics, who admitted
Tertullian. de Praescript. Ista haeresis non recipit quasdam Scripturas, and si
quas recipit adiectionibus and detractionibus ad dispositionem instituti sui
interuertit, and si recipit no^ recipit integras, and si aliquatenus integras
praestat, nihil^minus d^uersas expositiones commentatae conuer^it.
of the scriptures no otherwise then they lift themselves, rejecting the books
that specially made against them, and by additions and detractions framing the
books which they did receive to serve their own turn, and by their wicked
glosses wresting the words of scripture to the maintenance of their damnable
errors. They took upon them to know more then the Apostles, saying, that the
holy Ghost which Christ promised to send, was not given to the Apostles, but to
the^, so that the Montanists affirmed, that Dicunt Paracletum plura in Montano
dixisse, quam Christum in Euangelium protulisse.
the holy Ghost spoke more things in Montanus, then Christ did commit to the
Gospel, and not only more, but greater and better things. When they were
urged by the teachers of the Church with these corruptions and falsifications,
Haec and ipsi habent in nos retorquere, and. a nobis potius adulteria
Scripturarum and expositionum earu^ mendacia inferri etc.
they were ready to answer, that the corrupting of the Scriptures and false
expositions thereof were rather found with them: by means whereof there was no
end of reasoning with them, because they could hold them to no certain grounds
whereupon to proceed against them. Hereupon Tertullian referred men as Irenaeus
did, to consider the Churches planted by the Apostles, and which had had
continuance of Pastors and teachers from them, by them to learn what faith and
doctrine was delivered by the Apostles, as not doubting but what they delivered
was the truth, as Supra sect. 4.
who devised nothing of their own, but faithfully assigned to the nations the
doctrine which they had received of Christ. He sets it down as a principle,
that undoubtedly Hoc propono, vnu^ and certum aliquid institutu^ esse a Christo
quod credere omni modo debeant nationes.
there was some one and certain thing appointed by Christ for the nations to
believe: that whatsoever that was, Christ undoubtedly delivered it to his
Apostles, Duodecim praecipuos lateri suo adtegerat destinatos nationibus
magistros, etc. Si Christus Apostolos misit ad praedicandum, (praescribimus)
non alios esse recipiendos Praedicatores, quam quos Christus instituit.
whom he chose to be teachers of all nations, and therefore that no other
Preachers are to be received but whom Christ appointed: that to say that either
the Apostles knew not all things, or did not make known all things to all men,
is In vtroque Christum reprehe^sions subijcientes, qui aut minus instructos,
aut parum simplices Apostolos miserit.
to reprove Christ as sending Apostles either insufficient, or not dealing
simply and plainly. Taking it then for granted, that the Apostles delivered
al truth to the Church, he moves another doubt that happily the Churches had
erred, and forsaken that which at first was delivered by the Apostles. To this
therefore he answers, that Quid verisimile est, vt tot ac tantae in vnam
fide^ errauerinit Nullus inter multos euentus vnus est exitus: variassedebuerat
error doctrinae Ecclesiarum. Caeterum quod apud multos vn^ inuenitur, non est
erratum, sed traditum.
it is not likely, if the Churches had erred, that being so many and so great,
they should in error light all upon one faith; that they would surely have
varied in their error one from another, because where there are many going but
by hap, they cannot all happen upon the same end. Therefore what with many is
found one (says he) it is no matter of error, but that that was first
delivered unto them. He goes on further to show, that it is the mark of truth
Ab excessis reuertor ad principalitatem veritati and posteritatem mendacitati
deputanda^, exillius quoque Parabolae patrocinio, etc. Ita ex ipso ordine
manifestatur id esse dominicum and verum quod sit prius traditum id autem
extraneum and falsum quod sit posterius immissum.
to be first, and that what comes in after is to be reputed a lie, as
appears by the Parable wherein the good seed or wheat was first sowed, and
then afterward the tares. Thus by the order it is so manifest (says he) that
that is of the Lord, and true, which was first delivered, but that strange and
false, which is afterward come in. Now if any of them would dare to challenge
to themselves the antiquity of the Apostles, he wills them Siquae audent se
interserere aetati Apostolicae, vt ideo videantur ab Apostolis traditae, quia
sub Apostolis fuerunt, possumus dicere. Acdant ergo originos Ecclesiarum
suarum, euoluant ordinem Episcoporum suoru^, etc.
to show the original of their Churches, and the succession of their Bishops
from the Apostles, which if there had been any such, they might easily have
done, this being very little more then a hundred years after the time of the
Apostles. But withal he declares, that such opinions of theirs as were
mentioned in the time of the Apostles, Quae tunc sub Apostolis fuerunt, ab
ijsdem Apostolis and demonstratae and deierata.
were by the Apostles showed and renounced, whereof he gives sundry examples,
of denying the resurrection, of observing circumcision, of forbidding marriage,
of denying the Godhead or manhood of Christ, of worshipping Angels, and such
like condemned in the writings of the Apostles. N^m and sic facilitis
traduce^tur dum aut iam tunc fuisse deprehenduntur aut ex illis quae tunc
fuerunt semina sumpsisse, etc. Sieve ergo taedem nunc sunt aliquanto
expolitiores, quae sub Apostolis rudes habe^t suam exinde damnationem: sieve
aliae quide^ illae fuerunt aliae autem postea o^o^tae sunt, and quasdam ex illu
op^niones vsurpauerunt habendo cum eu consoretum praedicationis, habeant etiam
necesse est consortium damnationis, etc Et si nihil de damnaticijs
participare^tur, de aetate sola praeiudicatentur, tanto magis aduiterae, quanto
nec Apostolis nomin^iae. Vnde fi^m^^^ constat has esse quae adhuc tunc nunt
rebantur futurae.
Thus (says he) they shall the more easily be traduced, whilst they are found
either to have been then, or to have taken any seeds from those that were
then. For whether they be now the same somewhat more polished and fined, which
in the Apostles times were yet rude and unfashioned, they have their
condemnation from thence; or whether they were one then, and other have since
sprung up, which yet have borrowed some opinions from them, surely in being
partakers with them in their preaching, they must needs also be partakers of
their condemnation. And albeit they did not participate with those that were so
condemned, yet (says he) there should prejudice be taken against them only
for their latter age, being so much the rather corruptions of the truth, for
that they are not so much as named by the Apostles; whence it is so much the
more certain, that they are those which then it was foretold should be in time
to come. Hereupon he refers his Reader to sundry particular churches,
Percurie Ecclesias Apostolica^ apud quas ipsae ad^uc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis
locis praeside^tur, apud quas ipsae authenticae literae eorum recitantur, etc.
Proxima est tibi Achaia? habes Corinthum. Si non long es a Macedonia, habes
Philippos, etc. si Italiae adiace^, h^bes Romanam, etc. Cum Aphricanis quoque
Ecclesijs contestatur: vnum Deum nouit, Creatorem vniu^sita^^^: and Iesum
Christum ex Virgin Maria, filium Creatoris, and carnis resurrectionem: legem
and Prophet^s cum Euangelicis and Apostolicis literis miscet and inde fidem
portat eam, etc.
where were still Bishops in the seats of the Apostles, and their authentical
Epistles were still read, as of the Corinthians, the Philippians, the
Thessalonians, the Ephesians, the Romans, which together with the Aphricane
Churches acknowledged one God, the Creator of the whole world, and Jesus
Christ of the Virgin Mary, the Son of the Creator, and the resurrection of
the flesh; joining the law and the Prophets with the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and thence deriuing that faith. Thus had he before
set down the doctrine and faith, which in all this treatise he thus labors
to uphold and maintain: Regula est autem fidei illa scilicet qua creditur v^um
omnino Deum esse, nec alium quam mundi Creatorem, qui vniuersa produxerit de
nihilo per verbum suum primo omnium omissum, etc. Superest vt demonstremus an
haec nostra doctrina, cuius regulam supra edidimus de Apostolerum traditione
censcatur.
The rule of faith is this, to believe that there is one only God, and the
same no other but the Creator of the world, who by his word first of all sent
forth, made all things of nothing. The same word called his Son, was under the
name of God diversely seen of the Patriarchs, evermore heard in the Prophets,
last of all by the spirit and power of the Father was brought into the Virgin
Mary, made flesh in her womb, and being borne of her, did the part of Jesus
Christ: preached thencefoorth the new law and the new promise of the kingdom
of heaven, wrought miracles, and being nailed to a cross, rose again the
third day, and so forth according to the articles of Christian belief. Upon
the assertion of this rule he infers, that Si haec ita se habent, vt veritas
nobis adiudicetur quicunque in ea regula incedimus quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis,
Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo tradidit, constat ratio pro positi nostri
definientis non esse admittendos haereticos ad ean^e de Scripturis
prouocationem quos sine Scripturis probamus ad Scripturas non perti^ere.
since the truth must be adjudged to them who walk in that rule which the
Church had delivered from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, and Christ
from God, it was hereby assured which he had before propounded, that the
heretics were not to be admitted to disputation by the Scriptures, who without
the Scriptures were proved to have no title to the Scriptures. Therefore for
conclusion of all this he says, that Illic igitur and Scripturaru^ and
expositionum adulteratio deputanda est, vbi diuersitas muenitur doctrinae.
Quibus fuit propositum aliter doce^di, necessitas institit aliter disponendi
instrumenta doctrinae. Alias enim non potuissent aliter docere, nisi aliter
haberent per quae decerent Sicut illis non potuisset succedere corrup tela
doctrinae sine corruptela instrumentorum eius, ita and nobis integritas
doctrinae non compentisset sine integritate eorum per quae doctrina tractatur.
Etenim quid contrarium nobis in nostris? quid de proprio i^tulimus, vt aliquid
contrarium ei and in Scripturis deprehensum detractione vel adiectione, vel
transmutatione remediaremus? Quod sumus, hoc suntinde Scripturae ab initio suo
Ex illis sumus antequam nihil aliter fuit quam sumus.
the corrupting of the Scriptures and of the meaning thereof, must be reckoned
to be there where there was found diversity of doctrine from the Scriptures.
For they (says he) who intended to teach otherwise, had need otherwise to
dispose of the instruments of doctrine and teaching. For they could not teach
otherwise, except they had somewhat otherwise whereby to teach. But on the
contrary side he says: As their corrupting of doctrine could not have
success without corrupting of the instruments thereof; so neither could
integrity or soundness of doctrine have stood with us, without the integrity
of those instruments by which doctrine is handled. For in our Scriptures what
is there contrary to us? What have we brought in of our own, that somewhat
being found in the Scriptures thereto contrary, we should remedy by adding or
taking away, or changing any thing? What we are, the same are the Scriptures
even from their beginning. From the^ we are ever since there was nothing
otherwise then we are. This is the brief sum of all that Tertullian in that
book says, pertinent to the matter here in hand, wherein as there is nothing
in favor of the cause which M. Bishop maintains, so there is much to be
observed for the oppugning and conuincing thereof. First, it is apparent that
Tertullian here says not a word for the auouching of any doctrine beside the
Scripture, but only for justifying the doctrine that is contained in the
Scripture. The heretics oppugned the maine and fundamental grounds of
Christian faith, concerning the unity of the Godhead, the creation of the
world, the Godhead and incarnation of Christ, the resurrection of the dead, the
coming of the holy Ghost, and sundry other such like. They rejected such whole
books, and razed such testimonies of Scripture as evidently made against them,
affirming the same not to have been written by the Apostles, or by any divine
inspiration, Contra Marc. lib. 4 Contraria quaeque sententiae suae erasit
conspirantia cum Creatore quaesi ab assertoribus eius intexta.
but foisted in, yea sometimes that they were to correct and reform those
things which the Apostles had written. Therefore albeit the points in question
were manifestly decided by clear testimony of Scripture, yet the authority of
Scripture being rejected and refused, it was necessary for many men's
satisfaction to take some other course for the conuicting of them. Ibid
Haeresis sic semper emendat Euangelia dum vitiat. Iren. lib. 3 cap. 1.
Eme^datores Apostolorum.
Hereupon he referred men to the consideration of the Apostolic Churches
where the doctrine of the faith of Christ was most renowmedly planted, and had
successively continued from the time of the Apostles, that by the testimony of
those Churches it might appear, both that the Scriptures were authentical and
true, and that the doctrine avouched against the Heretics, was no other but
what the Apostles themselves by the institution of Christ had in those
Scriptures delivered to the Church. In which case they did nothing else but
what we also have done, when upon exception taken against us, as using the
Scriptures partially for the maintenance of our religion, which yet every eye
may see to be clearly justified thereby, we have further alleged the
tradition of the Church, and showed by pregnant and express testimony and
witness of the ancient Fathers and Councels, both that we acknowledge all
those Scriptures which were with them undoubtedly approved for Canonical, and
do gather no other assertions or doctrines, but what by them were gathered from
thence. And if M. Bishop will not hereupon conclude us to be patrons of their
traditions, as we suppose he will not, then let him know that he abuses
Tertullian, in seeking to make him a supporter thereof, who did nothing in
effect but what we do: let him take knowledge of his own singular falsehood and
treachery, in alleging a speech of tradition, which imports no more but the
written doctrine of the Scripture, thereby to color their traditions, which
are both beside and contrary to the Scripture. Yea and his treachery is so
much the greater, in this general naming of Tertullians book of Prescriptions
as making for their traditions, for that Tertullian, which is secondly here to
be noted, does plainly affirm, that what they are, the Scriptures are, that
is, that they taught nothing but what the Scripture had taught them, yea and
that integrity of faith could not have stood with them, but by the integrity
of the Scriptures, by which the doctrine of faith is managed and taught,
thereby signifying that albeit by the importunity of heretics they were
forced to appeal to the tradition of the Churches, yet that neither their
safety, nor the safety of the Churches to which they appealed stood in
tradition, but in having the Scriptures entire as they were first delivered
unto them, that out of them they might teach what was first delivered. Yea and
that so, as they needed no adding to the Scriptures, nor taking from them, nor
changing of any thing, for the saluing of any thing which they taught, whereby
it appears, that he meant not to leave any place for unwritten doctrines, or
any such traditions as the Church of Rome defends against the plain letter
and express word of holy Scripture, only by taking upon her to make such
meaning thereof as may not touch her devices, howsoever they contain impious
idolatry and blasphemy against God, and the apparent dishonor of the name of
Christ. Again, we are to note, that he teaches it to have been some one
certain matter of doctrine, which Christ at the first delivered to his
Apostles, and the Apostles to the Church: that that only is true which was
thus delivered at first, but whatsoever since has come in, is erroneous and
false. To which purpose elsewhere also he gives this prescription, that Contr.
Marc. lib. 3 Illic pro^u^cianda est regulae interuersio vbi posteritas
inuenitur.
we are there to affirm the perverting of the rule, where there is found
laternesse of time: and again, that Ibid. lib. 4. Ei praescribens outhoritatem
quod antiquius reperietur, and ei prescribens vitiationem quod posterius
reuincetur.
authority is to be yielded to that that is the more ancient, but that to be
preiudicated of corruption, which shall be proved to be the later. Therefore in
the words formerly alleged, we see he makes it a certain mark of
corruption and falsehood, not to have been named or mentioned by the Apostles.
Now if by this prescription we examine the doctrine of Popery, we shall easily
perceive and find, that in it is the perverting of the rule, as wherein there
are so many devices never mentioned by the Apostles, yea which had neither name
nor place for many hundreds, yea some not for a thousand years or more after
the time of the Apostles, as has been declared before in answer of the Epistle
to the King. This is a true and certain rule, and necessary to be observed,
and we learn thereby to condemn for novelties and humane presumptions,
whatsoever has not warrant from the beginning, and to admit of no faith or
doctrine, but what the Church received immediately from the Apostles, and the
Apostles from Christ, and Christ from God. And because what Christ received
from God has witness of the law and Prophets, as we have seen before out of
Chrysostom: therefore we are to know, that there is no doctrine truly affirmed
as belonging to the new Testament, which has not confirmation and testimony
from the old. Fourthly, we see that albeit Tertullian did refer his Reader to
Tradition, yet he took not this witness of tradition only from the Church of
Rome, but also from other Churches which were founded by the Apostles as well
as it. So does he also in another place, saying: Contra Marc. lib. 4. V^deamus
quod lac a Paulo Corinthij hauserintiad quam regulam Galatae sint recorrecti,
quidlega^t Philip penses, Thessalonicenses, Ephesij, quid etiam Romani de
proxime sonent, quibus Euangelium and Petrus and Paulus sanguine suo signatum
relic runt Haebemus and Ioannis alum ^as Ecclesias, etc
Let us see what milk the Corinthians did draw from Paul, by what rule the
Galathians were reformed; what the Philippians, Thessalonians, Ephesians do
read; what the Romans also near unto us do teach, to whom Peter and Paul
left the Gospel sealed with their blood. We have also the Churches which were
taught by S. John, etc. And although in his prescriptions he name it as the
honor of the Church of Rome, that the Apostles Peter and Paul did with their
blood utter De praescript. Foelix Ecclesia cui totam doctrinam Apostolicum
sanguine su^ profuderunt.
all their doctrine to that Church, yet does he not name it as a thing proper
and peculiar to it, in as much as S. Paul plainly affirms, that to the
Church of Ephesus also he had preached Act. 20.27.
all the counsel of God, and thereby leaves us to understand, that he did the
like to all the Churches. Herby then we descry the notable fraud of M. Bishop
and his fellows, who now hang the authority of all tradition only upon the
Church of Rome, and will have nothing authentical from other Churches but
only from that Church. For although Tertullian might safely argue from
tradition in the consent of many Churches, and might conclude it undoubtedly to
have bin delivered from the Apostles, which was uniformly received by them
all, when as none of them had power to obtrude or thrust upon other Churches
any doctrines devised by themselves, and especially being so soon after the
time of the Apostles as before was said, yet can no such assurance be builded
upon any one Church, and that so many hundreds of years after, and especially
such a Church as by tyranny and usurpation has compelled other Churches to be
subject unto it, thereby enforcing upon them whatsoever it pleases to devise
for the serving of it own turn, and wherein there have been so many
innouations and alterations, as that their varieties and uncertainties from age
to age, do show that they are departed from that one certain rule, which
Christ and his Apostles first delivered to the Church. To conclude, Tertullian
teaches us to take knowledge of such heresies or falsehoods as are noted to
have been in the Apostles times, and by them condemned, and thereby to know
them for deceivers, not only who teach the same, but any that have taken seeds
from thence, or being then but rude and unfashioned are since polished and
fined with more probable device and show. Such were then the teaching Act. 15.1.
of justification by the works of the law, Col. 2.18.
the worshipping of Angels, Ibid. ver. 23.
the not sparing of the body, nor having of it in honor to satisfy the flesh;
to which we may add the 1. Tim. 4 3.
forbidding of marriage, and commanding of abstinence from meats noted for time
to come. All which we see in the Papacy now maintained and practiced; and
though they be glosed and colored with tricks and shifts, that they may not
seem to be the same that the Apostles spoke of, yet by Tertullians rule are to
be taken to have been then condemmned, inasmuch as the Apostles speaking of
them as they were then, used no restraint for warrant of them as they are
defended now. Thus then M. Bishop has little cause to boast of Tertullians
book of prescriptions, and better might he have forborne the naming of him,
but that he has learned of his master Bellarmine, to name authors sometimes
in general, when in particular they make nothing for that he says; as in that
whole book Tertullian has not one word for warrant of any tradition or
doctrine that is not contained in the Scripture. But he will make the matter
sure, I trow, out of another place, where Tertullian formally proposes the
question whether traditions unwritten be to be admitted or not, and answers
that they must so. Now it is true indeed that Tertullian so resolves and
concludes the matter in those words which Master Bishop has alleged, but he
should withal have told us when it was that he so resolved, and then little
cause should we have to wonder at that he says. He wrote his book of
prescriptions, when he yet continued in the society of the Church, but the
book which Master Bishop cites de Corona militis, he wrote afterward, when
he was fallen away, and besotted with the prophecy of Montanus, and purposely
girdeth according to his usual manner, at the Catholic and godly Pastors and
professors of the Church, and specially indeed of the Church of Rome, at
which it was that he was specially offended. He vpbraideth them as Tertull. de
Coron. militis. Noui pastores little in pace leones, in praelio ceru^s, etc. Non
dubito quoslam sarcinas expedire fugae accingi de ciuitate in ciuitatem nulla^
aliam Euangelij memoria^ urant.
fearful and faint-hearted, and minding nothing more if persecution should
arise, then to run away. And because they had condemned Montanus with his new
prophecy, therefore he says of them: Plane superest vt martyria recusare
medite^tur qui prophetias musae^ sp. sancti respuerunt.
It remains indeed that they think of shunning martyrdom, who have
rejected the prophecies of the holy Ghost. The matter whereupon he took the
occasion of this writing, was briefly thus. A Soldier who was a Christian,
coming amongst the rest to receive the Emperors donatiue, refused to wear
his garland upon his head as the manner was, but came with it in his hand.
Being demanded why he so did, he answered that he might not do as the rest
did, because he was a Christian. Hereupon he was taken and cast in prison, and
fear there was least further danger should hereby grow to the whole Church.
Many hereupon condemned the indiscreet zeal of this man, who without cause in
a matter merely indifferent, would thus provoke the Emperors fury, both
against himself, and the whole profession of Christian faith. Tertullian ready
to entertain every such occasion, takes the matter in hand, and writes this
book as in commendation and defense of the constancy and resolution which he
had showed in this matter. Now it is to be considered, what it was that was
said on the Churches behalf, which Tertullian takes upon him to oppugn.
Maxim illud opp^nunt; Vbi aute^ prohibemur ne coronemur, etc. Vbi scriptu^
est, ne coronemur, etc.
This they specially urge, says he, Where are we forbidden to wear a garland?
where is it written that we should not wear a garland? To this he answers,
that Hanc si nulla scriptura determinauit, certe consuetudo cerroborauit, quae
sine dubio de traditione manauit.
though no Scripture had so determined, yet custom had so confirmed, which no
doubt, says he, came by tradition. He then brings in the Churches reply,
Etia^ in traditionis obtentu exigenda est, inquis, authoritas scripta.
But say thou, in pretense of tradition, authority of Scripture is to be
required. Whereby it is manifest, that the Church then rejected unwritten
traditions, and where tradition was alleged, required authority of Scripture
for the warrant of it; and hereupon was it that Tertullian being now become an
heretic, defended unwritten traditions against the Church. Therefore the
latter Church of Rome in defending traditions beside the Scripture, follows
the steps of Montanus the heretic, and we in oppugning the same, do no other
but take part with the ancient Church of Rome. Albeit the absurdity of
Tertullians defense of traditions here does sufficiently bewray it self, in
that he makes it Annon putat omni fideli licere concipcie and constituere
dunta aeat quod Deo co^gnat, quod disciplinae co^ducat, quod saluti proficiat?
etc Salus traditionis respectu quocunque traditore censeatur.
lawful for every faithful man to conceive and set down what may be fitting
to God, what helpful to discipline, what profitable to salvation, and will
have tradition to be regarded, whosoever be the author of it. He makes
Confirmata co^suetume idonea test probatae traditionis.
custom a sufficient witness for the approving of tradition, who
notwithstanding elsewhere though still possessed with the same humor, yet much
more discreetly, says, that De virgin velan. Consuetudo f^re initium ex
ignorantia vel simplicitate sortita in vsum per successionem corroboratur and
na aduersus veritatem vindicatur.
Custom commonly having his beginning of ignorance or simplicity, is by
succession strengthened to common use, and so is maintained against the truth,
well observing withal, that Ibid. Dominus noster Christus veritatem se, non
consuetudinem cognominatuit, etc. Quodcunque aduersus veritatem sapit, hoc erit
haeresis, etiam vetus co^suetudo.
Christ did not call himself custom, but truth, and that whatsoever sauoureth
against the truth, is heresy though it be an ancient custom. As for the
instances which M. Bishop says he brings for the justifying of Traditions
unwritten, they are partly impertinent, and partly heathenish and heretical
devises; and surely if the Church had been then fraught with traditions, as the
Church of Rome is now, he would not have been so slenderly furnished for the
approving of them. His first instance is, that in baptism Aqua^ adituri
contistamur nos renunetare diabolo and pompae et Angelis eius.
they did profess to renounce the devil and his pompes and his Angels. But
this is no other but written doctrine, and the Scripture teaches it, when it
names Heb. 6.1.
repentance from dead works as one of the foundations of Christian profession,
and of the doctrines of the beginning of Christ, and we use the same
renunciation in baptism, who yet disclaim traditions unwritten. Form of
words makes no difference of doctrine, and though in other terms, yet we do
no other thing therein, but what the Scripture teaches us to do. His second
instance of De hinc ter mergitamur.
thrice dipping, is a matter only of ceremony, not of doctrine, and it is
merely indifferent whether it be done once as in the name of one God, or
thrice as to import the Trinity of the persons. As for Jnde suscepti lactu and
mellis con^ordiam praegustamus.
the tasting of milk and honey which is his third instance, it was also a
voluntary observation, which may seem first to have been brought in by
heretics, howsoever after it got place in the Church, because Dionysius who
for his time most exactly describes Dionys. Ecclesiast hierarch. cap 4.
the ceremonies of the Church, makes no mention of it. Lauacro quotid^^^o
(...) die pe^ tot (...) m^l^^ abstinemus: Die dominico reiunium nefas ducimus
vel de geniculis adorare. Eadem immunitate (...) in Pentecosten vsque gaudemus.
Not to wash for a week after baptism, not to fast or pray kneeling upon the
Sunday, or betwixt Easter and Whitsontide, were also but positive ceremonies,
subject to the discretion of the Church, used in some places and times, and not
in other, insomuch that in part they are grown out of use even in the Curch of
Rome, and therefore come not within the compass of traditions, as we here
dispute of them. Eucharistae Sacramentu^ and in te^pore victas, etc. etiam
aniel^canis caetibus nec de aliorum quam praesidentium manu suntimus.
To receive the Sacrament at the hands of the Bishop or Ministers, is the
institution of Christ, and we are taught it by the written word, but either to
do it in the morning before day, or at the time of other feeding, was a mere
arbitrarie and indifferent thing, and the Church of Rome now uses it at
neither time. Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs annua die facimu^.
Offerings yearly made for the dead and for birthdaies, were first brought in
by the heretic Montanus, to whom now Tertullian had addicted himself, and of
whom the ecclesiastical history testifies, that Eusebius. hist. eccl. lib. 5.
cap. 16. Sub praetextu and nomine oblationum munerum captatione^ artificiose
co^mentus est.
under the pretense and name of offerings, he cunningly devised the taking of
rewards and gifts. And although the one of them by the plausible color of it
took such fast hold, as that the stream thereof has run into the lakes and
puddles of the Church of Rome, yet the other was soon rejected, or not at all
admitted, but only amongst his fellows, Origin testifying that Christians
Origin. in Job. lib 3. Nos no^ natiuitatis die^ celebram^s sed mortis, etc and
in Le^i^t hom. 8 Nemo ex omnibus sanctis inuenitur dum festu^, etc. egisse in
die natalis su^.
did not celebrate their birthday, and that it was not found that any of the
Saints had made a festival day of his birthday. Calicis aut panis etiam
nostri aliquid in terra^ decuti anxit pa timur.
Not to endure to have any part of the Sacrament fall to the ground, is a part
of that 1. Cor 14.40.
decency and reverence which the Scripture requires to be used in sacred and
holy things; or if he speak it of ordinary bread and drink, the Scripture
also teaches, that of those good blessings of God, John. 6.12.
nothing should be lost. The use of Ad omne^ progressum atque promotum ad omne^
aditura et exitu^, ad vestitum and calceatum, ad lauacra, ad men sai, ad
lumina, ad cubilia, ad sedilia, quaecunque nos conuersatio exercet, frontem
crucis signaculo cer^nus.
the sign of the cross was ceremonial also, no matter of doctrine and faith,
but only an occasion of remembrance, and a token of the profession thereof,
which in discretion for temporary consideration was begun, and by like
discretion cause so requiring, might be left again. Our Church in some part,
where it is most free from Popish abuse, uses the sign of the cross, and yet
well knows, that unwritten traditions, as the name is understood in this
disputation, are not justified thereby. We doubt not as touching outward vsages
and ceremonies, as touching positive constitutions and ordinances of the
Church, but that under the name of traditions, according to the circumstances
before expressed, they may be commanded, and are to be obeyed, though they be
not contained in the Scripture, but for matter of faith and of the worship of
God, we deny that any thing may be admitted beside the written word, and
Tertullians instances are too weak to serve Master Bishops turn to prove
the contrary. To be short, it appears plainly by Tertullian, that the
Catholic Church defended then against heretics the same that we now defend
against the Papists, that pretense of Tradition without authority of Scripture
avails not; and therefore that the Papists under the name of Catholics are
indeed heretics, wrestling and fighting against the Church.

11 W. BISHOP.
Come we now unto his second testimony out of S. Jerome, In cap. 23. Math.
who writing (as he says) of an opinion, that S. John Baptist was killed,
because he foretold the coming of Christ (the good man would say, Zachary S.
John's Father, for the Scripture shows plainly why S. John lost his head Math.
14.
) But S. Jerome there says, this Because it has not authority from
Scriptures, may as easily be contemned as approved. Out of which particular, M.
Perkins (showing himself a doughtie Logitian) would enforce an universal,
that forsooth all may be contemned that is not proved by Scripture. As if you
would prove no Protestant to be skillful in the art of true reasoning, because
M. Perkins behaues himself in it so unskillfully. But S. Jerome in the same
place declares why that might be as easily reproved as allowed, not having any
ground in the Scripture, because (says he) It is taken out of the dreams of
some Apocryphal vvritings, opposing Scripture to other improoued writings, and
not to approved Traditions; to which (he says in his Dialogues against the
Luciferians, before the middle,) That the Church of God does attribute the like
authority, as it does unto the written Law.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins indeed mistook in naming John Baptist in steed of Zachary the
father of John Baptist, but it is no matter of consequence for his advantage,
and therefore might easily be pardoned by Master Bishop, who for advantage
has made many greater and fouler faults. Hieron. in Math. 23.
Some, says Hierome, will have Zachary (who is said to have been slain
betwixt the temple and the altar) to be meant of the father of John Baptist,
auouching out of the dreams of Apocryphal books, that he was slain because
he foretold the coming of our Savior. Hec quia ex Scriptures non habet
authoritatem, eadem facilitate conte^nitur quae probatur.
This, says he, because it has not authority out of the Scriptures, is as
easily contemned as approved. Where M. Perkins does not out of a particular
enforce an universal, as M. Bishop pretends, but rightly alleges, that
Hieromes words containing a minor proposition and a conclusion, must by rules
of Logic imply a mayor proposition for the inferring thereof. This has no
authority out of the Scriptures; therefore it may be as easily contemned as
approved. Why so, but only because whatsoever has not authority of
Scripture, is as easily contemned as approved? The argument contained in
Hieromes words, cannot stand good but by this supply, and so it is not the
inferring of an universal from a particular, but the proving of the particular
by the universal, according to due course. But M. Bishop tells us, that the
cause why that story might as well be reproved as allowed, was because it was
taken out of the dreams of some Apocryphal writings. Which what is it but to
use a shift in steed of an answer, the sentence being in it self entier, and
absolutely giving the cause of the rejecting of that story, because it had no
authority out of Scripture? Yea, if it be true which M. Bishop says of
traditions, Hieromes argument proves to be nothing worth. For though this were
written in Apocryphal books, and had no proof of Scripture, yet it might be
confirmed by tradition, and therefore it follows not, that because it was
written in Apocryphal books, and had no proof of Scripture, it should
hereupon be rejected. Aug. de ciu. Dei lib. 15. cap. 23. In Apocryphis etsi
inuenitur aliqua veritas, tamen propter nonnulla falsa nulla est Canonica
authoritas.
In the Apocryphal writings, says Austine, some truth is found, albeit
because there are many things also false, they have no canonical authority.
If this therefore notwithstanding it were written in Apocryphal books might be
true, then it might be confirmed by tradition, and therefore not to be
contemned, and thereof it follows, that Hieromes reason of rejecting it for
wanting authority of Scripture, is worth nothing. Which if M. Bishop will not
say, then let him acknowledge that Hieromes meaning simply is this, that there
is no necessity for us to believe, what authority of Scripture does not
confirm, saying no other thing therein, but what elsewhere he makes good,
reasoning both ways, Hieron. aduer. Heluid. Naetum Deu^ esse de virgin
credimus, quia legimus: Mariam nupsisse post partum non credimus quia non
legimus.
We believe it, because we read it; we believe it not, because we do not read
it. And surely if Hierome had had here any conceit of tradition without
Scripture, he would not have left this matter thus indifferently, as easily to
be contemned as approved, but would simply have contemned it, because tradition
had given another cause of the death of Zachary, namely for that he affirmed
Mary the mother of Jesus, to be still a virgin, and accordingly placed her in
the temple in a place which was appointed only for virgins and maidens.
Whereof Origin says: Orige^ in Mat. tract. 26. Venit ad nos traditio talis,
etc.
Such a tradition has come to us, and Basil: Basil. de humana Christi gener.
Zachariae historia quada^ qua ex traditione adnos vsque peruenit.
A story of Zachary by tradition has come to us, and in like manner
Theophylact: Theophyl. in Math. cap. 23. Habet^ta narratio nobis tradita.
Thus has a narration delivered by tradition to us. If this then being
delivered by tradition, yet auailed so little in the Church, because it wanted
the authority of Scripture, we may well conceive that Hieromes meaning was
plain, that tridition howsoever colorable it seem to be, yet is of no moment
or credit without the Scripture. As for the other words alleged by Master
Bishop that Hieron. adu. Lucifer. Luciferianus dixit, etc. Nam and multa alta
quae per traditione^ in ecclesijs obseruantur, authoritate^ sibi scriptae legis
vsurpauerunt.
to traditions the Church of God does attribute the like authority as it does
unto the written law, they are set down for the words of a Luciferian
schismatike, and the example thereof taken from a Montanist heretic, even from
Tertullian, of whom was spoken in the former section, insomuch that some of
Velutin lauacro ter caput mergitare, deinde egressos lactis and mellis
praegustare concordia^, etc. die dominico and per omnem Pentecosten, nec de
geniculis adorare et ieiunium soluere.
the instances of traditions used by Tertullian, are there set down in
Tertullians own words. And yet by those instances it appears, that the words
come not within the compass of our question, because he speaks only of
ceremonial customs and observations which are temporal and occasional, not
of matters of doctrine and faith, which are necessary and perpetual, which
though they had in time grown to be alike in practice and use, as if they had
been written, yet in judgment and doctrine were not holden to be alike, and
therefore for the most part have ceased since to be observed even in the Church
of Rome.

12 W. BISHOP.
Master Perkins. His third Author is Saint Augustine. Lib. 2. de doct. Chri.
cap. 9.
In those things which are plainly set down in Scriptures, are found all
those points which contain faith and manners of living well.

Answer. All things necessary to be believed of every simple Christian, under
pain of damnation, that is, the Articles of our Belief, are contained in the
Scriptures, but not the resolution of harder matters, much less of all
difficulties, which the more learned must expressly believe, if they will be
saved, which distinction S. Augustine elsewhere does signify: De peccatoru^
meritis cap. vlt.
and is gathered out of many other places of his works, as in that matter of
rebaptizing them, who became Catholics, after they had been baptized by
heretics. He says, Lib. 5. de bapt. contra Donat. cap. 23.
The Apostles truly have commanded nothing hereof (in their writings) but that
custom which was laid against S. Cyprian, is to be believed to have flowed
from an Apostolical tradition, as there be many things which the universal
Church holds, and therefore are to be believed. The same says he of the
custom of the Church in baptizing infants. De genes. ad letra. lib. 10. cap.
23.
And in his Epist. 174. of the word (...) that is not in the holy Scripture,
and yet nevertheless is defended to be used in the assertion of faith. As also
(says he) we never read in those books that the Father is unbegotten, and
yet we hold that he is so to be called. Lib. 3. cap. 3. cont. max. Arianum.
And Saint Augustine holds that the holy Ghost is to be adored, though it be
not written in the word. The like of the perpetual Virginity of our blessed
Lady, Heresi. 4.
out of which and many more such like, we gather most manifestly that Saint
Augustine thought many matters of faith not to be contained in the written
word, but to be taken out of the Churches treasury of Traditions.

R. ABBOT.
It is strange to see here what stutting and stammering the man uses, loath to
confess the truth, and yet forced by the very evidence thereof, in a manner
fully to subscribe unto it. I pray thee gentle Reader to mark well the words
of Austine, that are here alleged. Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9. In
ijs quae a perte posita sunt in Scripturis inueniuntur illa omnia quae con^nent
fidem mo ^esque vivendi.
In those things, says he, which are plainly set down in the Scriptures, are
found all those things which contain faith and behavior of life. He says not
barely, in the Scriptures, but in those things which are plainly set down in
the Scriptures; nor that some special matters of faith are found, but all
those things are found, which contain faith and conversation of life. Now how
nicely does M. Bishop mince the matter. All things, says he, necessary to be
believed of every simple Christian under pain of damnation, are contained in
the Scriptures, as if S. Austin spoke here only of simple Christians, and not
of those that are of learning and knowledge, when as his drift is in this
book, to teach the Preacher how to conceive of the Scriptures for his own
use. Then he restrains all those necessary things, to the articles of our
belief, whereas S. Austine expounds himself as touching Spem scilicet and
charitatem de quibus superiore libro traectauimus.
hope and charity, of which he had entreated in the former book. Then he
excepteth the resolution of harder matters and many difficulties which the
learned must expressly believe, when as S Austine says, that in the Scriptures
are found all those things which contain faith and conversation of life,
insomuch that we have heard him Suprae. sect. 8.
before pronounce a curse to an Angel from heaven, who either concerning
Christ, or the Church of Christ, or any thing belonging to our faith and life,
shall preach any thing but what we have received in the scriptures of the Law
and the Gospel. But yet if they will have S. Austins words to be understood of
all things necessary to be believed of every simple Christian, we would gladly
know why they require every simple man, under pain of damnation, to believe
the Popes supremacy, his succession from Peter, the power of his pardons, the
validity of his dispensations, to believe their doctrine of the Mass, of
Purgatory, of invocation of Saints, of prayer for the dead, of worshipping
idols and images, and a thousand such other devices, when as these are not
found in any plain places of Scripture, nay when as the plain text of
Scripture is clearly and manifestly against them. Thou must understand, gentle
Reader, that M. Bishop gives not this answer in earnest, but the evidence of
S. Austines words being so pregnant against him, somewhat he must say for the
present, to color the matter, howsoever it be otherwise contrary to his own
defense. It is not for their thrift to grant that what concerns every simple
Christian upon pain of damnation is plainly set down in Scripture; to
believe so, is the marring of a great part of their harvest. But alas in this
case what should he do? if Saint Austine say it, it is not for him to speak
against it; only what he loses here, he must do his best to recover other
where. But for this lame answer, whereby he in part confesses the truth
against himself, and yet labors in part to conceal it and keep it back,
he seeks patronage from another place of Austine, saying that Saint Austine
elsewhere does signify that distinction. He notes in the margent de
peccatorum meritis cap. vltimo, but which book it is of the three, he notes
not, nor what the words are. Now in the last chapters of the first and third
book, there is nothing incident to this purpose, but that which S. Austine
says in the last chapter of the second book, is such as that we need not
wonder that M. Bishop did forbear to set down his words. For having there in
question whether the soul be ex traduce, that is, whether it be derived and
propagated by generation, with other points thereupon depending, he says that
the matter is August. de peccat. mer. and remiss lib. 2. cap. 36. Disputatione^
desiderat eo moderamine tempe ratam vt magis inquisitio cauta lau litur, quam
praecipitata reprehendatur assertio. Vbi enim de re obscurissima disputatur,
non adinuantibu^ diuinarum Scripturarum certu clarisque documentis cohibere se
debet humana praesu^ptio nihil faciens in alteram partem declinando.
with such moderation to be handled, as that a man may be rather commended for
inquiring warily, then reproved for affirming rashly. For (says he) where
question is of a very obscure matter, without the help of sure and evident
testimonies or instructions of holy Scriptures, the presumption of man is to
withhold it self, doing nothing by inclining either way. But he goes on yet
further: Ibid. Etsi enim quod libet horum quem admodum demonstrari and
explicari possit ignorem, illud tamen credoquod etiam hinc diuinorum eloquioru^
clarssimae esset authoritat, si homo illud sine dispendio promissa salutis
ignorare non posset.
For albeit I know not how any of these points (mentioned before) may be
declared and made plain, yet I believe that the authority of the words of God
should be most clear concerning them, if man without damage of salvation
promised might not be ignorant thereof. In which words we see Saint Austine
mentioning difficult and hard questions, but we see withal that he denies the
determining of any such without assured and clear testimonies of holy
Scripture, affirming that he believes that there should be clear authority
of Gods word for the deciding of them, if man (and not only simple men)
without loss of salvation might not be without knowledge of them. Hereby then
he most evidently testifies, that whatsoever is necessary for the salvation
of mankind, has clear and evident testimony of holy Scripture, and that what
has not so, we are to surcease from defining any thing of it. How lewdly then
does M. Bishop deal, to make his Reader believe that Saint Austine says for
him, that the resolution of harder points and difficulties, which yet the
learned must expressly believe, are not contained in the Scriptures? But yet he
tells us, that that is also gathered out of many other places of his works,
and yet out of all those places alleges not any part or point of doctrine
which Austine himself does not undertake to justify by the Scriptures. It
has been before declared, that when we say that all matters of doctrine and
faith are contained in the Scripture, we understand as the ancient Fathers
did, not that all things are literally and verbally contained in the Scripture,
but that all are either expressed therein, or by necessary illation and
consequence to be derived from thence. S. Hierome doubts not to say as we do,
Hieron. contra Heluid. Sicut haec quae scripta sunt, non negamus, ita ea quae
non sunt scripta renuimus.
What things are written, we do not deny; but what are not written, we reject:
and yet in the same book he says also, that it is Jbid. Sanctae Scripturae
idioma, etc. ea de quibus posset ambigi si no^ fuissent scripta, signari;
caetera vero nostrae intelligentiae derelinqui.
the property of the holy Scripture, that those things whereof there might be
doubt if they were not written, are set down, but other things are left to our
understanding to collect and gather them thereby. And in this sense Saint
Austine says, August. cont. Maxim Arian. lib. 3. cap 3. Ex ijs quae legimus
aliquae etiam quae legimus intelligimus.
By those things which we read, we understand some things also which we do not
read. Thus does the same Saint Austine sometimes say, that the Church
receives some things that are not written, not that those things are not to be
proved and defended by the Scriptures, but only that they are not literally
expressed in the Scriptures. And so it appears in the first instance produced
by M. Bishop as touching the rebaptizing of them who became Catholics after
they had been baptized by heretics. For although Saint Austine say, that Jdem
de Bapt. contra Donatist. l. 5. cap. 23. Apostoli nihil exinde praeceperunt,
sed consuetudo illa quae opponebatur Cypriano ab eoru^ traditione exordium
sumpsisse credenda est.
the Apostles commanded nothing thereof, but that the custom which was
opposed to Cyprian was to be believed to have flowed from an Apostolical
tradition, yet he himself disputes that point against the Donatists
continually by the Scripture, refuses to have the matter decided but only by
the Scripture, and in the first propounding thereof says very plainly to them,
Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 7. Ne humanis argumentis id agere videar, etc. ex Euangelio
profero ceriae documenta quibus demonstro quam recte placuerit and vere
secundum Deu^, vt hoc in quoquae^ schismatico vel heretico ecclesiastica
medicina curaret in quo vulnere separabatur, illud aute^ quod sanu^ maneret
agnitu^ potius approbaretur, quam improbatu^ vulneraretur.
That I seem not to deal by humane arguments (namely for that a general
Council has so confirmed) I bring assured proofs out of the Gospel, whereby
I show how rightly and truly according to God it thus seemed good to them, that
ecclesiastical medicine should cure that in an heretic or schismaticke
wherein he is wounded and separated from the Church, ^ut that which remains
sound should rather be acknowledged and approved, then by being disallowed
should be wounded. To omit many other places that might be alleged to the same
purpose, soon after the words alleged by M. Bishop, he says thus, Ibid. lib
5. cap 23. Contrae maendatu^ Dei est quod venientes ab haereticis si illic
baptismu^ Christi acceperunt, baptizantur, quia sanctaru^ scripturaru^
testimonijs piane ostenditur, etc.
It is against the commandment of God, that men coming from heretics
should be baptized, if there they have received the Baptism of Christ, because
by testimonies of holy Scripture it is plainly showed thus and thus. Literally
therefore and as touching matter of fact and example, Saint Austine speaks of
it as not written in the Scripture, but by Tradition so accustomed, because
there is nothing expressly mentioned thereof, but yet shows that therefore
this Tradition was accepted and approved, because by testimonies of Scripture
it was confirmed to be right, Ibidem. lib. 4. cap. 7 Quia been perspectis ex
vtroque litere disputationis rationibus and Scripturarum testimonijs, potest
etiam dici, Quod veritas declarauit, hoc sequimur.
because the reasons and testimonies of Scripture being well considered on both
sides of that controversy, it might be said, What the truth has declared,
that we follow. And thus it is true which S. Austine adds in the place cited,
Lib. 5. cap. 23. Sicut sunt multa quae vniuersa tenet Ecclesia, and ob hoc ab
Apostolis praecepta been creduntur, quanquam scripta non repertiantur.
that there are many things which the whole Church holds, and for that cause
are believed to have come from the Apostles, albeit they be not found set down
in Scripture, because they be not namely and word for word set down in
Scripture, albeit they be to be justified by those things that are there set
down. Of this kind is that which M. Bishop names in the next place, of the
custom of the church in baptizing infants, which Austin says De Genes. ad.
liter. lib. 10. cap. 23. Nec omnino credenda nisi Apostolica esse traditio.
is to be believed to be no other but an Apostolic tradition, and we also
acknowledge no less. But what? did Austin hold it a tradition that could not
be proved and warranted by the scripture? Nothing less. For he himself
against the Pelagian heretics proves the necessity thereof by the
Scriptures, August. epist. 89. Dicunt infantem morte praeuentum non baptizatum
perire non posse, quo^^am sine peccato nascitur, etc. Dicit Apostolus, Per vnum
hominem, etc. Jdeo non est superfluus baptismus paruulorum, vt qui per
generationem illi condemnationi obligati sunt, per regenerationem liberentur.
They say (says he) that an infant not being baptized cannot perish, because
he is borne without sin: but the Apostle says, By one man sin entered into
the world, and by sin came death, and so death went over all, forasmuch as
all have sinned, etc. Therefore the baptism of infants is not superfluous,
that they who by generation are bound to condemnation, by regeneration may be
delivered from it. And in another place against the Donatists, De Baptis. lib.
4. cap. 24. Si quisquam hac in re authoritatem diuinam quaerat, etc. Veraciter
conijcere possumus quid valeat in par^^^^s Baptimi sacramentum ex circumcisione
carnis quam prior populus accepit.
If any man (says he) desire divine authority in this behalf, we may truly
conjecture what the sacrament of Baptism avails in infants, by the
circumcision of the flesh which the former people received. So by the rest of
the Fathers sundry arguments are taken from the Scriptures for the justifying
of that custom, and Bellarm de sa^ram Baptism. lib 1. cap 8
Bellarmine himself by the Scriptures proves that infants are to be baptized,
and therefore full weakly does M. Bishop deal to bring this for proof of
their Traditions, that is, of doctrines beside the Scripture. In his other
objections he is as idle as in any of these, or rather more idle. The Arian
heretic presses Austine to show where the word (...) is read in the
Scriptures. Saint Austine answers him, that August. Epist. 174. Respondebatur
a nobis quia nos Latin loqueremur and illud Graecum esset, prius quaren^ on
esset quid sit Homousion, and tunc exigendum vt in libris sanctis ostenderetur,
etc. quia et si fortasse nomen ipsum non inueniretur, restamen ipsa
inueniretur. Quid est enim contentiosius quam vbi de reconstat, certare de nomen
(...) was a Greek word, and they spoke Latin, and therefore it was first to
be set down what is meant by (...), and then to be required in the scriptures,
because albeit the word perhaps be not found there, yet the thing it self is
found. For what greater wrangling is there, then to contend about the word,
when there is a certainty of the thing? Where we see M. Bishop in the place
which he himself cites, condemned for a contentious wrangler, that thus
urges the word consubstantiall as a tradition beside the Scripture, when as
the thing it self and matter imported by it, is contained in the Scripture, yea
and S. Austin himself in the same place proves it by the Scripture, and
elsewhere asks of the Arian heretic, Idem. contrae Maximin. lib. 3. cap 14.
Quid est Homousion, nisi, Ego and Pater vnum sumus.
What is Homousion, consubstantiall, but, I and my father are one? By the other
word unbegotten he takes advantage against the Arian, who had set down that
term in the confession of his faith concerning God the Father. He demands
of him whether the Scripture had used that word, which not being found, and yet
approved, he concludes: Jdem. epi. 174. Vides posse fieri vt etia^ de verbo
quod in scriptura Dei non est, reddatur tamen ratio vnde recte dici ostendatur:
sic ergo and homousion quod in authoritate diuinorum librorum cogebamur
ostendere, etiamsi vocabulu^ ipsum ibi non inuentamus, fieri posse vt illud
inueniamus cut hec vocabulu^ recte adhibitum iudicetur.
Thou see that it may be, that of a word which is not set down in Scripture,
yet reason may be given to show that it is rightly spoken: so therefore
consubstantiall also, which we were required to show by authority of
Scripture, albeit we find not the very word there, yet it may be that we find
that to which the word may be judged to be rightly applied. In these words
therefore there is nothing imported but what we are instructed by the
Scriptures; the meaning is there, though the letters and syllables be not
there. In like sort the case stands with his other instance of the holy Ghost
to be adored, which we may wonder that he should be so impudent, or rather so
impious, as to make an example of traditions beside the Scripture, as if the
Scriptures did not prove that the holy Ghost is to be worshipped, when as S.
Austine proves it there against the Arian no otherwise but by the Scriptures.
But as touching all these points concerning the Godhead, let that suffice which
Thomas Aquinas has given for a rule, that Thom. Aquin. sum. p. 1. qu. 36. art.
2. ad 1. De Deo dicere non debemus quod in sacra Scriptura non inuenitur vel
per verba vel per sensum. Licet per verba non inueniatur in sacra scriptura
quod spiritus sanctus procedit a Filio, inuenitur tamen quantum ad sensum.
concerning God we ought to say nothing which is not found in Scripture either
in words or in meaning. Whereof he says for example, Though in very words it
be not found in holy Scripture that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son,
yet in sense and meaning it is there found. To this our assertion accords,
that no matter of faith or doctrine is to be admitted but what either in words
or in sense is contained in the Scriptures. Let M. Bishop show us the sense of
their Traditions in the Scriptures, and we will receive them, though we find
not the words; but if he allege for Traditions beside the Scripture, those
things the sense and meaning whereof is in the Scriptures, though the words be
not, he abuses his Reader, and says nothing against us. For this matter I
refer thee further (gentle Reader) to that which has been said Sect. 11.
before in answer of his Epistle to the King. As touching the perpetual
virginity of the blessed virgin, what we are to conceive, has been before
declared. S. Austin August. haeres. 56 and 84.
affirms it, but not under the name of a tradition: and Hierome when he would
maintain it against Hieron. aduer. Heluid. Ipsa Scripturarum verba ponenda
sunt, etc. Non credimus quia non legimus.
Heluidius, took upon him no otherwise to maintain it but only by the
Scripture, thereby showing that he took tradition to be a very weak and
uncertain ground. Now therefore it plainly appears that S. Austin has
pulled down the churches treasury of traditions, because M. Bishop can bring
nothing to the contrary, but that he plainly and truly meant that which he
said, that in those things which are plainly set down in Scripture, are found
all things belonging to our faith and conversation of life, and thereby leaves
no place to M. Bishops matters of faith that are not contained in the written
word.

13. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins his last testimony is taken out of Vincentius Lyrinensis, who
says (as he reports) that the canon of the Scripture is perfect and fully
sufficient for all things.

Answ. I think that there is no such sentence to be found in him the says by
way of objection, What need we make recourse unto the authority of the
Ecclesiastical understanding, if the Canon of the Scripture be perfect? He
affirms not that they be fully sufficient to determine all controversies in
religion, but through all his book he proves out the clean contrary, that no
heresy can be certainly confuted and suppressed by only Scriptures, without
we take with it the sense and interpretation of the Catholic Church.

R. ABBOT.
The words of Vincentius are uttered first by way of objection thus: Vincen.
Lyrin. Hic forsitan requirat aliquis, cum sit perfectus Scripturarum canon,
sibique ad omnia satis superque sufficiat, quid opus est vt et Ecclesiasticae
intelligentiae ^ungatur authoritas
Some man happily may ask, seeing the Canon of Scriptures is perfect, and in it
self abundantly sufficient for all matters, what needs it that the authority
of Ecclesiastical understanding should be joined unto it? He has taught a man
in the words before to ground and settle his faith, Duplici modo fidem munire:
primo diuinae legis authoritate tum deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae traditione.
first by the authority of the law of God, and then by the tradition of the
Catholic Church, meaning by tradition, as appears, the interpretation or
exposition of Scripture delivered by the Church, not any matters of doctrine to
be received beside the Scripture. Hereupon he asks the question, seeing the
Scripture is abundantly sufficient, what need is there to add the tradition of
the Church? taking it for a thing received, and by all men approved, that the
Scripture in it self is abundantly sufficient to instruct us every way and in
all things belonging to faith and godliness, and therefore making it a doubt
why the other should be needful. And that we may understand that he meant it
not only by way of objection, but positiuely, in the repeating of the same
points afterward, he sets down this exception and reason, Jbid. Non quia
canon solas non sibi ad vniuersa sufficiat sed quia verba diuina plerique pro
suo arbitratis interpretantes, varias opiniones erroresque concipiant.
Not but that the Canon alone is in it self sufficient for all things, but
because many interpreting the words of God as they list, do conceive diverse
opinions and errors there from. M. Bishops answer then is false, that
Vincentius affirms not that the Scriptures be fully sufficient to determine
all controversies in religion, for Vincentius affirms it peremptorily, and
therefore teaches us to shun them who after the Scriptures and interpretation
thereof teach us that there are yet other matters of Christian doctrine and
faith that are not contained in the Scriptures. M. Bishop tells us that
through all his book he proves the contrary. But what is that contrary? Marry
that no heresy can be certainly confuted and suppressed by only Scriptures
without we take with it the sense and interpretation of the Catholic Church.
Whereby we see that either he has not read that book of Vincentius, or does
impudently falsify that which he has read. True it is that Vincentius in
respect that heretics do often very guilefully allege the Scriptures, and
wrest them to the maintenance and defense of their new devices, does refer a
man for his safety to the judgment and resolution of the Catholic church,
not as they loudly bear us in hand, of the church of Rome, as if by it the
Catholic Church were to be understood, but so as Vt id teneamus quod vbique,
quod semper, quod a omnibus creditu^ est; hoc est etenim vere proprieque
Catholicu^ quod ipsa vis nominis ra^ieque declarat, quae omnia vere
vniuersaliter comprebendit.
that we hold that which has been believed every where, and always, and of
all: for this (says he) is truly and properly Catholic, as the nature and
signification of the word declares, which indeed comprehends universally
all. Hereto he frames those rules of antiquity, universality and consent,
idly bragged of many times by the Papists, when as according to the
declarations of Vincentius they are not able to make good any one point of
their doctrine oppugned by us, but in diverse and sundry points are convicted
thereby. But the matter that touches M. Bishop very nearly, is the restraint
and limitation of this rule, which he says is Quae tamen antiquae sanctorum
Patrum consensio non in omnibus diuinae legis quaestiunculis sed solum certe
praecipue in fidei regula mag no nobis studio and inuestigandae and sequenda
est.
not to be followed in all questions of the word of God, but only or chiefly
in the rule of faith, whereby he means those things that concern the
articles of the Creed: In ijs duntaxat praecipue quaestionibus quibus tetius
Catholici dogmatis fundamenta nituntur.
in those questions, as he repeateth afterward, upon which the foundations of
the whole Catholic faith do rest. It is untrue then which M. Bishop says,
that Vincentius holds no heresy to be suppressed or confuted but by the
tradition of the Catholic Church, when as he applies his rule only or at
least chiefly to those heresies which touch the maine pillars and foundations
of Christian faith. And it is yet further untrue, because Vincentius further
adds, that Sed neque semper neque omnes haereses hoc modo impugnandae sunt,
sed nouitiae recentesque tantummodo, cum primum scilitet exoriuntur, antequam
infalsarint vetustae fidei regulas; ipsius temporis vetentur augustijs; ac
priusquam mananie latus veneno, maiorum volumina vitiare conentur. Caeterum si
dilatatae and inueteratae hareses nequaquam hac via aggrediendae sunt, eo quod
prolixo ten porum tractu longa ijs furandae veritatis patuerit occasio. Atque
ideo quascunque illas antiquiores vel schismatum vel haereseo^n prophanitatet
nullo mod^ nos oportet nisi aut sola, si opus est. Scripturarum authoritate
conuincere, aut certe iam antiquitus vniuersalibus sacerdotum Catholicorum
Concilijs conuictas damnatasque vitare.
neither always nor yet all heresies are to be impugned in that sort, but
only those that are new and fresh, namely when as they first spring up, before
they have falsified the rules of ancient faith, and are therein hindered by
the straitness of the time, and before (the poison spreading further abroad)
they labor to corrupt the books of the ancient Fathers. But heresies that are
far spread, and are grown old, are not to be set upon in this sort, because by
long tract and continuance of time they have had great opportunity to steal
the truth. And therefore as touching all profane heresies and schisms that
are grown old, we are in no sort to do otherwise, but either to convince them,
if need be, by only authority of Scripture, or else to avoid them, being
aunciently convicted and condemned by general Council of Catholic Bishops.
Where we see that Vincentius affirms directly contrary to that that M. Bishop
reports of him, that heresies are not always to be dealt with by those rules
that he has before set down, yea that heresies that have continued long, and
have been far spread, are no otherwise to be convicted but by only
authority of Scripture. And thereof he gives reason, for that they have had
time and opportunity to falsify the rules of faith, and to corrupt the books
and writings of the ancient Fathers, which heretics always labor to do, so
that the doctrine of faith cannot safely be ieoparded upon their consent. Now
whatsoever M. Bishop and his fellows dream of this book, this rule does so
fit us, as if Vincentius had purposely studied to instruct us in what sort we
ought to deal against them, and to justify the course that we have used in
that behalf. Antichrist has set up his kingdom aloft in the Church, and the
whore of Babylon has sitten like a Queen for many ages past. She has
fulfilled that that was prophesied of her, that Apoc. 14.8.
she should make all nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornications. Chap. 17.2.
The Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the
inhabitants of the earth have been drunk with the wine of her fornications.
She has had Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 38 Rex superbiae prope est and quod dici
nefas est, sacordotum est praeparatus exercitus, etc.
an army of Priests, according to the saying of Gregory, an army of Monks
and Friars, of Schoolmen and Canonists, who have bin her agents and factors
for the uttering of her merchandise and the upholding of her state. They have
used their endeavor to the uttermost for the corrupting Erasm. Epist. ad
Warram. Archiepis Caniuar. apud Hieron.
of the ancient monuments of the Church. They have made away many of the
writings of the Fathers, they have falsified those that remain, they have
foisted in bastards and counterfeits under their names. Most lewdly and
shamefully Ludou. Viues de cause. corrupt. art. Adscripta sunt Origeni,
Cypriavo, Hieronymo, Augustino quae ipsis nunquam ne per qui^tem quidem in
mentem venerant, indigna non solum tantia ingenijs atque illa eruditione, sed
etiam seruis cor^ siquos Scythas habuerunt aut Seres.
they have fathered upon Origin, Hierom, Cyprian, Austin (and the rest) such
things as they never dreamed of, unworthy not only of their conceit and
learning, but even of their slaves, if they had any, that were Scythians and
Barbarians. By the names of such renowned authors, they have sought to gain
credit to devices of their own, such as the ancient Church was never
acquainted with. Now therefore Vincentius his rule stands good on our part,
that inasmch as they have had so long time and opportunity to steal away the
truth, and to falsify the Fathers writings, therefore we are to convict them
by authority of Scripture only, knowing it to be true which Chrysostom
says, that Chrysostom. oper. imperf. in Math. hom. 49. Ex qu^ heresis obtinuit
Ecclesias nulla probatio potest esse verae Christianitatis, neque refugium
potest esse Christianorum aliud volentium cognoscere fidei veritatem nisi
Scripturae divine, etc Nullo modo cognoscitur volentibus cognoscere quae sit
vera Ecclesia Christi, nisi tantummodo per Scripturas, etc. Sciens Dominus
tantam confusionem rerum in nouissimis diebus esse futuram, ideo mandat vt
Christiani volentes firmitatem accipere fidei verae ad nullam rem fugiant, nisi
ad Scripturas. Alioqui si ad alia respexerint, scandalizabuntur and peribunt,
non intelligentes qua sit vera Ecclesia, and per hoc incident in abhominationem
desolationis qua stabit in sanctis Ecclesiae locis.
since heresies have gotten foot in the Church, there is no proof of true
Christianity, nor other refuge for Christians desirous to know the truth of
faith, but only the Scriptures of God: no way for them that are desirous to
know which is the true Church of Christ, but only by the Scriptures. Our Lord
(says he) knowing that there should be so great confusion of things in the
last days, does therefore will that Christians desirous to receive assurance of
true faith, should fly to nothing but only to the Scriptures. Otherwise if
they look to any thing else, they shall stumble and perish, not understanding
which is the true Church, and thereby shall light upon the abomination of
desolation which shall stand in the holy places of the Church. Now therefore we
have done nothing but that that in the course of Christianity is just and
right, to call the trial of the controversies and questions of religion to the
authority of the Scriptures only, and to teach men therein only to repose
the certainty and assurance of their faith. Albeit by the singular providence
of almighty God it has come to pass, that in antiquity, as we have the same
remaining unto us, there is yet light sufficient to discover the apostasies and
abominations of the Church of Rome, to justify the truth of God against their
falsehood and lies, and to make it appear that we do rightly and truly apply
the Scriptures to the reproouing and conuincing thereof, as through this whole
work is most plainly and clearly to be seen. And this is so much the more
manifest for that they themselves have been forced to complain that they are
feign Index Expur. in castig. Bertra^. Cu^ in Catholicis veteribus alijs
plurimos feramus errores and extenuemus, ex cusemus, excogitato commento
persaepe negemus et commodumijs sensu^ affingamus dum opponuntur in
disputationibus aut in conflictionibus cum aduersarijs, etc.
to bear with very many errors (as they call them) in the old Catholic
writers, and to extenuate them, to excuse them, by some devised shift to deny
them, and to set some convenient meaning on them, when they are opposed in
disputations or in conflicts with their adversaries. In many questions we show
the antiquity, the universality, the uniform consent and agreement of the
ancient church for us and against them, and it is strange to see what poor
and miserable shifts, yea what impudent and shameless devices they are driven
to, and yet cannot avail to suppress the light thereof. In a word, it is
plainly found that they have no cause to brag of Vincentius Lyrinensis,
either as doing damage to us, or yielding any gain or advantage to themselves.

14. W. BISHOP.
Thus M Perkins having ended with the Law and Testimony, adds in a postscript
two other slender reasons to his former: the first, that Christ and his
Apostles used always to confirm their doctrine with the testimonies of
Scriptures, and not with Tradition.

Answ. First for our Savior Jesus Christ, be out of his divine wisdom
delivered his doctrine most commonly in his own name, But I say unto you: and
very seldom confirms it with any testimony out of the Law. The Evangelists
do often note how Christ fulfilled the old prophecies; but never or very
seldom seek to confirm his doctrine by testimonies: their own they do
sometimes; but to say they never wrote any thing out of Tradition, proceeds of
most gross ignorance. Where had S. Matthew the adoring of the Sages? S John
Baptists preaching? briefly, that was done before his own conversion, but by
tradition. S. Mark wrote the most part of his Gospel out of Tradition
received from Peter, as witnesses Eusebius Lib. 2. hist. cap. 14.
. S. Luke testifies of himself, that he wrote his whole Gospel Cap. 1.
as he had received it by Tradition from them who were eyewitnesses. What
desperate carelessness was it then to affirm that the Apostles never used
Tradition to confirm any doctrine? when some of them built, not only parcels,
but their whole Gospels upon Traditions?

R. ABBOT.
The reasons seem slender to M. Bishop, but yet the Reader must needs take
them to be very strong, in that they are put off with so slender and weak an
answer. If the doctrine of faith and of the service of God had stood in the old
Testament in any part upon tradition, undoubtedly our Savior Christ would have
made some mention thereof; and as he often refers himself to the Scriptures,
so would sometimes have appealed to tradition also. But that does he never: he
reproves traditions and condemns them, but never uses one word to approve
any. M. Bishop answers, that Christ most commonly delivers his doctrine in
his own name (I say unto you) and very seldom confirms it out of the Law.
But that is a very weak and silly shift, yea there is in it apparent and
manifest untruth. For we find our Savior in the Gospel more often citing and
alleging the Scriptures, then we hear him saying, I say unto you, as every
Reader may observe. Again, where he does say, I say unto you, he teaches us
to understand that John 14, 10.
he speaks not of himself, but what he says, he speaks as Chrysostom
before has taught us to construe it Chrysostom. supra sect. 7.
out of the Law and the Prophets, according to the written word of the law and
the Prophets, delivering no point of doctrine but what has witness and
confirmation from thence. Thirdly, it is much to be observed against M. Bishop,
that where our Savior does most often use those words, Mat. 5.18.20.
I say unto you, he uses them to challenge the written Law from the corruption
of Tradition, and to affirm the original truth thereof. For Tradition had
taught men to understand the law literally only and of outward actions, but he
shows in the commandments Ver 22.28.
of murder and adultery, that the intention of the Law is extended to the
affections of the heart. Tradition had diminished the integrity of the Law,
and taken from it, Ver. 34.
teaching only not to forswear; but he teaches that the truth of the Law
extends to vain and idle swearing. Tradition had added to the Law of it own
device, and where God had said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, by a corrupt
gloss put to it, Thou shall hate thine enemy: but he teaches that the name of
Ver. 44.
a neighbor reaches to them also that are our enemies. Thus he rectifieth
that which Tradition had made crooked, but for Tradition he says nothing.
Surely they that thus perverted the written Law, would have perverted
Traditions also, if there had been any; and Christ would have restored the
integrity thereof, but there is no surmise given us of any such matter. We
hear him often saying, Mat. 19.4.
Have ye not read? and Chap. 21.13.
It is written, and Luke 10.26.
What is written in the law, how read thou? but we never hear him saying,
Have ye not thus received by Tradition? He tells the Saduces, Mat. 22.29.
Ye err, because ye know not the Scriptures: and the cause of the Disciples
error was noted, John 20.9.
As yet they knew not the Scripture: but no where does he note the not knowing
of Tradition for any cause of error. He says, John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, they testify of me, but he never says, search after
Traditions, they are they that testify of me. Mat. 26 54.
How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled, says he, but never mentions
the fulfilling of any thing that was delivered by tradition. Luke 24.27.
He interpreted to his Disciples in all Scriptures the things which were
written of him, but out of Tradition he interpreted nothing unto them. Ver. 45.
He opened their understanding that they might understand the Scriptures, but
we read not of giving them understanding of Traditions. Thus the Evangelists
from place to place, upon diverse occasions do set down Mat. 1.22. and 2.17.
etc.
the fulfilling of those things which were spoken by the Prophets, mentioning
the things which are wri^^en, but never once speak of the fulfilling of
Tradition. And what? will M. Bishop have us to dream as idly as he does,
that there were Traditions from God beside the Scriptures, when we find these
infinite references to the Scriptures, and to Traditions none at all? He tells
us a childish tale, that the Evangelists very seldom confirm Christ's doctrine
by testimonies, but their own they do sometimes, as if the doctrine of the
Evangelists were not the doctrine of Christ; and showing that he is little
acquainted with the reading of the Evangelists, who makes that very seldom
which is so often done. And when it is done, it is done by Scripture only,
never by Tradition; which is the point whereto he should have answered, and he
says nothing to it. Only he lewdly abuses the ignorant Reader, by seeming to
say somewhat, when that which he says is but an impertinent vagary, and
concerns not that that is objected to him. To say that they never wrote any
thing out of tradition (says he) proceeds of most gross ignorance. Where
had Matthew the adoring of the Sages? etc. Pelting brabler, what is this to that
that M. Perkins says? Christ and his Apostles in infinite places confirm that
which they preach by the doctrine of former times; they signify, the
fulfilling of those things which were of old taught unto the people of God.
They never confirm any thing but by Scripture; they mention nothing fulfilled
that was taught by Tradition, but only by Scripture. Tell us M. Bishop how
could this be, if there were Tradition beside the Scripture? We ask you not
whence the Evangelists had the history of those times whereof they wrote, but
how it comes to pass that they never mention anything delivered by tradition
in former times? But these are the iuggling tricks of shifting companions,
deluding the eyes of the simple with shadows and empty colors, maliciously
oppugning the truth when as they have nothing to say against it. In that that
we say, is nothing but what S. Hierom said long ago, Hieron. in Mat. 13.
Quicquid in Euangelio praedicabant, legis and prophetaru^ vocibus comprobaru^t.
Whatsoever the Apostles preached in the Gospel, they preached it by the words
of the law and the Prophets: whereof it follows against M. Bishop, that they
taught no doctrine by tradition, but only by the scriptures As for his
questions, whereas he demands where S. Matthew had the adoring of the Sages and
John Baptists peaching, etc. I answer him first with the like question; where
had Moses the story of the creation of the world, and the knowledge of those
things which God in Genesis 11.6. and 18.17.20.
sundry places is brought in speaking as with himself? I suppose he will
answer, that he received the same from him that made the world, from him that
was the author of those speeches. So say we that Matthew learned the worshipping
of Christ by the Sages of Christ himself whom they worshipped: he learned John
Baptists preaching of him who^ John Baptist preached. He learned his Gospel as
Paul did, who says of himself, Gal. 1.12.
Neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ. As touching the Gospel of S. Mark, Eusebius reports, that the
faithful Eusebius. hist lib. 2. cap. 15. Non suffecran^ illis semel audita, nec
contenti fuerunt non scripta diuinae praedicationis doctrina, sed Marcum
omnigena obsecratione obtestati sunt vt commentarios ipsis doctrinae eius quam
verbo tradita^ accepissent literis comprehensos relinquerent, nec destiterunt
donec viro persuaserint, etc. Aiunt autem Petrum cum ex instinctu spiritus
sancti factum hoc cognonisset, delectatu^ esse virorum istoru^ voluntate and
scriptum hoc Euangelium Ecclesius ad legendu^ authoritate suae confirmasse.
who had heard the preaching of S. Peter, not thinking that sufficient, nor
contented with the doctrine of that divine preaching unwritten, most earnestly
entreated Mark that he would leave them in writing the commentaries or records
of the doctrine which they had delivered unto them by word, and ceased not till
they had persuaded him thereto. Now they say (says he) that the Apostle when
he understood this to have been done by the instinct of the holy Ghost, ioyed
much in the desire of those men, and by his authority warranted this Gospel
in writing to the reading of the Church. Now this story is well worthy to be
observed. The faithful had heard the preaching of Peter: they thought
Tradition to be a very uncertain keeper of the doctrine which they had heard:
they desire to have the same left unto them in writing, to that purpose they
entreat Mark the scholar and follower of Peter; the thing is done by the
instinct of the holy Ghost; Peter acknowledges so much, and by his testimony
approves the Gospel thus written to the reading of the Church. Who would not
here wonder that M. Bishop should allege this story for patronage of his
traditions, which shows that the church from the beginning was so jealous and
fearful of resting upon tradition? S. Luke wrote his story Luke 1.2.
as they delivered who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of
the word, they 2. Cor. 13.3.
in whom Christ spoke, and whose word was 1 Thessalonians. 2 13.
the word of God, the word of the preaching of God. Yea and what he wrote, he
wrote also as S. Mark did by the instinct of the holy Ghost, because as S.
Paul tells us, 2. Tim. 3.16.
all Scripture is given by inspiration of God: and as of prophecy, so of the
Gospel also we must understand that 2. Pet. 1.21.
it came not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved
by the holy Ghost. August de consens. Euangel. lib. 1. cap. 35. Cum ille
scripserunt quae ille ostendit and dixit nequaquam dicendum est quod ipse no
scripserit, quandoquidem membra eius id operata sunt quod dictante capite
cognonerunt. Quicquid enira ille de suis factis and dictis nos legere volun,
hoc scribendum illis tanquam suis manibus imperauit.
When the disciples wrote (says S. Austin) what Christ showed and said unto
the^, it is not to be said that he did not write, because the members wrought
that which they learned by the inditing of the head. For whatsoever he would
have us to read of the things which he did and said, he gave in charge to them
as his hands to write the same. Now therefore the Evangelists grounded not
their Gospels upon Traditions, that is, upon report from man to man, but upon
the immediate oracle and instinct of God himself. But the absurd Sophister
dallieth by an equivocation of the word tradition, and whereas it is questioned
betwixt us in one meaning, he brings proof for it in another meaning. The
word originally may import any thing that is delivered howsoever either by word
or writing. Whatsoever God says unto us, it may in this sort be called Gods
tradition, because he has so delivered unto us. Thus does Cyprian call that
which we read in the written gospel, Cyprian. lib. 2. epist. 3. Adradicem
atque originem traditionis Dominicae reuertatur. In calice dominico offerendo
custodire tradiotionis dominicae veritatem.
the original of the Lords tradition, and wills in the Lords cup to keep
the truth of the Lords tradition. Thus whatsoever we have received in the
Scriptures was first Tradition as delivered by word, and still is Tradition
because it is delivered in writing, tradition signifying whatsoever is
delivered, as before was said. But though the word in it self have this
general and indifferent signification of any thing that is delivered, yet in
our disputation it is restrained to one only manner of delivering, by word and
relation only, and not by Scripture: and therefore where Irenaeus says, Jren.
lib. 3. cap. 1.
Euangeliu^ nobis in Scripturis tradiderunt, he that should translate as M.
Bishop does, they delivered the Gospel by tradition in the Scriptures, should
show himself as absurd a man as M. Bishop is, because he sets down two
opposite members of a distinction, and confounds them both in one. Now then
the question is not in the general signification, whether the Gospel were a
tradition, that is, a thing delivered from God, or whether it were a tradition
by word, that is, a thing delivered by word, but whether of that tradition,
that is, of that doctrine delivered from God by word, any part were left
unwritten to go thenceforth under the name of unwritten tradition. We deny not
but that the whole Law and Gospel is the Lords tradition: we deny not but
that the Evangelists in the history of Christ had things first delivered unto
them by word, which they should afterward commit to writing, although in the
writing thereof inspired of God, John 14.26.
the holy Ghost bringing all things to their remembrance, and guiding them in
what sort they should set them down; but we deny that either in the Law or in
the Gospel there was any thing left unwritten that concerns us to know for
attaining of true faith and righteousness toward God. To come now to the point,
howsoever the Evangelists built their Gospels upon Tradition, that is, upon
that that was then delivered unto them, whether by Christ or by his Apostles,
yet what is this to prove that they confirmed any doctrine, that is, any part
of this tradition now delivered unto them, by tradition of former times, that
is, by any doctrine left unwritten by Moses and the Prophets? This was the
matter in hand, why then does M. Bishop seek thus in a cloud to steal away?
He tells us of desperate carelessness, thinking to carry the matter with
desperate words, but we must tell him, that it is desperate treachery in him
thus to mock his Reader with boisterous babbling, when he says nothing to
prove that that he should, that either the Apostles proved any doctrine by
unwritten tradition of the old Testament, or left any thing to be proved by
unwritten tradition in the new.

15. W. BISHOP.
His other reason is, that if we believe unwritten traditions were necessary to
salvation, then we must as well believe the writings of the ancient Fathers, as
the writings of the Apostles: because Apostolical traditions are not elsewhere
to be found but in their books: but that were absurd, for they might err.

Answer. That does not follow for three causes: First, Apostolical traditions
are as well kept in the mind of the learned, as in the ancient fathers writings,
and therefore have more credit then the Fathers writings. Secondly, they are
commonly recorded of more then one of the Fathers, and so have firmer testimony
then any one of their writings. Thirdly, if there should be any Apostolical
tradition related but of one ancient father, yet it should be of more credit
than any other thing of his own invention, because that was registered by him
as a thing of more estimation. And aagaine, some of the rest of those blessed
and godly personages would have reproved it as they did all other falsehoods, if
it had not bin such indeed as it was termed: which when they did not, they gave
a secret approbation of it for such, and so that has the interpretatiue
consent at least of the learned of that age, and the following for Apostolical
tradition.

But Master Perkins proves the contrary by Saint Paul, who says, Act. 26.22.
That I continue to this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying no
other thing then that which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. Why
make you here a full point: let Saint Paul make an end of his speech, and tell
us for what points of doctrine he alleges Moses and the Prophets: Marry to
prove that Christ should suffer death, and rise again, and that he should give
light to the Gentiles. For these and such like, which were evidently foretold
in holy writ, he needed not to allege any other proof: but when he was to
persuade them to abandon Moses Law, he then delivered to them the decrees of
the Apostles, and taught them to keep them: Act. 16.
As also when he instructed the Corinthians in the Sacrament of the Altar, he
begins with Tradition, saying: 1. Cor. 11.
I deliver unto you as I have received from our Lord, not in writing, but by
word of mouth. And in the same Chapter puts down the contentious
Scripturist, with the custom of the Church, saying, If any man lust to strive,
we have no such custom: so that out of S. Paul, we learn to allege
Scriptures, when they be plain for us, and when they bear not so clear with
us, to plead Tradition, and the custom of the Church.

R. ABBOT.
It is strange to see how M. Bishop has slubbered over this matter, being of
so great moment and importance for the authority and credit of their
traditions. They tell us that traditions unwritten, are a part of the word of
God. The council of Trent professes Council. Trident. ses. 4 cap. 1. Pari
pietatis affectu ac reuerentia suscipit, etc.
to receive them with the like affection of piety and reverence, as they do
the holy Scripture. Now we desire to know by what testimony or warrant we may
be secured particularly what these traditions are; for if they be alike to be
esteemed with those things that are contained in the Scriptures, there is
reason that they be approved unto us by testimonial and witness equivalent to
the Scriptures. If then the writings of the ancient fathers be made the
witnesses of these traditions, we must believe the writings of the ancient
fathers, as well as we believe the Scriptures. M. Bishop tells us that
traditions are as well kept in the minds of the learned, as in the ancient
fathers writings, and therefore have more credit then the fathers writings. So
then belike the minds of the learned, together with the writings of the
ancient fathers, are of equal credit and authority with the Scriptures, and
if Master Perkins had put in both these, then Master Bishop had not had a
word to say. But we must yet ask further, whence or upon what ground do the
minds of the learned accept of these traditions. If he will say, that they
receive them of the fathers, then the argument still stands good. If he say
that they receive them of other learned that were before them, then it must be
said that they also received them from other learned that were before them, and
so upward till we come to the fathers, and so in fine it must fall out, that
the fathers must be alike believed as the holy Scriptures. If M. Bishop be
ashamed to say so, let him tell us otherwise what it is that we shall certainly
rest upon. But alas good man, we see he cannot tell what to say; only
Bellarmine tells us, that Bellarm. de sacram. lib. 2 ca. 25. Omnium
co^cilioru^ veterum and omnium dogmatum firmitas ab authoritate praesentis
ecclesiae dependet.
the assured certainty of all councels and of all doctrines of faith, depends
upon the authority of the present Church. Now then the testimony of the present
Church, is made of equal and like authority with the holy Scriptures, and
Bellarmine is in as pitiful a case as M. Bishop is. For the testimony of the
present Church, what is it but the testimony of the learned of the present
Church, and therefore now the minds of the learned are as good an oracle of
truth as the Scriptures are. If this be not so, let us hear from M. Bishop
what else is to be said hereof; for if traditions be to be received with like
devotion and reverence, as those things that we are taught in Scripture, then
there must be somewhat or other to commend the same unto us with the like
authority as the Scripture does the rest, and what that is we are desirous to
understand. Now M. Bishop adds two further exceptions against M. Perkins
argument, and they are such wise ones, as that we may very well think them to
be his own. Secondly, says he, they are commonly recorded of more then one of
the fathers, and so have firmer testimony then any one of their writings. But
what is this to M. Perkins his speech, which is not restrained to any one of
the fathers writings, but takes them jointly, and infers it as an
absurdity, that the writings of the fathers being taken all together, should be
made equal in credit to the holy Scriptures. Thirdly, says he, a tradition
being related but by one ancient father, yet should be of more credit then any
other of his own invention, because that was registered by him as a matter of
more estimation. But what idle babbling is this? what makes this to the
clearing of the point in question? He will have us to receive traditions with
the like piety and reverence, as we do those things that we are instructed by
the Scripture. He puts a case of a tradition, reported by one only of the
fathers. He should hereupon have answered how we can in that sort admit of such
a tradition as Apostolical, but by yielding the like credit to that one father
as we do to the holy Scriptures. But he like a man in a wood, that knows not
which way he is to go, tells us that this tradition is of more credit then
any other of his own invention, because it was registered by him as a matter of
more estimation. O the sharp wits of these Romish Doctors, that can diue so
deep into matters, and talk so profoundly, that they themselves understand
not what they say. To as little purpose is that which he adds, that if that
tradition were not as it was termed, some of the rest of the fathers would have
reproved it, which when they did not, they gave it their interpretative consent
to be Apostolical tradition. But let the consent be either interpretatiue or
express; what is this against the consequence of the argument which he takes
upon him to answer, that if we must receive traditions in that sort as they
require us, and have no where to ground them but upon the testimony of the
fathers, then we must give as much credit to the testimony of the fathers, as
we do to the holy Scriptures. I am forced thus odiously to inculcate the matter
in question, to make the ridiculous folly of this wrangler the more plainly to
appear, who having nothing to say, yet has not so much wit as to hold his
peace. In this simplicity he goes forward to answer the place of the Acts,
where Saint Paul is brought in saying, Acts. 26.22.
I continue to this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying no other
things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. In which
words it is plain, that the Apostle professed in the preaching of the Gospel,
(...). etc.
to say nothing without the compass of those things which had been before
spoken by Moses and the Prophets. M Bishop answers, that he means only of
those things which he adds, That Christ should suffer, and that he should be
the first that should rise from the dead, etc. For these things, says he,
evidently foretold in holy writ, he needed not to allege any other proof. Yea
but what other proof does he use for any other doctrine? Forsooth when he was
to persuade them to abandon Moses law, he then delivered to them the decrees of
the Apostles, and taught them to keep them. Yea, but Paul preached a long
while before those decrees of the Apostles were made, as appears from his
conversion in the ninth Chapter, to the fifteenth Chapter, where those decrees
are made; and all this while what other proof did he use, but only the
Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets? Do we not think that this man has
wonderfully hardened both his heart to God, and his face to men, that can apply
himself to write in this sort? He well knows that the question is not here
of new decrees, but of old traditions, what proof the Apostle had, or what
ground of doctrine from the old testament, but only the Scriptures of the law
and the Prophets? The Apostle himself says, he had no other, he taught
nothing, but according to the written books of the old testament, according to
that which elsewhere he says, that Romans 16.26
the Gospel was published amongst all nations, by the Scriptures of the
Prophets. For a summarie brief thereof, he names the suffering and
resurrection of Christ, etc. but he that says that herewith he preached any
thing but what was warranted by Moses and the Prophets, makes him to dally and
to speak a manifest untruth, in that he says that he spoke nothing without
the compass of those things which Moses and the Prophets prophesied before.
Now the wise man for instance against this tells us, that he delivered the
decrees of the Apostles, and taught them to keep them. Which beside that it is
nothing to the purpose, as has been said, does also set forth his notable
silliness and folly, in that for proof of traditions and doctrines unwritten,
he brings the example of the Apostles decrees, which are expressly mentioned
to have been sent to the Churches in writing, Acts. 15.23.
They wrote letters by them after this manner, etc. But in the height of his
wisdom, he goes forward to prove the same by another speech, When he
instructed the Corinthians in the Sacrament of the Altar, he begins with
tradition, saying, I deliver unto you as I have received from our Lord, not in
writing but by word of mouth. Surely the man's head was wonderful quaifie in
the writing hereof, or else we must think that he was in some trance. I
deliver unto you not in writing but by word of mouth, when notwithstanding in
his Epistle, he sends it to them in writing. Or what, does he mean that the
Apostle received it of our Lord, not in writing, but by word of mouth? But what
is that to the purpose, when he delivered the same here by writing, and not by
word of mouth? He had heard there was some text or other there for his purpose,
but neither did he well know it, nor had leisure to seek it out. The words of
the Apostle are these, I have received of the Lord that which I have also
delivered unto you. Now we conceive M. Bishops meaning, though his
understanding being very muddie, failed him so exceedingly in the expressing of
it. The Apostle forsooth gives to understand, that he first delivered unto
them the institution of the Lords supper not in writing, but by word of mouth.
And what of that? Does it therefore follow, that by tradition of the old
testament the Apostle proved any doctrine of the new? If this do not follow,
his allegation is brute and bootlesse, and he shoots wholly beside the mark.
The Apostle professes to have delivered what he received of the Lord; but what
he received of the Lord, was according to the Scriptures of Moses and the
Prophets. For the outward signs of the Sacrament were prefigured in
Melchisedeck, bringing forth Genes. 14.18.
bread and wine for the corporal refection of Abraham's army, as the heavenly
Melchisedeck should bring forth bread and wine for the spiritual refection and
comfort of the sons of Abraham. As for the doctrine and faith imported by
these signs, it is no other but what M. Bishop himself confesses to have been
evidently foretold in holy writ, namely that Christ should die for our sins,
and should rise again from the dead, to become a light and salvation unto us,
the Apostle himself instructing us the end thereof to be, 1. Cor. 11.26.
to show the Lords death till he come. Here was then no need to fly to
unwritten tradition, but of this institution the Apostles words stand good,
that he said nothing but what the Prophets and Moses did say should come. And
thus the fathers, and namely Tertull. adu. Marcion. per tot.
Tertullian, to show against the Marcionites, that there is but one God of the
old and new testament, and not two Gods adverse one to the other, as those
heretics blasphemously affirmed, do set down the accord of the Scriptures of
the new testament with the old, and the fulfilling of the one in the other, but
of traditions in the new testament according with traditions in the old, they
never spoke a word, which yet in that cause had been very needful, if there
had been any such. But M. Bishop being like the Lynx turning about and
forgetting what he was feeding upon, will tell us perhaps, that whatsoever he
had in hand, his meaning in the alleging of this place, was simply to prove
the Apostles approving of traditions. And if he tell us so, surely we will not
deny, but that it is indeed full simply done. The Apostle says that he first
delivered the institution of the Sacrament by word of mouth. What, must we
therefore think that it was not afterward committed to writing? The contrary
appears, in that we see it here written by himself. What is there here then
to hinder, but that as the Sacrament first delivered by word, was afterward
committed to writing, so all other points of Christian doctrine and faith,
though delivered at first by word and preaching, yet were afterward set down
in writing, and delivered unto us in the Scriptures? And if nothing hinder, as
indeed there does not, then let him understand that this place is very simply
and impertinently brought for traditions unwritten. To fill up the measure of
his folly, he tells us yet further, that the Apostle in the same Chapter
puts down the contentious Scripturist, with the custom of the Church,
saying, If any man lust to strive, we have no such custom. Where a man might
oppose him very hard, if he should ask him why those words of the Apostle do
not belong to the Traditionist, as well as to the Scripturist. We know his
dreams are very strong, but otherwise why he should apply these words to the
Scripturist, he himself cannot well tell. Again, it would be known of him
what custom the Apostle affirms here. We hear him saying, We have no such
custom, but we do not hear him saying, We have a custom. And therefore M.
Bishops alleging of these words in behalf of customs of the Church, may well
make us think, that in the doing of it he had the very same head on that he is
accustomed to have, to say nothing that he was much distressed for traditions
and customs, when he took not to be contentious, to be an unwritten tradition
and custom of the Church. So that his conclusion is like a body without either
head or feet, wanting strength to carry him so far as he is desirous to go,
and because the Apostles doctrine was neither according to unwritten traditions
nor customs, but according to the Scriptures only, we learn that neither
tradition nor custom, but Scripture only must bear sway for directing and
prescribing true faith and doctrine in the Church.

16 W. BISHOP.
Hitherto I have confuted what M. Perkins brought against Traditions. Now to
that which he says for them in our behalf.

First, says he, the Catholics allege, 2. These. 2.15.
Where, the Apostle bids the Church to keep the ordinances which he taught
them, either by word of mouth, or by Epistle: Hence they gather that besides
the written word, there be unwritten traditions that are necessary to be kept
and obeyed.

M. Perkins Answer. It is likely that this Epistle to the Thessalonians was the
first that ever Paul wrote to any Church: and then some things needful to
salvation might be delivered by word of mouth: but that was afterward written
in some others of his Epistles.

Reply. Observe first, that insteede of Traditions (according to the Greek and
Latin word,) they translate (...).
Ordinances; ever flying the word Tradition, where any thing is spoken in
commendation of them. But if any thing sound against them, then thrust they in
the word Tradition, although the Greek word bear it not. See for this their
corruption, and many other, a learned Treatise, named, The Discovery of false
translations penned by Master Gregory Martin, a man most singularly co^uersant
in the Greek and Hebrew tongues.

Secondly, is it not plain dotage, to avouch that this second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, was the first that ever he wrote? Surely, if none of his other
were written before it, yet his first to the same Church must needs have been
written before it. But let us give the man leave to dream sometimes. To the
point of the answer, that all was written after in some other of his Epistles,
which before had been delivered by word of mouth. How proves M. Perkins that?
the man has such confidence in his own word, that he goes not once about to
prove it. Good Sir, hold you not here; that nothing is needful to be believed,
which is not written in the word? Show us then where it is written in the word,
that S. Paul wrote in his latter Epistles, that which he taught by word of
mouth before, or else by your own rule it is not needful to believe it. But
yet for a more full satisfaction of the indifferent Reader, I will set down
the opinions of some of the auncientest and best Interpreters of this place of
the Apostle, that we may see whether they thought that S. Paul committed all to
writing, and left nothing by tradition.

Saint Chrysostom in his most learned and eloquent Commentaries upon this
text, concludes thus: Hereupon it is manifest that the Apostles delivered not
all in their Epistles, but many things also unwritten; and those things are as
well to be believed, as the written. Oecumenius and Theophylactus upon that
place teach the same.

S. Basil De spu. ca. 27.
speaks thus, I hold it Apostolical to persevere in Traditions not written:
for the Apostle says, I commend you that ye are mindful of my precepts: and,
do hold the Traditions, even as I delivered them unto you: and then alleges
this text: Hold the Traditions which you have received of me either by Word or
Epistle.

S. John Damascen accords with the former saying, Lib. 4. De fide cap. 17.
That the Apostles delivered many things without writing. S. Paul does
testify, when he writes, Therefore brethren stand and hold the Traditions
which have been taught you either by word of mouth or by Epistle. These holy
and judicious expositors of S. Paul, free from all partiality, gather out of
this text of his, that many things necessary to be believed, even until their
days remained unwritten, and were religiously observed by Tradition; which
throws flat to the ground M. Perkins his false supposition (fenced with
neither reason nor authority) that Saint Paul put in writing afterward all that
he had first taught by word of mouth.

Moreover Saint Paul immediately before his death in one of the last of his
Epistles, commands his dear disciple Timothy, 2. Tim. 2.
To commend unto the faithful, that which he heard of him by many witnesses;
and not that only which he should find written in some of his Epistles, or in
the written Gospel.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop begins with the taxing of our translations, for that we do
not say, stand fast and keep the traditions, but stand fast and keep the
ordinances, or the instructions which ye have been taught, blaming us for that
we use the word traditions, where any thing sounds against them, but utterly
reject it where any thing is spoken in commendation of them. But the reason of
our translating in that sort is just and godly, because our translation makes
nothing against that tradition which the Apostle intends in the Greek, and
excludes the stumbling block that might lie in the way of the more simple
Readers, by means that Popish abuse has caused the word to sound to a meaning
altogether contrary to the intent of the Apostle. Where the word tradition
carries the same sense wherein it is now used, we set it down; but where (...)
in Greek imports not that which custom has made the word tradition to sound
in English, good reason is there that we leave the word tradition, and take
rather some other word that may come most nearely to the expressing of the
Greek. Tyrant of old time did signify a King, till by the abuse of Kings the
name grew opprobrious and hateful, and is now used to signify a cruel and
usurping king. He therefore that should now translate tyrannus, a king, should
be thought scarcely well to enjoy his wits. Translations are always to be
framed according to the propriety and use of words then usually received when
they are done, and to do otherwise cannot but breed misunderstanding of many
things. And we would gladly know, why we may not as well translate (...),
ordinances, or instructions, as their Latin interpreter translateth it 1. Cor.
11.2.
praecepta, and they precepts in their English. Albeit for the avoiding of
their cavil I would rather translate it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
Stand fast and keep the things delivered, which ye have been taught either by
word or by our Epistle. But here M. Bishop refers his Reader to a learned
treatise as he calls it, named, The discovery of false translations, penned
by Gregory Martin, there to see somewhat for this corruption and many other. I
would not wish the Reader to forbear to look upon that book, only I wish
him withal to take knowledge of Doctor Fulkes answer to it, and he shall see a
discovery of a number of futilous and vain cauillations heaped together in
that discovery. Gregory Martin wrote his pretended discovery to be a
bellows to blow up treason and insurrection against his Prince, but when he
failed of his hope, and his calumniations were laid open, his heart never
served him to defend what he had written, because howsoever some things there
were that with some probability he might cavil at, yet in the most he was
made so naked, that he knew not how to cover his own shame. But he is long
since gone to his judge, and has learned what it is to fight against Gods
truth. But to come to the matter in hand, M. Perkins cannot be excused of too
much negligence in his answer to this place. He takes the second Epistle to
the Thessalonians to be the first, and by that means names that for very
likely which is very untrue, and so with mention of a bare likelihood passes
over the argument without giving any good satisfaction to him that would
require it. Thus it is true which the Poet says, Aliquando bonus dormitat
Homerus, and because M. Bishop dreameth so often, he must needs give him leave
to dream sometimes. To supply that wherein M. Perkins failed, we answer him,
that the traditions which the Apostle recommendeth to the Thessalonians, 1.
Cor. 15.3.4.
were no other but such as he mentions to the Corinthians, according to the
Scriptures. S. Ambrose makes the effect of his exhortation to be this: Ambros
in 2 Thessalonians. cap 2. In traditione Euangelij standum ac perseuerandum monet.
to warn them to stand fast, and to persevere in the tradition of the Gospel.
Romans 1.2.
The Gospel (as before has been noted out of the Apostles words) was
promised before of God by his Prophets in the holy Scriptures, and therefore
was accordingly Cap. 16.26.
preached by the Scriptures of the Prophets. The story says, that Paul at
his being at Thessalonica, Act. 17.2.3.
opened and declared by the Scriptures, that it behooued Christ to suffer, and
to rise again from the dead, and that this was Jesus Christ, whom (says he) I
preach unto you. Being driven from thence to Berea by the outrage of the Jews,
he preached there also, and Ver. 11.
they who received the word, searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things (which they taught) were so: whereby it appears that the word which he
preached in both places, was no other but according to the Scriptures. Thus we
have heard him before, saying, that Cap. 26.22.
he spoke nothing beside those things which Moses and the Prophets did say
should be. Now all the doctrine of the Gospel that is set down in the
Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets, is fully contained in the Scriptures of
the new Testament. Seeing therefore the traditions, that is, those things which
the Apostle delivered to the Thessalonians, were wholly according to the
Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets, it must necessarily follow, that in the
Scriptures of the new Testament the same are fully and perfectly contained, and
so on both sides now can be no other but according to the Scriptures. We are
out of doubt, that the Apostle preached to the Thessalonians the whole doctrine
of the Gospel, which we find set down in writing by the Evangelists, and by
himself and other the Apostles in their Epistles to other Churches. In his
former Epistle to the Thessalonians he did not set down that whole doctrine
which is written by them. Now we cannot make question but that his meaning was
to exhort them to persevere in the whole: as in those things which he expressed
in his Epistle, so in the rest also which we find written by himself and
others. Therefore the traditions or things delivered by word, have a necessary
and undeniable construction of all the rest of the written doctrine of the
Gospel that is not set down in that first Epistle to the Thessalonians. Our
exposition then is irrefragable and infallible, that the Apostle by those words
has reference to those things which are written otherwhere, but Master Bishop
has no argument to euict that he intended any thing that is written no where.
Because therefore we have a meaning of the words whereof we are certain and
sure, we rest there, and list not to admit a further meaning whereof we can
have no assurance. As for that which he cauilleth of, whether Paul in his
Epistles wrote all that he preached by word, I answer him, that he wrote the
effect and use of all, but not all whereof that use is to be made, because many
things are written by the Evangelists necessary for the use of Christian
faith, which are not written in the Epistles of Saint Paul, though by him they
were delivered to the Churches to which he preached. But though he wrote not
all that was needful to be written, yet we believe the testimony that he has
given in that Epistle which he wrote last, even a little before his death, when
almost all the books of the new Testament were now written, that 2. Tim. 3.15.
the Scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation, through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus: and therefore that, what by him and others, there is
so much written as concerns us to know for our instruction in the religion
and faith of Jesus Christ. Now whereas M. Bishop to prove the contrary,
alleges the expositions of some of the Fathers concerning those words of the
Apostle to the Thessalonians, I may well answer him as Austine answered
Hierome, pressing him in the like sort, with the names of sundry of the Fathers
that were before the^: Aug. Epist. 19 Ad ipsum confugio: ad ipsum ab omnibus
qui aliter sentiunt literarum eius tractatoribus prouoco.
I fly to Paul himself, to him I appeal from all expositors of his writings
that think otherwise. He has told us, that the Scriptures are able to make us
wise unto salvation, and therefore we do not believe the^ that tell us, that his
meaning is in the other place, that we have need of traditions beside the
Scripture for supply of that wisdom. Yea and their collection as M. Bishop
conceiueth of it, cannot stand good. It appears by those words of the
Apostle, that he delivered more to the Thessalonians by word, then is contained
in his former Epistle to the^, but it does not therefore follow that he
delivered more unto the^ then is contained in the Scriptures. No reason can
there be devised to make good this co^nexio^. But to examine the^ particularly,
first we may not think Chrysostom so forgetful, as that he should cross
that which in the very next Homily before he has said: Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians.
hom. 3. Omnia clara sunt and pla^a ex Scripturis diuinis: quaecunque necessaria
sunt, manifesta sunt.
All things are clear and evident by the holy Scriptures: whatsoever things
are necessary, they are manifest. Surely if any thing be to be cleared by
tradition beside the Scripture, then it cannot be said that all necessary
things are manifest by the Scriptures. And therefore whereas he says, Hereby
it appears that the Apostles delivered not all in their Epistles, but many
things also unwritten, and both the one and the other are alike to be believed,
we must understand it of that tradition which the Church holds collected and
gathered from the Scriptures, though it be not literally expressed therein.
Thus the baptising of infants, and the not rebaptising of them that have been
baptized by heretics, and the administering of the Lords supper only by the
Minister, and such like, have been always holden by the Church, and defended
by the Scriptures, and yet they are no where literally contained in the
Epistles of the Apostles. In such things Chrysostom requires a man to submit
himself in peace to that which the Church practices being grounded upon the
Scripture, and not contentiously to wrangle against it, because it is not in
very words contained therein. But if any tradition be urged upon us that has
no ground or warrant from the Scripture, good reason we ask, as Cyprian did of
Stephanus, Cyprian. ad Pomp. supra Sect. 5.
Whence is this tradition? Comes it from the authority of Christ, or of the
Gospel, or from the instructions and Epistles of the Apostles? For God
testifies, that we are to do those things which are written. Si ergo aut in
Euangelio praecipitur, aut Apostolorum Epistolis, aut Actibus continetur,
obseruetur certe haec sancta traditio.
Therefore if this tradition be commanded in the Gospel, or in the Epistles or
Acts of the Apostles, let it be observed and kept for holy. Whereby he will
have it understood, that if it be not there warranted, it is not to be
observed. The tradition which he there impugneth is taught indeed by the
Gospel, though he conceived not so, but hereby he teaches us, that it was to
stand for a certain rule, that no tradition could be justly approved without
warrant of the Gospel. And therefore Chrysostom himself also teaches us
otherwhere, that Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95. Siquid dicitur absque Scripturis,
auditorum cogitatio claudicat^ vbi vero ex Scripturis diuinae vocit prodijt
testimonium and loquentis sermonem and audientis animu^ confirmat.
if any thing be spoken without Scripture, the mind of the hearers goes lame;
but when out of the Scriptures comes the testimony of the voice of God, it
confirms both the speech of him that speaks, and the mind of him that
hears. Neither does it sufficiently give this confirmation to allege
generally, that the Scripture speaks of traditions, because it is still a
question whether those be the traditions which the Scripture speaks of,
unless by the Scripture it self they be justified so to be. To Chrysostom M.
Bishop adds Oecumonius and Theophilact, but as they take their exposition out
of Chrysostom, so in him they have their answer. Next he brings in a
sentence under the name of Basil, which is not only suspected by Erasmus and
others, but may by the place it self be well presumed to be none of his. There
is good cause to think, that the Cuckoo has played her part, and laid her
eggs in Basils nest: that some counterfeit to grace himself has not sticked
to disgrace him, by putting to him patcheries of his own device. To say nothing
of the difference of style, and other arguments noted by Erasmus, we may
observe how he makes Basil contrary to himself, not only to those rules
which he has given otherwhere, but even to the course which he has before
professed in this book, yea and makes a several question of that whereof
Basil in the beginning of his book severally propounds nothing. The matter as
Basil declares was this: Basil de spir. Sanct. cap. 1. Glorificationem
absoluens Deo ac Patri interdum cum ficio ipsius ac Spiritu sancto interdum per
filium in Spiritu sancto.
that in his prayers in the Church for conclusion, he would sometimes pronounce
glory to God and the Father, with his Son and the holy Ghost, and sometimes
by the Son in the holy Ghost. Some Cap. 2.
affected as he conceiueth to the heresy of Aerius or Arius, blamed him for
saying with the Son and the holy Ghost, affirming that several terms should
be used of the three Persons, of the Father, and by the Son, and in the holy
Ghost, intending that in this diversity of phrases, a diversity of natures
should be understood. He shows that the heretics borrowed this fancy Cap. 3.
from the curiosities of vain Philosophy, and propounds Cap. 4.
that in the Scriptures no such difference of those syllables is observed. This
he prosecuteth Cap. 5.
at large, and in the end propounds his adversaries objection: Cap. 6. in sine
that this manner of speaking, with the Son, was strange and unusual, but by
the Son, was familiar in the phrase of Scripture, and accustomed with the
brethren. He answers, that Cap. 7.
the Church acknowledged the use of both those speeches, and did not reject
either of them, as if the one did overthrow the other. He affirms, that so
many as did keep the tradition of their ancestors without alteration in all
countries and cities, did use this speech. Therefore even the very country
clownes (says he) do so pronounce according to the manner of their forefathers.
That then which has been said by our ancestors, we also say, that glory is
common to the Father with the Son, and therefore we sing hymns of
glorification to the Father together with the Son. But he adds, which is
the thing that we are specially to observe, Quanqua^ hoc nobis non est satis
sic a patribus esse traditum, nam and illi Scripturae secuti sunt authoritatem,
etc.
Albeit it is not enough for us that we have it so by tradition from the
Fathers, for they also followed the authority of Scripture, taking their
ground from those testimonies which a little before we have alleged. Thus he
calls by the name of the tradition of the Fathers, that wherein they followed
the authority of the Scriptures, and plainly instructs us, that without
authority of the Scriptures, the tradition of the Fathers is no sufficient
warrant for us. And to this accords that which has been before cited from
him, that Supra Sect. 5.
it is a declining from the faith to bring in any thing that is not written.
Thus in another place he says: Supra Sect. 10
If whatsoever is not of faith is sin, as the Apostle says, and faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: surely whatsoever is beside the
holy Scripture, because it is not of faith is sin. And again, Idem reg.
contract. q 95 Necessarium est and consonum vt ex sacrae quisque Scriptura quod
necesse sit, discat cum ad pretatis plero^horiam, tu^ ne assuescat humanis
traditionibus.
It is needful and convenient, that every man do learn out of the Scripture
that that is necessary for him, both for the full assurance of godliness, and
that he may not be accustomed to the traditions of men. Now how can we imagine,
that Basil thus reducing all to the Scriptures, and though alleging as we do
the tradition of the Fathers, yet with us acknowledging, that that suffices
not without authority of the Scriptures, should so soon after attribute so
much to traditions that have no confirmation from the Scripture? Albeit, this
contrariety had been small, neither should we have had any cause to take
exception against those words of traditions, whether they be Basils or whose
soever, if in exemplifying the same he had not strained them so far, as that M.
Bishop himself must perforce confess they cannot accord with truth. For if he
had no more but required the observation of traditions unwritten, we should
have conceived that he meant unwritten, as Basil elsewhere does, who professes
Basil. de fide. Vocibus agraphis quidem, verum no^ alienis a p^a secundum
Scripturam sententia. etc.
to use words that are not written, but yet such as vary not from the meaning
of piety according to the Scripture: words and terms which in letters and
syllables are not framed to the Scripture, but yet do retain that meaning that
is in the Scripture. Thus in the former part of the book de Sp. sancto he
mentions Cap. 9. De Sp. sancto. Sententiae quas traditione Patrum sine
scripto accepimus.
speeches concerning the holy Ghost, which without Scripture, says he, we have
received by the tradition of the Fathers, which yet are such as have all their
foundation and ground in the Scriptures. So in the place here questioned he
names diverse things for unwritten traditions, which we religiously hold
according to the doctrine of the Scriptures, though the words be not precisely
set down therein. Such is in baptism Cap. 27. Renuntiare Satanae and Angelis
eius in baptismo ex qua Scriptura habemus?
the renouncing of the devil and his Angels: from what Scripture, says he,
have we it? Again he says, Ibid Ipsam fidei professione^ quae credimus in
Patrem and filiu^, and Spiritu^ sanctum e quibus habemus scriptis
The very profession of faith whereby we believe in the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, out of what Scripture do we take it? The maine matter which he
laboreth there to approve by unwritten tradition, is the pronouncing of glory
to the Father and the Son, together with the holy Ghost, which yet he himself
says, that Cap. 25. Vim habet Scripturis congruentem. Nihil diuersum dexero
quod ad sententiae vit^^ attinet.
it has a meaning agreeing with the Scriptures, and that in meaning it nothing
differs from that which Christ says, the Father, and the Son, and the holy
Ghost: and so we also hold and profess according to the Scriptures. In this
sense therefore we also admit of unwritten traditions, and blame, as he does,
them who strictly urge what things are found in the Scriptures, that is, admit
of nothing but what in precise terms is expressed therein, and therefore the
words here in question thus far make nothing against us. Yea and in the
assertion of those other traditions which he mentions, he nothing crosses
us, because we deny not traditions, as was said in the beginning, which are but
rites and ceremonies of the Church, who our selves have such traditions in use,
and deny not the liberty of other Churches for the like. Such traditions he
there mentions to have been in those times, the signing of them which
profess Christ with the sign of the Cross, praying toward the East, to be
thrice dipped in baptism, to pray standing all the time from Easter to
Whitsontide, and such like. Now such traditions we condemn not, but we cannot
but dislike, that whereas these are no matters of faith and perpetual
necessity, but only of arbitrarie and indifferent observation, he
notwithstanding reckons the^, Cap. 27 Quorum vtraque pare^ vim habent ad
pietatem.
as having like force to piety with those things that are written, and that
the rejecting hereof shall be the Et ea damnahimus quae in Euangelio ad salutem
necessaria habentur.
condemning of those things which in the Gospel are accounted necessary to
salvation. To which assertion M. Bishop for the credit of their Church of Rome
will refuse to subscribe, because they hold the most of these things to be
indifferent, insomuch that there is no necessity with the^ of thrice dipping
him that is baptized and that custom of standing in prayer for the time above
named is worn out of use. Wherein it cannot be denied, but that the Church of
Rome has done greatly amiss, if it be true concerning such traditions which
Basil there is made to say. In a word Basils traditions if they be his,
concern not our disputation, either being such as are contained in the sense,
though not in the letter of the Scripture, or else being only temporary and
arbitrarie observations of the Church, neither of which we impugn. We impugn
those traditions which are made necessary and perpetual doctrines of faith,
and of the worship of God, and yet neither in the letter, nor in the sense and
consequence of the scriptures can be justified so to be. Of this sort are the
Popes supremacy and succession of Peter, his Pardons, invocation of Saints,
worshipping of images, prayer for the dead, the single life of Priests, the
curtolling of the Communion, the sacrifice of the Mass, and a huge deal of
such other baggage. Wherein we may take knowledge of the notable fraud of these
Romish Traditioners, who tell us out of the Fathers of traditions, traditions,
when as in none of the ancient Catalogues of traditions those traditions are
found, which they especially require to be believed under that name. The
Fathers mention Apostolic traditions as they call them, whereof the Church of
Rome observes nothing: the Church of Rome tells us of Apostolic traditions
whereof there is no mention with the Fathers. They agree not in their beadroll
of traditions, and yet we forsooth must believe that the traditions of Popery
are the same that they speak of, and have been continued from the time of the
Apostles. But what the manner of the ancients was, Hierome teaches us to
understand, when he says: Hieron. ad Lucin. Vnaequae que Prouincia abunde^ in
sensu suo, and praecepta mai^rum leges Apostolicas arbitretur.
Let every Province abound in it own judgment or opinion, and think the
precepts of their ancestors to be Apostolic laws. This was indeed their
custom, whatsoever observations they had, to term them for the credit of
them, Apostolic traditions, howsoever they were but humane presumptions, and
sometimes contrary to that which the Apostles practiced, as Hierome there
shows of the tradition of Jn Actibus Apostolorum dictus Pentecostes and dit
Dominico Apostolum Paulum and cum to credentes teiunasse legimus.
not fasting upon the Lords day, and the days betwixt Easter and Whitsontide,
which he says that Paul and with him the faithful did. But as touching all
such traditions we are to consider what the same Hierome elsewhere says, that
Idem in Agg. cap. 1 Quae absque authoritate and testimonijs Scripturarum quasi
traditione Apostolica sponte r^periunt and contingunt, percutit gl^dius Dei.
What things men of their own accord devise and feign, as of Apostolic
tradition without testimony and authority of the Scriptures, the sword of God
strikes down. As for Damascene whom M. Bishop alleges last, we hold him not
worth the answering. We doubt not but he defended unwritten traditions without
any qualification being a notable idol-monger, and having no means for defense
of his idolatry but the pretense of unwritten tradition. M. Bishop committed
much oversight to reckon him for a man free from all partiality, who in that
respect could not but be partial in behalf of the cause which he had
undertaken against the written truth of God. But M. Bishop has yet one string
more to play upon: S. Paul commands Timothy (says he) to commend unto the
faithful that which he had heard of him by many witnesses, and not that only
which he should find in some of his Epistles, or in the written Gospel. S.
Paul's words are these: 2. Tim. 3.2.
What things thou have heard of me by many witnesses, the same deliver to
faithful men which shall be able to teach other also. He wills Timothy in
special manner to instruct some in those things which he had heard and
received of him, that they might be for the work of the ministry, and serve
for the instructing and teaching of others. The question now is, what those
things were of which he speaks. M. Bishop when he says: not only that which
he should find written, confesses that the Apostle meant it of those things
that are written, though he will not have it thought to be meant of those only.
We take it then for granted, as indeed it cannot be denied, that the Apostle
here intended those things that are written, but we would hear an argument to
prove, that the Apostle meant any thing further that is not written. If he
might use those words of those things that are written, what hinders but that
he might use them of those only? M. Bishop cannot prove that he did not so,
but we prove that he did so, because in the next Chapter he tells the same
Timothy: 2. Tim. 3.15.
The Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus. Therefore M. Bishops proofs come much too short, to
give us any assurance that S. Paul by traditions understood any thing, but
what is to be learned by the Scriptures.

17. W. BISHOP.
The second argument for Traditions, is this, to believe that there be so many
books of holy Scripture, and no more: and that those be they which are
commonly taken so to be, is very necessary to salvation; now this is not to be
found written in any place of holy Scripture, but is received only by
Tradition, wherefore it is necessary to salvation to believe some Tradition.
M. Perkins answers, that the books of the Old and New Testament, be
Scripture, is not believed on bare Tradition, but by the books themselves on
this manner. Let the man who is endued with the spirit of discerning, read the
books, and consider first the author of them, who is God; then the matter
contained, which is divine; the manner of speech, which is full of majesty in
simple words: lastly, the end aimed at, which is Gods honor: and by this means
he shall discern any part of Scripture from the writings of men whatsoever.

Reply. A wise and deep observation I warrant you, and well worthy a grave
Author: Let us examine it briefly, first, he will have his man endued with the
spirit of discerning: who shall indue him with that spirit? M. P. seems to
say, that every sheep of Christ has his spirit. But S. Paul 1. Cor. 12.
teaches plainly the contrary, that some certain only have the judgment
to discern. And touching this matter of discerning which books are
Canonical, which are not: not the learned in the primitive Church would take
upon him to discern which they were; three hundred years after Christ, was
left undefined by the best learned, whether the Catholic Epistles of S. James
and Jude: the second of S. Peter: the second and third of John, and his
Apocalypse, were Canonical or no, as is confessed on all parts: has then
every Christian this spirit of discerning, when the best Christians wanted it?
Who more profound, more skillful to discern, than that subtle and sharp
Doctor S. Augustine, and yet the Protestants will not allow him the true spirit
of discerning which books be Canonical. For he in diverse places of his
works, De doct. Christ. cap. 8. 18. de ciuit. Dei 36. lib. 2. cont. Epist.
Gaudent. 23
holds the books of the Machabees to be Canonical Scriptures: and expressly
proves the book of Wisdom so to be: De Praedest. Sanct. 14.
and yet our Protestants will not admit them. See therefore how foolish and
vain his first rule is. Come to the second.

His second is, that he who goes about to discern whether the book be
Canonical or no, must consider the Author, who is God. If he must at the first
take God to be the Author of the book, what needs any further labor? it must
needs be Canonical that has God for the Author. This man's wits were surely
from home, when he discoursed thus: and therefore it should be but folly to
stand upon his particularities, let this one reason in general serve to
confute him: all this manner put together, serves only to help particular
men to discern which books are Canonical, who may easily after their
diligent inquiry err and be deceived in this point, because every man is a
liar. Romans 3.
And if there be no more certain means to assure them of this, which is the
ground of all their Religion, then every particular man's discretion and
judgment, then out of doubt their whole Religion is most unwisely builded upon
mean men's inventions and discretion: who also for the most part do neither
understand the language in which they were first penned, nor the usual phrases
of Scriptures translated: that I say nothing of the figures, parables,
prophecies, and controversies which seem to be, and many other difficulties,
and yet these men need not doubt, having learned some half dozen lines of
Master Perkins, but that reading any book, they shall be able presently to
discern whether it be Canonical or no. A goodly mockery: Men were not so
taught in the Primitive Church, but the most skillful and wisest in discerning
Canonical books, trusted not unto their own judgment, but leaned always
upon Apostolical Traditions. So did Cerapion an auncieni holy Writer (as
Eusebius reports) reject certain books set out in the Apostles names,
because they had not received from their Predecessors any such. The like does
Clement of Alexandria, Cap. 11.
and that famous Origin Cap. 19.
of the same book, who observe the Ecclesiastical Canon, as he had learned
and received by Tradition. So does he deliver his opinion of the four
Evangelists, and other books of Canonical Scripture, and not relying on his
own wit, which was excellent, or learning which was singular in all manner of
languages and matters. That S. Augustine was of the same mind, may be gathered
out of these words of his, Lib. 35. cap. 6.
Contra Faustum. Of what book can there be any assurance, if the letters,
which the Church propagated by the Apostles, and by such excellency declared
throughout all Nations, does teach and hold to be the Apostles, should be
uncertain whether they be Apostles or no? So that he makes the declaration of
the Church descended of the Apostles, to be a sure pillar to rest upon, for the
certain knowledge of Canonical Scripture, and other spirits whatsoever, if
they follow not that rule to be rejected: so far is he off from encouraging
every sheep of Christ's fold, to take that weighty matter upon himself, as M.
P. does. And what can be more against the most prudent providence of the divine
wisdom, then to permit every one to be a judge of the books of Canonical
Scripture? For if al those books, and no other should pass curra^t for
Canonical (which any Christian taking upon him the spirit of discerning, would
censure to be such) then away with all the old Testament, because diverse
esteemed it to proceed of some evil spirits, as witnesses Freueus Lib 1. cap.
20. 21. 22.
and Epiphanius: Haeres. 6. 6.
Yea, not only all the old must be abrogated, but all the new also, because it
has many falsehoods mixed with the truth, as some presuming greatly of their
spirit and skill in discerning, did teach: so testifies S. Augustine, Lib. 32.
cap. 2.
Contra Faust. Some would have had but one of the four Gospels, some five,
some six, some seven; some rejected all S. Paul's Epistles: many, and those
of the faithful, did not admit for Canonical some of the other Apostles
Epistles, nor the Revelations. If then the divine foresight of our Savior had
not prevented this most foul inconueniencie, by instituting a more certain
means of discerning and declaring which books were penned by inspiration of
the holy Ghost, which not: then by leaving it unto every man's discretion, he
might be thought to have had but slender care of our salvation, which every
true Christian heart does abhor to think: and therefore we must needs admit
of this most holy and provident Tradition of them from hand to hand: as among
the Protestants Brentius does in his Prolegomenis, and also Kemnitius, handling
the second kind of Traditions, in his examination of the Council of Trent:
albeit they reject all other Traditions, besides this one.

R. ABBOT.
That which M. Perkins here says, has his proper use in the ordinary
receiving of the scriptures in a Christian Church, where being from our
infancy baptized into Christ, and bred up in the continual noise and sound of
the word of God, and having by this means some seeds of the spirit of God
sowed in our hearts, we simply and without controversy or question take the
scriptures, presuming upon the record of the Church, and believing them to be
that which they are said to be, that is, the book of God, and in this
persuasion applying our selves to the reading of them, and finding therein a
spirit so different from the spirit of man, so great a majesty in so great
simplicity, and all things so correspondent to those shadows of truth and
righteousness, which Romans 2.14.15.
the work of the law written naturally in our hearts, and confirmed by light
of education do represent unto us, we resolve, and fully do believe them to be
that that at the first we presumed of them, the oracles of God, the words of
salvation and eternal life, having an inward testimony and conviction to draw
from us the assent, and immovably to ground us in the assurance thereof. This
seems to Master Bishop to be no wise observation, but the reason is because
he himself is scarcely wise. When he has said all that he can say, yet this
must stand for good, that there is nothing that can cause the heart of man
sufficiently to apprehend that the Scriptures are the word of God, till the
Scripture it self in the conscience by the spirit do euict it self so to be.
And herein it is true which Origin says, that Origin. de princip. lib. 4. c.
1. Siquis cum omni studio and reuere^tia, qua dignum est Prophetica dicta
consideret, in eo ipso dum legit and diligentius intuetur, cerium est, quod
aliquo diuiniore spiramine mentem sensumque pulsatus, agnoscet non humanitus
esse prolatos eos quos legit, sed Dei esse sermones, and ex semetipso sentiet
non humana art nec mortals eloquio, sed diuino (vt ita dixerim) cothurno esse
conscriptos.
he who with all diligence and reverence, as is meet, shall consider the words
of the Prophets, it is certain that in the reading and diligent viewing
thereof, having his mind and understanding knocked at by a divine inspiration,
he shall know that the words which he reads were not uttered by man but are
the words of God, and of himself shall perceive that those books were
written, not by humane art, not by the word of mortal man, but by a majesty
divine. In a word, as the Sun when a man is brought into the light of it, not
by telling, but by sight and by it own light is discerned to be that that
gives light unto the world, so the Scripture which is as it were the chariot
of Aug. in Psalm. 80. Est in Scripturis nostris sol iustitiae and sanitas in
pe^nis eius.
the Sun of righteousness, when a man is brought into the sight thereof,
even by it own light is discerned to be that that ministers unto us the light
of everlasting life. Now the spirit of discerning, of which M. Perkins
speaks, is not to be understood of that special gift of 1. Cor 12.10.
discerning spirits mentioned by S. Paul, which imports a singular and
eminent dexterity in spying and finding out the secret frauds and deceipts of
counterfeit teachers and false Apostles, but the common spirit of the
faithful, 1. Cor. 2.12.
which we receive, as the Apostle says, that we may know the things that are
given unto us of God: whereby it is true which our Savior says: John 10.27.
My sheep hear my voice and they follow me: Ver. 4.5.
they know the shepherds voice, and they will not follow a stranger, but they
fly from him, for they know not the voice of strangers. Ver. 14.
I know mine, and am known of mine. Again he says: Cap. 7.17.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God,
or whether I speak of my self. Whereby he teaches us, that in applying our
selves to learn and practice the will of God, we attain to discern the
doctrine to be of God. And herein consists that Col. 1.9.
spiritual understanding which the Apostle recommendeth generally to the
faithful in his prayer for the Colossians, the use whereof is Phil. 1.10.
(...).
to discern things that differ (namely, from the truth) and 1. John 4.1.
to try the spirits whether they be of God or not. Now the spirit as it uses
the ministry of the Church for the delivering of the books of scripture, so it
uses the ministry of the Church to give advertisement of those books which
have not the like authority as the Scripture has. And this advertisement it
seals and confirms, whilst having testified otherwhere the undoubted
doctrine of God, we discern thereby some doctrines in those books, that are
of another stamp, and not correspondent to the rest. For when they are in any
part found to be of another spirit, we conceive of the whole, that they were
written with another pen, and therefore albeit for the most part they carry the
savor and taste of those things which we read in the other books, yet in
their defects we fully apprehend that which we have been told, that they are
not of like majesty and authority with the rest, and though we may profitably
read them for those things wherein they are derived from the other, yet that we
cannot securely ground any doctrine immediately upon them. In this simplicity
without further question many thousands receive the Scriptures, they read them,
and by the power of the holy Ghost they grow thereby to faith and spiritual
strength, and attain unto everlasting life. So certain are they of the truth,
which they learn in them, as that they are ready to forsake all, and to lay
down their lives for the testifying of that which they believe thereby.
Against this M. Bishop tells us, that not the learned in the primitive
Church would take upon him to discern which books were canonical, and which
not. But in so saying he very greatly abuses his reader, for the scriptures of
Moses and the Prophets, and all the books of the new Testament save only those
few which he mentions, have been discerned and acknowledged for Canonical
without contradiction from the time that first they were delivered to the
Church. Yea but for three hundred years after Christ, says he, it was left
undefined by the best learned as touching those few, the Epistles of James and
Jude, the second of S. Peter, the two latter of S. John, and the Apocalypse,
whether they were Canonical or not. Be it so, but is this a sufficient ground
for him to affirm, that they discerned not which were undoubtedly canonical
Scriptures, because they doubted whether these were so or not? What, did so
many hundred thousand Martyrs suffer in the space of those 300 years, and did
they know no certain and undoubted grounds whereupon to build the assurance of
that for which they suffered? Did the Bishops and Pastors of the Church teach
the people of God out of the Scriptures, and yet did they not discern whether
they were Scriptures or not? As for the doubt that was made of these books by
him mentioned, it was only by some, and in some places, and upon weak and
uncertain grounds, as the second Epistle of S. Peter upon difference of style,
the Epistle to the Hebrews, for that it seemed to some for want of
understanding to favor the heresy of the Nouatians, the Revelation of Saint
John, for that to some such like it seemed to make for the millenarie fancy of
Corinthus, but this was not sufficient so to ouerweigh the authority of them,
but that the former testimony that was given of them prevailed still in the
Church, so that they were not since confirmed or first received into authority
by the Church, but only acknowledged and continued still in the authority
which they had before. Therefore of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the
Revelation, Hierome testifies thus: Hieron. ad Darda. de terra repromiss.
Illud nostris dicendum est hanc Epistola quae inscribitur ad Hebraeos non solum
ab Ecclesus Orientis, sed abomnibus retro Ecclesus and Graeci sermonis
scriptoribus quasi Pauli Apostoli suscipi licet plerique eam vel Barnabae vel
Clementis arbitrentur, and nihil interesse cuius sit, cum Ecclesiastici viri
sit, and quotidie Ecclesiarum lectione celebretur. Quod sicam Latinoru^
consuetudo non recipit inter Scripturas Canonicas, nec Graecorum quidem
Ecclesiae Apocalypsim Ioannis eadem liberate suscipiunt, and tamen nos vtraque
suscipimus, nequaquam huius temporis consuetudinem, sed veterum scriptoru^
authoritatem sequentes, qui plerunque vtriusque vtuntur testimonijs, non vt
interdum de Apocryphis facere solent, etc. sed quasi canonicis and
ecclesiasticis.
This must we say to our men, that this Epistle to the Hebrews, not only of
the Eastern Churches, but of all the former Churches and writers of the Greek
tongue, has been received as the Epistie of Paul the Apostle, albeit many
think it either to have been written by Barnabas or Clement, and that it
skilleth not whose it is, seeing it came from a special man of the Church, and
is daily frequented in the reading of the Churches. And if the custom of the
Latins receive it not amongst Canonical Scriptures, the Churches of the
Greeks by the like liberty receive not the Revelation of S. John, and yet we
(says he) receive them both, not following the custom of this time, but the
authority of the ancient writers, who commonly use the testimonies of them
both, not as they are wont sometimes to do out of the Apocryphal books, but
as being books Canonical, and of authority in the Church. Herby then M.
Bishop may see, that it was but in his ignorance, and upon some other man's
word, that he says, that for three hundred years it was not defined whether
these books were Canonical or not, whereas they had undoubted authority in
the first Church, and began in latter time to be questioned without cause. Of
those other therefore which he mentions, we conceive in the like sort, of
which they that in their simplicity doubted, yet in the other Scriptures by
the holy Ghost discerned 2. Cor. 4.6.
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
and thereby became partakers of life in him. Whereas he says, that we allow
not S. Augustine the true spirit of discerning which books be canonical,
because he makes the books of Machabees and the book of Wisdom to be
Canonical Scriptures, and yet we will not so admit them: we answer him, that
he has not the spirit to understand and discern the meaning of Saint Austin.
Ruffinus mentions the books whereof the question was as touching the reading
of them in the Church to have been of three sorts: Some were Ruffinan
expos^symb apud Cyprian. Haec sunt quae Patres intra Canonem concluserunt, ex
quibus fide^ nostrae assertiones constare voluerant.
Canonical, which he reckons the same that we do, upon which (says he) they
would have the assertions of our faith to stand. Other some he calls Alij
libri sunt qui non canonies, sed ecclesiastici a maioribus appella^ sunt, etc.
Ecclesiastical books, not Canonical, naming all those which we term the
Apocryphal Scriptures, all which (says he) the Fathers would have to be read
in the Churches, but not to be alleged to prove the authority of faith. A
third sort there were which were termed by them Cateras Scripturas Apocryphas
nominaru^t, quas in Ecclesiis legi noluerunt.
Apocryphal writings, which they would not have to be read in the Churches at
all, which were all those that are wholly rejected as bastards and counterfeits,
such as were Sect. 13.
before spoken of in answer to the Epistle. Now of those three sorts some made
but only two, and that diversely. Some reckoned under the name of Apocryphal
Scriptures all that were not of the first sort, and properly termed Canonical,
as Hierome did, who having reckoned the same books for Canonical that
Ruffinus does, and accounting them in number two and twenty, as the Hebrews
do, adds that Hieron in Prolog Galeata. Fu^^^ pariter veteris legis libri
viginis duo, etc.
we are to know that whatsoever is beside these, is to be put amongst
Apocryphal writings. Therefore (says he) the book called the Wisdom of
Solomon, the book of Jesus the Son of Syrach, of Tobie, of Judith, are not
in the Canon, Thus he reckons the Ecclesiastical and Apocryphal books
under one name of Apocryphal. Some on the other side under the name of
Canonical books contained all that were not of the last sort, that is, of
those bastards and counterfeits which were wholly exploded and rejected out of
the Church. Thus S. Austin does, extending the name of Canonical to all that
was admitted publicly to be read, and therefore comprehending the books
called Ecclesiastical jointly under that name. But here the name of Canonical
is not properly used, because the Scriptures are called canonical, of being
the Canon, that is to say, the rule of our faith, which those Ecclesiastical
books are not, as before we have heard. And what? does Austine make them all
of equal and like authority? Nothing less: for in the first place cited by
Master Bishop, where he sets all those books down under one name of
canonical, he gives this rule, Aug. de doct. Christ lib. 2 ca. 8. In
Scripturis canonicis ecclesiaru^ Catholicarum quamplurium authoritatem
sequotur, etc. Tenebit igitur hunc modum in Scripturis Canonicis, vt cas quae
ab omnibus accipiuntur ecclesus, praeponat eis quas quaedam non accipiunt: in
eis vero quae non accipiuntur ab omnibus, praeponat ca^ quas plures
grauioresque accipiunt eis quas pauciores minorisque authoritat^ ecclesiae
tonent.
In the Canonical Scriptures let a man follow the authority of the greater
number of catholic Churches, and this course he shall hold, to prefer those
which are received of all catholic Churches, before those which some do not
receive, and in those which are not received of all, let him prefer those
which the more Churches and of greater authority do receive, before those which
are holden of the fewer and of lesser authority or account. He would not have
used any such exception, if he had taken all those books to be alike inspired
of God, and therefore does manifestly teach us to make some difference betwixt
them, and consequently not to account the books of Machabees properly
canonical, inasmuch as few or no Churches esteemed them so to be. And this may
somewhat further appear in the second place which M. Bishop cites, where
speaking of the Princes of the Jews after the reedifying of the temple, he
says, Aug. de ciu. Dei. lib 18. cap. 36. Quorum supputatio temporum non in
Scripturis sanctis quae canonicae appellantur sed in alijs inuenitur in quibus
sunt and Machabaeoru^ libriquos non Iudaei, sed ecclesia pro Canonicis habet
propter quorundam martyrum passiones vehementes atque mirabile^, etc.
The account of their terms is not found in the holy Scriptures which are
called canonical, but in other books amongst which are the books of the
Machabees, which not the Jews but the Church reckons for canonical, because
of the great and wonderful sufferings of some martyrs, who before the
incarnation of Christ striued even to death for the law of God. Where we see
him first plainly secluding those books from the canonical Scriptures,
according as they were secluded by the Jews, albeit withal he says that the
Church in a particular respect admitted of them as canonical, that is,
publicly to be read, to give knowledge of the constant suffering of some
therein mentioned, for the testimony of the law of God. But in what sort it was
that the Church admitted of them, and the rest of that kind, Hierome gives us
to understand: Hieron. praefat. in lib Solom. Sicut Judith and Tobiae and
Machabaeorum libros legit quid^m ecclesia, sed eos inter canonica^ Scripturas
non recipit; sic and haec duo volumina (sapientiae and Ecclesiastici) legate ad
aedificationem plebis, non ad authoritatem ecclesiastic^rum dogmatum
confirmandum
The Church reads them, but accounts them not amongst the canonical
Scriptures: it reads them for the edification of the people, not to confirm
the authority of the doctrines of the Church. And this that Hierome says, is
confirmed also by Austine himself, where he teaches, that August de ciu. Dei.
lib. 17. ca. 20. Aduersus contradictores non tanta fir^^^^^^ pr^^eruntur quae
scripta non sunt in Canone Iudaeorum.
those things which are not written in the canon of the Jews, are not with so
great strength (or authority) alleged against them that contradict us. Hereby
therefore they are proved to be no canonical Scriptures properly so called,
because canonical Scriptures being the rule and measure of our faith, do
convince those that contradict, which S. Austine acknowledges these do not.
The third place alleged by M. Bishop, helps yet further to clear this
matter, where Gaudentius the Donatist alleging the example of Razias, killing
himself in the second book of Machabees, for defense of their Circumcellions
casting themselves down from rocks, and provoking others to kill them, that
they might be accounted martyrs, S. Austine first condemns the fact, which
the Author of that book commends, and then adds for exception further:
Idem cont. Epist. Gaudent. li. 2. ca. 23. Hanc Scripturam quae appellatur
Machabaeorum Iudaei non habent sicut legem and Prophetas and Psalmos, quibus
Dominus testimoniu^ perhibet tanqua^ testibus suis dicens, Oportebat impleri,
etc. Sed recepta est ab ecclesia no^ inutiliter si sobrie legatur vel audiatur,
maxim propter illos Machabaeos qui pro Dei lege sicut very martyrs a
persecutoribus tam indigna atque h^rrenda perpessi sunt, etc.
This Scripture which is called of the Machabees, the Jews account not as the
law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, to which the Lord gives testimony as
his witnesses, saying, All things must be fulfilled which are written of me in
the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, but it is received
of the Church not unprofitably if it be soberly read or heard, specially for
those Machabees, who for the law of God like true martyrs suffered so unworthy
and horrible things at their persecutors hands. Where we see how coldly he
speaks of the receiving of that book, as rather to excuse the Church, then
to defend it for so doing, that it was done not unprofitably, and yet with this
exception, if it be soberly read, and the reason of the receiving of it, not
for the authority of the book, but for the story of those Machabees, who there
are recorded so constantly to have suffered torments for their observing the
law of God. But withal he absolutely shows, that those books are none of
the^, Luke 24.44.
to which Christ gave testimony as his witnesses, who notwithstanding calls
those witnesses by the name of Ver. 27.
all Scriptures, thereby giving fully to understand that these are no
Scriptures. Hereby therefore we conceive, that S. Austine well discerned the
defect of these books, and rightly understood that they are not so to be
accounted of as those are, to which Christ has given witness by his own
word. No otherwise therefore could he conceive of the book of Wisdom being
of the same kind, and that he did so, it plainly appears, for that of that
and the book of Ecclesiasticus it was that he said that which before I
mentioned, that the books which are not in the canon of the Jews, are not
alleged with so great authority against them that say against us. And that
this book was not received in the Church as a book of divine authority,
appears by the very place which Master Bishop cites, where it is showed,
that Saint Austine citing a testimony out of the said book, exception was
taken against it, Aug. de prae^^. sanct. cap. 14. Quod a me positum fratres
istos ita respuisse dixistis tanquam non de libro canonico adhibitu^.
For that it was taken out of a book that was not canonical. S. Austine
indeed pleads earnestly to gain credit to it, and alleges that of long
time it had been accustomed to be read in the Church, and men had used to cite
the testimony of it as divine, but yet could not expressly say that ever it was
reckoned for a Canonical book. And as for those arguments, M. Bishop is
deceived, to think that they could prove it to be Canonical, because the
book of Ruffinan exposit. symb.
the Pastor was in like sort read in the Church, as Ruffinus bears witness
in the place before alleged, and yet was not accounted canonical Scripture,
and Cyril and Ambrose cite the books of Esdras by the name of Cyril. cont.
Julian. lib. 1. Sic ait Scriptura diuinitus inspirata, etc. Ambros. de obitu
frat. Prophetico sermon dicitur, etc. ^epeto sacro Scriptura solatia tua and
de bono mort. cap. 11 Ait propheta ad angelum, etc.
holy Scripture, and inspired of God, and Ambrose calls him by the name of a
Prophet, whereas Hierome calls those books Hieron. praefat. in Esdram and
Nehem. Nec apocryphorum tertij and quarti libri s^mnijs delectetur.
dreams, and wishes no man to be delighted with them. They used these books
in their Sermons casually as we do, thinking it not material to cite them for
exhortation to the people, howsoever they held them not of sufficient authority
otherwise. Therefore they cited them with condition sometimes, Hieron. ad
furiam. Legunus in Judith. sicut tamen placet volumen recipere.
if we will receive such or such a book, as Hierome does the book of Judith,
and Origin. in Math. tract. 30. Si recipitur liber qui dicit quonia^ sapientia
est quae facta est populo columna nubis, etc.
Origin the book of Wisdom, of which we here speak. By these things
therefore it is plain enough, that though Austin were not willing that
authority should in that sort be detracted from any book that was received
publicly to be read in the Church, yet that he was well able to discern, and
so did, which books were of divine and infallible authority, and which were to
be accounted of inferior and lesser worth, judging thereof in effect no
otherwise then we do. Now from this M. Bishop goes to another cavil at that
that M. Perkins says, that a man to come to know the Scriptures to be of God,
must first take and believe them so to be. He says that the man's wits were
from home in so discoursing, but the cause is, because his wits serve him not
to conceive that which M. Perkins says. Very well and truly does Saint Austine
observe, that Aug. in Joan. tract. 29. Jntellectus merces est fidei: ergo^oli
quaerere intelligere vt credas, sed ^rede vt intelligas.
understanding is the reward of faith: Seek not therefore, says he, to
understand that thou may believe, but first believe that thou may
understand. He gathers it from that which the Disciples say, John. 6.69.
We believe and know that thou art Christ the son of the living God. They
first believe, and in believing they learn to know. The belief of which
Master Perkins speaks, is the belief of a learner, of whom in matters of
other knowledge, they are wont to say, Oportet discentem credere, the learner
must believe. There are in all Arts and Sciences certain propositions and
principles, which the learner first accepts upon the word of him that
teaches him; which notwithstanding afterward he attaineth so to know, as that
if he that taught him, should say any thing to the contrary, he should think
him beside himself, and by no means yield to him, as knowing that certainly
now which he did at first believe. Even so is it in this case; a man having it
wrought out of his own conscience, that there is a God, to whom honor, and
worship, and service is due, and that this God undoubtedly has some way
revealed wherein that honor and worship does consist, betaketh himself upon
the testimony of the Church, to the reading and hearing of the Scriptures, and
in the exercise thereof, finds and feels that to be true, which was
testified unto him, and says: Psalm. 48.7.
Like as we have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God. And as the
Samaritans being drawn to Christ by the report of the woman, after they had
seen and heard him, say, John. 4.42.
Now we believe not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves,
and know that this is indeed the Messiah the Savior of the world, so this man
being first brought to the Scriptures by the report of the Church, and thereby
believing the same to be of God, does by his own experience afterward fully
apprehend the truth and certainty of that report, yea more then was reported,
so that he says, Origin. in Ca^t. hom. 2. Per illos quidem audiui; ad te autem
veni and tibi credidi, apud que^ mulio plura viderunt oculi mei quam
annunciabantur mihi.
By them I heard of thee, and I came to thee, and have believed thee, with whom
mine eyes have seen much more then before was told me. Therefore he rests
not his faith now upon the Church, but upon God himself, so that though the
Church should slide back, and deny that which it has before affirmed, yet he
stands secure, and chooses rather to die a thousand times, then to forgo
the comfort and hope that he has conceived by the Scriptures, which were at
first delivered unto him by the Church. Thus Christian people have been wont
to receive the Scriptures of the hands of the Church, wherein they have lived
without seeking any further approbation and warrant thereof, because in the use
of them they have given a sufficient warrant and testimony of themselves. So
then we rest not the Scriptures upon the discerning of private spirits, as
Master Bishop idly and vainly cauilleth, but we make the Church as the hand
of God, whereby he puts the Scriptures into our hands, and private spirit
does no more but subscribe to the testification of the Church. But now if
Master Bishop will question the public testimony of our Church as touching
knowledge what Scriptures are to be delivered, we answer him, that such and
such only we acknowledge and deliver by our testimony, because by like
testimony those only have been acknowledged and delivered unto us. Here then
we refer our selves to Tradition, and therefore all that Master Bishop
alleges to the end of this section, is but fighting with a shadow of his
own, and nothing against us. He says in the end that Brentius and Chemnitius
admit of this Tradition, albeit they reject all other Traditions beside this
one, whereas Chemnitius setting down eight kinds of Traditions, acknowledges
seven of them, and determines our defense against the Papists, to consist in
one kind only. We fight not against the word, we know it has his use;
Master Perkins in three conclusions here acknowledges Traditions: the Church
of Rome has brought it by her abuse to one special use and meaning, and in
that use only we impugn it, namely as it imports matters not of temporary
rites and ceremonies indifferently used, but of perpetual doctrine and faith,
which neither in word nor in meaning can be verified and confirmed by the
written word, presupposed and acknowledged to be the word of God. In this sense
we deny Traditions; the name otherwise we reject not; we say that by
testimony of Tradition the notice of the canonical Scriptures is given unto
us. This Master Bishop thinks should make for the credit of their Church of
Rome, dreaming that this must be by the tradition of that Church, or that that
Church must be the witness unto us of this tradition. But therein he very
much deceives himself; amongst all the traditions mentioned by the ancient
Writers, we never find this tradition, that for the number of the books of
canonical Scripture, we must take the tale and tradition of the Church of
Rome. If he can make good any such tradition, he shall find us much the more
favorable for all the rest. Otherwise we do not know why it should not be as
ready for the Church of England, to judge which are canonical Scriptures, as
it is for the Church of Rome. What means should they have for the discerning
of them, that is not as open to us as it is to them? We take the account of
holy Scriptures in the same sort as the ancient Church did, Ruffin in exposit.
symb. Secundum traditionem patrum: Sicut ex patrum monumentis acceptmus. Hilar.
prolog. in Psalm. Secundu^ traditiones veterum.
according to the tradition of the fathers, and out of the monuments of the
fathers. We reckon those only for canonical books, which from the time of
the Apostles, have had certain and undoubted testimony to be so; testimony I
say, of so many Churches, and nations, and peoples, to which at first they were
delivered, and thenceforth used amongst them to be read in their Churches,
expounded in their pulpits, meditated in their houses, which the fathers have
perpetually cited in their books, and opposed in general Councels against
Schismatikes and heretics, to which they have attributed all authority for
the deciding and determining the causes and controversies of the Church, Aug.
in Ioannis epist. tract. 2. Contra quas nullus audeat loqui qui se vult quoquo
modo vocari Christianum.
against which none dare speak, says Saint Austine, who will in any sort be
called a Chrstian man. Idem cont. faust. l. 11. cap. 5. Excellentia canonicae
authoritatis veteris and noui testamenti Apostolorum confirmata temporibus per
successiones episcoporum, and propagationes ecclesiarum tanquam in sede quadam
sublimiter constituta est, cui serutat omnis fidelis and pius intellectus.
The excellency of the canonical authority of the old and new testament,
says he again, being confirmed in the time of the Apostles, has by
succession of Bishops and propagation of Churches been set in a high and
lofty seat, that all faithful and religious understanding may be servant
unto it. Now by the Scriptures which thus irrefragably and unquestionably have
been received universally of the whole Christian world, we learn to judge of
those books adioined to the old testament, whereof question is betwixt the
Church of Rome and us. For in those books as touching the old testament, we
learn that Romans 2.2.
to the Jews were committed the words of God, whereof it follows, that none
are to be accounted the words of God, that were not committed unto them. The
books committed to them our Savior Christ names to have been Luk 24.44.
Moses, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, and calls these Ver. 27.
all the Scriptures, as before was noted. Because then these are all the
Scriptures, and those which we seclude from the Canon are none of these, it
follows that by the sentence of Christ himself, they are declared to be no
Scriptures. And hereto agrees the ancient tradition of the Church of the
Jews, recorded by Josephus, who acknowledges that they had Joseph. cont.
Apion. lib. 1. Su^t nobis solummodo duo and viginti libri quoru^ just fides ad
nutitur. Horum quinque sunt Moseos etc. Amorie Moseos vsque ad Artaxerxem
Persaru^ regem Prophetae temporum suorum res gestas conscripserunt in tredecim
libris. Reliqui vero quatuor hymns in Deum and vitae humanae praecepta
noscuntur continere.
only two and twenty books, to which justly they gave credit, whereof five
are the books of Moses: From whom to the time of Artaxerxes King of Persia,
the Prophets wrote the matters of their times in thirteen books, which are
thus reckoned, 1. Iosuah. 2. the Judges with Ruth. 3. the two books of Samuel.
4. the two books of Kings. 5. the two books of Chronicles. 6. Ezra and
Nehemiah. 7. Esther. 8. Job. 9. Esaias. 10. Jeremy. 11. Ezechiel. 12. Daniel. 13.
the book of the twelve lesser Prophets. The other four, says he, contain
Hymns and Songs to God, and precepts of humane life, which are, the Psalms,
the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Canticles. Of those things which were
afterward written, he says, Ab Artaxerxe vsque ad nostrum tempus singulae
sunt conscripta, no^ tamen priori simili fide sunt habita, co quod non fuerit
cert^ successio prophetarum.
that they were not of like credit to the former, because there was no certain
succession of Prophets amongst them. This tradition the Jews hold constantly
and inuiolably till this day, and in their dispersion through the world, do
still give witness to the books that were delivered to their fathers, God by
his providence appointing them to be August. cont* faust. lib. 12. cap. 23.
Quid est hodie gen^ ipsa nisi quaeda^ scriniaria Christianorum, ba^ulans legem
and Prophetas in testimonium assertionis ecclesiae.
the roll-keepers of the Christians, as Saint Austine notes, carrying the law
and the Prophets for the testimony of that which the Church teaches. If God
then have appointed them to be witnesses of those books of the old Testament,
which should serve for the assertion of our faith in the new, we should do
amiss to admit of other books of the old Testament for assertion of our
faith, whereof they give no witness. This computation of the Scriptures
according to their tradition, is followed by the fathers of the Christian
Church, professing exactly to set down the number of Canonical books, as by
Eusebius. lib. 4: cap. 25. Veteris instrumenti libros diligenter cogritos subieci:
Where wisdom in the Greek is added by apposition to the Proverbs, so called
by the ancients.
Melito Bishop of Sardis, by Jdem. lib 6. cap. 24. Where a fault is committed
by Eusebius, in leaving out the book of the twelve lesser Prophets, for the
two and twentieth.
Origin, by Athan. in Synopsi.
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, by Epiphan de men's. and pond.
Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, by the whole Council of Council. Laodic. cap. 59.
Laodicea, for the Greek and Eastern Churches, and for the Latin and
Western Churches, by Hilar. Prolog. in Psalm. Ita secundum traditiones veterum
deputantur.
Hilarie, by Hieron. in Prolog. Galeato.
Hierome, by Ruffinus in expositione Symboli.
Ruffinus, all reckoning for Canonical Scriptures the same that we do, and
excluding from the Canon the same that we exclude. The same reckoning we find
in the Canons, which have gone in the Church of Rome under the name of the
Canons of the Apostles; only Canon. Apostol. 84.
three books of Machabees are foisted in, of which we read not to that
purpose any other-where. Yea, and that they went not in that account in the
Church of Rome, is apparent by Gregory Bishop there, who being to apply the
example of Eleazar in the Machabees, to the matter that he had in hand, says;
Gregor. Moral. lib. 19. cap. 13. De quae re non inordinate agimus si ex libris
licet no^ canonicis, sed ta^^n ad ecclesiae edificatione^ editis exempli^m
proferamus. Eleazar enim, etc.
Of this thing we shall not do amiss, to bring an example out of the books,
though not canonical, yet set forth for the edification of the Church. In
which words he plainly shows, that neither the books of Machabees, nor the
rest of that sort were holden for canonical Scriptures, albeit they were set
forth to be read, for that they contained many things profitable for the
edifying of the people. For this cause S. Austine reckons them amongst the
canonical books, but because he confesses, as we have seen, that in
contradiction they have not that August. cont. faust. lib. 28. cap. 4.
Confirmatiua authoritate clarescerent.
confirmatiue authority, which elsewhere he names for the prerogative of the
Scriptures, he thereby confesses that they are not truly canonical, because
it is for that authorities sake that the name of canonical Scriptures is given
to those to which it does appertain. Therefore we reckon him also as a
witness of this tradition, whereby our Church discerns what books we are to
approve for determining faith and doctrine in the Church, and under that name
to commend as the infallible Oracles of God, to the devotion of the people. But
now Master Bishop will ask, what the reason is, that admitting this tradition
we do not admit also of other their traditions, of which we also read in the
writings of the fathers? Whereto to say nothing that their traditions are
uncertain as touching their beginning, variable in their proceeding, corrupt
in their use, and many of them vpstart devices, shamefully and lewdly
attributed to the fathers, whereas this tradition of the Scriptures without
alteration or interruption, has had constant and perpetual acknowledgment
both of the whole nation of the Jews; and of the whole Christian Church
throughout the whole world, from the beginning until this day, we answer
him, that by this tradition it self, we are instructed against the admitting
of their traditions. For this tradition or delivering of the Scriptures from
God, is as the delivering of a commission from a Prince. For as by the
commission the subject is directed what to do in the Princes service, and is
thereby listed and bounded so, as to do nothing but according to the tenure and
warrant of the commission, being punishable if he shall attempt any thing
further upon his own head: so by this commission of holy Scripture delivered
unto us by the Church from God, we are instructed and limited what to believe
and what to do as touching faith and duty toward God, and are justly to be
punished if we shall dare in any sort to go beyond the bounds and warrant of
this commission: yea and the Church it self is to hold and profess it self
so tied to the precepts and rules of this commission, as that it may not
presume to obtrude or thrust any thing upon the people of God to be believed
and taught, but whereof it has thereby received warrant and instruction from
God himself. And if the Church shall further attempt or enterprise any thing,
as the Church of Rome does, it is to receive check and controlement from this
writ of Gods commission; neither are we to think our selves discharged for
that we are thus told by the bearer of the writ, so long as by the writ it
self we are commanded otherwise.

18. W. BISHOP.
The two next arguments for traditions, be not well propounded by Master
Perkins. The third is to be framed thus: Either all the books of holy
Scripture contain all needful doctrine to salvation, or some certain of them
without the rest; not some of them without the rest, for then the other should
be superfluous, which no man holds: therefore all the books of holy
Scripture put together, do contain all necessary instruction. Now then the
argument follows, but some of those books of holy Scripture have been lost,
therefore some points of necessary doctrine contained in them are not extant in
the written word, and consequently to be learned by tradition. Master Perkins
answers, first supposing some of the books to be lost, that all needful
doctrine which was in them, is in some of the others preserved. But why did he
not solue the argument proposed? were then those books superfluous? Does the
holy Ghost set men to pen needless discourses? which this answer supposes:
therefore he gives a second more shameful, that none be perished, which is
most contrary unto the plain Scriptures, 1. Paral. vit. 2 Paral. 9.
as S. John, Chrysostom proves, Hom. 9. in Mat. Et hom. 7 an priorem ad
Corinth.
where he has these express words: That many of the Prophetical books were
lost, may be proved out of the history of Paralipomenon (which they translate
Chronicles.) Now as for M. Perkins guesses, that some of them are yet extant,
but otherwise called, some were but little roles of paper, some profane and of
Philosophy, I hold them not worth the discussing, being not much pertinent,
and auowed on his word only, without either any reason or authority.

R. ABBOT.
Of this argument well propounded, we deny the minor proposition. We say that
some of the Scriptures, though some other had miscarried, should contain all
doctrine needful to salvation. The consequence that he makes thereof, that
then those other are superfluous, is childish and absurdly injurious to the
Scripture. The same doctrines are contained in a hundred places of holy
Scripture, and who will hereupon conclude that they are superfluous in one
place because they are contained in another? The Evangelists diverse times
record the same stories, and even word for word; and must it follow, that the
latter did superfluously write that which the former had set down? There is no
point of necessary doctrine and faith contained in any one book of holy
Scripture, but the same has testimony and witness of other books. Matters
of fact and circumstance there may be one where, which otherwhere are not
mentioned, but points of necessary doctrine and faith, have manifold testimony
of the written word. Supposing it then to be true which M. Bishop says, that
some of the old books were lost, which the wisdom of God thought necessary
for those times, though unnecessary for us, yet it cannot be inferred hereof,
that any doctrine was thereby lost, because though there might be some matters
of story there only mentioned, yet there could be no matter of doctrine that
was not contained in Moses law. And if Master Bishop will needs persuade us,
that some points of doctrine were there delivered that are not in other
scripture, and must now be learned by tradition, we desire to understand
whether by tradition he have learned what those traditions were, and that out
of their Churches treasury of traditions he will discover these secrets, of
which neither the Prophets nor Evangelists, nor Apostles, nor Fathers, nor
Councels were ever able to inform us. He tells us that Chrysostom affirms
the loss of those books; but does Chrysostom tell him of any doctrines
derived by tradition from those books? Surely he wanted some proof for the
Popes triple crown and his year of Iubile, and the great storehouse of merits
and satisfactions at Rome, and dreaming it in his sleep, believed it when he
was awake, that these matters were written of in these books, and the books
being now lost, they come to us by a tradition of which the world never heard
any thing for the space of two or three thousand years. But we must think
that he wrote not these things for us, but for them who he thought would be
more ready to believe him then we are. Now M. Perkins further answers, that
though those books were lost, yet it follows not that any part of the Canon
of the Scripture was lost, because there might be books which were not
reckoned for Scripture books. For proof hereof he brings the words of the
Apostle, Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning,
arguing hereof, that because books that be lost cannot serve for our learning,
and all the books of scripture that were formerly written, were to serve for
our learning, therefore no books of scripture formerly written could be lost.
M. Bishop after his manner, calls it a shameful answer, but says not a word
to disprove it. He tells us that there were such books, but he proves not
that they were books of scripture, and to the reason alleged out of the
Apostles words he replieth nothing at all, and therefore I pass him over,
without any further answer.

19. W. BISHOP.
Master Perkins his fourth objection of the Jewish Cabala, is a mere dream of
his own: our argument is this, Moses who was the penman of the old Law,
committed not all to writing, but delivered certain points needful to
salvation by tradition; nor any Lawmakers that ever was in any country,
comprehended all in letters, but established many things by customs, therefore
not likely that our Christian law should be all written.

That Moses did not pen all, thus we prove: it was as necessary for women to be
delivered from original sin as men. Circumcision the remedy for men, could
not possible be applied to women, as every one who knows what circumcision is
can tell; neither is there any other remedy provided in the written law, to
deliver women from that sin: therefore some other remedy for them was
delivered by tradition.

Item, if the child were likely to die before the eight day, there was remedy
for them, as the most learned do hold, yet no where written in the law. Also
many Gentiles, during the state of the old Testament, were saved, as Job, and
many such like, according to the opinion of all the ancient Fathers: yet in
the Law, or any other part of the old Testament, it is not written what they
had to believe, or how they should live: wherefore many things needful to
salvation were then delivered by tradition.

To that reason of his, that God in his providence should not permit such a
loss of any part of the Scripture: I answer, that God permits much evil.
Again, no great loss in that, according to our opinion, who hold that
tradition might preserve what was then lost.

R. ABBOT.
It concerns M. Bishop to speak well of the Jewish Cabala; for if the Cabala
be not good, certainly Popish traditions are stark naught; the Jews having as
good warrant for the one, as the Papists for the other. Both of them to
purchase credit to their own fancies and devices, betook themselves to this
shifting pretense, that the word of God was delivered first by Moses, and then
by Christ and his Apostles, partly written and partly unwritten. Whatsoever
they have listed to bring in, either of curiosity or for profit, they have
referred it to the unwritten word, and this has been the sink of all both
Jewish and Popish superstition, both verifying in themselves that which our
Savior obiecteth to the one, Mat. 15.6.
Ye have made the commandment of God of no authority by your tradition. M.
Bishop here like a loving brother takes the Jews by the hand, and will help
them for the maintenance of their traditions, that by them he may gain some
reputation to his own. His proofs for them are such as that without doubt they
being but dul-heads in co^pariso^ of him, were never able for themselves to
devise the like. That Moses committed not all to writing, he proves, because
it was necessary for women to be delivered from original sin; but they could
not be delivered from it by circumcision, not being capable thereof, and no
other remedy is provided in the written law; therefore some other remedy was
delivered for them by tradition. Further he alleges, that there was remedy
for children dying before the eight day, before which they might not be
circumcised: but there is none found written, therefore it was delivered by
tradition. O the excellent wit of this man! he has with these arguments so
troubled the whole pack of the Protestants, as that not one of them can tell
what to say. But for our learning, M. Bishop, we are desirous to know of you
what these remedies were that you speak of? What was the ceremony for the
freeing of women from original sin, and children dying before eight days
old? Where have ye found, or how can ye prove that there was any such? Surely
you that can see so far into a millstone of traditions, are able (I trow) to
inform us what it was, if any such thing were. Ridiculous vain man bringing in
steed of proofs fantastical imaginations, whereof he has no ground, nor can
give us any testimony at all, either from the Jews themselves, or from other
ancient writers, but only out of the presumptions and idle dreams of some of
their own schoolmen. Yea and in this device of his he crosses the doctrine of
his own part: for tell us M. Bishop, did circumcision take away original sin?
If it did so, what difference then betwixt the sacraments of the old Testament
and of the new? You are wont to tell us, that the sacraments of the old
Testament did signify grace, but not give grace: that they did signify the
taking away of sin, but not take it away: that they did signify
justification, but did not justify. Therefore Bellarmine accordingly
determines, that circumcision did not justify or take away sin, but in that
respect was of as little force as uncircumcision, yea and argues that if
circumcision had justified, then justification should have been proper to men,
because men only are circumcised; so far is he from conceiving that some
other remedy was provided for women in steed of circumcision. For expounding
the Apostles words, Rom 3.29.
Is God the God of the Jews only, as if he had said, Bellar. de effec.
sacram. cap. 14. Quasi dicat, Deus est omnium Deus: quomodo, igitur credibile
est cum dedisse remedium contra peccatu^ solis Iudaeis? Possumus nos etiam hinc
aliter argumentari: An masculoru^ Deus tantu^? nonne et foeminarum? Quis ergo
credat Deum dedisse remedium quod solis masculis prosit?
God the God of all; how then is it credible that he should give remedy against
sin to the Jews only? he adds: We may hence also argue, Is God the God of
men only? is he not also the God of women? Who then will believe that he gave
a remedy (against sin) that should be available for men only? His
resolution then is, that circumcision was no remedy against sin, because God
would not appoint a remedy against sin (as he conceiueth) which should not be
common to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, to women as well as men. Now
therefore inasmuch as M. Bishops foundation fails, surely that which he
builds upon it must needs fall, and look what he will say was the delivering
of men from original sin, the same he must confess has been the delivering
of women also, so that either he must resolve one means for both out of the
written word, or pass over to tradition unwritten; and if he have not a
tradition for both, then all his matter of Jewish tradition must come to
naught, and there is nothing proved but that Moses committed all to the written
law. But his phrase of delivering from original sin, implies an error
before confuted in the question of that point. Our regeneration consists in
the forgiveness of sins, and the first fruits of the sanctification of the
holy Ghost, the same spirit working sometimes without any sign or sacrament of
initiation, as in the fathers until the time of Abraham, who himself was
justified before the sacrament of Circumcision; sometimes with that sign of
circumcision, proper in execution to men only, but yet sealing the fruit of
Gods promise and the effect of his spirit both to men and women Ephesians. 1.5.9.
according to the purpose of the grace of God: sometimes with a sign common
both to men and women, as in our baptism we see, thereby showing that he
works freely according to his own will, not tying himself to outward
signs, but saving only by his grace, either with signs where they are, or
without, where either there is no institution, as in the beginning, or there
wants means and opportunity of execution, as often befell in circumcision of
the old Testament, and does befall in baptism of the new. Now as touching M.
Bishops third reason, it is as reasonlesse as the former, so that we may wonder
that the author of it should be so without reason. Job and many such like
Gentiles (says he) were saved. Very true. But in the Law or any other part of
the old Testament it is not written what they had to believe or how they should
live. But that is not true: for seeing there is but Ephesians. 4.5.
one faith, 2. Corin. 4.13.
the same spirit of faith of the whole body of Christ from the beginning to the
end, by that faith that is written in the law of Moses, we know what they had
to believe, and according to that faith how they ought to live. Yea and where
it is written, what they did believe and how they did live, there it is written
what they had to believe, and how they were to live. But in the book of Job it
is written of himself and of his friends, what they did believe, and what the
ordering of their life was, all according to the law of Moses, and the faith
therein contained. It is therefore untrue which M. Bishop says, that it is not
written what they had to believe or how they were to live. But yet giving the
man his way, let us see what his conclusion is: Therefore (says he) many
things needful to salvation were then delivered by tradition. We may see his
head was troubled, and he had forgotten what he was to conclude; for this his
conclusion should have been, Therefore Moses committed not all to writing. But
this would not follow; for though it were not namely written of Job what he had
to believe, yet we cannot hereof infer, that therefore he had any thing else
to believe but that that is written. What hinders I say, but that Moses may
be conceived to set down the faith whereby Job was to be saved, though he do
not expressly say, that Job was to believe thus. But it may be that M. Bishop
meant, that that conclusion should be subordinate to the former, and so would
reason thus, Job and such like received many things by tradition, therefore
Moses committed not all to writing. Yet neither can this stand good, because
nothing lets but that Moses might commit to writting all that faith that Job
received by tradition. Job was Ambros. Offic. lib. 1. caep. 36. Job antiqutor
Mose, etc.
auncienter then Moses, as Ambrose says, and might receive the doctrine of
faith by word and tradition of other men; but yet we see that that faith is no
other but what Moses after comprised in the written law. Albeit what that
tradition was, has been Sect. 1.
before declared, not resting in relation from one man to another, but
continually renewed and confirmed by revelation and illumination immediately
from God, being certainly corrupted by tradition where he did not graciously
show himself for the preservation of it. And as for other Gentiles, whosoever
they were that were saved after the writing of the Law, they were saved only
by that faith which the scriptures of Moses and the Prophets have described
unto us. But M. Bishop not content to bring Moses alone for a patron of
traditions, tells us beside, that not any lawmakers in any country
comprehended all in letters, but established many things by custom: therefore
(says he) it is not likely that our Christian law should be all written. Where
we may justly hiss at his gross and wilful absurdity, that will measure the
Lawmakers of heaven with the lawmakers of the earth, and by imperfection in
the laws of men, will argue imperfection in the laws of God. No understanding
of man can either by laws or by customs provide for all occurrents of the
commonwealth, but daily there are arising and growing the occasions of new
laws; and will he then frame the light of God to the measure of our darkness?
And yet what lawmaker has there been, or is there in the world, who if he were
able to comprehend an absolute perfection of all laws, would not certainly
take course to set the same down in writing, as being the only secure and safe
way for the perpetuating thereof? And if we will thus conceive of any wise and
reasonable man, how much more should we attribute it to the wisdom of God,
that knowing the slippernesse and mutabilitie of the minds and thoughts of men,
he would for safety and assurance set down in writing whatsoever he would
have to stand for law of worship and service toward him? I need not to stand
upon this, for the comparison is of it self so odious and absurd, as that
every man may wonder that the man's discretion should fail him so far as to
reason in this sort. For conclusion of this section, a toy took him in the head
concerning somewhat said by M. Perkins in the sectio^ before. It was said that
it should call the providence of God in question, to say that any part of
Scripture should be lost. M. Bishop answers, that God permits much evil.
True, but he permits no evil injurious to his own glory. M. Perkins
supposes out of that that was said before, that all Scripture was at first
written for our learning. To say that it was intended for our learning, and yet
is now lost, what is it but to call in question the providence of God? His
other answer, that there should be no great loss, because tradition might
preserve that which was then lost, is a temerarious and witless presumption,
contrary to the experience of all ages, whereby it is found that nothing is
continued according to the first original which is delivered by word only from
man to man. And his assertion is so much the more ridiculous in this behalf,
for that he knows not any thing that Tradition has preserved that was
written in those books. If Tradition have preserved any thing thereof from
being lost, let him acquaint us with it; or if he cannot do so, let him give us
leave to take him for that we find him, a mere babbler, giving himself
liberty to say any thing without fear or wit.

20. W. BISHOP.
Now instead of M. Perkins his fifth reason for us of milk and strong meat:
wishing him a mess of Pap for his childish proposing of it, I will set down
some authorities out of the written word, in proof of traditions.

Our Savior said, being at the point of his passion, John 16.12.
that he had many things to say unto his Apostles, but they could not as then
bear them. Acts 1.
Our Savior after his resurrection appeared often unto his Disciples, speaking
with them of the kingdom of God, of which little is written in any of the
Evangelists.

1. Cor. 11.
I commend you brethren that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Traditions even as I have delivered them to you.

1. Tim. 6.
O Timothy, keep the depositum, that is, that which I delivered thee to keep:
2. Tim. 1.
Hold fast by the holy Ghost, the good things committed unto thee to keep:
which was as S. Chrysostom and Theophylact expound, the true doctrine of
Christ, the true sense of holy Scriptures, the right administration of the
Sacraments, and government of the Church: to which alludeth that ancient holy
Martyr S. Irenaeus, Lib. 3. c. 4.
saying, that the Apostles laid up in the Catholic Church, as in a rich
treasury, all things that belong to the truth.

S. John who was the last of the Apostles left alive, said, Epist. 3.13.
that he had many other things to write, not idle or superfluous, but would not
commit them to ink and pen, but referred them to be delivered by word of mouth.
And to specify for example sake some two or three points of greatest
importance, where is it written that our Savior the Son of God, is (...),
that is, of the same substance with his Father? Where is it written, that the
holy Ghost proceeds from the Son as well as from the Father? Where is it
written that there is a Trinity, that is, three persons really distinct in one
and the very same substance? And that there is in our Savior Christ Jesus no
person of man, but the substance of God and man subsisting in the second person
of the Trinity? Be not all and every of these, principal articles of the
Christian faith, and most necessary to be believed of the learned, and yet not
one of them in express terms written in any part of the holy Bible? Wherefore
we must either admit traditions, or leave the highest mysteries of our
Christian faith unto the discretion and courtesy of every wrangler, as shall
be more declared in the argument following.

R. ABBOT.
The mess of pap has scalded M. Bishops mouth, and he would feign put it off
to M. Perkins. He is ashamed of the childishness of this reason, yet not
denying it to be one of theirs, but only blaming M. Perkins his manner of
proposing it, whereas we imagine he would have done it, if he had known how to
have proposed it in better sort. But because he is so desirous to pass it
over, let us be content also to let it go, leaving the mess of pap to them
whose the reason is, and let us follow him to examine the authorities which he
brings for proof of their traditions. The first is from the words of Christ
John 16.12.
at the point of his passion, saying that he had many things to say unto his
Apostles, but they could not as then bear them. Which words being of old a
special refuge Tertul. de veland virgin.
of Montanus the heretic, an ancient Papist, we cannot wonder to be used now
by the Papists for the shrowding of that trash and the like as they have
borrowed of him. But of these words so much has bin said Sect. 7.
before, as that I need not here to stand upon them any further. His second
authority is that in the Acts, concerning our Saviors appearing to his
Disciples Act. 1.3.
by the space of forty days, and speaking of the things which appertain to
the kingdom of God. Of these things (says M. Bishop) little is written in any
of the Evangelists. And we desire to know what he has learned of those things
by tradition; and if he will name to us these or these things, we desire to
know how he can prove that those were the things whereof Christ spoke: if he
cannot prove it, we reject his foolish presumption, and can much better deny
then he affirm. What those things were, by tradition we know nothing, but by
Scripture we do know. The effect of all his speeches is set down by S. Luke in
his last chapter. There he makes his Apostles Luke 24.48.
witnesses of those things which he spoke. What they witnessed, appears in
their sermons every where in the Acts of the Apostles, and in their Epistles
and writings, all consonant and agreeable to that brief sum there expressed
by S. Luke. Now then to argue as we have done before, we are sure as touching
the things that are written, that they are of those things whereof Christ spoke;
but how does M. Bishop prove that he spoke any thing more then that that is
written? It is expressed by S. Luke that the things whereof Christ spoke were
things appertaining to the kingdom of God. But S. Paul Acts 28.23.
testified the kingdom of God out of the law of Moses and out of the Prophets.
The things therefore which Christ spoke, as is also imported in the Luk
24.27.44 46.
last of S. Lukes Gospel, were no other but according to the scriptures of
Moses and the Prophets, and therefore M. Bishops conceit of matters unwritten
must needs be an idle dream. Thirdly he alleges the Apostles words,
commending the Corinthians for that 1. Cor. 11.2.
they kept the traditions even as he had delivered the same unto them. Where we
find the name of traditions, which we deny not, but traditions of doctrine
that should remain unwritten we find not. By traditions we understand here out
of the circumstance of the words following, rites and ceremonies prescribed by
the Apostle for order and decency in the public assembly of their Church,
which kind of traditions M. Perkins has acknowledged in the beginning of this
question. If M. Bishop will allege that this is but a shift, and will needs
enforce that it must be understood of matters of doctrine, we will gratify him
so far, but still we require him to prove that those matters of doctrine were
any other then were afterward put in writing. There was but little of the new
Testament written at the writing of this Epistle. Those things which were
afterward written, must needs be understood in these traditions whereof the
Apostle speaks, if we understand them of doctrine, because we know that by
his preaching he had delivered those things unto them. And if the Apostles
words be necessarily to be understood of those things that are written, we
desire to know how they can enforce any necessity of understanding any other
things thereby. One of these traditions he mentions afterward, Ver. 23.
the institution of the Lords Supper. It is written by himself, it is written
by the Evangelists. Here is then a tradition, but no tradition unwritten. The
sacrament of Baptism was another of his traditions, but that is written also.
Another tradition he himself expresses, to have been 1. Cor. 15.3.
the death and resurrection of Christ, but that tradition is also plentifully
contained in the Scriptures. So elsewhere he signifies it to have been his 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
tradition, that he which would not labor should not eat, and that tradition
he has also Ver 1
there set down in writing. Now since these were of the number of his
traditions, and yet are written, what should hinder but that the rest are
written as well as these? M. Bishop alleges the place, and so leaves it
without head or tail: there is the name of traditions, and that is enough for
him, whereas if he should draw an argument from thence for their traditions, he
knows that his folly would too plainly appear. His next citation is out of
S. Paul to Timothy: 1. Tim. 6.20.
O Timothy keep the depositum, says he. Where we see that one ape will be
like another: his masters of Rhemes would affect a foolish kind of singularity
in translating, and he will show himself as wise as they. Why could they not as
well have given us English, and said, keep that that is committed unto thee to
keep, seeing that is the signification of the word depositum. Yet in the other
place he is content to leave them, 2. Tim. 2.14.
Hold fast by the holy Ghost the good things committed unto thee to keep, where
they read, keep the good depositum. But what is that that was thus committed
to Timothy to keep? He tells us, that it was the true doctrine of Christ,
the true sense of holy Scriptures, the right administration of the Sacraments,
and the government of the Church. But what of all this? We expected unwritten
traditions, and in all these things we see no necessity to understand any
thing but that that is contained in the Scriptures. In the Scriptures we learn
the true doctrine of Christ; and whatsoever is contained in the true sense of
Scripture, is contained in the Scripture. There we learn whatsoever
necessarily belongs to the administration of Sacraments and government of the
Church. But our question is here of necessary doctrines which are neither
contained in the word nor sense of holy Scripture, and M. Bishop does amiss in
the citing of these places, unless he can make it good, that such were
committed to Timothy by S. Paul. Albeit those particulars are neither set down
by Chrysostom nor Theophylact; only Theophylact generally expounds the
words thus, Theop. int. Tim. cap. 6. Quaecunque scilicet tibi sunt per me
demandata, tanquam Domini praecepta seruata, nec horu^ quicquam imminues.
2. Tim. 3.15.
Whatsoever things have been committed unto thee by me, keep as the
commandments of the Lord, and diminish nothing thereof. Now although those
words have reference to more then is written in those two epistles, yet they
have not reference absolutely to more then is written, because in the latter of
those Epistles the Apostle plainly tells him, that q the Scriptures are able
to make him wise unto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. As
for that which M. Bishop alleges out of Irenaeus, it is nothing at all to his
purpose. He says that Iren. lib. 3. ca 4. Apostili quasi in depositoriu^ d^ues
plenissime in Ecclesiae contuleru^t omnia quae sunt veritatis.
the Apostles have laid up in the Church, as in a rich treasury, all things
that belong to the truth: but how they have laid the same up in the Church, he
has before expressed: Ibid. cap. 1.
The Gospel which they first preached, they after by the will of God delivered
to us in the Scriptures to be the foundation and pillar of our faith. Thus then
the Church is the treasury of truth, by having the Scriptures which are the
oracles of all truth. His last authority is taken from the words of S. John
which he uses in his two latter Epistles: Having many things to write unto
you, I would not write with paper and ink, but I trust to come unto you and
speak with you mouth to mouth. We see S. John's words, but hard it is to say
how we should conclude traditions from them. S. John would write no more to them
in that sort, or in those Epistles; but does it follow hereof that he would
teach them any thing that is not contained in the Scriptures? He might have
many things to write unto them according to the Scriptures; and what should
lead us to presume that he should mean it of other things whereof we are
taught nothing there? In a word, what is there in the citing of all these
authorities but impudent and shameless abusing of ignorant men, whilst for a
color he only sets them down, and for shame dares not set down how that
should be inferred that is in question betwixt us and them? But to fill up the
measure of this illusion he goes on yet further, and by way of specification
asks, Where is it written that the Son of God is of the same substance with
the Father? or that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Son as well as from
the Father? or that there is a Trinity, that is, three persons really distinct
in one and the very same substance? or that there is in Christ the substance of
God and man subsisting in one second person of the Trinity? Absurd and wilful
wrangler, where was it written which Christ said, Luke 24.46.
Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer and to rise again
from the dead the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins should
be preached in his name amongst all nations. Where is it written in the
Prophets which S. Peter alleges, Acts 10.43.
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name all that believe in
him shall have forgiveness of sins? Where do Moses and the Prophets say
that which Saint Paul says, Ibid. 26.22.23.
they do say that Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that
should rise from the dead, and should show light to the people and to the
Gentiles? To come nearer to him, he has told us before, that the articles of
our Belief are contained in the Scriptures. But where is it written in the
Scriptures, that we should believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven
and earth? or that we should believe in the holy Ghost? or that there is a holy
Catholic Church, a communion of Saints? I will say as he says here, Be not
all these things necessary to be believed, and yet not one of them in express
terms written in any part of the holy Bible? He will say, that though they be
not there written in express terms, yet in effect and substance they are
written there, and are thereby to be declared and proved, and so he will
verify the words of our Savior Christ and his Apostles Peter and Paul, in
those citations of Moses and the Prophets. Wizard, and are not those other
articles then written in the Scriptures, because they are not written in
express terms? Did not the Fathers conceive all those points of faith from
the Scriptures, and by the Scriptures make proof of them? Is it not the rule
of their own schools which I have before mentioned out of Thomas Aquinas,
that Supra. sect. 12.
concerning God nothing is to be said, but what either in words or in sense is
contained in the Scriptures? What, are we maintainers of traditions, in saying
that faith only justifies, that Christ only is our Mediator to the Father,
that Saints are not to be inuocated, nor their images to be worshipped, because
these things are no where written in express terms? Let it not offend thee,
gentle Reader, that I be moved, to see a lewd man laboring by vain
cauillations to sophisticate and delude those that are not able to understand
his cosinage and fraud. It is the cause of God, and who can bear it patiently,
that the souls which Christ has bought should be intoxicated with such
charms? We do not say, that nothing is to be believed but what is written in
the Scriptures in express terms, but we say that nothing is to be believed
but what either is expressed in the Scriptures, or may be proved thereby, and
therefore in oppugning traditions, we oppugn only such doctrines of faith, as
neither are expressed in the Scriptures, nor can be proved by the Scriptures.
Let M. Bishop prove their traditions by the Scriptures, and we will not reject
them for unwritten traditions, but will receive them for written truth. But of
this see what has been said before in the twelfth section of this question,
and in the eleventh section of the answer to his Epistle to the King.

21. W. BISHOP.
The sixth and last reason for traditions: Sundry places of holy Scriptures be
hard to be understood, others doubtful, whether they must be taken literally
or figuratively: if then it be put to every Christian to take their own
exposition, every several sect will coin interpretations in favor of their
own opinions; and so shall the word of God, ordained only to teach us the
truth, be abused and made an instrument to confirm all errors. To avoid which
inconvenience, considerate men have recourse unto the traditions and ancient
records of the Primitive Church, received from the Apostles, and delivered to
the posterity, as the true copies of Gods word: see the true exposition and
sense of it, and thereby confute and reject all private and new glosses which
agree not with those ancient and holy commentaries: so that for the
understanding of both difficult and doubtful texts of Scripture, traditions
are most necessary.

M. Perkins his answer is, that there is no such need of them, but in doubtful
places, the Scripture it self is the best gloss, if there be observed first
the analogy of faith, which is the sum of religion, gathered out of the
clearest places: secondly the circumstance of the place, and the nature and
signification of the words: thirdly the conference of place with place: and
concludes, that the Scripture is falsely termed the matter of strife, it being
not so of it self, but by the abuse of man.

Reply. To begin with his latter words, because I must stand upon the former.
Is the Scripture falsely termed matter of strife, because it is not so of his
own nature? why then, is Christ truly called the stone of offense or no to them
that believe not? S. Peter says, Yes. No, says M. Perkins, 1: Pet. ^.
because that comes not of Christ, but of themselves. But good Sir, Christ is
truly termed a stone of offense, and the Scripture matter of strife, albeit
there be no cause in them of those faults, but because it so falls out by the
malice of men.

The question is not wherefore it is so called, but whether it be so called or
no truly: that which truly is, may be so called truly. But the Scripture truly
is matter of great contention, every obstinate heretic understanding them
according to his own fantasy, and therefore may truly be so termed, although
it be not the cause of contention in it self, but written to take away all
contention.

But to the capital matter, these three rules gathered out of Saint Augustine,
be good directions, whereby sober and sound wits may much profit in study of
Divinity, if they neglect not other ordinary helps of good instructions and
learned commentaries: but to affirm that every Christian may by these means
be enabled to judge which is the true sense of any doubtful or hard text, is
extreme rashness and mere folly. S. Augustine himself well conversant in
those rules, endued with a most happy wit, and yet much bettered with the
excellent knowledge of all the liberal Sciences: yet he having most diligently
studied the holy Scriptures for more than thirty years, with the help also
of the best commentaries he could get, and counsel of the most exquisite, yet
he ingeniously confesses, That there were more places of Scripture, that after
all his study he understood not, then which he did understand Epist. 119. cap.
21.
. And shall every simple man furnished only with M. Perkins his three rules of
not twice three lines, be able to dissolve any difficulty in them whatsoever?
Why do the Lutherans (to omit all former heretics) understand in one sort, the
Caluinists after another, the Anabaptists a third way, and so of other sects?

And in our own country how comes it to pass that the Protestants find one
thing in the holy Scriptures, the Puritans almost the clean contrary? Why I
say is there so great, bitter, and endless contention among brothers of the
same spirit, about the meaning of Gods word? If every one might by the aid of
those triuial notes, readily disclose all difficulties, and assuredly boult out
the certain truth of them. It cannot be but most evident to men of any
judgment, that the Scripture it self can never end any doubtful
controversy, without there be admitted some certain Judge to declare what is
the true meaning of it. And it cannot but redound to the dishonor of our
blessed Savior, to say that he has left a matter of such importance at randon,
and has not provided for his servants an assured mean to attain to the true
understanding of it. If in matters of temporal justice, it should be permitted
to every contentious smatterer in the Law to expound and conster the grounds of
the law and statutes as it should seem fittest in his wisdom, and not be
bound to stand to the sentence and declaration of the Judge, what iniquity
should not be law, or when should there be any end of any hard matter, one
Lawyer defending one part, another the other: one counselor assuring on his
certain knowledge, one party to have the right, another as certainly auerring
not that, but the contrary to be law, both alleging for their warrant some
texts of Law. What end and pacification of the parties could be devised,
unless the decision of the controversy be committed unto the definitive
sentence of some, who should declare whether counselor had argued justly, and
according to the true meaning of the Law: none at all, but bloody debate and
perpetual conflict, each pursuing to get or keep by force of arms, that
which his learned counsel avouched to be his own.

To avoid then such garboiles and intestine contention, there was never yet any
Lawmakers so simple, but appointed some governor and Judge who should see the
due observation of his Laws, and determine all doubts that might arise about
the letter and exposition of the Law, who is therefore called the quick and
lively law; and shall we Christians think that our divine Lawmakers, who in
wisdom, care, and providence, surmounted all others, more than the heavens do
the earth, has left his golden laws at randon, to be interpreted as it should
seem best unto every one pretending some hidden knowledge from we know not
what spirit? no no, it cannot be once imagined without too too great derogation
unto the sovereign prudence of the Son of God.

In the old Testament, which was but a state of bondage, and as it were an
introduction to the new, yet was there one appointed unto whom they were
commanded to repair for the resolution of all doubtful cases concerning the
Law: yea, and bound (were they under pain of death) to stand to his
determination; and shall we be so simple as to suffer our selves to be
persuaded, that in the glorious state of the Gospel, plotted and framed by the
wisdom of God himself, worse order should be taken for this high point of the
true understanding of the holy Gospel it self, being the life and soul of all
the rest?

R. ABBOT.
It is truly said by Thomas Aquinas, that Thom. Aquin. sum. p. 1. q. 39. art.
4. c. In proprietatibus locutionum non tantum attendenda est res significata,
sed etiam modus significandi.
in propriety of speeches we are not only to regard the thing signified, but
also the manner of signification. A speech may be true, and yet true only in
some manner of signification, which therefore in propriety of speech is not
true, because the thing properly and of it self is not that that the speech
imports it to be. Christ, says M. Bishop, is truly called the rock of
offense. Be it so, yet it is true only in some manner of signification in which
it is that the Scripture so calls him; in propriety of speech it is not
true, because Christ of himself and properly is not so. He becomes so to
unbelievers only by their default, and therefore only accidentally and
respectively is so called: set aside the respect, and he cannot be truly called
so. Even so the Scriptures are made a matter of strife by the iniquity and
importunity of evil men, and to them only they are so called, whereas in
themselves they are not so, but properly serve for the ending and determining
of all strife. Master Perkins therefore might justly say, that they are falsely
termed the matter of strife, having respect to the affection and intention of
them by whom they were so termed. For they who gave this name, gave it by way
of deprauing and disgracing the Scriptures, when being required by us to stand
to the judgment of the Scriptures, they refused to do so, and alleged that
the Scriptures could give no judgment, but rather were themselves matter of
controversy and strife; seeking by this pretense to draw all to the
determination of their own Church. But herein they offered indignity and
dishonor to him who has given unto us Psalm. 119.104.105.
his word to be the lantern unto our feet, and the light unto our steps, by
his precepts to get understanding to hate all the ways of falsehood. Froward
men may take occasion to strive about matters of the Scriptures, when
notwithstanding the Scriptures clear those things whereabout they strive.
Tertul de resur. carn. Videntur illis materias quasdam subministrasse and ipsas
quidem ijsdem literis reuincibiles
The Scriptures, says Tertullian, seem to minister matter to heretics, but
yet they are to be convicted by the same Scriptures. Where there is in the
heart humility and obedience to the word of God, there question and
controversy soon ends: but where there is frowardness and selfewill, there
will be no end of contention, howsoever there be apparent conviction. To leave
this, and to come to the matter specially in hand, it seems that M. Bishop
has much forgotten what he was about. The matter in hand is to prove
traditions, that is, doctrines of faith beside the Scriptures, and he makes
here a long discourse concerning the means of attaining to the understanding
of the Scirptures. Let that means be what it may be; in the true understanding
of the Scriptures there is no other but the doctrine of the Scriptures; and
what is that to their traditions? In this argument he and his fellows keep
their wont, that is to trifle and say nothing to the matter whereof they
pretend to speak. Yet to follow them in their own steps, the question is of
the true interpreting and expounding of the Scriptures. It is apparent they
say, what the Scripture says, but it is doubtful what it means. There be
many difficulties; some expound one way, some another way, but how is it to be
known who expounds the right way? M. Perkins brings them in playing their
old trump, that we must have recourse to the tradition of the Church, imitating
therein the old heretics, whose allegation was as Irenaeus records, that
Iren. lib. 3 cap. 2. Cu^ arguuntur ex Scripturis in accusationem conuertuntur
ipsarum scripturarum, etc. quia non possit ex his inuentri veritas ab his qui
nesciant traeditionem.
by the Scriptures the truth could not be found out by them that were ignorant
of tradition. To this M. Perkins answers, that the Scripture it self
declares it own meaning, if we observe the analogy of faith gathered out of
the manifest places of Scripture; if we weigh the circumstance of the place,
and signification of the words; if we diligently weigh and compare one place
with another, and use such other like helps as the Scripture yields. With
these words M. Bishop notably plaieth the sycophant, as if M. Perkins hereby
affirmed, that every Christian man by these means is enabled to judge which is
the true sense of any doubtful or hard text: that every simple man furnished
with these three rules, is able to resolve any difficulty in the Scriptures
whatsoever. Against this he brings in the confession of S. Austine, that
after so long study, the things which he knew not in the Scripture, were more
then those which he did know. Thus he sets up a S. Quintin for himself, and
bestows himself very valiantly in running at it. But where does M. Perkins
profess this effect of those three rules with every Christian man, every
simple man, nay where does he affirm so much of any learned man, be he never
so learned? He sets down those rules as S. Austine does the same and many
other, as necessary helps for the searching of the truth, and by the exercise
whereof men should labor to profit and grow in the understanding of the
Scriptures, and may attain to the knowledge of that truth that is necessary to
salvation, but far was he from conceiving that which M. Bishop speaks of,
that every simple man may thereby resolve all difficulties whatsoever. M.
Bishop for the attaining of the sense of Scripture, refers us to their
Judge, and to the traditions and ancient records of the primitive Church, to
those ancient and holy commentaries. But is he so witless as to think that
any man using this direction of his, shall be thereby enabled in the
Scriptures, to resolve all difficulties whatsoever? If he will have no such
fantastical paradox gathered of that which he says, why does he lay the
imputation of it upon M. Perkins, when it follows no more of M. Perkins
speech one way, then it does of his the other way? As for his question, why the
Lutherans notwithstanding these rules, do understand the Scriptures in one
sort, the Caluinists after another, the Anabaptists a third way, we answer him,
that in his question there is more malice then wit. We ask him the like
question, how it comes to pass that notwithstanding their rules and
directions, yet all these differ from them in the expounding of Scripture? Now
as he will answer that notwithstanding their directions be true, yet that
cannot hinder but that heretics will dissent from them, so we answer him, that
notwithstanding our rules and instructions in this behalf be true, and taken
from the course of the ancient fathers, yet that cannot let, but that Popish
heretics, and selfe-willed Lutherans, and foolish mad Anabaptists will dissent
from us. If he will say that albeit all these dissent from them, yet they
themselves agree in one, the like will be said of all other parties, that
albeit others do vary from them, yet amongst themselves they vary not. It is
therefore no more prejudice to our rules that others dissent from us, then it
is to Papists that we dissent from them. As for the Anabaptists, let him not
put them to us, because we wholly detest them, but rather take them home to
them, because being both of them the wicked offspring of him who is John. 8.44.
a liar, and the father of lies, they have both learned of him to teach men by
equivocations and mental reseruations, to lie, to periure and forswear
themselves. As for our own country, we must tell him that the dissension
betwixt Protestants and Puritanes, was never so mortal and deadly amongst us,
as was the dissension of the secular Priests and Jesuits amongst them; the one
in no sort to be compared to the other. If there might be such a garboile more
then hellish or devilish amongst them without prejudice of their religion,
what prejudice should it be to us, that there is some matter of difference
amongst us? He will say that the maine matter amongst them, was but a matter of
circumstance and of government, and so his wisdom knows, if he list, that
the matters of controversy amongst us, are only matters of ceremony and
form. He will say that they all accorded in the religion established by the
council of Trent, and so let him know, that we on both parts subscribe to the
same articles of religion established amongst us. He will say that there is
some controversy about the meaning of some of those articles amongst us, and
so let him remember that there is great question of the meaning of some of the
articles of the Trent religion amongst them. In a word, we are able always to
justify, that in substantial points of faith there is no so great difference
amongst us, but that there is greater to be proved to have been continually
amongst them. But now M. Bishop having lightly passed over those observations
of M. Perkins, comes himself to set us down a course for the attaining of
the true and right sense of holy Scripture. For the first part whereof, he
bestirreth his Rhetorical stumpes by way of declamation, to show us how
necessary it is, that in the Christian Church there should be a Judge for the
deciding and determining of controversies and questions that arise about the
Scriptures, and if in matters of temporal justice Judges be appointed, and
every lawmakers do ordain governors and Judges for the declaring and
executing of his laws, and God took this course amongst the people of Israel
in the old testament, he tells us that surely Christ in the new testament
would not leave his Church unprovided in this behalf. Where we will seem for
a time not to know his meaning, but will simply answer him, that Christ in this
behalf has provided for his Church, having given thereto Ephe. 4.11.12.
Pastors and teachers for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry, and for the building up of the body of Christ, till we all
meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God unto a
persit man. As in civil states there are appointed magistrates and governors
in towns and cities, for the resolving and deciding of causes and questions of
civil affairs, so has God appointed the ministers of his word, every one
according to the portion of the Lords flock committed unto him, to deliver
what the law of God is, and to answer and resolve cases and doubts, as touching
faith and duty toward God, Tit. 1.9.
to be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and to improve them that speak
against it; to be the same to the people, as God of old required the Priests to
be, Malach. 2.7.
The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and men should seek the law at
his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. If of these Acts.
20.30.
any arise speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them, the rest are
warned Ver. 28.
to take heed to the Lords flock, and therefore are by common sentence and
judgment to condemn such, that thereby the people of God may take knowledge
to beware of the^. But if in the Church any controversy or question depend,
parts being taken this way and that way, so that the unity of faith and peace
of the Church is endangered thereby, the example of the Apostles is to be
imitated, and in solemn assembly and council the matter is to be discussed and
determined, the Bishops and Pastors gathering themselves together either in
lesser or greater company as the occasion does require, and applying
themselves to do that that may be for the peace and edification of the Church.
And this has been the care of godly Christian Princes, that (...) 17.8 9. 2.
^^^on. 1^.8.
as amongst the Jews there was a high court of judgment established for the
matters of the Lord, to the sentence whereof they were appointed to stand, yea
and he that did presumptuously oppose himself, was to die for his contempt; so
there should be in their Christian States consistories of judgment, assemblies
and meetings of Bishops for considering and aduising of the causes of the
Church, and what could not be determined in a lesser meeting should be referred
to a greater, to a Council provincial, or national, or general. By their
authority they have gathered them together, they have sometimes bin themselves
present and sitten with them as moderators, and after as princes have by their
edicts ratified and confirmed what has been agreed upon, as we may see in
Eusebius. de vit. Constant. li 3. ca. 13. Prolatas sententias sensi^^ excipete,
vitissim far openi virique parit, etc. quid ipse sentiret eloqu^.
Constantine the great in the Council of Nice, in Synod. in Trullo per tot.
Praesidente eodem pi^ssimo Impe^tore, etc. Conueniente Synodo secu dum
Imperialem sanctione^.
Constantine the fourth in the sixth Synod at Constantinople in Trullo, in
Toleta^ council. 3. Princips omnes reg^ra^^^ sui pontifi^es in vnu^ conuenire
mandauit, etc. p^^tet.
Reccaredus the King of Spain in the third Council of Toledo. Now therefore
albeit the Empire being divided, and many Princes of diverse dispositions
possessing their several kingdoms and states, there be no expectation or hope
of a general council, yet M. Bishop sees that we hold it necessary that in
every Christian state there should be Judges appointed for the causes and
matters of the Lord and of the Church, even as in our church of England we have
our sovereign Synods prouincial or national, the sentence whereof we account
so weighty, as that no man may dare upon peril of his soul presumptuously to
gainsay the same. But yet with all, for the excluding of his issue, he must
understand that in causes and matters of faith and of the worship of God, we
make these to whom this judgment is committed, not lawgiuers at all, but
Judges only. As therefore the Judge is not his own mouth, but the mouth of the
law, not to speak what he likes, but what the law directs, nor to make any
other construction of the law but what is warranted by the law: even so the
Judge ecclesiastical is to be the mouth of God, not Ezech. 13.3.
to follow his own spirit, nor Ierem. 23.16.
to speak the vision of his own heart, but out of the mouth of the Lord,
neither to make other interpretation of the laws of God, then by the same laws
can be justified and made good. Thus we see, that as God tied the Jews to the
sentence of the Priests, so he required the sentence of the Priests to be
according to the law. Deuteronomy. 17.11.
According to the law, which (law) they shall teach thee, thou shall do; thou
shall not decline from the thing which they shall show thee. Lyra. ibid. Hic
dicit glossa Hebraica, si dixerint tibi quod dextera sit sinistra, vel sinistra
dextera, talis sententia est tenenda quod pataet manifest falsu^ esse, quod
sente^tia nullius hominis cuiuscunque sit authoritatis est tenenda, si
contineat manifest falsitatem vel errorem, and hoc patet per hoc quod
praemittitur in textu. Indicalunt tibi iudicij veritate^; and postea subditur:
Et docuerint te iuxta legem eius. Ex quo patet quod si dicunt falsum vel
declinem a lege Dei manifest, non sunt audiendi.
The Hebrew gloss, says Lyra, here teaches, that if they say to thee, that
the right hand is the left, or the left the right, this sentence is to be
holden, which appears to be manifestly false, says he, because the sentence
of no man is to be holden of what authority so-euer he be, if it do manifestly
contain falsehood and error, and this is plain by that that is put before in
the text, They shall show thee the truth of judgment, and is afterward added,
They shall teach thee according to the law, whereby it is plain that if they
say any thing false, or decline manifestly from the law of God, they are not to
be hearkened unto. It is not then so to be conceived, as that obedience should
be absolutely due unto them, because as in the civil state there may be
corrupt Judges that wrest the law, and give sentence against law, so there may
be corrupt men also in places of ecclesiastical judgment, men more affected
to their own will, then to the word of God, seeking rather themselves then
Jesus Christ. It is therefore to be observed, that as in matters of civil
justice, some things there are in the law so clear, that if the sentence of
the Judge be contrary thereto, every man may discern and see that he swarueth
from the truth, neither will a man take it to be law which the Judge
pronounces, because his own eyes perceive the contrary; so those things that
concern faith and religion toward God, some things by the Scripture it self
are so apparent and plain, as that it is manifest, that not for any ambiguity
in themselves, but by the iniquity and frowardness of men they are called into
question; and that to question the exposition, is nothing else but to seek
collusion. In which cases the Judge has no more to do, but to deliver the
peremptory sentence of God himself, Aug. ac bapt. cont. Donat lib. 2. ca. 6.
Ass. ramu^ fra^eram diuinam in scripturis sanctis, and in illa quid sit grauius
appendamus imm^ non appendamus, sed a Domino appensa recognoscamus.
not to weigh, as S. Austine says, but to recognize and acknowledge what the
Lord has already weighed. Sometimes matters are more hard and doubtful, not
so much happily of themselves, as by means of opposition and contradiction, and
therefore are not so readily plain, until they be made plain. For the
explaning and declaring whereof, the Church as the Judge is to use the help of
the law it self, that is, of the holy Scripture, and to that purpose to apply
the rules before expressed, and so not by mere authority, but by testimony
and warrant, to approve to the conscience of every man the sentence that shall
be given for determining the thing in doubt. O^^gen in Le^^^ h^^ 5. Inductus
testa^ent^s l^^^t omne ve^^u^ quod ad Dea^ ^^^tinet requiri and dis^uti, atque
ex ^^sis omnim rerum scienti^m capi. Siquid aute^ superficerit quod non diuina
scriptura decernat, nulla alia tertia scriptura debet ad authoritatem scientia
suscipi, sed quod superest, Deo reserueni^.
By the two testaments, says Origin, every word that pertains to God, may be
sea^ched out and discussed and all knowledge of things may be taken from them,
and if there be any thing further, which the holy Scripture determines not,
there ought no other writing be received for authority of knowledge, but what
remains we must reserve to God. Ide^ in Ierem. ho. ^. Necesse est nobis
Scripturas sanctas in testimonium vocare. Sensus quippe nostri and enarrationes
si^e his testibus non habent fidem.
It is necessary for us, says he, that we call the holy Scriptures to
witness; for our senses and expositions without these witnesses have no
credit. Idem in Math. tr. 25. Dibemus ad testimonium omnium verboru^ quae
proferimus in doctrina, proferre s^^sum Scripturae qu^si confirm entera que^
exp^^^mus sensum. Sicut enim omne aurum quodquod fuerit extra templum non est
sancti fi^arum, sic omnis sensus qui ^uerit extra diuinam Scripturam, qu^muis
ad^^rab^lis videatur quibusdam, non est sanctus, quia non continetur a sensu
Scripturae quae sol^^ cum solum sensum santifi^are qu^^ in se habet.
We must, says he again, for witness of all the words which we utter in
teaching bring forth the sense of Scripture, as co^firming the sense which we
deliver: for as all the gold which was without the temple was unholy, so every
sense which is without the holy Scripture, though to some it may seem
admirable, is unholy, because it is not contained of the sense of Scripture,
which is wont to make holy, only that sense which it has in it self. By this
rule the judgment of the Church is to proceed, and so to use the gift of
interpretation, as that he that gainsaieth may be convicted as by the testimony
of God himself, and they who have not the gift of interpretation, may yet see
and perceive that their constructions and expositions are according to the
Scripture. Now if the Church in their affirming or expounding, shall contrary
that which the Scripture has manifestly taught, and under pretense of being
the Judge in the causes of God, shall judge against God, what shall we then do?
Surely as a private man may by ordinary knowledge of the law, be able to accuse
a Judge of high treason against his Prince, eue^ so in this case a private man
by ordinary knowledge of the law of God, may be able to accuse the Church of
high treason against God. And as it is ridiculous in case of treason, to
allege that it belongs to the Judge to give the meaning of the law, and to
leave him at liberty to expound it, that it may rest thereupon whether his own
fact be treason or not; so it is in like sort ridiculous, to allege that it
belongs to the Church, to make the meaning of the Scriptures; that the Church
is Judge, and it must rest in the power thereof, by expounding the scriptures to
determine whether that which it self commands, be offense to God or not. The
Church indeed is Judge, but tied to bounds of law; if the Church judge against
the evidence of the law, then God himself by his own word is to be the Judge.
For what an absurdity shall it be further to require a Judge, where God
himself has pronounced a sentence, or to enquire after a meaning where the
law speaks as plainly as the Judge can devise to speak? When the Judges of
the people of the Jews said, E^. 8.12.
A confederacy, and Esaias the Prophet cried out, say not, A confederacy, that
is, follow not them that lead you to leagues and covenants with idolatrous
nations, who was to be the Judge betwixt them? Esaias says to the people: Ver 20.
To the law and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them. Who was to be the Judge when the
Prophet Jeremy said one thing, and Ierem 26.1^.
the Priests and Prophets who were the Judges, said another? They said, Ver. 15.
This man is worthy to die: he says, If ye put me to death, ye shall bring
innocent blood upon your selves. Who was now to be judge betwixt them? Surely
none but Ver 4.
the laws which God had set before them, to which he calls them; Cap. 11. 3.
4.
the covenant which he commanded their Fathers when he brought them out of the
land of Egypt. When our Savior Christ stood on the one side, and the Judges,
namely, the high Priests, and Scribes, and Elders of the people on the other
side, where was the Judge? John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures says our Savior Christ, for they are they that
testify of me. We see the highest court of judgment under heaven pronounces
sentence against the Son of God. God indeed had appointed them for Judges,
the righteousness of the cause of Christ was not to be discerned but only by
the Scriptures. Thus it has been in the Church of Christ; the Donatists on the
one side affirmed themselves to be the Church; the Catholic and godly Bishops
affirmed the Church to be with them; whom did these godly Fathers make the
Judge? Optatus speaking of a maine question betwixt them, whether he that was
already baptized, though by an heretic, might be baptized again, says:
Optat. contra Parmenian. li. 5. Vos dicuis, licet, nos dicimus, Non li^et.
Jnter lic^t vestrum, and non licet nestrum, ^^tant and remigrant animae
populoru^. Nemo vobis credat, nemo nobis: omnes contentiosi homines sumus
Quaerendi sunt iudices. Si Christiani, te viraque part dari nosess^nt quia
siudijs veritas impeditur. D^foris quaeren^us est iudixisi Paganus, non potesi
nosse secreta Christian^^ si li^^^, (...) est Chri^tu^i baptis^at^ Ergo ni
^^rr^s d^ hac re^ul^^^ poterit reper^ri iudiciu^, de (...) quare^dus est iudex.
Sed vt quid p^^^sanus ad coel^, ^^^m habemus hic in Eua^gelio? Testament^m
^^qu^^, etc. Ergo voluntas c^^^vilut in Testamento, sic in Euangelio inquiratur.
You say it is lawful, and we say, it is not lawful. Between your, it is
lawful, and our, it is not lawful, the peoples souls do waver. Let none
believe you nor us; we are all contentious men. Judges must be sought for: if
Christians, they cannot be given of both sides: for truth is hindered by
affections. A judge without must be sought for: if a Pagan, he cannot know the
Christian mysteries: if a Jew, he is an enemy of Christian baptism. No
judgment of this matter can be found on earth, but from heaven, But why knock
we at heaven, when here we have the testament of Christ in the Gospel? In the
Gospel, as in his Testament, we are to enquire and search what his will is. To
the like effect Austin speaks as touching a question betwixt him and the
Pelagians, whether there be sin in infants from their birth or not: Aug. de
nupt. and concupis lib. 2. cap. 33. Ista controuersia iudicem quaerit. Iudicet
ergo Christus and cui re^ mors eius profecerit ipse dicat, Hic est, inquit,
sanguis, etc. Judicet cum illo, and Apostolus quia and in Apostolo ipse
loquitur Christus, etc.
This controversy requires a judge: let Christ therefore be Judge: let
himself say what his death served for. This is my blood, says he, which shall
be shed for many for remission of sins. Together with him let the Apostle
judge, because Christ himself speaks also in the Apostle. Thus they made no
doubt to make the Scripture the Judge, or Christ himself in the Scripture:
knowing well that the judgment of the Church in such cases is no other but
only the pronouncing of a sentence already given by the highest Judge. To this
purpose therefore he requires of the Donatists the bringing forth of such
things as are evident and plain, because Christ somewhere or other has
plainly spoken whatsoever is necessary for us to know. Idem de unit. Eccles
cap. 5. Hoc praedico atque propono vt quaeque aeperta and manifesta deligamus,
etc.
This I say before hand and propound, that we make choice of such speeches as
are open and manifest. We are to set aside such things as are obscurely set
down, and wrapped up in couers of figures, and may be interpreted both for our
part and for theirs. It belongs to acute men to judge and discern who does
more probably interpret those things, but we will not in a cause which the
people are interested in, commit our disputation to such contentions of wit,
but let the manifest truth cry and shine forth. Read to us those things that
are as plain as those are that we read to you. Bring somewhat that needs
not any man to expound it. This is the course of Ecclesiastical judgment; by
this means they are to stop the mouths of contentious men, and to satisfy
the people that are interested in the cause. By all this then it appears,
that God has not left his Church destitute of authority of judgment, but
has both appointed Judges, and prescribed them laws whereby to judge; only
that we remember, that Psalm. 82.1.
he is the Judge amongst the Judges, and the sentence must be his. But now we
know what it is that M. Bishop aymeth at, for he would feign have it conceived,
that there should be some one to be judge, and that one must be the Pope. They
name sometimes the Church, and sometimes the Council, but the Church is but the
cloake-bagge, and the Council the capcase to carry the Pope whither it pleases
them, because neither Church nor Council can define any thing but as shall be
pleasing to the Pope. The Church cannot err, the Council cannot err, but the
reason is, because the Pope cannot err. Set aside the Pope, and the Church may
err and the Council may err, but the Pope only cannot err. This is a
drunken fancy, witless, senseless, such as the ancient Fathers never
imagined or dreamed of, nay, unworthy whereof there should be any question,
whether those godly Fathers approved it or not. If we would argue from the
temporal state, as M. Bishop does, what state is there or has been that
makes one man Judge and interpreter of all laws? He names it to have been so
in the old Testament amongst the Jews, but either he knows not, or
impudently falsifieth the story in that behalf. For the law of Moses did not
make the high Priest alone a Judge, but only as elsewhere it is expounded 2.
Chro. 19.11.
the chief of them that were appointed Judges for all matters of the Lord.
There was a whole Council to which those causes were referred, and by common
consultation and judgment things were agreed upon, and the sentence
accordingly pronounced by the Priest. He had not to say, I determine thus or
thus, but as we have example in the Gospel, he said, Mat. 26.66.
What think ye? as being to have consent of the rest before he could give a
sentence. Therefore Moses sets all down in the plural number, as of many,
Deuteronomy. 17.8.9.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee, etc. thou shall come to the Priests
of the Levites, and to the Judge that shall be in those days, and ask and
they shall show thee the sentence of judgment, and thou shall do according to
all that they of that place shall show thee. According to the law which they
shall teach thee, thou shall do, etc. Only because the sentence in common
agreed upon, was pronounced by the Priest as the chief, therefore it is added:
Ver. 12.
And the man that shall do presumptuously, not hearkening to the Priest (as
touching matters of the Lord) or to the Judge (as touching civil causes, for
we see these two plainly distinguished each from other) that man shall die. Now
if God would not in that small kingdom have all to depend upon the judgment
of any one, how improbable is it, that to one should be committed a judgment
of all matters of the Lord throughout the whole world? And how do they make it
good that any such power or authority should belong unto him? They tell us
much of Peter, but we find not that attributed to Peter which they ascribe to
the Pope, neither do they give us any warrant from Christ that that is
descended to the Pope which is attributed to Peter. Surely if Christ would have
had the Pope to succeed in Peter's place, the Popes should have been qualified
as Peter was. But we see the contrary: for amongst all the generations of men
since the world was, it cannot be showed, that ever there was such a succession
of rake-hels and hel-hounds, such monsters and incarnate devils as have been
amongst them, men that have given themselves wholly to the devil, as their own
stories do report, Heretics, Apostaties, Atheists, dogs, most unworthy of
all other to have the Sun shine upon them, or the earth to bear them.
Alphonsus de Castro said once, though afterward he was made to unsay it:
Alph^ns^^e Castro lib. 1 ca 4 contra haeres. Cu^ cons^^t pl^^res cor^^^ ad^^
^sse ill^teratos, vt Gra^^^atram penitus ignorant, qui fit, vt sicras literas
interpretari p^^s^^t? Thus it was printed twice at first, but after for the
Popes credit he was instructed to leave it out.
When as it is certain, that many Popes are so unlearned, as that they are
utterly ignorant of their very Grammar, how can it be, that they should be able
to expound the Scriptures? Surely very unlikely it is, and who does not see it
to be the most certain and inevitable danger of the Church, that the
moderation thereof, and the detennining of the faith should be committed to
one, but specially to such a one? Gregory Bishop of Rome saw it well, when the
Patriarch of Constantinople making claim to be universal Bishop, he gave this
for one reason against that universality, for that Gregor. lib. 4. Ep. 32.
Vniuersa Eccl^sia. quod absit, a statu suo corru^t, quando is qui appell^tur
v^^uersaelis cadit Et lib. 6 Ep^. 24.
if there be one to be universal Bishop, in his fall must be the fall of the
whole Church. And that God by the multitude of the overseers of his church,
has provided for the safety thereof, Cyprian well observes, who one where
affirming, that Cipria de simp. Praelat. Episcopatus v^^^^ est c^^^^^ a
singulis in s^^^dum p^^^ t^^^tur.
the office of Bishopric is but one, whereof every Bishop fully has his
part, and therefore signifying that none has therein to challenge prerogative
above another, adds further in another place, that Id^^^ lib. 3. Ep. 13 (...)
er^^runt, etc. vt si quis ex hoc co^^^^io haere^^^ (...), and grege^ Christ
^^cerare and v^stare t^^^rit sa^ueni (...) caerer^, and quasi p^^teres vtil^s
and (...) S^^cord^s (...) Dominic^s (...)
therefore the corporation of Bishops consists of many, that if any one of
this College or company shall assay to bring in heresy, and to rend and waste
the flock of Christ, the rest should help, and as good and compassionate
Pastors should gather the Lords sheep into his fold. This provision of God,
Antichrist the man of sin, the Bishop of Rome, being to bring the
abomination of desolation into the church of Christ, has defeated and made
void, challenging to himself alone an universal power and authority of
judgment over the whole Church, and under pretense thereof devising and
establishing in the Church whatsoever he list, to the dishonor of God, to the
perverting of the faith of Christ, and to the destruction of infinite souls,
making a meaning of the word of God to serve his turn, that nothing which he
says or does may seem to be controlled or checked thereby. To this purpose
they have bewitched the world to entertain this paradoxe, which in the old
Christian world was never heard of, that Hosius de expresso Dei verbo Siquis
habeat interpretationem Ecclesiae Romanae de aliquo loco Scripturae, etia^si
nec sciat nec intelligat an and quomodo cum Scripturae verbis conueniat, tamen
habet ipsissimum verbu^ Dei.
if a man have the interpretation of the Church of Rome of any place of
Scripture, albeit he neither know nor understand whether and how it agrees
with the words of the Scripture, yet he has the very word of God. And in like
sort do our Rhemish impostors labor to persuade their Reader, that Rhem.
Testam. Argument of the Epistles in general.
if any thing in Paul's Epistles sound to him as contrary to the doctrine of
the Catholic Church, (it is unknown what Church they mean) he fails of the
right sense. Thus howsoever clearly the scripture sounds, yet it means not
that which it says, if it be contrary to that which they affirm. To this
impudent devise they are driven, because they see that the scripture condemns
them, unless they themselves have the managing of the scripture: that if the
scripture be admitted for judge, it peremptorily pronounces sentence against
them, so that they have no means to color their abominations, but by
challenging to themselves to be judges of the scripture. As for us we hang the
doctrine of faith, not upon our expositions, but upon the very words of God
himself; we make the holy scripture the judge, not in ambiguous and doubtful
speeches, but in clear and evident sentences, where the very words declare
what the meaning is. It is a question betwixt us and them whether Saints images
be to be worshipped or not: they say they are, we say they are not. Let the
Judge speak, Exodus 20.4. Deuteronomy. 5.8.
Thou shall not make to thy self any likeness of any thing in heaven above,
or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth; thou shall not now
down to them, nor worship them. It is a question whether there be now any
sacrifice to be offered for the forgiveness of sins. They say there is so in
their Mass, we say there is none. Let the Judge speak: Mat. 26.28.
This is my blood of the new Testament which is shed for you, and for many for
remission of sins. Heb. 10.18.
Now where remission of sins is, there is no more offering for sin. It is a
question betwixt us, whether the Saints be our Mediators unto God or not. They
say they are, we say they are not. Let the Judge determine it. 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is one God (says he) and one Mediator betwixt God and man, even the
man Jesus Christ. It is a question whether a man be justified before God by
works or not. They say it must be so; we say it cannot be. Let the Judge
answer it, Romans 3.20.
By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight. Gal.
3.11.12.
That no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident, for
the just shall live by faith, and the law is not of faith, but the man that
shall do those things shall live in them. They allege that the Judge says,
that Iam. 2.24.
a man is justified by works, and not by faith only: we say, that that is
only in the sight of men or with men: they say that it is in the sight of God.
Let the judge end it. Romans 4.2.
If Abraham were justified by works, he had to rejoice, but not with God. It
is a question whether the crosses and sufferings of the Saints do yield us any
help with God, or any part of satisfaction for our sins. They say they do,
we say they do not: let the judge tell us whether they do or not. 1. Cor. 1.13.
Was Paul crucified for you? Gal 6.14.
God forbid that I should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
It is a question whether the people ought to be partakers of the Lords cup:
they say no; we say yea. Let the judge decide it. Mat. 26.27.
Drink ye all of this. Thus in all matters betwixt them and us, the judge
speaks clearly on our side: his words are so plain as nothing can be more
plain. Yet notwithstanding they tell us, that all these things have another
meaning, which we must take upon the Popes word. The commandment (forsooth) is
meant of the idols of the Gentiles, not of the images of Saints. As if a
whore-monger should say, that the law forbids whoredom of Christians with
heathens, not one with another. The Scripture, they say, intends there is no
other Mediator of redemption but one, but Mediators of intercession there are
many. As if an adulterous woman should say, that she may have but one husband
of this or that sort, but of another sort she may have many. And yet they make
them mediators of redemption also, because they make them mediators of
satisfaction, and redemption is nothing else but the payment of a price of
satisfaction. Thus they dally in the rest, and show themselves impudent and
shameless men: let them for their meanings read to us as plain words of the
judge, as those are that we read to them, and we will admit of them. If not,
they must give us leave to stand to the sentence of the judge of heaven and
earth, and to account the Pope as he is, a corrupt and wicked judge, although
were he what he should be, yet void of all title of being judge to us.

22. W. BISHOP.
Give me leave (gentle Reader) to stay somewhat longer in this matter, because
there is nothing of more importance, and it is not handled any where else in
all this Book. Consider then with your self, that our celestial Lawmakers
gave his law, not written in Ink and Paper, but in the hearts of his most
faithful subjects, Ierem. 31. 2. Cor. 3.
endowing them with the blessed spirit of truth, John 16.
and with a most diligent care of instrusting others, that all their posterity
might learn of them all the points of Christian doctrine, and give credit to
them as well for the written as unwritten word, and more for the true meaning of
the word, then for the word it self. These and their true successors be lively
Oracles of the true and living God, them must we consult in all doubtful
questions of Religion, and submit our selves wholly to their decree. S. Paul
that vessel of election, may serve us for a singular model and pattern of
the whole; who having received the true knowledge of the Gospel from God, yet
went up to Jerusalem with Barnaby, to confer with the chief Apostles, the
Gospel which he preached, lest perhaps he might run in vain, and had run,
as in express words he witnesses himself. Gal. 2.
Upon which fact and words of S. Paul, the ancient Fathers do gather, that
the faithful would not have given any credit unto the Apostles doctrine,
unless by S. Peter and the other Apostles, it had been first examined and
approved. Tertul lib. 4. in Marc. Hier. Ep. 89 quae est 11. inter Ep.
Augustini. August. lib. 28. contra Faustu^, cap. 4.
Again, when there arose a most dangerous question of abrogating Moses law:
was it left to every Christian to decide by the written word? or would many of
the faithful believe S. Paul, that worthy Apostle in the matter? Not so, but
up they went to Jerusalem, to hear what the pillars of the Church would say:
where, by the decree of the Apostles in council, the controversy was ended:
which S. Paul afterward delivered in his preaching, commanding all to observe
and keep the decree and ordinance of the Apostles Acts 16.
. And if it would not be tedious, I could in like manner show, how in like sort
every hundredth year after, errors and heresies rising by misconstruction of
the written word, they were confuted and rejected, not by the written word
only, but by the sentence and declaration of the Apostles scholars, and
Successors.

See Cardinal Bellarmine, Tom. 1. lib. 3. cap. 6.
I will only record two noble examples of this recourse unto Antiquity, for
the true sense of Gods word: the first, out of the Ecclesiastical history,
Lib. 11. cap. 9.
where, of S. Gregory Nazianzen and S. Basil, two principal lights of the
Greek Church, this is recorded: They were both Noble men, brought up together
at Athens: and afterward for thirteeene years space, laying aside all profane
books, employed their study wholly in the holy Scriptures. The sense and true
meaning whereof they sought, not out of their own judgment, (as the
Protestants both do, and teach others to do) but out of their Predecessors
writings and authority: namely, of such as were known to have received the
rule of understanding from the Tradition of the Apostles: these be the very
words.

The other example shall be the principal pillar of the Latin Church, S.
Augustine, who not only exhorts and advises us to follow the decree of the
ancient Church, if we will not be deceived with the obscurity of doubtful
questions, Lib. contra Crescon. 1. c. 33
but plainly affirms, That he would not believe the Gospel, if the
authority of the Church did not move him unto it. Con^ra Epist. sund. cap. 5.
Which words are not to be understood as Calvin would have them: that S.
Augustine had not been at first a Christian, if by the authority of the
Church, he had not been thereunto persuaded: but that when he was a learned and
judicious Doctor, and did write against heretics, even then he would not
believe these books of the Gospel to have bin penned by divine inspiration,
and no others, and this to be the true sense of them; unless the Catholic
Church (famous then for antiquity, generality, and consent) did tell him,
which and what they were: so far was he off from trusting to his own skill
and judgment in this matter, which notwithstanding was most excellent.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop here sets the stock upon it, and at one game he is minded to
win all, but indeed as a cousening gamester by shifting and iugling beguileth
honest simple men, so does he abuse the simple Reader with goodly glorious
words, craving leave as it were to give him satisfaction in a high point, and
applying himself under this color most trecherously to delude him. Consider
(says he) that our celestial lawgiuer gave his law not written in Ink and
Paper, but in the hearts of his most faithful subjects. For this he quoteth
the words of God by the Prophet Jeremy: Ierem. 31.33.
After those days, says the Lord, I will put my law into their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts, etc. and the words of the Apostle to the
Corinthians 2. Cor. 3.3.
Ye are manifest to be the Epistle of Christ ministered by us, not written with
ink, but with the spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in
fleshly Tables of the heart. Now therefore he will have us to conceive that
which Andradius one of the great masters of the Trent-Councell has told us,
that Andrad. Orth. explicat. lib. 2. Non spectauit Christus vt Eua^gelium
literit descriptum aut in membranu exaratum iaceret, sed vt verbis explicatum
omni creaturae promulgaretur.
Christ did not look that the Gospel should lie written in letters or printed
in parchments, but that by declaration of words it should be published to all
creatures. Where we see how they apply themselves so much as in them lies to
impeach and vilify the authority of Scriptures, as if they were written only
of private fancy, and Christ had had no care or regard to have it so. But how
impertinently those places are brought for proof hereof, appears very
plainly out of the words themselves. For what was the law that God promised by
Jeremy to write in the hearts of his people? Was it not the law given before by
Moses, concerning which Moses also expresses the same promise that Jeremy
does: Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that
thou may love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul that
thou may live. Now Exodus 34.1.
that law God himself had delivered in writing, and Verse. 27.
commanded Moses also to write the same. Therefore the words of Jeremy as
touching writing Gods law in our hearts, can import nothing against the writing
of it with ink and paper, but only that the laws which were before by the
ministry of Moses delivered only in ink and paper, should by the power of
the holy Ghost through the faith of Christ be wrought and written in the
affections of the heart: that God in Christ would not administer only
outwardly the letter of the law, whether in writing or in preaching, but would
in both by the regeneration of the spirit give grace inwardly for the
fulfilling of it. As little to that purpose is the other place. The false
Apostles labored to impeach the credit of S. Paul's Apostleship, as if he had
had no sufficient commission or warrant of it. S. Paul for himself alleges,
that the Corinthians were as an Epistle from Christ, whereby he was
sufficiently commended and his calling testified unto them, in that the Gospel
by his ministry had had so great success, and taken so great effect amongst
them. That singular effect of his preaching he imports to have been a greater
assurance unto them then any epistle written with ink and paper, and to have
commended his ministry above the ministry of Moses, who gave the Law only
in tables of stone, because here the spirit of God concurred with the outward
service, and wrought mightily in their hearts, for the receiving of the
doctrine of the faith of Christ, and converting of the^ unto God. Now to say
that the Corinthia^s were an epistle not written with ink nor in tables of
stone, what is it to show that the celestial lawgiver gave not his laws
written with ink and paper? Surely the difference of the two testaments, which
is the thing that M. Bishop would insinuate, was never holden to consist in
this, that the one should be written and the other unwritten, because even in
the old testament the new was written, but herein it stood, that the one either
written or taught by word, ministered only knowledge what we ought to do, not
any grace for the doing of it, but the other not only teaches by writing or
by preaching but ministers also grace to work in the heart obedience to that
that it teaches. August. de sp. and lit. cap. 20. Propter veteru hominis noxam
quae per literam rube^rem and minantem minime fanabitur dicitur illud
testamentu^ vitas: hoc vero nonum propter nouitatem spiritus qua hominem nouum
san^ta vitio vetustatis,
The old Testament, says S. Austin, is so called because of the corruption of
the old man, which was not healed by the commanding and threatening letter, but
the other the new, because of the newness of the spirit, which heals the new
man from the old corruption. But we would gladly know of M. Bishop how it is
true which the Apostle says, that 2. Tim. 3.16.
all Scripture is inspired of God, if it be true which he says, that God did
not give his laws written with ink and paper. If the Gospel might well
enough have been kept in men's hearts without writing, why were the faithful so
instant with S. Mark first, and after with S. John, as we have seen before,
for the writing of their Gospels? Why does the Apostle tell the Philippians,
that Phil. 3.1.
it was necessary for them that he should write unto them the same things that
he had preached unto them, if there were no such necessity? Why is S. John in
the Revelation so often commanded Revel. 1.11 and cap. 2.1. etc and cap. 14.13.
to write, to write, if tradition might serve as well as writing? Surely
Irenaeus tells us, that it was Jren. ^ib. 3 c. 1. Euangelium per voluntatem
Dei in Scripturu nob^s tradiderunt.
by the will of God that the Apostles delivered unto us the Gospel in writing,
as we have showed before. So likewise we have heard S. Austin saying, that Aug.
supra sect. 14.
Christ commanded his disciples to write what he would have us to read of his
sayings and doings. The same S. Austine says again, that Idem in epist. Joan.
tract. 2. Contra insidiosos errores Deus voluit pouere firmamentum in
scripturis sanctis contra quas nullus audet loqui qui quoquo modo se vult
videri Christianum.
God would place a bulwark against deceiptfull errors in the holy Scriptures,
against which no man dare speak that will in any sort be taken for a Christian
man. Do these Fathers tell us that it was the will of God, the commandment of
Christ, that his laws should be delivered unto us written with ink and paper,
and will M. Bishop persuade us that it was not the will of God? But I would
further question with him, What, are they all so perfect in the Gospel at
Rome, as that they need no written Gospel? Is it so settled in their hearts
and remembrances by tradition only, as that without any Scriptures it might be
preserved amongst them? If M. Bishop say yea; he knows himself to be a liar.
If he say, no, what is the reason that he sets thus lightly by ink and
paper? Fie upon this wilful blindness: how strange a thing is it that any man
should thus cast a veil over his own eyes? He tells us further, that Christ
endowed his Apostles with the blessed spirit of truth, and with a most dilligent
care of instructing others, that all their posterity might learn of them all the points of Christian doctrine. Now thus far he says true: but his purpose
is, with a little truth to color a great lie. For he adds, that we should
give credit to them as well for the written as unwritten word. Sycophant, what
have we here to do with the unwritten word? The unwritten word is the matter in
question, and must it here be presumed before it be proved? Let it first be
made good, that the Apostles meant to leave behind them any unwritten word. We
say, that because they had care that all posterity by them should learn all
the points of Christian doctrine, therefore they had care that all the points
of Christian doctrine should be committed to writing, that as S. Luke
professes to have written to the intent that Theophilus Luke 1.4.
might thereby acknowledge the certainty of those things whereof he had been
instructed, so by his writings and the rest, we should acknowledge the
certainty and assured truth of their doctrine, and not lie open to the
illusions of such impostors and cosiners as M. Bishop is, who under the names
of the Apostles should broach those things which the Apostles never thought.
Whereof we have a notable example in Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. ca. 36.
Papias, who succeeded immediately after the time of the Apostles, who whilst
he was not contented with those things which were left in writing, but was
still hearkening after every one that took upon him to have bin a follower of
any of the Apostles, and enquiring what any of them had said or done, swallowed
many gudgeons given him by such deceivers, and delivered, Alia ta^quam ex viua
trad. tione ad se relata et peregr^na^ quasdam seruatoris parabolas and
doctrinas cum non nullis fob^losis adijcit, etc. Apostolicas d^sputationes non
recte accepit, etc. Quamplurimis ^os se ecclesiasticis viris ciroris causam
dedit, quiad antiquitatem ipsius respexerunt. etc.
as reported to him by tradition, many fabulous things and strange doctrines,
conceiving himself by that means amiss of the Apostles speeches, and giving
occasion to many other to err as he did, whilst for his antiquity they
respected him very much. This is the end of M. Bishops vnwritte^ word: they will
teach us what pleases their Lord god the Pope, and the^ make us believe it is
a part of the unwritten word. But yet he adds again, that our crediting the
Apostles should be more for the meaning of the word then for the word it self.
Where it is not in any good meaning that he thus nicely distinguishes betwixt
the word it self and the meaning of the word, leaving it forsooth to be
understood, that they left the word one way and the meaning of the word another
way; the one in writing and the other by tradition. But what, will M. Bishop
have us think that the Apostles would write words, and not mean by their
words to signify their meaning? Is it likely that they would write one thing
and in meaning intend another? Did they not write to that very end, that in
their writing it should appear to all ages what doctrine they taught? Surely
they were honest and plain dealing men; they would not beguile us, they would
not mock us: they have simply told us what their mind is. There are many
difficulties in their writings and in the whole Scriptures, it is true, but yet
there are perspicuities also so far as is needful for the clearing of them.
There is to exercise the strong; but yet there is also to sustain and comfort
the weak. There is to provoke the appetite, but yet there is also to satisfy
the hunger. There is B^rnard. in paru. ser. 64. In Pelago sacra lection^^ and
agnus ambulat and elephas natat.
depth for the Elephant to swim, but there are also shelfes and shallowes for
the lamb to wade. It is truly said by S. Austin, that Aug. ep. 3. Non quod ad
ea quae necessaria sunt saluti tanta in eis difficultate peruentatur.
without any great difficulty we thereby attain to those things that are
necessary for salvation, and that Idem de vtilit. credendi. cap. 6.
Inscripturis disciplina ita modificata vt nemo inde haurire non possit quod
sibi satis est si modo ad hauritendum deuote ac pie vt vera religio poscit
accedat.
the doctrine thereof is so tempered, as that there is no man but may draw from
thence that that is sufficient for him, if he come to draw with devotion and
piety, as true religion requires he should do. M. Bishop goes on and tells
us, These and their true successors be the true and lively oracles of the true
and living God; them we must consult in all doubtful questions, and submit our
selves wholly to their decree. But what M. Bishop? are not only the Apostles,
but their successors also the lively oracles of God? Which of the successors of
the Apostles ever took upon him either severally or jointly so to be? We have
heard that Ephesians. 2.20.
the household of God are built upon the foundations of the Apostles and
Prophets, but that they are built upon the foundations of the Apostles
successors we never heard. As for consulting with the Fathers in doubtful
questions, we willingly yield to do it, that we may have their help to find
out in the Scripture the resolution of such doubts, but that we are to submit
our selves wholly to their decree as accounting them the oracles of God, is a
point of learning which S. Austin knew not when he said; Aug. de not. and great.
cap 61. Eg^ in hutusmedi quorumlibet hominum scriptu liber sum, quia solis
Canonicis Scripturis debeo fine vlla recusa^nne confensum.
I am free in such writings of men whatsoever they be; because to the
Canonical Scriptures only do I owe consent without refusal. But not to stand
too long upon these fancies, let one place of Hierome be an ^^s^er to them all.
Hier. in Psalm. 86. Quomodo narrabit Dominus? Non verbo sed Scriptura. In cutus
Scriptura? in populorum: quae Scripturae populis omnibus legitur, hoc est, ve
omnes intelligant, etc.
The Lord will declare or show in the Scripture of the people, and of the
Princes that have been in her. How will the Lord declare? Not by word but by
writing, or by Scripture: In whose Scripture? Even in the Scripture of the
peoples, which is read to all peoples: that is, that all may understand. The
Lord has spoken by his Gospel, not that a few, but that all should
understand: the Princes of Christ have not written for a few, but for all the
people. The Princes are the Apostles and the Evangelists. Those (says he)
which were or have been in her. Mark what he says, which were, not which are:
so that the Apostles excepted, whatsoever after shall be said, is cut off, and
has no authority. Albeit therefore a man be holy, albeit he be learned, after
the Apostles, he has no authority. In which words he shows us, that the
counsel of God thought good to leave us the Apostles doctrine, not by word,
not by tradition, but by writing: that the scriptures which he has given us by
them are so disposed, as that they serve for the understanding of all men, that
all authority of doctrine is concluded and ended in them, neither has any
after them authority to teach us any thing toward God, that is not warranted
and approved by their writings. It is false therefore which M. Bishop says,
that Christ gave not his laws written with ink and paper: and again, that
the meaning of the word is not to be known by the word it self: and again,
that the successors of the Apostles also are the lively oracles of the true and
living God. In the next place he abuses the Apostle S. Paul, and under color
of the names of two or three of the Fathers, absurdly misapplieth his going up
to Jerusalem, as if he had gone to have his doctrine examined and approved by
the Apostles that were before him. He names S. Peter single and by himself,
as to have us to conceive, that S. Paul yielded some high pre-eminence and
superiority to him. But there is no such matter as he pretends, the Apostles
own declaration overthrows all this fancy. He professes, that Gal. 1.12.
he received not his Gospel of man, nor was taught it but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ. After that he had received the revelation of the Gospel from
Christ, and was appointed to preach the Gospel amongst the Gentiles, directly
against M. Bishops devise he says: Ver. 16.17.
Immediately I communed not with flesh and blood, neither went I up to Jerusalem
to the^ that were Apostles before me, but went into Arabia, etc. Ambros. in
Gal. cap. 1. Nec consilium cutusquam petijt, aut ad aliquem retulit quid esset
acturus, sed protinus Christum praedicauit, etc. Non fuisse dicit necessitatem
electum se a Deo pergend^ a^^ praecessores Apostolos, vt aliquid forte disceret
ab eis, etc.
He asked no man's counsel (says Ambrose) nor referred it to any man what he
should do, but forthwith preached Christ. He says, that there was no
necessity that he being chosen of God, should go to the Apostles his
predecessors, as happily to learn any thing from them. Now how badly does M.
Bishop deal to make his reader believe, that S. Paul's doctrine was first to be
examined and approved by Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, when as S. Paul
professedly says, that he went not to take any approbation from them, because
he had received equal authority and commission with them. He further
declares, that Ver. 18.
three years after he went to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him 15.
days. Ambros. ibid. Non vt al^quid ab eo disceret, quia ^am ab authore
didicerat, a quo and ipse Petrus fuerat instructus, sed propter ^ffectum
Apostolatus, and vt sciret Petrus hanc illi datam licentiam quam and ipse
acceperat
Not to learn any thing of him, says Ambrose, because he had already learned
of the author himself, by whom Peter was taught, but for affection of the
Apostleship and that Peter might know that the same commission was give to him
which Peter himself had. He went to him Theophy. act^^n Gal. 1. Non vtilitatis
sed honoris duntaxit gratia, vt Petru^ spectaret.
not for any benefit, but for honors sake to see him, says Theophylact. Not
for any such honors sake as M. Bishop imagines, as to acknowledge him his
superior in place and office, S. Paul himself professing himself 2. Cor. 12.11.
in nothing to have been inferior to the very chief Apostles, but for that
honors sake of which the same Apostle says: Romans 12.10.
In giving honor, go one before another, and whereof we are wont to say, that we
name a man honoris gratia, for honors sake, by which Theophyl. vt supra. Vt cum
qui aetate esset prouect^or veneraretur and magnificeret
the younger honoreth the elder, the equal his equal, yea and the superior his
inferior. For otherwise it is true which Cyprian says that Cyprian. de simpl.
Pralat. Hoc era^t reliqui Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari conserito praediti
and hoacris and potestatis.
the rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was, endued with equal
fellowship both of honor and of power. But to go forward Gal. 2.1.
14. years after befell that that M. Bishop here speaks of, that Paul went
up again to Jerusalem. The occasion whereof was that that the mentions here
as another matter, about the question of the Gentiles observing of Moses law.
Paul and Barnabas had preached the Gospel with great success amongst the
Gentiles, and namely, at Antioch. Whilst they were abiding there, Act. 15.1.
there came down certain from Judea, and taught the brethren, Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. Hereupon there was
great dissension and great disputation of Paul and Barnabas against the^.
These false Apostles pretended themselves to have come from the Apostles at
Jerusalem, and to have received their instructions from the^, as may appear by
those words of their answer, Ver. 24.
We have heard that certain which departed from us have troubled you with
words, and cumbred your minds, saying ye must be circumcised and keep the law,
to whom we gave no such commandment. Under this color they slandred Paul, as
teaching another Gospel then the other Apostles did. Now when as they thus
pretended the Apostles names, and made show to have received commandment from
them, it was necessary for the satisfaction of the Church, that the matter
should be cleared by the Apostles themselves. Wherefore it was thought good,
and God Gal. 2.2.
by revelation also so directed, as the Apostle signifies, that Act 15.2.
he and Barnabas, and some other of the^ should go to Jerusalem to the Apostles
and Elders about this question. This occasion of his going let S. Ambrose
declare: Ambr. in Gal. 2. A Iudaeis causa legis mala illi siebat opinto, quasi
discordaret a praedicatione caeteroru^ Aposto lorum, and hinc fiebat multis
scrupulus, ita vt gentes possent perturbari ne in aliud inducer^^tur ab eo quam
tradebant Apostoli, qui cum Domino fuerant. Nam ipsa occasion subuersi su^t
Galatae a Iudaeis dicentibus, quiae aliud tradebat Paulus quam Petrus. Hinc
factum est vt admonitus reuelatione Domini ascenderet Hierosolyma^, etc.
The Jews, says he, caused an evil opinion of him in behalf of their law,
as if he disagreed from the preaching of the rest of the Apostles, and herby
some scruple grew to many, so as that the Gentiles might be troubled or
perplexed with doubt, left by him they should be drawn to any thing else then
the Apostles delivered who had been with the Lord. For by this occasion the
Galathians were perverted by the Jews, saying, that Paul delivered or taught
otherwise then Peter did. Hence it came to pass, that being admonished by
revelation from the Lord, he went up to Jerusalem. What to do? to be examined
and approved of the^ as his superiors and judges, as M. B. says? What, had he
preached the Gospel now 17. years, and does he now at length remember
himself to come to his superiors to be examined of them? no such matter. He
came as he says Ver. 2.
to confer with them of the Gospel which he preached among the Gentiles. Now
Hiero. in Gal. 2. Aliud est co^ferre, aliud discere. Inter conferentes
aequalitas est, inter docentem and discente^, minor est ille qui discit.
it is one thing to confer, says Jerome, another thing to learn. There is
equality bewixt the^ that confer; but betwixt him that teaches, and him that
learneth, he that learneth is the lesser. He conferred then with the other
Apostles, as his equals, not in respect of himself, as to have any thing added
to himself by the^, but only for satisfaction of the Church, that the scandal
of the slander of the false Apostles might be removed, and all the Church might
know, that in their doctrine they consented al in one, that so neither his
labor thenceforth, nor that that he had bestowed might be bestowed in vain, by
reason of any such false suggestions of his dissenting from the rest. And to
show that he conferred with the^ to no other end, he says afterward, that Ver
6.
they added nothing further to him, that Ver. 7.
they saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to him as the
Gospel of the circumcision was committed to Peter, Ver. 9.
that they who seemed to be pillars, James, Peter, and John, gave unto him, and
Barnabas right hands of fellowship, yea that he was so far from being
inferior to them, as that at Antioch: Ver. 11.
he withstood Peter to his face as justly to be blamed, for not going the right
way to the truth of the Gospel, in that he seemed by his carriage to draw the
Gentiles to the observation of the law contrary, to that which before had been
acknowledged by him. Now then the reason is manifest of S. Paul's going up to
the pillars of the Church, albeit he were as great a pillar as any of them. And
as for the sentence of the Council, it did not teach him any thing which he
knew not, but only signified the common acknowledgement of that which he had
before taught. Chrysostom in Gal 1. Ab initio quid esset agendum perspexerat, nec
opus h^bebat vllo doctore, sed quae post multa^ discussione^ erant Apostoli
decreturi, haec ipsa citra discussionem coelitus h^bebat apud se certa and
indubitata.
He understood from the beginning, says Chrysostom, what was to be done, and
needed no teacher, but what the Apostles after much debating should decree, the
same had he certain and undoubted with himself from heaven without debating.
Now by this that has been said, we may conceive what to think of those
allegatio^s which M. Bishop for a show has quoted in the marge^t. That which
Tertullian says is apparently false, that Tertul. contra Marc. lib. 4.
Ascendit ad consultandos Apostolos ne forte secundu^ illos non credidisset, and
non secundum illos euangelizaret.
Paul went to Jerusalem to consult with the Apostles, lest happily he had not
believed as they did, or did not preach the Gospel as they did. As though it
were likely, that the Apostle would have continued his preaching for 17. years,
not knowing whether he preached right or wrong. As though he knew not that
which he preached to be the truth, having received it (as before is showed) by
the revelation of Jesus Christ. That which Jerome says must be esteemed
according to the humor wherein he wrote it, which was in great choler and
stomach toward S. Austin for disliking his opinion as touching Peter's
dissimulation, mentioned in the chapter whereof we here speak. His words are,
that Hieron apud August. Epi. 11. Ostendens se non habuisse securitate^
Euangelij praedicandi, nisi Petri and illorum qui cum illo era^t fuisset
sententia roboratum.
Paul had not had security of preaching the Gospel, had it not been confirmed
by the sentence of Peter and those that were with him. As though he had
preached 17. years, as before was said, without warrant of preaching? As
though he expected confirmation now from Peter, or those that were with him,
who so long before had had confirmation from Christ himself? As though he
became an Apostle by warrant of Peter, and those that were with him, who in the
beginning of his Epistle writes himself, Gal. 1.1.
Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, with many other
words before mentioned, disclaiming the receiving of any authority from men.
Ieromes heat made him forget that which is before cited out of his exposition
upon that Epistle, that conference imports equality, and therefore that the
Apostle showing that he went to confer with the rest of the Apostles, imports
that he received of the^ no warrant of authority, but only by consent. As for
that which is quoted out of S. Austine, it makes nothing to M. Bishops
purpose. August. cont. Faust lib. 28. ca. 4 Si non inueniret in carne Apostolos
quibus co^mu^icando and cu^ quibus Euangeliu^ conferendo eiusde^ societatis
esse appareres, ecclesia illi omnino no crederet. Sed cum cognouisset eum hoc
annuntiantem quod etiam ill^ annuntiabant, et in eorum comunione atque vnitate
viuentem, accedentibus etiam per eum talibus signis qualia and illi
operabantur, ita eam Domino co^mendante, ^^ruit authoritate^ vt verba illius
hodie sic audiantur in ecclesia, tanquam in illo Christus sicut ipse verissime
dixit l^cutus audiatur.
If there had been no Apostles living, that Paul in communicating with them,
and conferring with them of the Gospel, might appear to be of the same
society, the Church would not have believed him. But when they knew him
preaching the same which they preached, and living in their unity and
fellowship, doing also the same miracles which they did, God thus commending
it, he obtained authority, that his words are now heard in the Church, as if
Christ were heard speaking in him, as he himself most truly says. In which
words he attributes to the rest of the Apostles the giving of a testimony,
that he was of the same society and fellowship with them, but imports
nothing at all of any their judicial power or superiority over him. The
occasion of the words will show the purport of them. Manicheus the heretic
wrote an Epistle as the Apostle of Christ, contrarying those things which were
written by the true Apostles. The Manichees urged this Epistle as the true
story of Christ, alleging that the Gospels were corrupted and not true. S.
Austine questioneth how the Church should take him for an Apostle, or admit
that for truth which he wrote concerning Christ, when as he lived not in the
time of the Apostles, nor was known to be one of them, by having communion and
fellowship with them. For even Paul, says he, if he had lived after their
times, and had not been known to have society and company with them, and by
his preaching and miracles together with them, had not been commended to the
Church by God, the Church could not have taken him for an Apostle of Christ,
nor believed him upon his own word. This is all that is said, and nothing
intended that the rest of the Apostles should give him warrant as Judges, but
only as witnesses testify him to be one of them. But now admit that they were
as Judges, and were to give commission and warrant to S. Paul; what is it that
M. Bishop would prove thereby? Forsooth that there were some of authority for
judgment, and deciding the controversies of the Church. Be it so; but why does
he take pains for that which we do not deny? Yea but it is that Peter may be
known to be the Judge. Be it so that Peter amongst the rest was one, yea and a
chief man amongst them, because S. Paul says, that Gal. 2.9.
James, and Peter, and John seemed to be pillars, that is, special and chief
men amongst the Apostles. Yea, but that is not enough, but Peter must be the
high and sovereign Judge, and the rest only assistants and helpers to him. But
that is apparently false, because in that judgment of which S. Paul speaks
James sat as the chief, and accordingly pronounced the definitive sentence;
Chrysostom. in Act. hom. 33. Iacobus fert and non resilit: illi erat principatus
concreduus.
to him, says Chrysostom, the principality or chiefty was committed. Yet let
us yield so much that Peter was the highest Judge in this assembly; what of
that? Marry forsooth the Pope succeeds in Peter's place, and he must therefore
be the one high and supreme Judge over all Churches. This is the issue that M.
Bishop drives at, but for his life cannot tell how to conueigh the Pope into
S. Peter's place. This conclusion Bellarmine makes out of three places that are
here alleged, quoting them only as M. Bishop does from him, but citing no
words, and saying of them that they Bellar. de verbo Dei. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Diserte affirma^t Ecclesia^ no^ fuisse Paulo creditura^ nisi Euangelium eius a
Pe^^o confirmatu^ fuisset. Ergo Petr^ erat tunc and proinde success^ris eius
nunc de doctrina fidei.
expressly affirm, that the Church would not have believed Paul, had not his
Gospel been confirmed by S. Peter. Therefore it belonged to Peter then, and
now to his successor, to judge of the doctrine of faith. Where we see him to
be outright a Jesuit, that is, a man of a brazen face and a wicked conscience,
for that he knew well that two of these do not mention Peter, but speak
generally of the Apostles, the third which is Hierome, names not Peter alone
as he does, but coupleth with him those that were with him, and makes that
which he says common to them all. But it is a further point of impudency in
him, to force that upon the Pope hereby, which never any of these fathers nor
any other ever imagined, that he should be in Peter's place the universal Judge
of Christian faith, so that if S. Peter who they say was Bishop of Rome before,
had been dead before that council of Jerusalem, and Paul the third had
succeeded in his place, Paul the Apostle must have had his Gospel confirmed by
Paul the Pope, as impious a caitife as ever the world bred. I will not stand to
take any further in this filth, let them lie in it that love it, and M. Bishop
having taken upon him to swear whatsoever Bellarmine does lie, must be content
to be dawbed with his dirt. He goes on and tells us, that he could show how
every hundred years after, heresies were confuted and rejected not by the
written word only, but by the sentence and declaration of the Apostles
scholars and successors. So then they were not rejected by the sentence and
declaration of any one Judge, he is now gone from that, but it was by the
sentence and declaration of the Apostles scholars and successors, as all
Bishops were. And indeed in those first Councels the Bishop of Rome had no
more to do then other Bishops, yea sometimes less then some others, to who^ the
moderation of the present business by general consent was committed, as in the
Nicene council to Theod. hist. li. 2. ca. 15 Cuius concilij su^t ille non
princeps?
Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spain above all the rest of the Bishops, who
therefore Council Nicen. subs^ript. in sine.
subscribed first of all. And as for the deciding of matters, it was referred
only to the authority of the written word, as appears in the same council of
Nice, where Constantine propounds this rule unto the^: Theo. l. hist. li. 1.
ca. 7. Euangelici and Apostolici libri necnon antiqu^ru^ Prophetarum oracula
plane nos instruunt quid de reb^s d ui^is ((...)) sentiendum sit: proinde
posita h^stili discordia sumamus ex dictis diuini spiritus explicatione^
quaestionum.
The books of the Evangelists and Apostles, as also the oracles of the old
Prophets, do plainly instruct us what to think concerning Gods matters:
therefore setting aside all hostile discord, let us take the resolutions of our
questions from the words of the holy Ghost. Their sentence therefore was but to
acknowledge and pronounce the sentence, which the holy Ghost had given in the
written word, and no otherwise did they take upon them to declare it, but by
the same word. Only for the greater satisfaction of the Church, and the more
fully to take away all cauillations of heretics, they alleged sometimes the
testimonies of such as had been before them, to show that by the same written
word, they had taught no otherwise the^ they did. Albeit there were not always
general Councels for the confuting and rejecting of heresies, but many times
the Pastors of the Church in their private writings confuted and condemned
them only by the verdict and sentence of the written word. So Hilary only by
the voice of the heavenly Judge in the Scriptures, rejected the Arian heresy,
Hilar. de synod. cont. Arian. fide^ Nicena^ nunqua^ nisi exulaturus audiui.
never having heard of the Nicene definition, until he was going into
banishment for that faith. Yea, and after the definition of the council, S.
Austin did not rest upon their sentence, but upon the sentence of the written
word, and therefore says to Maximinus the Arian: August. contra Maximin lib.
3. cap. 14. Nec ego Nicenum, nec in debes Arimine^se tanqua^ praeiudicaturus
proferre consiliu^. Nec ego huius, nec tu illius authoritate deti^ (...)
^^ripturaru^ a^ ^tibus, no^ (...) ^nque propr^ (...) ^trisque comu^ testibus
res cu^ re, causa cu^ causa, ratio cu^ ratione conceriet.
It is not for me to allege the council of Nice, nor for thee to allege the
council of Ariminum: neither am I bound to the authority of the one, nor thou
of the other. By testimonies or authorities of Scripture, not proper to either
of us, but common to both, let matter try with matter, cause with cause, reason
with reason. He knew very well that the sentence of a council might be
quest^^ned also, and therefore that the controversy must finally rest upon
(...) sentence of the Scripture. M. Bishop further refers us to Bellarmine,
as touching those Councels every hundred years, whose instructions are
needless to us to certify us of the truth in that behalf, being otherwise
better to be known then by any thing that he can tell us. But I would wish
that he that desires to know the quality and disposition of that wretched
man, should thoroughly examine that chapter that Master Bishop quoteth, wherein
he has set down so many apparent and wilful lies, as that it may well
appear what spirit it was that led him throughout his whole books. In the
next place he tells us an idle tale and impertinent, of Basil and Gregory
Nazianzene, of whom Ruffinus reports, that Ruffin. lib. 2. c. 9. Omnibus
Graecoru^ se^ularium libris remotis solu diuinae S^ripturae volumnibus opera^
dabant carumque intelligentians non ex propria praesu^ptione, sed ex maiorum
scriptis and authoritate sequebantur; quos and ipsos ex Apostolica successione
intelligendi regula^ suscepisse constat.
laying aside their profane studies, they applied themselves only to the
books of holy Scripture, and sought after the understanding of them, not out
of their own presumption, but out of the writings and authority of their
ancients, who also themselves by such as had succeeded from the Apostles, had
received the rule of understanding. To what end does he allege this against
us? Where it is said that they sought not the understanding of the Scriptures
out of their own presumption, for the shooting of his bolt, he makes a
parenthesis thus, As the Protestants both do and teach others to do. But the
Protestants would have him know, that that description of the studies of those
two fathers, does rightly describe the studies of every learned Protestant.
They see it to their grief in all our books, and in the process of this
whole book, it will appear to him, that the Protestants use the help of the
fathers writings as a singular benefit of God, for the true understanding of
the Scriptures, and for the finding out of the truth in those controversies
that are depending betwixt us and them. Yea, so far are we from contenting
our selves with our own understanding, as that we forbear not to turn and
wind all Popish authors, either of former or latter time, that what gold we can
find in their dunghils, we may apply it to the furnishing of the temple of the
Lord. But it pitieth me to think of the silliness of this man, in vpbraiding
us with not searching the writings of the ancient fathers, of who^ I am
persuaded that we may truly say, that he never read so much as one volume of
any one of the fathers, and had been in pitiful case for the writing of this
book, had not Bellarmine been content upon trust to lend him the whole stock.
Well, he has read them that have read the fathers, and if they lie, be it so;
he cannot tell how to help either himself or them. Thus for the finding of a
Judge we came first to the Pope, and from the Pope he has brought us to the
councels, and from the councels to the writings of the fathers, and now from
the writings of the fathers he leads us to the Church. He alleges to this
purpose two sayings of S. Austin. The former upon occasion of the question
betwixt the Donatists and him is thus, August. cont. Crescon. lib. 1. ca. 33.
Quisquis falli metuit istius obscuritate quaestionis, candem ecclesiam de illa
consulat quam sine vlla ambiguitate sancta Scripturae demonstrat.
Whosoever fears to be deceived by the obscurity of this question, let him
seek for advice to that same Church, which without any ambiguity the holy
Scripture does demonstrate and point out. We admit the condition; we willingly
hearken to the judgment of that Church: in obscure points which we do not
readily understand, we highly esteem the censure of that Church, which
otherwise by the Scripture is demonstrated to be the true Church. S. Austine in
those words has reference to the whole Church from the time of the Apostles,
and very rightly directs him that was not able otherwise to discern, to
presume that to be the truth which from the very original had been continued
and practiced in the Church. This serves not M. Bishops turn, because it
fitteth not to M. Bishops Church. No more does that other place which he
cites, Ide^ cont. epist. funda. cap. 5 Ego vero Euangelio non credere^ nisi me
Catholicae ecclesiae co^mcueret authoritas.
I should not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the catholic
Church should move me to it. M. Bishop before hand tells us that S. Austin
did not speak this as touching his being at first a Christian, but even now
being a learned and judicious Doctor, he would not believe but for the
authority of the Church. But very lewdly does he abuse S. Austine in making him
so to say, as if he had resolved that it being supposed that the Church should
backslide and fall away, he himself also would play the Apostata, and fall
away from the faith of Christ. What, was his faith built upon men, and not upon
God himself? Did he not know that though Romans 3.4.
every man be a liar, yet God is true? What if the whole world had conspired
against the book of God, as not long before by Arianisme it had against the
Son of God, when Constantius the Emperor said to Liberius Bishop of Rome
concerning Athanasius, Theodoret hist. li. 2. ca. 16. Quota pars tiles orbis
terrarum qui solus facis ^^m homine scelerato? Liberius. No^ dimnuitur
solitudine mea verbum fidei.
Who art thou to the whole world, who thus alone stand with a wicked man?
Liberius though afterward he yielded, yet for that time answered well; The
word of faith is no whit impeached by my being alone; and would not, think we,
S. Austine bear the like mind, howsoever all other sell away, yet constantly
to cleave to that which he knew to be the truth? It is not all M. Bishops
foolish Rhetoric that can make us to believe that S. Austin would make any
such protestation to that effect. Yea, and were not both he and his fellows
very absurdly wilful, they would well enough see, as happily they do, by that
which goes before, and that which follows, that it can be no otherwise
construed, but as in the person of a man at first receiving the Christian
faith; to who^ it is no small motive thereunto, that the same faith has found
credit and entertainment throughout the whole world. But the words themselves
shall best declare to what purpose they were set down. Ide^ vt supra. Si
inuonires aliquem qui Euangelio nondu^ credit, quid faceres dicenti tibi Non
credo? Ego vero Euangelio non crederem nisi me Catholicae ecclesiae commoueret
authoritas. Quibus ergo obtemperaui dice^tibus, Credit Euangelio; cur eis non
credere^ dice^tibus mihi, Noli credere Mani^haeo? Elige quod v^lis. Si dixeris,
creed Catholicis ipsi me monent vt ^ullam fidem acco^mode^ vobis, etc Si
dixeris, Noli Catholicis credere, no^ recte facies per Euangeliu^ mo cogere ad
fidem Manichaei, quia ipsi Euangelio Catholicis praedicantibus credidi.
If thou should find any man who yet believes not the Gospel, what
would thou do to him saying unto thee, I do not believe? Surely I should not
believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the catholic Church should move
me unto it. Whom then I have hearkened unto, saying unto me, Believe the
Gospel, why should I not hearken to them, saying to me, Believe not Manicheus.
Choose whether thou will. If thou will say, Believe the^ of the catholic
Church, they give me warning to give no trust to you. If thou will say, Do not
believe the^ of the catholic Church, thou shall not do well to force me by the
Gospel to the faith of Manicheus, because by the preaching of them of the
catholic Church, I have believed the Gospel. We see that both the propounding
and the process of these whole words, do cry out against M. Bishop, and as it
were with loud voice, do proclaim that S. Austins meaning was no other, but
that the consent and authority of the Church ouerspreading the whole world, was
at first a mighty and strong inducement unto him, to believe that Gospel
wherein all so constantly did accord; because it could not be taken but to be
of God which had gotten that estimation and account with so many nations and
peoples of so strange and diverse dispositions. Mark the words gentle Reader,
What would thou do to him, saying, I do not believe: Surely I should not
believe unless, etc. unto who^ I hearkened saying, Believe the Gospel, etc. By
the preaching of them I believed the Gospel. The thing is apparent unto any man
that does not stop his own eyes that he may not see. And hereof most holily
and devoutly the same S. Austin speaks in his confessions to God, even as it
were to tell us the meaning of these words: Ide^ Confess lib. 6 cap. 5 Semper
credidi and esse te and curam nostri gerere etiamsi ignorabam vel quid
sentiendum esset de substa^tia tua, vel quae via duceret aut reduceret ad te.
Ide^que eu^ essemu^ insirmi ad inueniendam liquida ratione veritate^ and obhoc
nobis op^s esset authoritate sancta^u^ literarum, ^am credere caeperam nullo
modo te fuisse tributuru^ tam excellentum illi Scriptur^e per omneti^m terras
authoritatem nisi and per ipsam tibi credi and per ipsam te quaerivoluisses.
I always believed, says he, that thou art, and that thou have care of us,
albeit I knew not what to think of thy being, or which way should lead me or
bring me again to thee. Therefore when I was too weak by apparent reason to
find out the truth, and for this purpose needed the authority of the holy
Scriptures, I began now to believe that by no means thou would give that
excellency of authority to those scriptures even throughout the whole earth,
but that thou would have us thereby to believe thee, and thereby to seek
thee. This place shows the true effect of that other speech, and it is great
impudency and impiety in M. Bishop and his fellows, to force upon S. Austine
that protestation which they do by their false construction.

23 W. BISHOP.
This matter is so large, that it requires a whole question: but being penned
up within the compass of one objection, I will not dwell any longer in it, but
here fold up this whole question of Traditions, in the authorities of the
ancient Fathers; out of whom, because I have in answering M. Perkins, and
elsewhere, as occasion served, cited already many sentences; I will here be
brief.

S. Ignatius the Apostles Scholar, does exhort all Christians, Eusebius li. 3.36.
To stick fast unto the Traditions of the Apostles, some of which he committed
to writing.

Polycarpus, by the authority of the Apostles words, which he had received from
their own mouths; confirmed the faithful in truth, and overthrew the
heretics. Ibid. li. 5. c. 20.


S. Irenaeus, who imprinted in his heart Apostolical traditions, received from
Polycarp, says, If there should be a controversy about any mean question,
ought we not to run unto the most ancient Churches, in the which the
Apostles had conuersed, and from them take that which is clear and perspicuous
to define the present question? For what if the Apostles had not written any
thing at all, must we not have followed the order of Traditions, which they
delivered to them to whom they delivered the Churches?

Origin teaches, that the Church received from the Apostles by Tradition, to
baptize Infants. Romans 6.


Athanasius says: Lib. de decre^. Niceni conc.
We have proved this sentence to have been delivered from hand to hand by
Fathers to Fathers: but ye, O new Jews, and sons of Caiphas, what ancestors
can ye show of your opinion?

S. Basil has these words: De Spir. Sanct. cap. 27.
We have the doctrine that is kept and preached in the Church; partly written,
and part we have received by Tradition of the Apostles in mystery, both which
be of the same force to godliness, and no man opposes against these, who has
at the least but mean experience of the Laws of the Church. See Gregory
Nazianz. Orat. 1. in Julian.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop is here as he was before, like the melancholic merchant of Athens,
who rejoiced at the sight of every ship that came in persuading himself that
it was his ship. He cannot light any where upon the name of traditions, but he
presently imagines that it is meant of their Popish unwritten traditions. And
here in the first place to color this, he translateth the words of Eusebius
amiss, by changing the singular number into the plural. Eusebius. hist. lib. 3.
cap. 32. Vt Apostolorum traditioni indivulse adhaerent admonebat. (...)
He warned them, says Eusebius concerning Ignatius, that they should cleave
steadfastly to the tradition of the Apostles. He says not traditions, as to
note sundry doctrines left unwritten, as M. Bishop would have it, but
tradition, as entirely and generally to signify the doctrine delivered by the
Apostles. Therefore he must necessarily be understood of the doctrine of the
Apostles which is written, but there is no necessity of understanding any more.
This tradition, that is, the doctrine delivered by the Apostles, Eusebius says
that Ignatius did testify by writing, and what he testified we should see by
those writings if we had them now in such sort as he left them, even no other
doctrine but what the Apostles before had left in writing. But those Epistles
have been diversely in hucksters hands, being grown to greater number then
Eusebius and Hierome heard of in their times, and containing many things now
which they had not then, and many then which they have not now. Ignatius now is
made to say, that Ignat. epist. 5. ad Phil. p. Siqu^ dominico die reiunauer^t
aut sabbato praeter vnum sabbatu^, is est Christi interfector.
if any man fast upon the Lords day or upon the Saturday, he is a murderer of
Christ, whereas S. Austine confesses, that Aug. epist. 86. Quibus diebus
^^unare eporteat vel quibus non oporteat nullo Domini vel Apostolorum praecepto
inuenio definitum.
he found it not defined by any precept of Christ or his Apostles what days we
are to fast and what not, and Hierome as we have heard before confesses, that
Paul and others with him did fast upon the Lords day. He is now made to say,
that Ignat. ibid. Siqu^ eum Iudaeis pascha peregeris, and festi eorum Symbola
susceperit, is particeps est and socius eoru^ qui Dominum occiderunt and
Apostolos eius.
if any man observe Easter with the Jews, or shall bear the marks of their
festival day, he is a companion and partaker with the^ who killed Christ and
his Apostles, whereas it is manifest by the ecclesiastical history, that Eusebius.
hist. lib. 5 cap 23.
Polycarpus the Bishop of Smyrna at that time kept Easter in that sort, and
refused to yield to Anicetus Bishop of Rome to do otherwise, and therefore that
there was no such observation to which Ignatius should adioine any such censure
as here is. Again Hierome cites this sentence out of Ignatius, that Hieron.
cont. Pelug lib. 3. Ignatius vir Apostolicus and martyr scribit audacter Elegit
Dominus Apostolos qui super omnes homines erant peccatores.
Christ chose Apostles who were sinners above all men, which now is not found
in those Epistles that we have. Therefore since we have his writings no otherwise
but maimed and corrupted, it is hard from them now to gather any certainty at
all, and those some traditions which M. Bishop speaks of, are but mere
forgeries conveyed into them by the Popes agents, albeit the former of those
traditions which I have mentioned, makes them also murderers of Christ,
because they fast upon the Saturday, or else they must deny that these
epistles do faithfully report the traditions of the Apostles. But what
tradition it was that Irenaeus meant, will appeer by that that is cited in the
next place concerning Polycarpus, who M. Bishop says, by the Apostles words
received from their own mouths confirmed the faithful in truth, and
overthrew the heretics. Let his author speak, and let the Reader judge how
honestly he deals in this citation. The words are the words of Irenaeus, of
whom Eusebius reports, that in certain speeches against Florinus the
heretic, he says of himself having been with Polycarpus when he was very
young, Eusebius. hist. eccl. lib. 5. ca. 18. Commemorare quea^ sermones eius quos
fecit ad multitudine^, and quomodo se cum Ioanne ac reliquis qui Dominu^
viderunt conuersatum esse dixerit, and sermones ecru^ memorauerit, and quae ex
illis de Domino audierant and de virtutibus eius and doctrina tanqua^ ex ijs
qui ipsi verbu^ vitae viderant et cuncta sanctis Scripturis consona recensuerit.
I remember the sermons that he made to the people, and how he told that he had
been conversant with John and others that saw the Lord, and mentioned their
speeches, and what he had heard of them concerning the Lord and concerning his
miracles and doctrine, as received from them who themselves had seen the Word
of life, and reported all things agreeable to the holy Scriptures. Here was
then the tradition of Polycarpus, containing nothing else but according to the
Scripture. As touching the tradition that See the Answer to the Epistle. sect.
11.
Irenaeus speaks of, it has been before showed that it contains nothing
else but the elementall articles of Christian faith, for the auouching whereof
he was forced to appeal to the tradition and successiue doctrine of the
Church, because he had to do with heretics that refused the trial of the
Scriptures. He says rightly, that if nothing had been written we must have
rested upon Tradition; but because God knew that Tradition was too uncertain
and weak a means for preservation of truth, therefore as he has before said,
the Apostles delivered the Gospel which they preached in writing, and that by
the will of God, to be the foundation and pillar of our faith. In a word, when
he says, What if the Apostles had not written any thing at all? must we not
then have followed the order of tradition? he intimates that now that they
have written, we are to follow that which they have written for the certainty
and assurance of our faith. He forces the order of tradition in this sort upon
the heretics, because by the Scriptures there was no dealing with them, but the
matters whereof he treats, are clearly taught therein, as every where he
shows throughout his whole book. His next allegation is vain and childish.
Origin teaches that the Church received from the Apostles by tradition to
baptize infants, whereas Bellarmine himself proves it to be necessary by the
Scriptures, as I have showed Sect 12.
before. That of Athanasius is as little to the purpose as all the rest. The
thing that he has in hand in the Athanas. lib. Quod Nicena synod u congruis
and pijs verbis decreta sua super Ariana haeresi exposuerit.
book cited, is to give a reason of the decree of the Nicene Council, that
the Son of God is of the same substance with the Father. He shows, that the
Fathers there assembled determined it by the Scriptures, Constantine also so
directing them as we have seen before. The matter was so cleared, as that the
heretics for shame were content to subscribe to that which was concluded
upon. Yet he declares, that afterward they fell to cauilling, that the words
whereby the Council expressed their meaning, were not found in the Scriptures;
that they devised them of themselves, and that none of the former Fathers had
used the same. He answers, that Cognoscet quisquis est studiosioris animi has
voces tamitsi in Scripturis non reperiantur habere tamen eas eam sententiam
qu^m Scripturae volunt, and hoc ipsum sonaere, etc.
Whosoever is of a studious mind, or desirous to learn, will know that those
words, though they be not found in the Scriptures, yet have the same meaning
which the Scriptures intend, and do signify the very same. Further, against
their other cauil he shows by diverse places alleged, that the Fathers of
former times had used the same words and manner of speech as the Council did.
Hereupon he concludes, Ecce nos demonstramus istiusmodi sententia^ a patribus
ad patres quasi per man^^ tradita^ esse. Vos autem nou^ Iude^, Cataphaeque
discipuli, quos verboru^ vestroru^ patre^ac maiores demonstra^u^.
Behold we show that this sentence has been delivered from fathers to fathers,
as it were from hand to hand: but O you new Jews and sons of Caiphas, what
fathers or auncesters will ye show us for your terms? Now shall not we think
that M. Bishop has here brought us a stout proof for traditions unwritten,
and doctrines beside the Scripture? Even as if we should say to M. Bishop and
his fellows, Behold we show you that which we say of the sufficiency of the
Scriptures delivered from fathers to fathers, even as it were from hand to
hand, and he should herupon cite us for witnesses of their traditions. As much
wit should he show in this, as he now does in that. The place of Basil is
answered at large Sect. 16.
before. He further refers us to the first oration of Greg Nazi^n. contra
Julian. erat. 1. Doctrina nostra insig^^re^ videus ob ecclesiae figuras quas
traditio^e acceptas in hunc vsque die^ serua^^mus, etc. Idem hic cogit (...)
scholas in omnibus ciuitatibus extruere parabat, and sacraria se desque partim
altiores, partim depressiores, propha^^^um dogmatum lectiones and ^xplicationes
instituere; tum preca^o^um alternatim ca^^^arum f^rmam, etc.
Gregory Nazianzen against Julian, but was ashamed to set down any words of
his, because the matters of tradition that he there mentions amongst the
Christians, which Julian the Apostata apishly would resemble in his Paganism,
were schools and forms higher and lower, lectures, hospitals, monasteries,
companies of virgins, singing by turns, and such other matters of external
order and discipline in the Church, and what are these to prove traditions,
that is, matters of doctrine not contained in the Scriptures? We admit almost
all those things which he there speaks of, and yet we condemn traditions in
that sense as we here make question of them. Surely M. Bishops traditions are
in a miserable case, that in all antiquity can find no better foundations
whereupon to build them. A man would not think that in so serious a matter he
would so trifle as he has done, bringing not one place in any sort appliable
to his purpose, but only that of Basil, and yet neither that of sufficient
weight to prove that that he has undertaken to prove, as before has been
showed.

24. W. BISHOP.
Because I have cited already some of the Latin ancient Doctors: in stead of
the rest, I will record out of them in a word or two, how old rotten heretics
used always to reject unwritten traditions, and fly wholly unto the written
word. See the whole book of Tertullians prescriptions against heretics, which
principally handles this very point. The same does Irenaeus witness of the
Valentinians and Marcionists. Lib. 3. cap. 2.
The Arians common song unto the Catholics was, I will not admit to be read
any words that are not written (in the Scriptures) as witnesses S. Hilary in
his book against Constantius the Emperor, against whom he alleges the
preaching of the Apostles and the authority of the ancient Bishops expressed
in his lively colors.

S. Augustine some 1200. years ago, records the very form of arguing, which
the Protestants use now a days in the person of Maximinus an Aria^, in his
first book against him in the beginning. If thou shall (says this heretik)
bring any thing out of the Scriptures which is common to all, we must needs
hear thee, but these words which are without the Scriptures, are in no sort to
be received of us: when as the Lord himself has admonished us, and said, in
vain do they worship me, teaching commandments and precepts of men. How S.
Augustine opposed against them unwritten traditions, has been before declared.
The like does S. Bernard affirm of certain heretics of his time called Hom.
62. Cant.
Apostolici.

So that most truly it may be concluded, that even as we Catholics have
learned of the Apostles and ancient Fathers, our noble progenitors, to
standfast and hold the Traditions which we have received by word of mouth, as
well as that which is written: even so the Protestants have received as it were
from hand to hand of their ignoble predecessors, old condemned heretics, to
reject all Traditions, and to fly unto the only Scriptures.

R. ABBOT.
For conclusion of this question he brings us here a rotten tale, how old
rotten heretics used always to reject unwritten traditions, and fly wholly
to the written word. To make this tale good, he brings us first a lie, and
then a fond cavil. He refers his Reader first to Tertullians book of
prescriptions, the purpose whereof what it is, I have showed before at large,
but in all that book is no word of heretics flying wholly to the written
word. Tertullian shows, how they mangled and marred the Scriptures being
urged therewith, rejecting what and where they list, so that by the Scriptures
there was no dealing with them; but that they did fly to the Scriptures, or
required trial thereby, he affirms not. And this is plain by Irenaeus, even
in that place whence M. Bishop cites him for his second witness, and where he
speaks of the very same heretics of whom Tertullian spoke. Iren lib. 3. c.
2. Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur in accusationem ipsarum conuertuntur
Scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant, neque sint ex authoritate, et quia vary
sunt dictae and quia no^ possit ex his inueniri veritas ab his qui nesciant
traditionem. Non enim per literas traditam illam, sed per vinam vocem; ob quam
causam et Paulu^ dixisse, sapientiam loquimur inter perfectos.
Heretics (says he) when they are reproved by the Scriptures, fall to finding
fault with the Scriptures, as if they were not aright, nor of authority, and
that they are doubtfully set down, and that by the Scriptures the truth cannot
be found of them that are ignorant of tradition: for they say that the truth
was not delivered by writing but by lively voice, and that therefore Paul said,
We speak wisdom among those that be perfect. Now by these very words of
Irenaeus, do thou esteem (gentle Reader) the treachery of this man, who
bears thee in hand that Irenaeus notes it there for a property of
heretics to reject unwritten Traditions, and to fly wholly to the written
word, when as it was their abusing and refusing of the Scriptures that made him
to appeal to the tradition of the Church, the matters of their heresies being
concerning the fundamental articles of our belief, which are evidently taught
by the written word. It is truly said, that heretics shun the Scriptures
even as the thief does the gallows: and as it is true in other heretics, so
it is in the Papists, upon whom how justly those words of Irenaeus light, and
how fully they describe their usage toward the Scriptures, has been Answer to
the Epistle. sect. 11.
before declared. To this apparent lie, M. Bishop adds a blind cavil, for
which he brings the speeches of Constantius the Emperor and Maximinus, both
Arians, out of Hilary and Austine. The matter is answered sundry times before.
Against the assertion of the Church, that the Son of God is consubstantiall
or of the same substance with the Father, they excepted idly and vainly,
that they would admit no words that were not written. M. Bishop knows well
that we do not so, because we receive and profess those words which they
refused, yea he knows that we say and teach, that the Pope is Antichrist,
that the Church of Rome is the purple whore of Babylon, that the Mass is an
abominable idol and wicked profaning of the Sacrament of Christ, and such
like, and yet these words are no where found in the Scripture. We contend not
concerning words, let them use what words they will, so that the doctrine
imported and meant by those words be contained in the Scriptures. Of those
heretics called Apostolici, S. Bernard says no such matter as he alleges.
All that he says is, that Berna. in Cant. ser. 66. Instituta Ecclesiae non
recipient.
they did not receive the ordinances of the Church, and what is that to the
doctrines of faith taught by Christ and his Apostles, which are not contained
in the Scriptures? Concerning which, against M. Bishops conclusion I conclude
this question with the saying of Saint Austin before alleged, and worthy here
again to be remembered, August. supra sect. 8.
Whether concerning Christ or his Church, or any thing that belongs unto our
faith and life, I will not say, if we, not being to be compared to him that
says, If we, but if an Angel from heaven shall preach unto you anything but
what ye have received in the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospel, accursed be
he. Hearken to it M. Bishop, and let it make you afraid to plead for
Traditions any more.

CHAPTER 8. OF VOWS.
1. W. BISHOP.
MAster Perkins is very intricate and tedious in delivering his opinion
concerning Vows: I will in as good order as I can, briefly correct his errors
herein. In this passage (which he intitleth of our consents) he rangeth many
things, wherein we differ much; as first, in the definition of a Vow, which he
defines thus: A Vow is a promise made to God, touching some duty to be
performed to him. This definition comes too short of a Vow, and agrees unto
all other covenants made between God and man; and so Adams acceptance not to
eat of the forbidden fruit should be a Vow, and Noes building of the Arc:
and briefly every acceptance and promise to fulfill any of Gods commandments;
and consequently every breach of them must needs be two several sins, the
one of disobedience in such a precept, the other of infidelity by breaking of
our vow. All which absurdities necessarily follow of M. Perkins his definition,
and be things unheard of either in holy Scriptures or among the ancient holy
Fathers, proceeding only out of the dross of their own devices, and therefore
with as great facility to be denied of us, as they do with audacitie avouch
them. To make up then the definition, we must add, that the promise to God be
of some better good, proceeding from our own free choice and liberty: so that
no vow is made without a man's free choice to bind himself, over and besides all
other necessary bonds; which to be of the nature of a vow, we gather first out
of the holy Scriptures: Deuteronomy. 23.
If thou make a vow, be not slow to perform it: but if thou will not promise,
thou shall be without sin. What can be more clear, then that a man may choose
whether he will vow or no? which is confirmed in S. Paul: He that decrees in
his heart, not having necessity, but having power over his own will, etc. So
that this liberty to promise, or not to promise, is of the substance of a Vow,
and that if he list not to vow, he does not sin: which were very false, if
the acceptance of necessary duties were Vows. For he that refuses to accept
them, does sin: as if a man should refuse to perform any of Gods
commandments. Hence it follows most manifestly, that the promise which we
make to God in Baptism, of keeping Gods commandments, is no vow, if a vow be
taken properly, because it lies not in us to refuse it, without we will
withal refuse the grace of Baptism, and remain in the state of damnation.
And M. Perkins affirming it to be a Vow, and often repeating it, does not once
confirm it with any shadow of proof, but takes that for granted, which he
knows we do deny flatly.

R. ABBOT.
What the nature of a Vow is, we shall best conceive by the use thereof, which
we find expressed in the Law of God, which if we well weigh and consider, we
shall conceive that a Vow is nothing else but a deliberate and solemn promise
made to God of some honor or service to be done unto him, interposed for a
motive to the obtaining and receiving of some special benefit at his hands.
The matter of Vows in the law of Moses is usually noted to be some ceremonial
worship, God having thereby prescribed to his people certain forms of
external observations, whereby they should upon occasions testify their
thankfulness and devotion toward him. As in other their legal service they
were restrained from following their own device, so in this point also of Vows
they were limited; neither might any thing be done by vow to God, but whereof
God had given warrant and approbation by the law. Albeit because devotion and
thankfulness is a matter of free and voluntary affection, and ready of it
self to show it self, therefore God, though he himself directed in that case
what might and should be done by him that vowed, yet did not by express
commandment tie any man to vow, but left it so far forth to issue from the
free and voluntary motion of his own heart. Now the use of vows we find in
Scripture to have commonly been upon condition of receiving some benefit and
mercy at Gods hands. Thus Jacob being to go to his uncle Laban for avoiding the
fury of his brother Esau, Genesis 28.20.
vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and keep me in this journey
which I go, and will give me bread to eat and clothes to put on, so that I
come again to my fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God, and
this stone which I have set up as a pillar, shall be Gods house, and of all
that thou shall give me, will I give the tenth unto thee. So the sons of
Jacob the Israelites in the wilderness Number 21.2.
vowed a vow, saying, If thou will deliver and give this people (which were of
the Canaanites) into mine hands, I will make their cities anathema, that is, I
will utterly destroy them, reserving the spoil thereof to be consecrated unto
thee. Thus Judge 11.30.
Iephthe upon condition of victory against the Ammonites, vowed for a burnt
offering to the Lord whatsoever at his return should first meet him out of
his own house: 1. Sam. 1.11.
Hannah upon condition of having a son, vowed him for a perpetual Nazarite
to the Lord: Psalm 66.12.
David makes vows to God in the time of his trouble, namely upon condition of
being delivered therefrom: and Absolon though counterfeitly, yet expressing the
manner and use of vowing, says to David his father, 2. Sam 15.8.
Thy servant vowed a vow when I remained in Geshur in Aram, saying, If the Lord
shall bring me again to Jerusalem, I will serve the Lord, pretending thereby
the offering of some sacrifices and offerings, by which he would show himself
thankful to God. And thus as in all other service of the Law the performance
of outward ceremonies was required, not for themselves, but for the spiritual
duties that were shadowed thereby, even so was it in vows, that not for the
carnal and outward things that were vowed, but for the inward affections and
devotions thereby exercised, they were acceptable unto God. For it is true
which Tertullian says, Tertul. aduers. Marc. lib 3 Non exigens Deus quae
fiebant, sed propter quod fiebant, ob honorem sci^icet Dei.
God did not require the things themselves that were done, but that for which
they were done, which was for the honor of God. Therefore to speak properly
and principally of the intention of vows, the matter of them was spiritual
and inward devotion, though acted by carnal service. But spiritual acts and
duties of religion are the same now that they were then, and the same then as
now. Therefore the thing properly and principally meant in vows, continues
now the same as it was also then. Whereof it must follow, that they who make
vows of other intendment then they did, and make promises to God of other
matters then were meant in their vows, do deal very sinisterly and corruptly
in alleging their example for the warrant of them. Yea and seeing the
spiritual devotions intended in their vows are common to all persons and of
all conditions, neither did import any thing that should belong to any divided
sorts or societies of me^, but what all Christians should alike perform to
God, what are they but deuisers of new worship and service unto God, who under
the color of those vows, do now bring in select and special acts and
exercises of religion peculiar only to some men? If all Christian devotions
signified by those vows, were found amongst the Jews, as has bin said, and
these select and peculiar devotions were not found, certain it is that these
devotions are but superstitions, and have no warrant from the old Testament to
be practiced in the new. Now then to come to that which M. Bishop says, albeit
there is no man but well knows that a promise is more then a bare acceptance,
yet wholly to take away that cauil, we term a vow a solemn promise, whereby a
man in special manner binds himself to that which he voweth. Albeit where
there is a promise made to keep Gods commandments, who but an absurd man will
hold it for an absurdity to affirm that in the breach there is a double
trespass, because to the observation he was tied with a double bond, both
absolutely by duty, and respectively by covenant and prom^se, and therefore
must needs be said to violate his duty the one way, and his fidelity the
other. Otherwise why does God upon Deuteronomy. 5.27.
a promise to keep his laws, so often charge his people in special manner
for dealing Psalm. 78.8.
unfaithfully with him, calling them in that respect Deuteronomy. 32.20.
children in whom is no faith, no fidelity or trust, Esa 30.9.
lying children, Chap. 57.4.
a false or lying seed, with sundry other speeches in sundry places to the like
effect. It was therefore but a Romish distemper of M. Bishops eyes, that made
him unable to see gold from dross, and caused him to take that for an error,
which common understanding should inform him to be a truth. As for that which
he tells us, that by our definition we make all covenants with God and
promises to him to be vows, we answer him, that we do indeed take all serious
and solemn promises to God to be very fitly contained under that name, not but
that in precise manner of speaking there is a difference to be made betwixt
them, but because we are not much scrupulous of distinction of words and terms,
where save only in circumstance there is no difference betwixt the things
themselves, no difference, I say, at all in that respect wherein they are
questioned betwixt the Papists and us. For the only difference is this, that
vows properly so called are uttered, as by examples I have showed before, with
condition of obtaining somewhat at Gods hands, but other oaths and covenants,
and promises, are absolutely and simply made. According to this strict rule of
speaking, it is only a covenant and promise that we make to God in Baptism,
to forsake the Devil and all his works, to believe in God and to serve him;
but it is a vow, when a man in sickness, by way of repentance of his former
life, says, If the Lord will be merciful unto me, and vouchsafe to restore me
to health again, I will forsake all my former evil ways, and betake my self
faithfully to his service. The matter then on both sides is one and the same,
and the difference is only in form of speaking, which being no other, we make
no doubt of calling both by the name of vows, neither is there any question in
that behalf, because the Papists term absolute promises Vows as well as we.
But M. Bishop, out of the dross of their schools, takes upon him to teach us
another difference, that a vow is a promise to God of some better good, the
same proceeding out of our own free choice and liberty, whereas other promises
may be of necessary duties, not being at our choice, but whereto we are tied
otherwise. Where he leaves us to guess what he means by some better good,
the words importing a comparison, and therefore implying a reference to some
other good, then which that is better which we promise by a vow. This mystery
Thomas Aquinas shall open for us, who says, that Thom. Aquin. sum. 22. qu. 88.
art. 22. in corp. Dicitur maius bonum in comparatione ad bonu^, quod comuniter
est de necessitate salutis.
this better good is so called in comparison of that good that is commonly
necessary for the obtaining of salvation: meaning thereby that it is better
then those virtues and good works which in common belong to the duty of every
Christian man. Which fancy of theirs is very fond and vain, because when of
old the vow was sacrifice, and the common duty was mercy, the vow could not
be said to be of a better good then was the common duty, for that mercy was
better then sacrifice, as God himself gave to understand, saying, Ose 6.6.
I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Yea it has been before showed, that of
old the thing principally intended in vows was matter of common duty, though
included for the time as it were in the shell of those outward ceremonies, and
therefore vows cannot be said to be of better good then common duty. We see
the special matter of Jacobs vow before mentioned, to have been that that
concerns every man for the obtaining of salvation, Then shall the Lord be my
God: before which, neither the building of a house to God, nor the giving of a
tenth of his goods to God, could be preferred as a better good. And who does
not understand and see, that in this assertion of a better good in their vows,
they affirm that that is directly contrary to the doctrine of the Scriptures.
How does he vow a better good, who in the vow of continency burns with
fleshly lust, when the Apostle so plainly says, 1. Cor. 7.9.
It is better to marry then to burn? How do they vow a better good in their
vow of poverty and beggary, when as our Savior says, Act. 20.35.
It is a more blessed thing to give, then to receive? How do they in their vow
of obedience tie themselves to a better good, in making themselves slaves to
the rules of men, then other men do in following the commandments of God,
when as the Scripture says, 1. Corin. 7.23.
Be ye not made the servants of men? These are very peevish and absurd devices,
bred in corrupt and rotten brains, and no way sauouring of Christian
understanding. As for that which he adds, that a vow must proceed of our own
free choice and liberty, and that no vow is made without a man's free choice to
bind himself, whether he vndrstand it of vowing, or of the thing that is
vowed, there is no necessity thereof. For albeit it be true that a man is not
always tied to vow, but sometmies is at liberty whether to vow or not, yet
this is not so always and in all vows, because (as shall be hereafter showed)
it is one part of honor and duty which God requires of every Christian man,
that we religiously vow and promise our selves and our faithful service unto
him. Whereby it appears as touching the thing vowed, that it is not always
at our free liberty and choice before our vow, whether to do it or not. For
seeing necessary duties are some part of the matter of vows, and it cannot but
be sin to forgo necessary and commanded duty, it must needs follow, that
vows are made of those things also, which it is sin otherwise not to do, and
are not at our choice and liberty whether to be bound to them or not. It had
bin sin in Jacob not to have the Lord for his God, and yet it is the thing
that he voweth, as we have seen, Then shall the Lord be my God. The words
which M. Bishop alleges for his purpose out of Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 23.21.
If thou vow a vow, be not slack to perform it, but if thou forbearest to
vow, it shall be no sin unto thee, are altogether referred to legal vows.
The spiritual duty of thanksgiving exercised by those types and figures,
could not be omitted without sin, but it was no sin not to make the
ceremonial vow; they were at their own free choice and liberty in that
behalf, but we cannot thence frame a rule generally for all vows. The other
place which is cited, is wholly impertinent, S. Paul thereby not only
affirming that the father does well to keep his daughter a virgin, when he is
upon good grounds assured that he has no necessity to do otherwise, when he
has full resolution that without any snare or danger to her he may so do. 1.
Corin. 7.37.
He that stands firm in his own heart that he has no need (by peril or
fear of incontinencie to marry his daughter) but has full power over his own
will (to do safely what he likes in that behalf) and has decreed in his
heart that he will keep his virgin, he does well. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 7. Hoc
dicit vt qui virginem habet cui animus ad nuptias non est, seruet illam, nec
illic ingerat fomitem nuptiarum, quam videt nubendi voluntate^ non habere: si
enim beneficia praestanda sunt, quanto magis minime sunt anferend^?
This is his meaning, says S. Ambrose, that he that has a daughter that has
no mind to marry, keep her a virgin, and do not thrust upon her occasion of
marriage, who he sees has no will or desire thereto; for if it be for a man to
do a benefit, much more is it for him not to take it away. Now how badly does
M. Bishop deal to wrest these words to his description of vows, as if the
Apostle had spoken of vowing to be where there is no necessity thereof, but a
man has full power whether to vow or not, when indeed he says nothing at all
to that effect. Here is therefore as yet no proof, that liberty to promise or
not to promise is of the substance of a vow, nothing to prove that the name of
vows does not belong to the acceptance of necessary duties, such duties as in
the refusal whereof we should commit sin. Nothing therefore is there to
hinder, but that the promise that we make to God in baptism should properly be
called a vow, if we understand the proper use thereof in respect of the thing
vowed as M. Bishop does. We take the proper use from the manner not from the
matter of it, as has been before said, but because the question here is what
is properly the matter of a vow, we say there is no exception thence to be
taken why the promise of baptism should not properly be called a vow. Surely
Hierome makes Hieron. in Esa. lib. 7. cap. 19. Votum offert et soluit Domino
qui est sanctus corpore and spiritu.
holiness in body and spirit the matter of a Christian vow. S. Austin asks
the question and answers it, Augus. in psalm. 75. Quid debemus vouere^ Credere
in illum, sperare ab illo vita^ aeternam, been viu^re secundum commune^ modu^,
furiu^ non facere, adulterium non, facere, no^ amare vinolentia^ etc.
What are we to vow to God? To believe in him, to hope for eternal life at his
hands, to live well according to the manner of life that is common to all, not
to steal, not to commit adultery, not to love drunkenness, not to be proud, not
to kill, not to hate our brother. And again, Jdem in Psalm. 131. Quid vouemus
Deo nisi vt simu^ templu^ Dei:
What do we vow to God but to be the temple of God? He makes it Idem de Temp.
ser 7. Votu^ eptimu^ offe^re anima^ nostra^. Quomodo? Moribus sanctis,
cogitationibus casti^, operibus fructuosis, auertendo a malo, and conuertendo
ad bonum.
the best vow to offer our soul to God. How? By holy behavior, by chaste
thoughts, by good works, by declining from evil, and turning to good. If
these things be the matter of Christian vows, why is the profession of baptism
which contains al these things, denied to be a vow? The great schoolmaster of
the Roman church defines Pet. Lombard. sen lib. 4. did. 38. Votu^ est
testificatio quaeda^ promissionis spontaneae quae Deo and de his quae Dei sunt
fieri debet, etc. Commune illud quod in baptismo omnes faciunt. etc.
a vow to be the testification of a voluntary promise which is to be made to
God, and concerning those things which belong to God; and according to this
definition makes that a vow which all make in baptism, because there
volu^tarily men protest and promise to consecrate to God both their bodies and
their souls, as being both his by right of creation and redemption, and will M.
Bishop here come in and tell us, Hic magister non tenetur, Here our master tells
a lie? Their ordinary gloss calls those protestations of baptism Gloss.
ordinar. in Psalm. 75. Communia vota sine quibus non est salus.
the common vows, without which there is no salvation: and Thomas Aquinas
durst not deny but that the same properly do fall into the nature of a vow,
because Thom. Aquin. sum. 22 q. 88. art 2. ad 1. Sub voto baptizatoru^ cadit
quia voluntary fit, licet sit de necessitate salutis, etc. and in corp. Omnino
voluntarium proprijssime cadit sub voto.
they are volu^tarily done, but forsooth most properly they are no vows,
because that is most properly a vow which is altogether voluntary, that is,
such as that a man is wholly at his own choice whether he do it or not. And
whence comes this most properly? Marry out of the forge of Thomas Aquinas his
brains, who seeing that that which he was to say for their other vows could
not well hang together, if the promise of baptism should be taken for a
perfect vow, hewed and pared the definition of a vow that it might be fitted
for his turn. Azorius the Jesuit tells us, that Azor. lib. 11. cap 14.
Baptisma esse votu^ proprie dictum veteres Theologi cu^ magistro videntur
sentire: sed probabilius est quod scholastici alij tenent.
the ancient Divines, as also the Master of the Sentences, seem to think
that baptism is a vow properly and truly so called, but (says he) it is more
probable which the rest of the Schoolmen hold. Thus against the judgment of
the ancient Divines, they frame all things as they list, and we must take every
of their blind sophismes to be a certain rule of truth. But we refuse them to
be our masters, and choose to follow that which the Church before them has
followed, accounting all those things the matters of our vows to God which
were figured by those ceremonies and sacrifices which were vowed by the law,
even all the spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, and al good
works whereby we honor and glorify almighty God, all which according to our
state of life we promise to God in baptism, and therefore do account that
promise a vow, because it contains the spiritual substance of those ancient
vows. The compiler of the book of Sentences in S. Austins works, has from one
or other gathered this sentence, Sent. apud August. to. 3. in fine. Quisquis
been cogitat quae voueat Deo and quae vouendo persoluat, seipsum voueat and
reddat. Hoc exigiur, hoc debetur.
Whosoever well bethinketh him what to vow to God, and what in vowing to pay,
let him vow himself and pay himself. This is required of God, and this is due
to God. If this be the right conceit of a vow, then the promise of baptism is
a vow, and it is not true which M. Bishop says, that there is no vow properly
so called of necessary duties, because we vow that which God requires, and
which is due to God. Albeit for conclusion I am to advertise thee (gentle
Reader) that we make not the matter of vows to consist only in necessary
duties, that is, such duties as God namely requires of us, but that sometimes
we vow those things which rest upon our choice, and whereof in particular we
are commanded nothing. For albeit God require thankfulness and duty for the
mercies which we have received of him, yet he has not precisely set down,
that by way of thanks a man should always do this or that, but has left the
devout and thankful mind to cast and consider which way he may testify the
affection of his heart, by doing some good work whereof he has understanding
by the word of God that it shall be acceptable unto him. Thus a man, though not
bound to it, yet may vow to do service to God in the ministry of the Church,
and being a minister, conceiving his service in this or that sort to be
profitable to the Church, may by vowing himself thereto abridge himself of
that liberty which otherwise he might enjoy. So may a man vow a part of his
goods to the poor, as Luke 19.8.
Zacheus did, when as by no commandment he is urged so to do. The like may
men do for the building and endowing of Schools, Hospitals, Colleges, and such
other godly and charitable uses, when yet these things by precept are not
necessarily laid upon them. Yea neither do we question but that a man upon good
grounds, and so long as he shall not thereby be 1. Cor. 7.35.
entangled in a snare, may privately vow unto God a single life, to the end that
he may the more commodiously apply himself to the service of Mat. 19.12.
the kingdom of God; this vow being conditional only so far as it shall be
seconded with the gift of God, and so long as it shall stand with peace of
conscience toward him. In these and such like is the true imitation of the
outward ceremony of the law, wherein men were at their liberty whether to vow or
not; works whereof generally we have warrant by the word of God, but whereof in
particular there is no necessity imposed upon us, being left unto us at large,
thereby freely and voluntarily to exercise our zeal and devotion toward God.
Wherein notwithstanding we are to remember that caution that Chrysostom gives,
Chrysos. in psalm. 49. Si quis aute^ exact perpenderit, etsi minime
promittatur, virtus tamen ei debetur. Id Christus fignificans dicebat, Quae
debuimus facere fecimus.
If a man exactly weigh the matter, our virtues are due to God, albeit they be
not promised or vowed, which Christ signifies when he says, We have done that
that was our duty to do. For seeing we are bound Luke 10.17.
to love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our
mind, with all our strength, we must conceive that though nothing be directed
unto us in particular as touching the necessity of such or such a work, yet in
the general we do nothing therein but what we owe to God, because whatsoever
is within us or whatsoever is without us, we owe all to him. Yea and the vow of
our baptism does after a sort contain all these other vows in that being
there consecrated wholly to God, we undertake thereby to take all occasions and
oportunities to do honor unto God. As for popish vows, being as they are for
the most part brainsick and idle fancies, such as whereof neither in the
general nor in the particular we have any testimony from God that they are
accepted in his sight, they are only apish counterfeits of those legal and
ceremonial vows, but do no way carry the true resemblance of them, nor that
life of spiritual worship and service that was shadowed thereby.

2. W. BISHOP.
The second point of our supposed consent is, that Vows were some part of Gods
worship in Moses law, but are not so in the Gospel, which we also deny. M.
Perk. proves his assertion thus: Vows belonged to the ceremonies of Moses law,
but all those ceremonies are abolished by Christ's passion.

Ans. That Vows in themselves were no part of the ceremonies of Moses law, but
true parts of the worship of God in all estates, as well in the state of nature
and the Gospel, as in Moses law: but this point M. Perk. handles again in the
first point of our difference, where it shall be discussed. Thirdly he says
that special vows may be made in the new law, to perform some bodily
exercise for some good end, as to fast, to task our selves to prayers, or
study of holy Scripture, and such like, but many rules must then be obscrued:
that we vow an honest thing agreeable to Gods word: this we allow. Secondly,
that it be so made that it may stand with Christian liberty, that is, that it
make not such things necessary in conscience, which Christian religion leaves
at liberty. This rule of his is flat repugnant to the nature of a vow, and
contrary to himself. For he says a little before, that a Christian may vow
fasting, prayer, almesdeeds. I then demand, having vowed these things, is he
not bound to perform them? Yes, or else he breaks his vow, with which God is
highly displeased. Deuteronomy 23. Eccles. 30.
An unfaithful promise displeases God. Then is it manifest, that all vows do
abridge us of our liberty, and make that unlawful for us, which before our
vow was lawful: which is so evident of it self, that I marvel where the man's
wit and memory was when he wrote the contrary.

His other rules, that a vow be made with good deliberation and with consent of
our superiors, and not only of things possible, but also of the better sort,
Quaest. 88.
we allow, for they are taken out of our Doctors. See S. Thom.

R. ABBOT.
That which M. Perkins says is true, that in the law of Moses the ceremonial
work it self was a part of the worship of God, and was to be done in it self
by way of obedience to God. He speaks not of the act of vowing simply by it
self, as M. Bishop falsely wresteth his words, but of the vow of a ceremonial
duty in the way of service to God, which if M. Bishop do not acknowledge to be
abolished, he must become a Jew, and practice the sacrifices and offerings
prescribed by Moses law. But of this he tells us that we shall hear more
hereafter, and we are content to wait his leisure, As touching vows under the
Gospel, M. Perkins affirms, that they may be made as touching the
performance of some outward and bodily exercise, for some good ends and
purposes, as when a man seeing himself prone to drunkenness, does by vow bind
himself for a time to the forbearing of wine and strong drink, or upon
occasions tieth himself to set fasting, and prayer, and reading of the
Scriptures, and giving of some set alms, and such like. But as touching such
vows, he delivers certain cautions to be observed. The first M. Bishop
allows, that our vow be agreeable to the will and word of God. The second he
understands not, and therefore cauilleth at it. It is required that our vow
stand with Christian liberty, that is, that by vowing we entangle not our
consciences with any opinion of the necessity of the things themselves which we
have vowed, as if any worship or holiness consisted in those external and
formal observations, but that in our practice of them we know that in
themselves they are no matters of conscience, nor do yield us any part of
righteousness with God. Now this which M. Perkins applies against the
conceit of the very things themselves which a man has vowed, M. Bishop
construeth as if he meant it of being at liberty from the performing of his
vow. But a man may religiously perform his vow, and yet know that the thing it
self is of no value with God which he performs; and therefore M. Perkins
wits did not fail in delivering, but M. Bishops in understanding. Those other
conditions that such vows must be made with consent of superiors, and of
things that are in our power to do, and agreeable to our vocation and calling,
and with good deliberation, and for a good end, M. Bishop approves also, and
therefore not questioning whence they were taken, and telling him that our
uprightness appears therein, if we be content to take of them what is
consonant and agreeable to the truth, we so let them go.

3 W. BISHOP.
Now to the points in difference.

First, the Church of Rome (says M. Perkins) teaches, that in the new
testament, we are as much bound to make vows, as was the Church of the Jews,
we say no; Considering that the Ceremonial Law is now abolished, and we have
only two Ceremonies by commandment to be observed for parts of Gods worship:
Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.

Answer. What, is not your Holy Day service (which you call divine service) any
part of Gods worship in your own opinions? Can a public assembly instituted
to honor God by prayer and thanksgiving with external ceremony of time,
place, apparel, kneeling, standing, and sitting, be no part of Gods worship in
your irreligious Congregations, assembled together against Christ and his
catholic Church? be it so. But admitting as you do, your service to be good;
it could not truly be denied to belong unto the worship of God. But to the
matter of difference, you grow very careless in your reports of our doctrine:
for we hold that neither in the old nor new law, any man is bound to vow, but
that it is and ever was a council, and no commandment, nevertheless, a thing
of great devotion and perfection in both states, intrinsecally belonging and
much furthering to the true worship of almighty God, which we prove in this
sort. In a vow are two things; the one is the good which is vowed, called the
material part: for example, Fasting, etc. The other, the promise it self made
to God, which is the form; the material parts do belong unto their several
virtues: but this promise and performance of it be substantial parts of Gods
worship. For by promising of any good thing unto God, we acknowledge and
profess that God is the sovereign goodness it self, and takes great
pleasure in all good purposes and determinations: therefore to honor and
worship him, we make that good promise again, in performing that good service
of God, we testify, that he is most maiesticall, reverend, and dreadful. And
consequently, that all promises made to him, are to be accomplished most
diligently, and without delay, wherein we honor and worship him, as
contrariwise they do much dishonor him who break with him, as if he were of
no better account then to be so deluded. This thing in it self is so certain
and clear, that he who denies it, must needs either be ignorant in the nature
of a vow, or not know wherein the true worship of God consists: for according
unto the holy Scriptures it self, all good d^edes done to the glory of God, be
acts of the true worship of God. And Saint Anne Luke 1.
did worship God, by fasting and prayer. And Phil. 4.
alms bestowed on Gods prisoners, is called a sacrifice pleasing and
acceptable to God: And it is said, Iac. 5.
to be a pure religion before God, to visit Orphans and widows: If then all
other virtuous duties done to the glory of God, be parts of his true worship;
much more vows, which by special promise dedicate a good deed to Gods
honor: they then being of their own nature, special parts of his true
worship of God, it follows necessary, that at all times they were and may be
used to the true worship of God: that they were in practice before Moses Law is
evident by that vow which Jacob made, Genesis 28.
of setting up a stone, which should be called the house of God, and of paying
the tenthes of all his goods. Out of which vow, we also gather, that God
holds for agreeable, any kind of good service offered unto him out of our
own devotion: albeit he has not commanded it, for no such thing as Jacob
there vowed was commanded him, but he being well assured that it would be well
taken by God, which was offered of good will, to his greater honor, he vowed
it, and is in holy Scripture commended for it.

Again, that when Saint Paul Colos. 2.
seems to disalow voluntary worship, he must be understood to speak either
of erroneous, or of frivolous and foolish things promised to God, which do not
properly serve to the setting forth of his honor.

R. ABBOT.
Our divine service, our prayers and thanksgiuings to God, our hearing of his
word, and receiving of his sacraments are indeed the worship of God, and our
public assemblies are instituted hereby to honor God, but as for the
external ceremonies of time, place, apparel, kneeling, standing, and sitting,
if M. Bishops wits stood right, he would know that they are things accidental
to the worship of God, but no parts thereof. God is not honored by our meeting
at such a time, or by being in such a place, or by wearing such or such
apparel, or by our kneeling, or standing, or sitting, but by the things which
according to his commandment we do in the usage of these things. The Church
was wont to forbear kneeling in their prayers from Easter to Whitsontide, and
yet we suppose M. Bishop is not so absurd, as to say that therefore they failed
to do to God some part of his worship. A number of apish gestures for many
hundred years were wanting in the mass, and was there some part of Gods
worship wanting all that while? This matter needs not to be stood upon, nor
would there have been occasion to speak of it at all, but that men's senses
commonly fail them most, when they think to use them most acutely against
God. He calls our congregations irreligious, and says they are assembled
against Christ and his Church, but God has justified our congregations to
their shame and confusion, and for the maintenance of them has so showed his
providence and power, that as the Egyptians said, Exodus 14.25.
The Lord fights for Israel against the Egyptians, so the Romish idolaters
have been forced to say, The Lord fights for the English congregations
against us. But to come to the matter, he finds fault with M. Perkins his
report of their doctrine, and therefore himself reports it, that they hold
that neither in the old nor new law any man is bound to vow, but that it ever
was a counsel and no commandment, yet nevertheless a thing of great devotion
and perfection in both states, and intrinsecally belonging to the true worship
of God. Where as touching ceremonial vows, he says truly that in the old law
no man was expressly bound to vow, but that those vows were matters of
perfection in the old law, if we will take it upon his word, we may, but how to
prove it he cannot tell; it is a mere dotage, neither is there any ground
whereupon to affirm that ever they were taken so to be. Nay even then was it
true which Origin says, Origin. in ^^um hom. 24. Se^^tipsu^ Deo offetre hoc
est perfectius and emine^tu^ omnibus votis: quod qui facit imitator est Christi.
To offer a man's self to God was a matter of greater perfection and eminency
then all vows; which he that does, says he, is the follower of Christ. But as
touching vows and promises of spiritual duties and services which were
figured in those ceremonial devotions, it is utterly false which he says,
whether in the old or new law, that we are not bound unto them, and his own
words do plainly show the contrary. For he tells us that vows do
intrinsecally belong to the true worship of God, and who doubts but that God
has required and commanded whatsoever belongs intrinsecally to his worship
and service? For if they be not commanded, there is no necessity of them. If
there be no necessity of them then the religion and worship of God may stand
perfect without them. If the worship of God may stand without them, then they
do not intrinsecally belong to the true worship of God. But because the true
vows are intrinsecally and essentially belonging to the true worship of God,
therefore we must understand and know them to be commanded of God, and that he
has not left any intrinsecall part of his true worship, to depend upon our
will. And this will yet further appear by Master Bishops proof, who, setting
down the matter and form of a vow, the matter the good thing which is vowed;
the form the promise it self made to God, tells us that this promise and
the performance of it are substantial parts of Gods worship. For by promising,
says he, of any good thing to God, we acknowledge and profess that God is the
sovereign goodness it self. Now if vows be a substantial part of Gods
worship, and yet not commanded of God, then some part of the substance of Gods
worship hangs upon our discretion and choice, whether to yield it him or not,
and we may yield him a maimed worship wanting some part of the substance of
it, and yet commit no trespass against him. So likewise if vows be the
acknowledging and professing of the sovereign goodness of God, and yet not
commanded of God, we may without sin forbear some part of the
acknowledgement and profession of the sovereign goodness of God. If thereby
we testify that he is most maiesticall, reverend and dreadful, and yet God
have not commanded them, we may refuse to give this testimony without any
impeachment of the majesty of God. But God is not worshipped in that sort; he
has not left our acknowledgement of him arbitrary to the discretion of our
will. He has commanded us Psalm. 96.8.
to give unto him the glory of his name, that is, the glory that belongs and
is due unto him, and if vows be a part of that glory, as M. Bishop tells us
they be, they cannot be exempted from that commandment. Christ has commanded
us Mat. 22.21.
to give to God the things that are Gods. If vows be a substantial part of
the worship of God, we are tied to give the same unto him, neither may we
think our selves bound for one part only, and at our own liberty for the
other. Now all this pains that he takes, to prove that vows are a part of
the worship of God, is but lost as touching us, because he fights without an
adversary, and proves that which we deny not; but it gives us advantage
against them, to charge them with manifest and abominable idolatry, in that
confessing vows to be a substantial part of the worship of God, they
communicate this honor to the Saints, and make vows to them of fastings,
prayers, pilgrimages, churches, altars, tapers, and what not? a thing so void
of all testimony of Scripture, as that Bellarmine is content to say, Bellar.
de cultu sanct ca 9. Cum scriberentur scripturae sanctae nondum caeperat vsus
vouendi sanctis.
that when the holy Scriptures were written, the custom of vowing to Saints
was not yet begun. It is nothing therefore against us that he alleges, that
Jacob made a vow, thereby to prove that there was use of vows before the time
of Moses law, but whereas he says that the things which Jacob vowed, were out
of his own devotion, and not commanded of God, he speaks it but at all
adventure, and has no ground for that that he says. For if his reason be
because we do not read that any thing was commanded to Jacob in that behalf,
we may likewise argue that he did all other devotions out of his own heart,
and received them not by commandment from God, because we read nothing of
any such commandment. But it is true which Origin says, that Origin. cont.
Cells. lib 7. Nemo qui oculis animae cernit, alio modo Deu^ colit quam sicut
ipse docuit.
no man that sees with the eyes of his soul, worshippeth God otherwise then
as he himself has taught, and which Hilary says, that Hilar. de Trinit. lib.
4. Neu potest ali^er de Deo quam vt ipse est de se testatus intelligi.
we may not understand otherwise concerning God, then as he himself has
witnessed of himself. M. Bishop therefore does amiss to make Jacob as blind
as he himself is, that he should go about to worship God with devotions of his
own device. He received instruction of the will of God from the fathers that
were before him, and he had also immediate revelation and illumination from God
himself. We see that God afterward in the law gives commandment of the same
things, of building altars and paying tithes, and undoubtedly God gave not
commandments of things which he had learned of Jacob, but which Jacob had
been taught by him. Yea, and because the Apostle S. Paul condemns Col. 2.23.
will worship or voluntary religion, that is, all such devotions as men
undertake of their own device, thereby giving to understand, that God never
approves any such, surely we may well resolve that Jacob would not be guilty of
any such presumption, but would first open his ear to learn of God what to
do, before he would put forth the hand to do any thing unto God. But says M.
Bishop, S. Paul when he seems to disallow voluntary worship, must be
understood to speak either of erroneous or of frivolous and foolish things
promised to God, which do not properly serve for the setting forth of his
glory. Where we see the very pattern of an erroneous, and frivolous, and
foolish answer. The Apostle simply taxes will worship as erroneous, and
frivolous, and foolish, and M. Bishop tells us, that he means that will
worship that is erroneous, or frivolous and foolish. He must be understood of
frivolous and foolish things says M. Bishop, and the Apostle tells us that
he speaks of such things as Ibid.
have a show of wisdom, and therefore not to sight, but only to spiritual
judgment are frivolous and foolish. And therefore does the Apostle make them
erroneous, and affirm that Ver. 24.
they perish in the using, because they are after the doctrines and
commandments of men, alluding to that which our Savior in the Gospel cites
out of the Prophet, Mat. 15.9.
In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men; but
M. Bishop will have us think that the Apostles meaning is not to reprove
generally the doctrines and commandments of men, but only some that be
erroneous. In a word, set them one against another, and hearken well what they
say. The Apostle says, voluntary religion or worship is erroneous, because it
is after the doctrines and commandments of men. Master Bishop says, all
voluntary worship is not erroneous, but only that that is erroneous. But here
we must think, that when he thus took exception against promising to God
frivolous and foolish things, he was quite out of the remembrance of the vows
of their religious orders. We must in charity be persuaded that he thought not
of them, because he would have considered, that in condemning the vowing of
frivolous and foolish things, he should condemn them, as in which there are so
many fantastical and frivolous toies, as touching their apparel and other
usage, as that we may wonder that ever such drunken devices could come from
sober men, if at least they were sober that were the deuisers of them. And if
he had remembered them, or when he does remember them, I marvel what
qualification or distinction he would have used, or will use to salve the
matter, that so ridiculous fooleries should be thought as properly serving to
the setting forth of the honor of God. Albeit it may be that though being
subtle and wise, he afterward pro forma disputes, in the behalf of those
vows that he may not walk too openly, yet carrying still a spleen to the
Jesuits, and for their sakes to all the rest he would first give us to
understand, that in his mind he accounts all those vows as superstitions,
and wholly condemned by the sentence of the Apostle. We are very desirous to
construe his meaning the best way.

4. W. BISHOP.
Now that Vows should be frequented in the state of the Gospel, besides the
evidence of Saint Paul's Vow, Act. 18.
and diverse other such like the Prophet Esaias did foretell, in these words:
Esa. 19.18.
They shall worship him with sacrifice and gifts, and they shall vow vows unto
our Lord, and perform them. To which Master Perkins answers, first, that by
such ceremonial worship as then was in use, the Prophet does express the
spiritual worship of the new Testament. This exposition is voluntary and
nothing proper: For what is more vild and absurd, then (to declare that
Christians shall make no Vows) to say that they shall make Vows, as though
one contrary were fit or would serve to express the other. This exposition
being very unmeet, Master Perkins adioyneth a second, that in the new
Testament we have vows of Moral and Evangelical duties, but such are not
any part of Gods worship: so that first you shall have no vows at all:
Secondly, the wind being changed, you shall have them, but as no parts of Gods
worship, as though Moral and Evangelical duties undertaken and performed to
Gods greater glory be not the very sinews and substance of his service and
worship.

R. ABBOT.
By the evidence of Act. 18.18.
S. Paul's vow, it is evident that M. Bishop wanted some discretion, to bring
that for an example of proof, that vows are to be frequented in the state of
the Gospel, the same being Numb. 6.2.
the Naz^rites vow, according to the ceremony of Moses law, no more belonging
to the state of the Gospel, then did all the Leuiticall priesthood and
sacrifices, condescended unto by the Apostle, as M. Perkins before had told
him, and be wisely says nothing to the contrary only for the infirmity and
weakness of the Jews, 1 Cor. 9.20.
to whom for the time he became as a Jew, Aug epist. 19. Non mentientis astis
sed compatientis affectis.
not by craft of lying, as S. Austine says, but by affection of compassion,
that he might win them unto Christ. As touching the place of Esaias, it is to
be observed that M. Perkins brings it in as alleged by them, to prove that
in external exercises we have as much use of vows as the Jews had. Esaias.
19.21.
The Egyptians (says the Prophet, importing the like of all the Gentiles)
shall know the Lord, and shall do sacrifice and oblation, and shall vow vows
unto the Lord, and perform them. To this he answers, that the Prophet
according to the usual manner of all the Prophets, does by the ceremonial
service of the Leuitical priesthood, import the spiritual worship of God,
intending that because it is spiritually meant, therefore it is misapplied to
the establishing of corporal and outward service. Now M. Bishops reply is like
himself, perverse and cross, that the Prophet would not say, They shall vow,
to signify that they should not vow. I answer him, that neither does M.
Perkins so intend, but that the Prophet would signify, that when those
Leuiticall and ceremonial vows should cease, yet the Gentiles should perform
to God that spiritual worship and service that was figured thereby, and
because the words are meant of spiritual duties, therefore that they are
absurdly wrested to the maintaining of a new kind of ceremonial vows. For as
the Prophet says, that Ibid.
they should do sacrifice and oblation, and brings in the Lord saying, Cap.
56.7.
Their burnt offerings and sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar, and
again, Cap. 60.7.
The Rams of Nebaioth shall come up to be accepted upon mine altar, when yet
the altar and burnt offerings and sacrifices should be quite abolished, and
therefore he says it only to signify that they should do that spiritual
service of inward and spiritual sacrifices that were represented and shadowed
in those carnal observations; so does he say, that they should vow vows, when
yet those Leuiticall vows should have an end, only because they should
perform to God those spiritual devotions which were signified by those vows.
Now as touching those spiritual devotions M. Perkins adds for another part
of his answer, that the Church of the new Testament makes vows unto God of
moral and Evangelical duties, the vow and promise whereof first made in
baptism, we always renew when we come to the Supper of the Lord. But withal
he says, that vows be also made of things and actions indifferent, which
things notwithstanding are not to be accounted any part of the worship of God.
Which words consisting of two parts severally applied, M. Bishop confounds
and most leudly and wretchedly peruerteth, as if M. Perkins had said, that in
the new Testament we have vows of moral and Evangelical duties, but such are
not any part of Gods worship, and so with a harlots face not fit to blush,
passes over the matter, when as it was directly showed him how that prophecy
is fulfilled in the new Testament without any of the fooleries of Popish
vows. I pray thee gentle Reader, to consider the matter well. M. Perkins
says, that we Christians vow vows of moral and Evangelical duties, and if
we make any other vows of things indifferent, those things must not be taken
for any parts of Gods worship. M. Bishop makes him to say, that vows of
moral and Evangelical duties, and the duties themselves, are no part of Gods
worship. Think with thy self what credit thou may give to him, who
sticks not so impudently to pervert so apparent and plain words. But in
those vows of moral and spiritual duties is the true performance of that
prophecy, and we may so much the more rest upon it, because M. Bishop has
nothing to say against it. What further belongs to the declaration of those
vows, I put it off to be handled in the next Section.

5. W. BISHOP.
Again says M. Perkins, they allege for Evangelical vows: Psalm. 75.
Vow unto God and pay it. M. Perkins his answer is, that this binds the Jews,
he would have you understand, not the Christians. We say; that it is no
commandment to either of them, but an exhortation, as well to the one as to the
other. First, because good vows do tend to the greater glory of God in all
states: (as has been proved before) Secondly, for that the Prophet in the next
verse, yielding the reason why we must pay our vows, says, That he unto whom
we have vowed is terrible unto the Kings of the earth; And therefore most
likely that such vows he spoke of there, may be made of any sort of men
inhabiting the earth.

Thirdly, because the ancient Fathers take it to extend unto us Christians, as
well as unto the Jews; let one S. Augustine serve, in his Commentary upon the
75. Psalm. Because we have handled those things (says he) peradventure thou
who wast willing before, but now wilt not vow: but mark what the Psalm said
unto thee: It says not, Do not vow, but vow and pay it: will thou not vow?
Therefore would thou have vowed, but not have fulfilled it? nay rather do
both: Let the one be of thine own promise, the other shall be performed by the
help of God. He then took these words to belong unto his Auditors who were no
Jews.

In the same place he does highly commend Christians for vowing, some
Chastity, some Hospitality, some Poverty: but because contraries being set
together, each do more lively appear in his kind, let us with this Exposition,
compare M. Perkins his Comment^rie upon this place: who says, that the Prophet
speaks of vows, of Prayer and thanksgiving: For so (says Master Perkins)
does he expound himself, Psalm. 50.12.
My vows are upon me, I will offer praises unto God. Well aimed, I warrant
you; The six and fiftieth Psalm written first, is the Exposition of the
seventy five Psalm, which was conceited and uttered after. Again, in the
seventy five Psalm David speaks t^ others: in the other he speaks of
himself. Thirdly, the Prophets words in the six and fiftieth Psalm, confirm
rather that which he taught before, that all considerate vows are praises and
parts of Gods worship, or as the words do more literally sound, because his
vows, that is, his prayers and desires were by God accomplished, therefore he
would praise and thank him.

R. ABBOT.
Psalm. 76.11.
Vow and perform unto the Lord your God, says the Prophet, all ye that be
round about him. M. Perkins very truly says, that these words whether we call
them an exhortation or a commandment, did concern the Jews only as touching
ceremonial vows, but as touching the spiritual intendment of them of praise
and thanksgiving, do generally concern both them and us. M. Bishop like old
True-pennie never but like himself, runs away with a piece of this answer,
and sets himself to prove that which M. Perkins denies not, that the words
respect both the Jews and us. We acknowledge so much M. Bishop: we say they
concern only them in in those duties or devotions that were proper to them
only, but in common they concern both them and us, in those duties and
devotions that belong to both. We cannot doubt but that the Prophet had
reference to the condition of that time, and did inuit both the Priests and
the people to that outward service of sacrifices and offerings, in the exercise
whereof it pleased God in his wisdom then to train them up. But because we
hear God so often professing, that he respected not their naked and bare
sacrifices, and seeming so to reckon of them as if he had never given
commandment of any such, namely when they were destitute of that inward piety
and obedience and devotion, which God would have to be exercised thereby,
therefore we must conceive that the Prophet here also looked further then to
outward service, and in commending to them the exercises thereof, did call them
to inward affections of praise and thanksgiving unto God. Seeing then the
outward solemnities and ceremonies which were the external matter of their
vows, were but instructions and inducements to spiritual offices and duties,
which in the right use of vows were principally vowed thereby, therefore in
the spiritual construction of those ceremonies, we are to learn what is the
true and proper matter of Christian vows. And because God as he is the same
God, so as touching spiritual worship, is alike worshipped from the beginning
to the end, we cannot doubt but that in the example and practice of the
faithful in those times we may behold as in a glass, what the duties are that
by their vows are recommended unto us. What we find amongst them, we know the
same belongs to us: what we find not amongst them, their vows give us no
warrant or example of it. Now what applications and constructions they made of
those sacrifices and offerings and other ceremonies which they vowed unto God,
we may see by many phrases and speeches which the Scriptures purposely use to
show the meaning of them. Many examples thereof we have in the Psalms: Psalm.
4.5.
Offer the sacrifices of righteousness: 50.14.23.
Offer unto God thanksgiving, and he that sacrifices praise he honoreth me.
51.17.
The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit, a contrite and broken heart. 107
22.
Let them offer sacrifices of praise. 115.17.
I will offer to thee a sacrifice of praise. 141.2.
Let my prayer be in thy sight for incense, and the lifting up of my hands an
evening sacrifice. Thus says Jonas, Ion. 2.9.
I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving, and Osee, Osc.
14.13.
We will render unto thee the calves of our lips. The vow of humbling or
afflicting themselves by fasting, what it imported appears by Gods reproving
of them, for that Esa. 58.3.
in the day of their fast they sought their own will, as giving to understand,
thas by their fast they were to be instructed to the forbearing of their own
desires, to the renouncing of their own wills, to the subduing of their own
corrupt and evil affections, to the eschuing of cruelty, oppression and
violence, that they might make way to the works of mercy which God did
command them, as in the Prophets words there is showed, Ver. 6.
Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bonds of wickedness, to
take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and to break
every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, to bring the poor
that wandreth into thy house? etc. In brief the Prophet Micheas shows the
signification of this humbling, and of all their sacrifices; Mich 6.8.
He has showed thee O man what is good, and what the Lord thy God requires of
thee. Surely to do judgment, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to
walk with thy God. The vow of the Nazarites was the principal vow of all the
rest. What the intention thereof was is expressed in the first description of
the ceremony of it, Number. 6.2.
to be separated to the Lord. Now this was the common condition of all that
people to be separated to the Lord, as God himself gives them to understand,
Leuit. 20.24.26.
I am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other people: therefore
shall ye be holy unto me; for I the Lord am holy, and I have separated you from
other people that ye should be mine. But God by a special vow of ceremonial
observations, whereby in outward things for the time they were divided from the
common conversation of themselves and their own people, would give a spectacle
and example to the rest of them, of putting off those carnal and earthly
affections by which they should be like to other peoples, for preserving of
spiritual integrity and holiness toward him. And therein is exemplified the
condition of all the faithful, of whom our Savior has told us, that Ioh.
15.19.
they are not of the world, but he has chosen them out of the world, and
therefore are 2. Pet. 1.4.
to fly the corruption that is in the world by lust, and to hearken to the
voice of God, 2. Cor. 16.17.
Come out from among them, and separate your selves, says the Lord, and touch
no unclean thing, and I will receive you. These are then the vows that belong
to us, vows of prayer, of praise and thanksgiving, of denying our selves, of
mortifying our own affections, of mercy and compassion toward our brethren,
and in a word, of keeping our selves holy unto God; even those vows whereof we
read many examples in the Psalms and other Scriptures: Psalm. 27.8.
Thou saidest, seek ye my face, and my heart answered thee, O Lord, I will
seek thy face. 79 9.13.
Help us O God of our salvation for the glory of thy name, etc. So we that be
thy people and sheep of thy p^sture shall praise thee for ever, and from
generation to generation we will set forth thy praise. 80.17.
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, and upon the son of man whom
thou made so strong for thine own self: so will not we go back from thee;
revive thou us and we will call upon thy name. 86.11.
Teach me thy way O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth. 119.33.34.
Teach me the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end; give me
understanding and I will keep thy law, yea I will keep it with my whole
heart. Ver. 106.
I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. Thus does Osee the Prophet instruct the people of God, Osc. 14.3.
Take you words, and turn to the Lord and say unto him, Take away all our
iniquity, and receive us graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips.
These vows are recommended unto us in the new Testament, when we are taught
Mat. 16.24.
to deny our selves, and to take up the cross of Christ that we may follow
him, Col. 3.5.
to mortify our earthly members, Romans 6.13.
to give our selves unto God, and our members as weapons of righteousness unto
God: Cap. 12.1.
to offer our bodies a holy, lively and acceptable sacrifice unto God; 1. Cor.
6.20.
to glorify God both in our bodies and in our spirits, as being both his; 2
Cor. 5.15.
to live unto him which died for us and rose again. These vows we made to God
in our baptism; and we profess the continuing and renewing of them from time
to time in coming to the table of the Lord, as also in our daily prayers and
meditations, and in all those promises which the remembrance of our own ways
draws from us every while. Of these the Prophet Esaias spoke in the section
before; of these the Prophet David here says, Vow unto the Lord your God and
perform the same, all ye that be round about him. Now then it is true that
vows are to the honor and glory of God, and that we are to consider the
dreadful majesty of God, that we may be moved carefully to perform the vows
that we have made unto him, and that these vows are such as may be made by all
sorts of men inhabiting the earth: and what of all this, either against M.
Perkins or against us? As for S. Austin, he confirms all that has been here
said of the exposition of these vows, that the things that we are here willed
to vow, are Supra sect. 1. ex. August. in Psalm. 75.
to believe in God, to trust in him, to live a good life, to hope to receive of
him eternal life, and such like as we have seen before. Now it is true that
he says further, that Ibid. Alius vouet castitatem coniugalem, vt praeter
vxorem suam no^ nouerit aliam, etc. Alij vouent experti tale contugium nihil
tale vltra pati^^lij virginitatem ab ipsi ineu^te aet ^te vouint: al^j voue^t
domum suam hosp^talem omnibus sanctis: alij vouent relinquere omnia sua, etc.
some vow chastity in marriage by keeping themselves, the husband to his own
wife only, or the wife only to her own husband; some having been married,
vow not to marry again, some from the beginning vow virginity, some to use
their houses for hospitality to the Saints, some to distribute all their goods
to the poor: some of which vows we question not, the rest are afterward to
be considered of. But that which M. Bishop cites, of his exhorting men not to
forbear vowing for the necessity of the performance thereof, but for that to
trust to the help of God, to prove that he took those words to belong to his
auditors and not only to the Jews, it is a proof needless, because we
acknowledge so much, in such sort as has been said before. As for that which
he further adds, of setting contraries together, that each may more lively
appear in his kind, it is but the lively setting forth of his own
indiscretion and folly. M. Perkins to show what may be understood by vows, in
the place here handled alleges a speech of David in a former Psalm. Psalm.
56.12:
Thy vows are upon me, O God; (that is, the vows which I have made to thee
are lying on me to be performed,) I will render praises unto thee. In which
place we see that the Prophet expounds vows concerning praises to God,
whereupon M. Perkins alleges, that vows likewise in the other place may be
construed of praises and thanksgiving unto God. Against this M. Bishop
excepteth full wisely I warrant you, as not likely that the Psalm fifty six
written first, should be the exposition of the Psalm seventy five which was
conceited and uttered after. But did not his understanding serve to instruct
him, that David though not expounding the latter Psalm in the former, yet in
the former expounding vows to be praises, does teach us how to expound vows,
when they are mentioned in a latter Psalm, or in any other Scripture sounding
to like effect? And who but he is ignorant, that Scriptures formerly written do
often give us light and help for the understanding and expounding of
Scriptures that are written later? His second exception is as good as that,
namely that David in the latter Psalm speaks to others, in the former of
himself. And what then? What should hinder but that by the name of vows he
should signify the praises of God in speaking to others, when he himself
expounds vows to be the praises of God in speaking of himself? Albeit he
mistaketh in making David the author of the latter Psalm, which is rather
thought to be written in the time of Ezechias, but questionless after David's
time. In his third exception his head being wild, he tells us, that the
Prophets words in Psalm fifty six confirm rather that which he taught
before. Where before when as the Psalm fifty six is the former of the two
Psalms? I think he cannot well tell what he meant by this speech. But what is
the thing confirmed? That all considerate vows are praises and parts of Gods
worship. What he means by considerate vows we know not, but we take those
only to be considerate vows whereby we vow those things which God has
warranted us to vow. Thus are vows a part of Gods worship, when we vow those
things which he has taught us to be belonging to his worship. Such were for
the time the ceremonies and sacrifices of the Law, not for themselves, but for
the spiritual duty that was employed in them and acted by them. If they were
not put to this use, God held them not for any part of his worship. David
therefore having respect to this, signifies that the thing which he properly
intended by his vows, was praise and thanks to God. This is all that David
says, and was by Master Perkins fitly alleged for that that he had in hand.

6. W. BISHOP.
Let us now come to the second point, wherein we dissent: They (says M.
Perkins) hold vows made of things not commanded, as of Fasting, Prayer, etc.
to be parts of Gods worship; and that they tend unto a state of perfection. We
say flatly no, holding that lawful vows be stays and props of Gods worship,
but not the worship it self: this is long since confuted. But here M. P.
sets up a rotten prop or two, to uphold his ruinous building, saying, S.
Paul says plainly, 1. Tim. 4.
Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness profits much. Where are you
good sir? We treat here of vows, which are formally actions of the mind: what
do you now about bodily exercises? Vows are principal parts of that
godliness, which is so profitable. And if by bodily exercise, fasting, and
other corporal pain or labor be understood, then we say, that such things of
themselves would profit little; but being directed to the chastising of the
rebellious flesh, to the end we may less offend, and better serve God, then
they may much profit us. But let us hear M. Perkins his second reason against
such vows. Gods kingdom stands not in outward things, and therefore his
worship stands not in outward things.

Answer. Gods kingdom in it self stands not in outward things, and as it is
in us also, it does consist chiefly in inward worship, by faith, hope,
charity, and religion, in whose kingdom vows hold an honorable rank: but a
great part of this worship among us, depends of outward things; for be not the
two only parts of Gods worship among Protestants (as M. Perkins says in this
question) Baptism and our Lords Supper, both which partly consist in outwardly
both speaking and doing? And is not faith (which is the root of all Christian
Religion) gotten by outward preaching and hearing?

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop shows himself again in his right color; for whereas M.
Perkins mentioning vows of things not commanded, adds for example, as of
meats, drinks, attire, etc. he in steed hereof puts in, as of fasting and
prayer, etc. that he might make his Reader believe, that M. Perkins affirmed
prayer to be no part of Gods worship. Well, he must keep his wont, and it
fitteth well the cause that he has in hand. The thing that M. Perkins
propounds is this, that lawful vows of things not commanded, are stays and
proppes of the worship of God, but not the worship it self. This M. Bishop
says is long since confuted, but where he cannot tell. But for proof hereof
M. Perkins first alleges the words of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 4 8.
Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable for all things.
To these words M. Bishop gives an answer that fully confirms what M. Perkins
says. But first he begins merrily, Where are you good Sir? Here M. Bishop,
what would ye? we treat here of vows, says he, which are formally actions of
the mind; what do you now about bodily exercises? Yea but M. Bishop, you have
told us before of good vows, and considerate vows, and therefore we presume
you allow not of all vows, as if a man should vow the Esa. 66:3.
killing of a man, or the cutting off of a dogs neck. You will tell us then,
that good vows are such as whereby we vow good things, and then we answer you,
that vows indeed take their condition and quality from the things themselves
that are vowed, and therefore that those only vows are the true worship of
God whereby we vow those things that belong to his true worship. Whence it
follows, that where bodily exercises are vowed by which God is not
worshipped, the sentence of the Apostle is rightly alleged against the taking
of those vows for any worship of God, that bodily exercise profits little,
but godliness is profitable for all things. We see the Apostle sets down
bodily exercise for one thing, and godliness for another, and thereby teaches
us, that bodily exercise by it self is no part of godliness: and if bodily
exercise be no part of godliness, then vows of bodily exercise can be no part
thereof. It is but at randon therefore that M. Bishop says, that vows are
principal parts of that godliness that is so profitable, because they are no
parts of that godliness but when that godliness it self is the thing which
we vow. But now he adds, If by bodily exercise fasting and other corporal
pain or labor be understood, then we say, that such things of themselves
would profit little, but being directed to the chastising of the rebellious
flesh, to the end we may less offend and better serve God, then they may much
profit. And what is this but that that M. Perkins says, that such things are
stays and proppes and helps of the worship of God, but in themselves they are
no part of Gods worship? The mortifying of fleshly lusts, the avoiding of
sin, the yielding of our obedience to God, these are things wherein God is
worshipped. But fasting and such other exercises are only helps to these, and
no part of them, and therefore the vows thereof (as M. Perkins says) are no
otherwise to be reckoned, but as props and stays, and not as parts of the
worship of God. Popery has wickedly taught men to reckon of them as
meritorious works and satisfactions for sin, yea not only for a man's own
sins, but for other men's sins also. These are impious and damnable
conceits, and far from that which the Scripture has taught us to conceive
of all outward things. But against that opinion of vowing such outward and
bodily service, Master Perkins further urges, that the kingdom of God
stands not in outward things, as eating, drinking, and such like, alluding to
the words of the Apostle, Romans 14.17.
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost, and he that in these things serves Christ, pleases
God and is approved of all men. The Apostle would thereby have it understood,
that we are no whit the nearer to the kingdom of God by eating or not eating,
by drinking or not drinking, by wearing or not wearing this or that, or by any
such like things belonging to the external conversation and life of man. By
outward things then we understand not all things that are done outwardly, but
only those things the use whereof properly belongs to the outward man. The
preaching and hearing of Gods word, the ministering and receiving of the
Sacraments, are things outwardly done, but they are things belonging not to the
outward but to the inward man. M. Bishops exception therefore as touching these
things is nothing to the purpose, but the argument stands good, that because
the kingdom of God consists not in such outward things as belong to the
outward man, therefore Popish vows are to be condemned as superstitious, and
as having no rank in any true religion, whereby men make vows of such
outward things, to become thereby the nearer to the kingdom of God. Now mark
gentle Reader, that as M. Bishop began this Section with one lie, so he ends
it with another, that M. Perkins says, that Baptism and the Lords Supper are
the two only parts of Gods worship amongst the Protestants, whereas M. Perkins
says no other but thus; We have only two ceremonies to be observed by
commandment, which are Baptism and the Lords Supper. It is one thing to say,
only two ceremonies, another thing to say, two only parts of Gods worship.
But let M. Bishop remember what the gains of a liar is, that a man knows not
how to believe him when he speaks truth.

7. W. BISHOP.
But it would weary a willing man to traile after all M. Perkins his
impertinent errors. Let us then at length come unto the principal point in
controversy. Catholics (says he) maintain such vows to be made as are not
agreeable to the rules aforementioned. The first is, that of Continency, whereby a
man promises to God to keep chastity in a single life, that is, out of the
state of wedlock. This kind of vow is flat against the word of God, as he
says, which he proves first out of S. Paul, If they cannot contain, then
let them marry: True, if they have not vowed chastity before, as the common
Christians of Corinth (to whom Saint Paul there speaks) had not. For such,
1. Cor 7.
if they cannot live otherwise chastely, it is better they marry then be
burned, that is, defiled with incontinencie. But to them who had vowed
chastity before, S. Paul writes in another style, That if they but desire to
marry, they incur damnation, 1. Tim. 5.
because they have made frustrate and broken their former faith and promise
made unto God of their chastity. So that this first text is a furlong wide at
the least from the mark.

R. ABBOT.
It would weary a man thus to traile after an impudent and wrangling
Sophister, who doubts not as we see, so apparently and wilfully to lie, and
neither understands what M. Perkins says, nor what himself should say. We
must come now to the principal point in controversy, as he terms it; let
us see how well he carries himself in the debating of it. M. Perkins
allegation is, that the Papists maintain such vows as are not agreeable to
the rules before mentioned, which are necessary to be observed in lawful
vows. The first of these is their vow of Continency, whereby a man promises
to God to keep chastity always in single life, that is, out of the state of
wedlock. Against this vow he alleges first the words of S. Paul, 1. Cor.
7.9.
If they cannot contain, let them marry, for says he, it is better to marry
then to burn. This is the commandment of almighty God, to all to whom the
gift of continency is not given, that they betake themselves to marriage, as to
a safe port and harbor, where they may be free from being tossed and turmoiled
with the waves and storms of incontinencie and raging lust, that so with quiet
mind and pure conscience they may serve God, and without interruption call
faithfully upon him. Now what has M. Bishop learned out of his many large
volumes for answer to this? The holy Ghost says, let the^ marry: True, says
he, if they have not vowed chastity before, as the common Christians of Corinth
to who^ S. Paul there speaks had not. Where when he co^strueth the Apostles
words of common Christians, he puts me in mind of the Maniches, who would by
no means allow of marriage in their Elects, their special and choice men,
but as for their auditors, that is, the common sort, August. cont. Faust. lib.
30. c. 6. Multos vestres auditores in hoc obedire nolentes vel non valentes
salua amicitia toleratis.
they were content to bear with them if either they would not or could not
live unmarried. Thus would he make us believe that the Apostle spoke but of the
common sort, but meant not any thing of the rest that were more special men,
when as the Apostle professes himself to write 1. Cor. 1.2.
to all that call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the beginning
of that Chapter whence this allegation is taken says, Cap. 7.2.
for the avoiding of fornication let every man have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband, and says it to them Verse 1.
that had written unto him in the name of the Church, who undoubtedly were not
of the common sort. But the exception which he uses is the very same as
whereby the Scribes and Pharisees of old deluded the commandment of God, as
our Savior mentions in the Gospel, and made it of no effect by their
tradition. God said, Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy father and thy mother. True, said they, except he have vowed or
sworn the contrary. Amongst sundry wicked oaths amongst the Jews, whereby
they vowed the committing of lewd and damnable acts, and then hasted to the
doing thereof that they might not be forsworn, this (as Philo the Jew
testifies) was one, that Philo de legib. special. Iureiurando suam
inhumanitatem confirmant, dum negant se hunc aut illum adiuturos vllo beneficio
quoad vixerit.
they would not help or do good to such a one so long as they lived. Amongst
many other forms or fashions of swearing, Josephus gives us to understand,
that one specially was Joseph contra Apion. li. 1. Iusiurandum quod Corban
appellatur. etc. Apud nullos autem inuenitur hoc iuramentu^ nisi apud Judaeos
solos, quod interpretatur ex Hebraica lingua, Donum Dei.
Corban, which is as much as to say, By the gift. Concerning which manner of
oath it is that our Savior Christ reprooueth their absurd superstition, where
he brings them in saying, Mat. 23.18.
Whosoever swears by the altar, it is nothing, but he that swears (...).
by the offering (or the gift) that is upon it, he is a debtour; that is, as
Hierome says, Hieron. ibid. Hoc studiosissime repetebant.
that they most earnestly required to be kept. So then if by any occasion the
son had said to his father, Matthew. 15.5. Mark. 7.11.
Corban, that is, by the gift, if thou have any profit by me, understanding
after their manner, then let God destroy me, or such and such evil befall me,
he was hereby tied, as they taught, that he should yield no succor or relief
to the necessity of his father. Whatsoever God had commanded, it skilled not;
he had now bound himself and must stand to it, not to do that that God had
required of him: let his father beg or starve, or do what he would or could for
himself, but of him he must have nothing. The very like is the tradition of
the Pharisees of the Romish synagogue, who when God has said, If they cannot
contain let them marry, answers, Be it so, if they have not vowed the
contrary; but if they have vowed single life, whether they contain or not
contain, they must not marry: let them swelter and boil and burn in filthy
lust even to the very bottom of hell, yet marry they must not in any case.
And whereas the Apostle says, It is better to marry then to burn, M. Bishop
tells us that for such, that is, for common Christians, if they cannot live
otherwise chastely, it is better to marry then to be burned, that is, defiled
with incontinencie; leaving it to be understood, that for Votaries, for such
special Christians as he is, it is better to be burned, that is, defiled with
incontinencie, then to marry. And that it may appear that I do not unjustly
force this consequence upon him, Cardinal Campegius doubted not most
impudently to say, that Sleidan. Comment. li. 4. Quod sacerdotes mariti fia^t
multo esse gratitus peccatu^ qua^ si plurimas domi meretrices alant.
it is a greater sin for Priests to be married, then to keep many harlots at
home: and in like sort Costerus the Jesuit, that Coster. Enchir. cap. 15
Sa^erdos si fornicetur aut domi concubina^ foueat, tameisi graut sacrileg^os se
obstringat, multo tame^ grauius peccat si matrimonium contrahat.
a Priest albeit he be guilty of great sacrilege if he commit fornication or
keep a concubine, yet sins more grievously if he marry. Yea that we may
not think that some petty fellows only have so conceived, Bellarmine that
filthy Friar says the same: Bellar. de Monach. cap. 30. Vtrunque est mal^
nubero and vri; immo peius est nubere, etc. Quae nubit post votum simplex tamen
aliquo modo magis peccat, quam quae forni^atur.
Both are evil, to marry and to burn, but yet the worse of the two is to
marry: yea, Philo de Leg. special. Quasi no^ melius deoque gratius sit tale
periurium, modo seruentur leges, etc. Addit enim culpae culpam, dum sacramento
abutitur, cum debu^sset potius abstinere a maleficijs. Abstineat igitur, and
supplex Deum exoret vt pro sua cleme^tia temeritati inco^sultae ignoscat qua ad
iura^dum praeceps actus est: nam duplicare noxam cum te possis exonerare
dimidio, maxima est insania vix vnquam curabilis.
she that marieth after a simple vow (that is, when she has but undertaken to
vow, and has not yet solemnly done it) yet in some sort sins more then she
that commits fornication. See these wretched caitifes, whom neither fear of
God nor shame of men can hold back from so devilish and damnable assertions,
whereby they do but set a snare to halter and strangle the consciences of men,
as they have done many thousands, and by whoredom and filthiness without
remorse sent them headlong to hell fire. As though, says Philo, to forswear
(in such a case) for the keeping of Gods laws, were not much better and more
acceptable to God. For a man adds sin to sin whilst he abuses his oath,
whereas he should rather forbear from evil doing. Let him therefore forbear,
and humbly entreat God that of his mercy he will pardon the unadvised
rashness whereby he was led headlong to swear: for to double the fault when
thou may disburden thy self of the one half, is very great madness, and
scarcely possible to be cured. Thus spoke Philo of those vows and oaths
whereby men bind themselves contrary to that which God has commanded, and
his words shall be the just condemnation of them, who by pretense of a vow of
humane institution and device, debar men from doing that which God has
taught them to do, and tie them to that uncleanness whereby they are loathsome
and hateful unto him. Mark it I pray thee gentle Reader, that by their vow of
continency, they profess more to renounce marriage which is the ordinance of
God, then fornication and whoredom which is the work of the devil. A man
has vowed continency, but yet cannot contain. What must be the means to
salve this evil? Not marriage by any means which is the medecin that God
has appointed, but adultery, and fornication, and unnatural Sodomiticall
filthiness and uncleanness, to which the devil tempts. It is a doctrine
never heard of in the world, until by the tyranny of Antichrist the Church
became a stye for these filthy swine, that a man should be taken to vow more
against marriage, then against unclean and filthy lust. But yet this notable
hypocrite here bears us in hand, that S. Paul was the author of this
accursed and desperate paradoxe. To them (says he) that had vowed chastity
before, Saint Paul writes in another style, that if they but desire to marry
they incur damnation, because they have made frustrate and broken their
former faith and promise made unto God of their chastity. Where we must
understand, that they of whom the Apostle there speaks were poor widows,
who were to live of the alms of the Church, and were used by the Church to
look to poor, sick and impotent people, and to give some attendance to
travelers and strangers, who were faithful Christians coming by occasion to
the place where they were, to wash their feet, which was a thing much done in
those hot countries, and to do such other necessary uses as might concern
them. Now because they that were married could not fitly be employed to such
service, neither was it fit that the Church should be every while to seek by
their bestowing themselves in marriage that did undertake it, therefore they
made choice only of such who would resolve and promise not to marry again.
And that they might be the more fit and likely, both to make and keep this
promise, the Apostle gives this caution; 1. Tim. 5.9.
Let not a widow be chosen under threescore years of age, after which there
need be small doubt that she should have mind or desire of marriage. This is
the great vow of chastity that M. Bishop tells us of, that a woman of
threescore years old, being to do some service to the Church, and to be
relieved therein by the Churches alms, should first promise not to marry
again. But the Apostle having set down this caution, goes on further saying,
But refuse the younger widows; for when they have begun to wax wanton against
Christ they will marry, having damnation because they have broken the first
faith. He will have no widows of the younger sort admitted to that company,
for the evident peril and danger thereof ensuing, which by experience then had
in some sort appeared. For some young widows coming by this means to live
idle upon common charge, gave themselves to wantonness, and quite cast off the
remembrance and regard of their duty toward Christ, yea and as Hierome
understands the word used by the Apostle, Hieron. ad Geront. Fornicatae sunt
in iniuriam viri sui Christi: hoc enim Graecus sermo significat.
They committed fornication to the injury of Christ, whose they had professed
themselves to be. The Apostle afterward further expresses what he means by
this waxing wanton against Christ, when he says, Verse. 15.
Certain are already turned after Satan, namely that they proceeded so far,
as that by apostasy and infidelity they forsook the faith and religion of
Christ, and betook themselves to follow Satan, whom by their baptism they had
professed to forsake. But of such he says, that being thus grown wanton
against Christ, they will marry, and adds, having damnation because they
have broken the first faith. Where the question is, to what these latter words
are to be referred, whether to that he says, they are waxen wanton against
Christ, or to the other words, they will marry. M. Bishop says, that
therefore they have damnation, because they will marry, but to give some
color thereof he falsifieth the text, and in the Apostles name sets down
his own words. We say, that therefore they have damnation, not because they
will marry, but because they are waxen wanton against Christ. We prove it to
be so out of the text it self; for whereas M. Bishop in the Apostles name
says; they have damnation because they have made frustrate and broken their
former faith, the Apostle himself says not so, but because they have made
frustrate their first faith. Now their first faith was that whereby they first
believed, and gave themselves to Christ: in which sort it is said to the Church
of Ephesus, Apoc. 2.4.
I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love; Remember
from whence thou art fallen, and do the first works, and this faith was not
broken by willing to marry, but by being become proud and wanton against
Christ. M. Bishop then does amiss, to put in their former faith, which is of
doubtful construction, in steed of their first faith, whereof there is no
doubt. If he will say, that the Fathers commonly understand it of their promise
not to marry, we will answer him, that whatsoever any of the Fathers say, yet
we will not pull out our own eyes, and say that we do not see that that indeed
we do see. Albeit there want not of the Fathers to justify us in this behalf,
who by plain allusion to this place, expound the first faith of the faith of
baptism, and that which we have at first received in the profession of Christ.
So does Athanasius, when he says: Athanas. de vnita Deit. Trin. Vae vobis qui
primam fidem baptismi coelitus institutam irritam facitis.
Woe unto you that make frustrate the first faith of baptism which was
delivered from heaven. In like sort Vincentius Lyrinensis mentioning Vincen.
Lyri. Scitum cunctu est quam vehementer inuehatur in quosdam beatus Apostolus
qui mira leuitate, translati fuerant abeo qui eos vocauerat in gratiam Christi,
etc Habentes damnationem quod primam fidem irritam fecissent
how earnestly the Apostle inueyeth against the Galathians, who so lightly were
removed from him that had called them in the grace of Christ, applies to them
these words, Having damnation for that they had broken or made frustrate their
first faith. So Hierome says, Hieron. praef. epist. ad Titum. Non sunt digni
fide qui primam fidem irritam fecerunt, Marcione^ ^oquor and Basilidem and
omnes haereticos, etc.
They are not worthy of credit who have broken their first faith, I mean
Marcion and Basilides and all heretics, etc. It is plain then that the first
faith is that according to which we have first believed in Christ, and first
plighted our troth to him. But by a second argument also from the text we prove
that that we say, where the Apostle adds; Ver. 14.
I will therefore that the younger (widows) marry, and bear children, and
govern the house, and give no occasion to the adversary to speak evil; for
certain are already turned back after Satan. Which last words do plainly
import, that he means that precept of such young widows as were already
chosen into the company mentioned before, being apparently to this effect,
some are already fallen away and turned after Satan; therefore I would have
the rest that are yet remaining to marry, least the like evil befall to any
of them. But this he would not have said, if he had meant that it had been
damnation for them to marry, or their willing to marry had been that
frustrating of their faith which he there intends, and therefore it is plain
that he meant not in that sort. And thus Chrysostom though he seem there to
understand faith of their promise not to marry, yet plainly determines that
the Apostle in those words speaks of them of whom he has said before, they
will marry, though not as having yet run into those excesses which he
sets down. Chrysostom. in 1. Tim. hom. 15. Volo igitur: quia and ipsae
volunt, volo and ego adolescentulas nubere, etc. long enim praestat haec
facere quam illa. Oportebat quippa solicit curare quae Dei sunt, fidemque
seruare: quonia^ vero illa non fiunt, melius est ista fieri quam illa. Neque
enim Deus irritatur, neque mala ista discuntur: quippe vid^itas illa nihil
parit boni; ex nuptijs vero plurima bona prodeunt and illud ante omnia, quod
negligentiae illaru^ and animo resupino consulitur, dum viris se subditas
norunt.
I will therefore; because they are willing, I also will that the younger
widows marry; for it is much better that they do so, then that they do those
other things (namely to wax wanton against Christ, to go idle from house to
house, being pratlers and busibodies etc.) They should indeed carefully look
to those things that belong to God, and keep their faith or promise, but
because they do not so, it is better they do thus (to marry) then to do those
other things. For by this means God is not provoked, neither are those evils
learned. For that widowhood brings forth no good, but of marriage many good
things proceed, and this specially for that thereby a remedy is provided
against their negligence and careless mind, because they know themselves to
be subject to their husbands. Thus does Theophylact expound the words;
Theophyl. in 1. Tim. cap. 5. Maluissem equidem inquit viduas hasce a
pactionibus cum Christo initis minime desciuisle; sed cum nuptias malint et
ipse assentio, etc. Est enim satius matresfamilias fieri, etc. quam per alienas
domos circu^ vagari, and ad nugas co^uerti et otium.
I had rather indeed that these widows had not fallen away from the promise
or covenant made with Christ, but seeing they had rather marry, I also assent
unto them; for it is better that they become huswifes, then that they wander up
and down to other folks houses, and turn to trifles and idleness. Thus
Ambrose also says; Ambros. in 1. Tim. cap. 5. Quoniam quae supra dixit de
huiusmodi (viduis) contraria and illicita perducent eas ad mortem, idcirco
consilium dat and praecipit ea fieri quae licita sunt, Melius est enim domus
suae curam gerere, quam in aliena domo adulari. Et mulium expedit nubere, quam
sub bona and p^ae professione notabiliter incedere.
Because those contrary and unlawful things which he has spoken of such
widows, shall bring them to death, therefore he gives counsel, and charge
that those things be done which are lawful. For it is better that they take
charge of their own house, then to use flattery in the houses of others. More
expedient is it to marry, then under a good and godly profession to walk so,
as to be subject to public note. Now then if M. Bishop will not believe us,
yet he will not gainesay the assertion of these ancient fathers, that the
Apostle here for avoiding those mischiefs and inconveniences that he speaks
of, gives liberty of marriage to them who notwithstanding had been received
into the number of Church widows, with profession and promise not to marry any
more. Yea, and that it may yet further appear, how far the ancient Church
was from the beastly and lewd conceit of Romish hypocrites before expressed,
Cyprian speaking of virgins which had vowed virginity, says thus: Cyprian
lib. 1. epist. 11. Sise ex fide Christo dicauerunt, pudice and cast sine vlla
fabula perseuerent; ita fortes and stabiles praemium virginitatis expectent. Si
autem perseuerare nolunt vel non possunt, melius est vt nubant quam vt mignem
suis delicijs cadant.
If by their faith they have dedicated themselves to Christ, let them continue
purely and chastely without any evil report; so let them firmly and steadfastly
look for the reward of virginity. But if they will not or cannot persevere,
it is better that they marry, then that by their wantonness they fall into
the fire. M. Bishops master Bellarmine, being pitifully distressed with this
testimony, that he might find a way and means to answer it, treacherously
suppresseth the first part of the sentence, and faith that Cyprian spoke not of
those Bellarm. iudic. de lib. concord. Luther. art. 16. Cyprianum non de ijs
loqui quae co^tinentiam vouerunt; sed de ijs quae adhuc deliberant quid sint
factura.
which had vowed continency, but of them who were yet in deliberation what to
do, whereas the very words of Cyprian, as we see, do mention them who by their
faith have dedicated themselves to Christ. Of virgins already vowed, S. Austin
also says: Aug. de sanct. virginit. cap. 34. Hae quae nubere volunt et ideo
no^ nuhunt quia impune no^ possunt, melius nuberent qua^ vrere^tur, id est quam
occulta concupiscentiae flamma in ipsa concupiscentia vastarentur.
They which would marry, and therefore do not marry, because they cannot
freely do it, were better to marry then to be burned, that is, then by the
secret flame of concupiscence to be consumed in lust. S. Hierome in like sort
complaining of some by whom Hieron. epist. ad Demetriadem. Sanctum virginum
propositum quarundam non been se agentium nomen infamat: quibus aperte dicendum
est vt aut nubant si continere non possunt aut contineant si nalunt nubere.
the holy profession of virgins was disgraced, whilst they miscarried
themselves, adds; who are openly to be warned either to marry if they cannot
contain, or else to contain if they will not marry. To conclude, Epiphanius
says, that Epiphan haer. 61. Apostolic. Melius est lapsu^ a cursu palam sibi
vxore^ sumere secundum legem and a virginitate multo te^pore paenitentiam agere
and sic rursus ad ecclesiam induci, etc. et non quotidie occultis iaculis
sauciari, ab improbitate quae ipsi a diabolo infertur. Sic nouit ecclesia
praedicare; haec sunt sanationis medicamenta.
better it is for a man that is fallen from his course (of virginity and
single life) openly to take a wife according to the law, and long to be
penitent for his fall from virginity, and so to be brought into the Church
again, and not daily to be wounded with the wickedness which by the devil is
brought upon him. Thus, says he, the Church was learned to teach; these are
her medicines wherewith to heal. This was the conceit of the ancient Church,
though too much addicted to that vowing of virginity, yet in the defect thereof
giving place to marriage, rather then to unclean and filthy life. But the
Church of Rome now is become a desperate Surgeon; a Surgeon did I say? nay a
cruel butcher, and a slaughterer of the consciences of men, not healing
wounds, but poisoning them, and forsalues and medicines giving them cords and
halters to hang themselves. Albeit their singular hypocrisy and impudency in
this behalf notably appears, when telling us that the Apostle denounces
damnation to them that marry after a vow of single life, they notwithstanding
give to the Pope a power to dispense where he list for the breaking of this
vow, and to give liberty of marriage. Thus Matthew of Paris mentions that he
dispensed with Math. Paris^n He^r. 3. anno. 1237.
Elnor the daughter of King John, and sister to King Henry the third, that
having solemnly vowed widowhood, yet she might marry to Simon Mounfort Earl
of Leicester. So does Platina record, that Plat. de vit. Pontif. in Coel^stin.
3.
Celestinus the third did by voluntary dispensation give Constantia the
daughter of Roger King of Sicilia, being professed a virgin to the Emperor
Henry the sixth, upon a condition of a benefit to come to himself thereby. Many
other examples are there of the like, by which they teach us lightly to esteem
of that they say as touching this matter, being in their own account, a thing
wholly subject to the Popes will. As for us, we are persuaded that if the Pope
herein can dispense, we may much more securely presume of that dispensation
which God by his word has given, commanding them to marry that cannot
contain. Master Bishop then may see, that the text alleged was not a furlong
from the mark, but he himself was gone a furlong, or rather a mile from his
own wits, that would go about to persuade us that it is better for votaries to
burn, that is, to be defiled with incontinencie then to marry, when the
Apostle absolutely says, It is better to marry, then to burn, yea that they
are all beasts and men of seared consciences, who by a vow intend to tie men
more strongly from marriage, then from beastly and filthy lust.

8 W. BISHOP.
The second is much like: 1. Tim. 4.
It is a doctrine of devils, to forbid to marry: truth, if one should hold
marriage in it self to be wicked, and therefore condemn it in all sorts of
persons, as Montanus, and the Manichees did. But we have a more reverend
opinion of marriage, than the Protestants themselves. For we with the Apostle
Ephesians. 3.
hold it to be a great Sacrament: they that it is a moral contract only.
Notwithstanding, we maintain, that such persons, who being of ripe years have
advisedly vowed chastity, may not marry; not because marriage is not
honorable, but for that they have solemnly promised to God the contrary: which
we also hold to be better, than if he had married. And so to use S. Austines
words, He forbids to marry, who says it to be evil, but not he who before
this good thing, prefers a better. And a little after, you see (says he)
that there is great difference between persuasion to virginity, by preferring
the greater good before the lesser, and forbidding to marry, by accusing lying
together for issue. The first is, the doctrine of the Apostles, which we teach,
the latter only of devils. Lib. 3. cont. Faust. Manich. cap. 6.


R. ABBOT.
Because the second is like the first, we presume it to carry sufficient weight
and strength of argument against M. Bishops answer. The Apostle reckons it
for one of 1. Tim. 4.1.3.
the doctrines of devils to forbid to marry. M. Bishop answers, Truth if one
should hold marriage in it self to be wicked, and therefore condemn it in all
sorts of persons as Montanus and the Manichees did. But if he had understood
what he had said, he would not here have named Montanus; for Montanus in this
point was outright a Papist, and condemned the Marcionites and Manichees for
that opinion, with which M. Bishop here charge him. Tertullian being become
by his fall the champion of Montanus, and being urged by the catholic Church
with the words of the Apostle, in the place here cited against Ibid.
commanding to abstain from meats, answers the place concerning meats, as
Master Bishop here does concerning marriage, that the holy Ghost in those words
Tertull. de Ieian. Praedamnant ia^ haereticos perpetuam abstinentiam
praecepturos ad destruenda et despicie^da opera creatoris, quales inueniam apud
Marcione^, apud Tatiantum, etc. non apud paraecletum.
condemns heretics that should command perpetual abstinence, to destroy
and disgrace the works of the Creator, Such, says he, as we find with
Marcion and Tatian (with whom the Manichees therein consented) not with
(Montanus his) paracletus. As therefore in meats, so in marriage Montanus
condemned them who dishonored the work of Gods creation, and took it to be a
thing in it self unclean, and wholly to be condemned. Therefore Tertullian
writing again in behalf of Montanus concerning marriage, setting the Church on
the one side under the name of Naturalists or Carnalists, and heretics on the
other side says, Tertull. de Monogam. Haeretici nuptias auferu^t, Psychici
ingerunttilli nec semel isti no^ semel nubu^t, etc. Neque continentia eiusmodi
laudanda est quia haeretica est, neque licentia defendenda quia Psychica est:
illa blasphemat, ista luxuriat: illa destruit nuptiarum Deum, ista confiuidit.
Heretics take away marriage, Carnalists urge it; they marry not so much as
once; these marry more then once; their continency is not to be commended,
because it is heretical, nor the license of the other to be defended, because
it is carnal: the one blasphemeth, the other exceeds; the one destroieth God
from being the author of marriage; the other shameth him. Anon after he says,
that Jbid. Christum Paracletus contestabitur quale^ credimus cu^ toto ordine
creatoris.
their Paracletus did testify Christ according to the faith, with the whole
order or ordinance of the Creator. In the same place he alleges their
soundness in the rule of faith, namely that which summarily we profess in the
articles of our Creed, as an argument that those things which they taught were
not of the evil spirit, Ibid. Aduersarius spiritus ex diuersitate
praedicationis apparet primo regula^ adulterans fidei; and ita ordinem
adulterans disciplinae, etc. Fidem dicit pro eis integritas praedicationis,
etc. Ante quis de Deo haereticus sit necesse est, tunc de instituto, etc.
Paracletus nouae disciplinae institutor, etc.
who would first have corrupted them in faith, and then have perverted them in
order of conversation, whereas now their integrity in preaching (the faith) did
give assurance or warrant for them. A man, says he, must first be an heretic
concerning God, and then as touching institution of behavior, but Montanus
their Paracletus was, as he says, an instructour or teacher (not of any new
faith but) of new order and conversation, to which purpose he says in another
place, having set down a brief of the articles of our belief, Tertull. de
veland. virgin. Hac lege fidei mane^te caetera iam disciplinae and
conuersationis admittu^t nouitatem correctionis, etc. Propterea Paracletu^
misit vt ad perfectu^ perduceretur disciplina.
This law (or rule) of faith abiding, other matters of discipline and
conversation do admit newness of correction, and makes the end of the sending
of their Paracletus to be this, that discipline or conversation might be
brought to perfection. Montanus then denied not marriage according to the rule
of faith, to be Gods institution, but professes of their continency that it
Idem de Monog. Continentia religiosa legem nuptiarum honorat.
honored the law of marriage, and therefore M. Bishop did him great wrong to
couple him in that sort with the Manichees, who wholly blasphemed marriage as
unclean, and having original from the devil and power of darkness. But yet
he will say that Montanus taught somewhat against marriage, and we acknowledge
the same, yet not as to condemn marriage, but Jbid. Saluo inquis iure nube^di.
Plane saluo, etc. nihilominus tamen ex ea part destructo qua continentiam
praefert. etc. Praelatione continentiae imposita.
to prefer continency, as Tertullian says. It is true that albeit he
acknowledged marriage to be Gods institution, yet he held the liberty thereof to
be permitted but only once, and that once to be yielded only to the infirmity
of the flesh, even as M. Bishop said before, that to common Christians the
Apostle said, If they cannot abstain let them marry, but it is plain by
Tertullian, that all this was but to commend a state of greater perfection, De
veland. virgin. Quae Paracleti administratio nisi haec, etc. quod ad meliora
proficitur.
the ministry of their Paracletus being that men should profit to better
things, and De Monog. Secundum sanctitatem caruis admonuit incedere.
should walk according to the holiness of the flesh, which they deemed one
special way to consist either in not marying at all or marying but once; in
opinion whereof, and some other points of conversation, accounting them of the
Church Ibid. Nos quos spirituales merito dici faciunt spiritualia charismata.
natural and carnal men, as before was said, they called themselves
spiritual, and in that respect are brought in by Origin as saying: Origin apud
Pamphil. in Apolog. Cataphryges dicentes, No^ accedas ad me quoniam mundus sumi
non enim occipio vxorem, nec est sepulchrum pateus guttur meu^ sed sum Nazareus
Dei, non bibens vinum sicut and illi.
Come not to me, for I am pure or holy; for I take no wife, neither is my
throat an open sepulcher, (as it were to feed and eat freely as those men do)
but I am a Nazarite of God, forbearing to drink wine as the Nazarites did.
Thus then howsoever they held God to be the author of marriage, and the liberty
thereof to have been formerly permitted once and more then once, yet now they
taught, that they were called to a greater exquisitnesse and perfection of
conversation, and therefore were either partly or wholly to forbear. Hereby
then it appears, that the Montanists and the Manichees are to be severed one
from another, and if the Apostles words do condemn them both, then M. Bishops
answer is insufficient, because they were not both guilty of that which he
says the Apostle there intended. Let him tell us; does the Apostle by those
words condemn them both or not? If he say, yea, as he must, then we infer,
that the Apostle then did not speak only of them who held marriage to be a
thing wicked in it self, because the Montanists did not think so. M. Bishops
answer therefore must have a supply, and that supply must bring both the
Montanists and the Papists within the compass of the Apostles words. The
Apostle himself gives us that supply when he says, that those spirits of
error of which he speaks, shall speak lies in hypocrisy. They then of whom
the Apostle speaks, shall in hypocrisy forbid to marie. And what is it to
say in hypocrisy? Surely, to forbid marriage in hypocrisy, is to forbid it
under color of purity and holiness, and more then ordinary perfection. The
Manichees did forbid marriage, but they forbad it not in hypocrisy, but by open
and professed blasphemy: neither did they so much forbid it, as blaspheme and
condemn it. A man may forbid that which notwithstanding in it self he
thinks lawful enough, but they wholly condemned marriage, as of it self
wicked and damnable, and without any forbidding to be absolutely detested. The
Apostles caveat was not so greatly needful against them or such other as they
were, because their abominable blasphemy did apparently bewray it self, and
was easily to be discerned: but the greater danger was to come by them who in
hypocrisy should teach these doctrines of devils, that is, with fair shows
and goodly pretenses, and insinuations which might blind the eyes of them that
were not jealous and suspicious thereof, and therefore of these specially he
gives admonition to the Church. Thus did the Montanists disallow of marriage,
not as of evil institution, but only as a more profane and carnal state,
fitting for vulgar and common Christians, but not so well sorting, specially
second marriage, with that eminency of purity and perfection whereto their
Paracletus did instruct them. Now in the same sort as the Montanists did, so do
the Papists forbid marriage only in hypocrisy, only as accounting it a more
secular and vulgar kind of life, then is fitting to their spiritual and
perfect states. M. Bishop tells us, that they hold it to be a great
sacrament, and some of them absurdly and ridiculously make the carnal
conjunction of married persons the consummation of that sacrament, when
notwithstanding in that sacrament and consummation of the sacrament they
affirm that impurity and pollution as cannot stand with their sacrament of
orders. Marriage (says Bellarmine) Bellar. de Clerie. cap. 19. Matrimonium
impedit munus sacrificandi quia summa quaedam puritas and sanctitas in eo
requiritur: mactis vero coniugij negari no^ potest, quin admixtae sit imputitas
quaedam and pollutio.
hinders the office of sacrificing, because therein is required an eminent
purity and holiness, whereas in the act of marriage there is mingled an
impuritie and pollution. Thus Costerus says, Coster. Enchir. cap. 15. Si in
veteri lege carnis immunditia pollutis non licebat vel edere panes
propositionis vel manibus contrectare res sacras vel templam ipsum intrare:
multo manus his conuenit sacrorum nostrorum administratio, qui vxoribus suis
liberisque procreandis vacant, etc. and post. Non tantus splender animi,
morumque grauitas elucet in homine qui mulierculae semper assideat, eidemque
vacet, quia libido omnis mores compositos dissoluit, minusque admirabilem
hominem reddit: sacerdotum porro est sancta castitate grauem quandam praese
far maiestatem, qua venerationi sint, and admirationi caeteris.
If in the old law it were not lawful for them that were polluted with the
uncleanness of the flesh, either to eat the show bread, or to handle holy
things, or to enter into the temple, much less does the administering of our
sacraments belong to them, who give themselves to wives and to getting of
children. There appears not (says he) so great glory of mind, and gravity
of manners in the man, who is still sitting by a woman, and attending to her,
because all lust weakeneth stayed manners, and makes a man less admirable:
whereas it is fit for Priests to carry a grave kind of majesty by holy
chastity, that they may be reverenced and admired of others. Thus these
beastly Friars measure the ordinance of God, by the filth and corruption of
their own wicked hearts, and in hypocrisy deprave that state of life as void
of gravity, and modesty, and majesty, and as if there were nothing therein
but lust and sitting by a woman, and attending to her, wherein nowithstanding
the holy Fathers, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, Priests, Nazarites, and
Apostles served God: yea and when themselves for the most part are like the
Manichees, detesting marriage, and yet Aug. de morib. Mani^h cap 19. Vidimus
post transeuntes nescre quas faeminac ta^ petula^^i gestu a^hinnientes vt
omnium triuia lium impudicitia^ impudentiamque superarent.
neighing like fed horses at every woman that passes by, with such immodest
and wanton behavior, as passes the unchastity and impudency of base and
common rascals; some pretty tokens whereof the Reader may find in the story of
Weston and his fellows, casting out the devil from Sara Williams and her
sister. They vow against marriage as to profane and unholy a state, but they
vow not against adultery, fornication, incest, Sodomy, against the horrible
uncleanness of vicious burning lust; they vow not against gluttony,
drunkenness, Simony, perjury, robbery; these things being of the devil
hinder not, but that they may sacrifice, because their Triderit. Council. sess.
6 cap. 1. Oblatio munda; quae nulla indignitate aut malitia offerentium
inquinari potest.
sacrifice is so clean, as that it cannot be defiled with any indignity or
evil of them that offer it; only in marriage being the institution of God,
there is that impurity and pollution as by no means may stand with the gravity
and majesty of their Priestly function. But to them belongs that of Ignatius:
Ignat epist. ad Philadelp. S. quis vnum dicit Deu^, and confitetur Iesum
Christu^, corruptionem and coinquinationem v^ca^ legitimam co^mixtionem and
f^^orum procreatione^, huiusmodi habet inhabitaterem draconem apostatam.
If any man profess one God, and confess Jesus Christ, and do call the
lawful conjunction of man and woman, and the procreation of children a
corruption or defilement, the same has the apostaticall dragon dwelling in
him. Now then of such spirits the Apostle speaks, as wherewith the Romish
doctrine is now inspired, not directly condemning the institution of marriage,
but by obliquity of words impeaching and disgracing it as too base and
unfitting for the eminent purity and holiness of some sorts of men. And
against such spirits was that Canon made, that goes with other under the name
of the Apostles; Canon. Apost. cap. 6. Episcopus aut presbyter propria^ vxorem
nequaquam subobte^tu religionis abijciat. Si vero retecerit, excommunicetur; si
perseuerauerit, deijciatur.
Let not a Bishop or a Priest put away his wife under pretense of religion: if
he so do, let him be excommunicated; and if he preseuer, let him be deposed. So
did the council of Gangra decree: Council. Gangrens. ca. 4 Siquis discernit
presbyterum co^^ugatu^ tanquam occasion nuptiarum quod offerre non debeat, and
ab eius oblatione ideo se abstinet, anathema sit.
If any man make difference of a married Priest, as if by reason of his marriage
he should not minister, and does therefore withhold himself from his
ministration, accursed be he. This did Pope Hildebrand, that firebrand of hell,
who Math. Parisan Williel. Conq. Presbyteros vx^ratos a diuino remouit officio
and laicis Missas eorum audire inter dixit, nou^ exemplo, etc.
put away married Priests from doing divine service, and forbad to be present at
their service, and in those steps the Church of Rome still walks, and has
the same curse still lying upon her till this day. By this it appears how
far it is from truth, which M. Bishop says, that they have a reverend
opinion of marriage, when in effect they judge no otherwise thereof the^ the
Montanists did, nor any otherwise at all, but only that they appropriate their
opinion to some sorts of men, whereas the Montanists deemed alike concerning
all. As for that which he says, that the Protestants hold marriage to be a
moral contract only, he speaks it but according to the skill that he has in
the Protestants doctrine, which is very little or none at all, but what his
masters have reported of them. The Protestants teach as God himself has
taught, that marriage is Prou. 2.17.
the covenant of God, and that they who are joined in lawful marriage, Mat. 19.6.
are joined by God, and therefore that it is more then a moral, that is, a
civil and humane contract. He goes on, and tells us what the cause is why
their votaries may not marry, not because marriage is not honorable, says he,
but because they have solemnly promised to God the contrary. But therein he
lies unto God, and talks dissemblingly, because albeit they are content to
say indefinitely that marriage is honorable, yet deny it to be honorable in
some states of men, and do therefore bind them from it by vow, because they
hold it dishonorable for them. It is not as he fraudulently says, that
therefore they may not marry because they have vowed the contrary, but
therefore they make them vow, because they hold that in that state of life they
may not marry, yea do hold it for a pollution and uncleanness in them. Whereas
he says, that in vowing against marriage a man does better then if he had
married; how true it is, appears commonly by the effects. To vow against the
ordinance of God which he has appointed for an infirmity which cannot be
avoided, what is it but to bid battle to God, and madly to fight against him.
God has said, If they cannot abstain, let them marry: to vow against that
that God has said, that though he cannot contain, yet he will not marry, is
to sin desperately against God. As for that which he alleges for his
purpose out of Austin, it belongs not thereto. Austine speaks nothing there
of vowing, neither does he so fully and perfectly there tell us the meaning of
the Apostles words, because he examineth not the circumstances of them. He
accounts virginity and continency of single life, a superior good to
marriage, and we deny it not, as has been Answer to the Epistle. sect. 8.
before said as touching preferment and priority of gift; but excellency of
gifts is a matter of external pre-eminence and preferment with men, not of
internal righteousness toward God, neither is a man the better for the
having, but only for the well using of them. Saint Austin never thought that
either virginity or the vow of virginity was acceptable to God for it self,
and howsoever we accord not with him as touching the vowing thereof, yet
understanding virginity and single life with that implication as he does, as
having more commodiousnesse and opportunity to serve God, and being used
accordingly, there shall be small difference betwixt him and us, and this will
be nothing for M. Bishops turn, because this preferment is only accidental
by consequence and use, not essentially belonging to virginity for it self.

9. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins his third and last text is, Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled. The strength of this
place lies in a double corruption of the text: for this verb (is) is not in
the text, nor cannot be the course of the Apostles speech, requiring a verb of
the Imperative Mood, as both the sentences before and after do convince.

Again, if you will have the Apostle say, that marriage is honorable among all
men, we must also needs take him to say, that the bed is also undefiled among
all, which was not true. Also that their conversation was without
covetousness, etc. For there is no reason why this word (is) should be joined
with the one more then with the other. And nothing but passion does cause them
to make the middle sentence an affirmative, when they turn both the other into
exhortations.

(...).
The second corruption is in these words (among all) when they should translate
(in all,) and the Adjective being put without a Substantive must in true
construction have this word (things) joined with it, and not (men:) wherefore
the text being sincerely put into English, it would carry no color of their
error. For the Apostles saying is, Let marriage be honorable in all things, and
the bed undefiled. Here is no willing of any man to marry, but only a
commandment to them that be married to live honestly in marriage, to keep
(as elsewhere he says) their vessels in sanctification, and not in dishonor,
and then shall their marriage be honorable in all things, that is, in all points
appertaining to matrimony: so that now you see that M. Perkins is not able to
bring any one place out of Scripture to disprove the vow of chastity.

R. ABBOT.
A double corruption, says M. Bishop, and yet there is neither of them to be
seen, and unless we will take his simple word, he is able to prove none. First
he blames us for saying, Marriage is honorable, telling us that we should
rather say, Let marriage be honorable, and sees not in the mean time that our
translation is implied in his own: for why should the Apostle say, Let marriage
be honorable, but because it is so; as if he should say, let it be so reckoned
of as it is, a thing honorable amongst all. But without any implicatio^, the
latter part of the sentence being affirmative, shows that the Apostle meant
to speak affirmatively in the former also. In this sort S. Austine conceived
the Apostles meaning, who mentioning the good things that are in marriage, due
order of generation, fidelity of chastity, and the sacred bond of marriage it
self, adds, August. cont. Pelag. and Celest. lib. 2. cap. 34. Propter haec
omnia honorabiles nuptiae in omnibus and thorus immaculatus.
In all these respects marriage is honorable in all, and the bed is undefiled.
So also Chrysostom understands it as we translate it, that the Apostle
Chrysostom. ad Heb. hom. 33. Cum posuisset honorabile coniugium and thoru^
immaculatum, ostendat quod merito inferat quae sequuntur.
sets down that marriage is honorable in all. So likewise Theophylact
rendereth the words affirmatively, Theoph. in Heb. 13. Connubium honorabile
est, honor dignum est.
Marriage is honorable, marriage is worthy of honor: and in the very same sort
Socrat. hist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Paphnutius in the Council of Nice, and the Sext. Synod. can. 13.
Fathers and Bishops of the sixth Synod in Trullo cite it as an affirmative
speech, Marriage is honorable in all, and therefore we reject M. Bishops
assertion as childish and vain, that this cannot be the course of the Apostles
speech. The sentences before and after, are uttered according as the matter
requires, but it more fitteth here for the inferring of the latter part of the
verse that the Apostle say affirmatively, Marriage is honorable, then Let it so
be, that fornicators and adulterers may understand themselves to be without
excuse, in that marriage is appointed as an honorable state, and remedy for the
avoiding of such sin. And thus does Chrysostom tie the two parts of the
verse together: Chrysostom. vt supra. Si enim connubium concessum est, just
scortator supplicijs afficitur.
For if marriage be granted, then the fornicator is justly punished. So
Oecumenius: Oecumen. in Heb. cap. 13. Na^ si coniugium permissum est and sine
peccato licet ad explendae concupiscentiam, quis erit excusationis praetextus
scortatoribus and adulteris?
For if marriage be permitted, and be lawful without sin to satisfy
concupiscence, what pretense of excuse shall there be for fornicators and
adulterers? The former part of the sentence then is an assertion that marriage
is permitted, and is lawful without sin. Yea but then says M. Bishop, we must
take him to say that the bed also is undefiled amongst all, which (says he) is
not true. But he should have told us why it is not true; where if he had
answered, that the bed of marriage is not undefiled amongst all, because some
pollute it by adultery and whoredom, it would have appeared that his
understanding was very short, that could not conceive that the Apostle tells
us what the marriage bed is of it self, not what it becomes by the usage of
it. He says elsewhere, 1. Cor. 3 17.
The temple of God is holy which ye are: and yet withal he says, If any man
destroy the temple of God, him will God destroy, as giving to understand, that
the uncleanness of men may defile that which God has made holy. So is it in
this case, the bed of marriage is holy and undefiled, God reputeth no uncleanness
or pollution to it, It is lawful without sin, as Oecumenius has before
expounded it: Primaes. in Heb. 13. Immaculatus lectustimmaculati and illi inde
surgentes, hoc est, maculam peccati i^de non trahentes.
They that rise from it are undefiled, says Primasius, not drawing from thence
any spot of sin, but the uncleanness is when the bed of marriage is made the
bed of adultery, and man's filthiness polluteth that which God has sanctified.
In a word, that which the Apostle says of all the creatures of God, is to be
applied to the marriage bed, it is Tit. 1.15.
clean to them that are clean, that is, to them who by chaste conversation
preserve in it that holiness and honor that God has attributed unto it. Now
by that that has been said, appears the vanity of his second cavil, where
he says, that in steed of in all things, we say amongst all or amongst al men.
The greek words are (...), that is, in all, and the sentence being so read,
Marriage is honorable in all, what else does it sound but marriage is honorable
in all men? And this is indeed the true and proper translating of the words;
for we in reading amongst all, do disadvantage our selves by not expressing
literally the words of the Apostle. For we know that that may be honorable
amongst all, which yet all are not capable of. The calling of the minister and
of the magistrate is honorable amongst all, but yet all cannot be ministers and
magistrates. But the Apostle says that marriage is honorable in all, to
signify that it is a state of life which God has instituted to be free for all
men. And that this is the true meaning of the Apostle, appears by that that
has bin before said. For if these words do serve to bereave fornicators and
adulterers of all pretense of excuse, then they must be so taken as that
fornicators and adulterers must understand that they appertain to them. And
how shall they understand that the words do appertain to them, unless we take
them in this sort, that marriage is honorable in all men? for otherwise they may
happily say, Marriage indeed is honorable, but it did not belong to us. For
suppose that Popes and Popish Priests be fornicators, as their Canon law
tells us, that Did. 81. Maximianes in glos Co^muniter dicum quod Clericus
pro simplici fornicatione deponi non debet, quia pauci sine illo vitio
inueniuntur.
few of them are found without that fault, how shall they be deprived here of
the excuse of their filthiness, if they may say, We held marriage to be
honorable, but it was not lawful for us to marry? But the words do serve to
take away from all adulterers and fornicators all excuse of such uncleanness.
They must therefore be taken to affirm indeed that which they seem to do,
that marriage is honorable in all men. And so does Theophylact apparently
expound it, Theoph. in Heb. 13. Non quia nuptiae aetate prouectioribus minus
conueniant, adolescentulos ver^ admocu^ deccant sed cunctis art honori sunt.
He says not that marriage is unfitting for the elder, and fit only for young
men, but honorable for all, though withal he expound those words in all, as
importing Vel in omnibus hoc est, quibusuit modis, and quouis tempore.
every way and at all times. But M. Bishop brings us to the Grammar, and
tells us, that the adjective being put without a substantive, must in true
construction have this word (things) joined with it. Full wisely, I warrant
you, and with great skill; as though where the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 8.7.
(...), we are not to translate, there is not knowledge in all men, or all men
have not knowledge, but rather there is not knowledge in all things, because
the adjective is there put without a substantive: and where the Apostle says,
2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
(...), we should not say all men, but all things have not says; and where he
says, 1. Tim. 2.9.
(...), we should not translate who gave himself a redemption for all men, but
for all things, because in these places the adjective is put without the
substantive, as in infinite other places it is, where notwithstanding it must
necessarily be understood not of all things but of all men. It is not passion
then, as he obiecteth to us, but plain frenzy, as it seems, that makes him
to use these blind and ignorant cauillations, and the places of Scripture which
M. Perkins has alleged against their vow of continency, stand still firm
and sure for ought that he has been able to say against them.

10. W. BISHOP.
The Scripture being so barren for him, he shall belike recompense it with the
abundant testimony of antiquity in favor of his cause: but oh unhappy
chance, he has clean forgotten in this question the record of the ancient
Church: what, was there not one Father, who with some one broken fragment of a
sentence or other, would relieve you in this your combat against the Vow of
Chastity? I will help you to one, but I fear me, you will scarce thank me
for my pains: it is such a one, as is neither holy nor father, but the
ancient Christian Epicure Iouinian, who, as S. Augustine has recorded Haeres.
82. ad Qued vult.
and S. Jerome, Lib. 1. contra Iouin.
, did hold that virginity of professed persons, men and women, was no better
then the continency of the married. So that many professed virgins believing
him did marry, yet himself did not marry, as Friar Luther did; not because he
thought chastity should be rewarded in the life to come, with a greater crown
of glory; but because it was fit for the present necessity, to avoid the
troubles of marriage: see just the very opinion of M. Perkins and our
Protestants. But this heresy, says S. Augustine in the same place, was quickly
suppressed and extinguished, it was not able to deceive any one of the Priests.
And in another place thus Lib. 2. re^rec. 22
he speaks of Iouinian, Holy Church most faithfully and valiantly resisted
this monster. So that no marvel if that M. Perkins could find small relief in
antiquity for this his assertion, which the best of them esteemed no better
then a monstrous sacrilegious heresy.

R. ABBOT.
How simply M. Bishop has dealt in the answering of the Scriptures alleged
against him, we have very well seen already, and it has been made appear to
him that we want not testimony of antiquity for the applying thereof in such
sort as we do. Albeit we freely say to him, that our faith rests entirely
upon the word of God; and where God has spoken plainly to us, we will not
suspend our assent upon question, whether men think the same that God has
told us. If men have given testimony thereof, we take their witness and use
it; if not, we say as in another case Cyprian does: Cypr. lib. 2. ep. 5. Non
sunt expecta^da testi^onia humana, cum praecedunt diuina suffragia.
We are not to look for the testimonies of men, where we have warrant already
from God himself, and with the Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 3.4.
Let God be true, and every man a liar. In the mean time we do but suffer M.
Bishop here to Prou. 7.22.
go like a fool to the stocks for correction, not imagining whither he goes,
and like the poor fish to dally and play with the bait wherein he receives
his own bane. He sporteth himself with Iouinian, and in the cause of Iouinian
we bring not a broken fragment of a sentence of some father, but in a manner a
whole Church, and no mean Church, but even the Church of Rome, defending and
maintaining that virginity, of professed persons is no better (with God) then
the continency of the married. The old Church of Rome condemned the doctrine
of Montanus, which was the same in effect as before I have said, that the
Church of Rome now maintains. The old Church of Rome vpheld the doctrine of
Iouinian, which was the same that we now defend against the Church of Rome.
This matter (gentle Reader) has been declared before at large Sect 8.
in the answer to M. Bishops Epistle, and thither I refer thee for the full
understanding of it. Here I will only briefly remember thee, that the doctrine
of Hierome against Iouinian found general opposition in the Roman Church, and
how scandalously and offensiuely it was taken, his own words may give us to
understand, when in his apology he says, Hieron. apolog. pro lib. aduer.
Iouin. Grande piaculu^, euersae sum ecclesiae, orbis audire non potest, si
virginitatem diximus esse mu^diorem quam nuptias.
A great offense, the Churches are overthrown, the world cannot abide to hear
it that I have said, that virginity is more pure (or holy) then marriage. It
was no small matter that made him thus to speak: to hold that virginity is
more holy then marriage, was then taken to be a doctrine pernicious to the
Church, and the world could not brook the hearing of it. Some private persons
were entangled with the conceit of it, but it was most hainously taken when it
came publikly to be defended. And albeit Siricius then Bishop of Rome, a
superstitious and unlearned man, the first for ought appears that sought to
give way in the Church of Rome to the dregs and filth of Montanus, which that
Church had before condemned, albeit I say this Siricius with some few of his
own pack had given sentence against Iouinian, yet so little did his sentence
avail with the rest of the Clergy, as that Hierome found himself much
aggrieued at their taking part against him. His words are plain, Ibid. sub
initio. Si seculi homines indignantur in minori gradu se esse quam virgins,
miror clericos and monachos and continentesid no^ laudare quod faciunt.
Castrant se ab v^^ribus suis vt imitentia virginum castitatem, et idipsum
volunt esse maritatas quod virgins?
Though secular men think much that they are put in lower place then virgins,
yet I marvel that Priests and Monks and continent persons do not commend that
which they do. They contain themselves from their wives that they may imitate
the chastity of virgins, and will they have it that married women are the same
that virgins are? Hereby it plainly appears, that howsoever in practice they
had yielded to the decree of Stricius, and to those fancies which then were
somewhat grown as touching single life, yet they retained still the same
judgment and opinion of doctrine, that virginity and marriage for themselves
made no difference at all with God, howsoever the one be more convenient then
the other for avoiding the distractions and troubles of our present life. For
the rest look to the place before mentioned, which I hope will give thee
satisfaction as touching this whole matter. As for Luthers marriage, he had
grounds sufficient whereupon to satisfy himself in that behalf, and better
were it for a great number of M. Bishops copesmates to do as Luther did, then
to practice that filthiness which under color of continency they now do.

11. W. BISHOP.
But M. Perkins has an argument that shall nevertheless demonstrate the vow
of perpetual chastity to be intolerable. For (says he) this vow is not in
the power of him that voweth: for continency is the gift of God, who gives it
not unto all, but unto whom he will, when he will, and as long as he will. And
if we object, that by prayer and fasting the gift of continency may be
obtained of God: he answers, that it cannot, because it is not necessary to
salvation. We reply, that it is necessary for all them that have vowed
chastity. And be it so, that God gives it not unto all, yet does he certainly
give it to some, for otherwise they cannot keep their vows, but to the
dishonor of God, and to their own damnation should break them.

And we only teach, that some such who have vowed chastity, could keep it:
so that the argument is very childish, and too too weak to lead any wise man
away from the holy and ancient doctrine of the Church.

R. ABBOT.
A very simple remonstrance does M. Bishop here give us to M. Perkins his
demonstration. The ground of the argument is this, that to make a vow of that
which by ordinary providence of God is not in our power, and wherein we have no
assurance of the extraordinary gift of God, is an intolerable presumption, a
wilful tempting of God, and a seeking to bind his gifts to the headlong rashness
of our fancies. What is he but a mad man that will make a vow to go upon his
head, or to fly in the air, or Iosu. 10.12.
to stay the Sun as Iosuah did, or Exodus 14.21.
to divide the sea as did Moses, or 1. King. 17.1.
to stay the rain as Elias did, or 2. King. 6.6.
to make iron swim as Elizeus did? Now of continency we are taught that it is
a special gift of God. Our Savior Christ expressly tells us, Mat. 19.11.
All men cannot receive this thing, but they to whom it is given. Therefore
August. de lib. arb. ca. 4. Quibus non est datum, aut nolunt, aut non implent
quod volunt.
they to whom it is not given, either have no will to it, or fulfill not that
which they are willing to. Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 7.7.
Every man has his proper gift of God, one thus, and another thus: and shall he
that has received his gift one way, vow the performance of that which
belongs to another gift which he has not received? But say they, the gift is
to be obtained by fasting and prayer. Yea but seeing prayer also is the gift of
God, how can he presume that God will give him grace to pray for the obtaining
of that other gift who has wilfullyvowed without God, and having received no
gift whereupon to vow? Surely they to whom it is not given, sometimes have no
will to it, as we see before in S. Austins words, and how can they faithfully
pray for that whereto they have no will? But it is true here which Solomon
says, Prou. 20.25.
It is a snare for a man after the vows to make inquiry; first to vow, and
then to be to seek and to learn for the keeping of it. And what? does fasting
and prayer obtain of God whatsoever we list to ask? Shall we vow to do as
Moses, and Iosuah, and Elias did, as I said before, and then think by fasting
and prayer to obtain it? Saint Austin rightly says, Augus. de verb. Dom ser.
53. Aliquando Deus propitius negat quod petis.
God in mercy sometimes denies that which we ask, because he thinks it not
convenient for us, or he has determined otherwise. Idem epist. 34. Bonus
Dominus qui non tribuit saepe quod volumus, vtquod malimus attribuat.
God is gracious (says he) who oftentimes gives not what we desire, that he
may give us that which we will like better when he has given it. Thus Saint
Paul, though 2. Cor. 12.8.
he besought to be eased of that sting of the flesh, the messenger of Satan
which buffetted him, yet obtained not what he desired. Therefore M. Perkins
very well observes that there are two sorts of the gifts of God, some common to
all, and therefore necessary because he has determined not to bring us to
salvation without them, as are repentance, faith, forgiveness of sins,
sanctification of the spirit, which as God first gives, so to our faithful
prayers he yields the increase thereof. Other gifts there are which God has
intended to be proper and peculiar to some, and whereof he makes not others
partakers, because the want thereof is no hinderance to their salvation, as are
the gifts of toongs, of healing, of knowledge, of wisdom, of utterance, and
such like. Of this sort is the gift of continency, which because it is not
necessary for salvation, we can no more presume to obtain by fasting and
prayer, then we can any of those other, or health, wealth, preferment, or any
such outward and temporal benefit. We may assay and use the means to see what
God will do, but we have no promise whereupon we may certainly resolve our
selves for success therein. As therefore to vow the use of those other gifts
when a man has them not, only upon presumption by prayer and fasting to
obtain them, is the part of a brainsicke and distempered man, even so is it for
a man to vow continency, not having received but presuming afterward by
fasting and prayer to obtain the gift whereby he should contain. But where M.
Perkins answers that the gift of continency cannot be presumed of by prayer
and fasting because it is not necessary to salvation, M. Bishop replieth, that
it is necessary for all them that have vowed chastity. And why so? For
otherwise they can not keep their vows, but to the dishonor of God and their
own damnation should break them. Where we see that M. Perkins understands
necessary in one respect, and M. Bishop in another. Master Perkins intends,
that prayer and fasting do not certainly obtain any thing, but what in it
self and simply is necessary to salvation. M. Bishop will have us think that
it obtains certainly whatsoever is necessary in respect of a vow for the
performance thereof. But because that which M. Perkins says is true, therefore
that which M. Bishop says is false, neither may we imagine by prayer and
fasting to subject the gifts of God to the madness of our vows. What? because
a man voweth to be a prophet or to speak strange toongs, shall it therefore be
necessary for his salvation, that God bestow upon him the gift of prophecy or
the gift of toongs, because otherwise he shall break his vow? If we will
think this absurd, we must say in the vow of continency as we will in this,
that the gift of continency is not necessary to salvation, but it is necessary
for a man to repent him of his rash and headlong vow, to ask God mercy for
abusing his sacred name in so unlawful sort, and to use the means ordained by
God for avoiding the mischieues of that vow wherein he finds not himself
seconded and confirmed by the gift of God. Because I say the gift of
continency is not in it self necessary to salvation, therefore God does not
always yield it to the prayers of men, howsoever they have vowed it, but
leaves them to the repentance of their error, and to the remedy which he has
appointed for them; and they who having vowed against marriage, and not having
the gift of continency do persevere therein, they do no other but rebel against
God, and not further their salvation by keeping their vow as they call it, but
increase their own damnation by the pollution and uncleanness of filthy lust.
Whereas he faith, that they only teach that such as have vowed chastity can
keep it: I answer him as Austin did to Julian the Pelagian, that where August.
cont. Julian. lib. 5. ca. 10. Non omnes capiunt, etc. cu^ posses dicere, No^
omnes capiunt verbum hoc, sed qui voluerit si veru^ esset quod dicitu vos.
Christ says, All receive not this saying, but they to whom it is given: he
might have said, All receive not this saying, but they that will, if it be true
which they say. For if they that have vowed chastity can consequently keep it,
then whosoever will vow it, is presently thereby put in state for the keeping of
it, and that is whosoever will, because whosoever will, may vow. Which because
it is apparently absurd, therefore our argument is strong enough to satisfy a
wise man against so vain and childish answers.

12. W. BISHOP.
But to the further confirmation of this point, let us hear what the holy
Fathers teach touching the possibility of this vow.

Tertullian near the end expounding these words, Lib. de monog.
He that can take, let him take. Mat. 19.
Choose (says he) that which is good, if thou say thou can not, it is because
thou will not, for that thou might if thou would, he does declare who
has left both to thy choice.

Origin upon the same place, Mat. 19.
He that will take this word that is set down of chastity, let him pray for
it, believing him that said, Ask and it shall be given you, and he shall
receive it: which does plainly confute M. Perkins, who says, that although we
ask never so much, we cannot obtain this gift. With Origin agrees Saint
Jerome upon the same place, who says, It is given unto them who have requested
it, who have desired it, and traveled that they might receive it.

The same song chaunteth Gregory Nazianzene, which is of three kinds of Eunuchs
Orat. 31.
.

Saint Chrysostom says, It is possible to all them who make choice of it: and
further adds, that our Savior Christ himself does prove it there after this
sort: Think with thy self if thou had been by nature an Eunuch, or by the
malice of men made one, what would thou then have done, when thou should
both have been deprived of that pleasure, and yet not have had any recompense
for thy pain. Therefore thank God, because thou shall have a great reward,
and a glittering crown, if thou live so as they must do without any reward:
yet (says he) thou may do it more easily, safely and pleasantly, both
because thou art fortified with hope of recompense, and also comforted with a
virtuous conscience.

We will wrap up this point with Saint Augustine, who directly confuteth Master
Perkins by many reasons and examples: Lib. 2. De adulterinis coning. cap. 12.
Et de bono viduit. cap. 20. And upon the Psalm, an hundredth thirty seven, he
yields another reason, why God will more really assist them, saying, He that
exhorts thee to vow, will help thee to fulfill it. All which heavenly
doctrine, because it is spiritually judged (as the Apostle speaks) the
carnal man cannot understand: and therefore Master Perkins being persuaded
that few can live chastely except they marry, avouches that this Vow does
bring forth innumerable abominations in the world; not the hundredth part so
many as the fleshly heretics imagine, and out of flying and lying tales
report and brute abroad. Nay I dare affirm, that let the authentical
Records of our Realm be well perused, and you shall find more lewd filthy
lechery to have been practiced by Ministers and their wives this last age,
then was in a thousand years before by all the Catholic Priests and religious
persons of the Land.

This may serve for a reproof of all that M. Perkins obiecteth against the Vow
of chastity: afterward the man would somewhat reason the matter by showing how
he condemns not chastity, yet says, that marriage is better then it, in two
respects. If Iouinian was reputed by the learned and holiest fathers, a
Christian Epicure and a monster, because he durst make marriage equal with
virginity: what shall this man be, who says it is better? His reasons are so
childish, that by the like you may prove dirt to be better then gold: wherefore
I will not stand upon them.

He nevertheless afterward concludes, that one may purpose constantly with
himself to lead a single life, but so, as he may change upon occasion, and
this to be a counsel of expedience, but not of perfection.

Lastly, that if any having the gift of continency do vow, and afterward
marry (the gift remaining) they have sinned; which is flat against his own
second rule, which prohibites us to leese our liberty, and to make any thing
unlawful in conscience, which Christian religion leaves at liberty.

R. ABBOT.
Holy fathers, says M. Bishop, and begins first of all with an heretic,
citing Tertullians book de Monogamia, which as Hierom testifies, was Hieron
in Catalog. Tertul. Specialiter aduersus Ecclesiam texuit volumina de
pudicitia, de persecutione, de ieiunijs, de Monogamia, etc.
written purposely against the Church. He manifestly abuses the words of
Christ; and whereas Christ says, Mat. 19.12.
He that can receive this, let him receive it, to note that every one cannot
receive it, as before he has said, Ver. 11.
All men receive not this saying, but they to who^ it is given: he forces him
even against the hair to say that every man can receive it if he will. Saint
Hierome says well concerning those words, Hieron aduer. Iouin. lib. 1. Si^
omnes virgins esse possent, nunquam Dominus diceret, Qui potest capere, capiat.
If all could be virgins, our Lord Christ would never have said, He that can
receive it, let him receive it. Now the truth is, that the heresy of Montanus
was so plausible, as that it did wonderfully insinuate it self into the minds
of men, and the Fathers and Bishops of the Church grew afterward sometimes to
speak in the same sort as Tertullian in behalf thereof had spoken against the
Church. The Church then pleaded a necessity of marriage and second marriage,
Tertul. de Monog. Quousque infirmitas ista impudentissima perseuerabit? etc:
Rideo cum infirmitas carnis opponitur, etc.
because of the infirmity of the flesh. This Tertullian exagitateth in the
place cited by M. Bishop, and derideth the allegation of it. For answer hereto
he said that Ibid. Ja^ nemini competit portare no^ posse quia per quem datur
portare per se non deest. Quamdiu causabimur carnem. quia dixit Dominus, Caro
infirma? Sed praemisit, Et spiritus promptus, vt vin cat spiritus carne^ vt
cedat quod infirmum est fortiori.
it was not now for any man to say he could not bear it, because he by whom it
is given to bear, will not be wanting for his part. How long (says he) shall
we pretend the flesh, for that Christ says, The flesh is weak? But he set
before it, The spirit is ready, that the spirit may overcome the flesh, and
that which is weak may yield to the stronger. This presumption he builded
upon, that God would not be wanting to them to give ableness to contain who
did endeavor themselves for the obtaining of it. Which being then presumed and
disputed against the Church, may give us light what to judge of such speeches
afterward used in the doctrine of the Church. For this conceit much prevailed,
that albeit Christ had said, All receive not this saying, but they to whom it
is given, yet the receiving thereof is given to them who by prayer ask and
seek it at Gods hands. And thus Origin for answer to some that said, that they
were willing to contain, but could not, says as M. Bishop alleges, Origin.
in Mat. trac. 7. Qui vult capax esse verbi quod de castitate positu^ est,
petat, etc. no^ dubitans de illo quod dictu^ est, Omnis quipetit, accipit.
He that will receive this word that is set down of chastity, let him ask not
doubting of that which is said, Every one that asks, receives. But Origin
well knew, if he had remembered it, that though every one that asks receives,
yet every one receives not the thing which he asks, because we Romans 8.16.
not knowing what to pray as we ought, do sometimes ask those things which are
either unprofitable or unnecessary for us. It is true that the prayer of the
faithful never returns empty; but yet therefore are we taught in our
prayers to submit our selves to the will of God, and to say with our Savior,
Mat. 26.39.
Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will be done, because God, though
August. Exaudit D^us etsi non semper ad voluntatem, semper tamen ad vtilitatem.
he hear us always for our good, yet does not hear us always according to
our will. Because therefore the gift of continency is a specall gift which God
has not left indifferent to every man, we may not upon our prayers resolve to
receive in particular that gift, because we have no warrant in particular for
the obtaining of it. And this could Origin himself upon occasion well
discern, when he says that our Savior Origin in Mat. tract 24. Reprehendit
hu^usmodi praeceptores qui crudeliter et sine misericordia non secundum
existimationem vtriu^ vniuscuiusque cudientis, sed maiora virtute ipsoru^
iniungunt, vtputa qui prohibent nubere, and ab eo quod expedit ad immoderatam
munditiam compellunt: qui etiam docent abstinere a cibis, and alia huiusmodi ad
quae non omnino oportet cogere, fideles alligant per verbu^ expositionis suae
onera grauia citra voluntate^ Christi dicentis, Iugum meum suaue est, et onus
meum leave est, and imponunt ea qua^tum ad verbum suum super humeros homi^um
curuantes eos and cadere facientes sub pondere grauiu^ mandatorum eos qui
^^tulare ea non sufferunt.
reproves such masters as cruelly and unmercifully, without weighing the
strength of their hearers, do enjoin them things beyond their power, as they
(says he) who forbid to marry, and from that which is expedient do force men
to a purity or cleanness more then needs, who also teach them to abstain
from meats, and by the word of their exposition do bind other such burdens to
which they should not at all compel faithful men, being beside the will of
Christ, saying, My yoke is sweet and my burden light; and do lay them by their
word and doctrine upon men's shoulders, bowing them down, and causing them that
are not able to bear them, to fall under the weight of their heavy
commandments. Thus spoke Origin against them, who notwithstanding alleged for
themselves, as we have seen, the same that he says in the other place, that
God for his part will not be wanting, and they that ask shall receive of him.
And if it be true which he says in those former words, then there was no cause
for him here to blame those teachers for laying too heavy burdens upon men,
because they might justly answer as he does, that the burdens were not to be
accounted too heavy, for that every one that asks may receive strength for
the bearing of them. But because he justly reprooueth those teachers, therefore
he gives to understand that M. Perkins justly says, that though it cannot be
doubted, that some by prayer obtain the gift of continency, yet it is not
yielded to the prayers of every man, and many though they pray never so much,
yet receive it not. As for Hieromes words, they show which is the way to
obtain it, but do not say that that way will bring every man unto it. Hieron.
in Math. 19. His datum est qui petierunt, qui voluerunt, qui vt acciperent
laborauerunt.
It is given to them that have asked it, that have desired it, that have
labored to receive it, but it follows not that it is given to all that do
so. He expressly directs his speech against them who thought that either Ibid.
Nem^ putet sub hoc verbo fatum vel fertunant introduci
by fatal destiny or by fortune and chance men received this gift, and
shows, that not so, but by prayer and labor they that have it do attain it.
But if all might so obtain it, there were no reason of that advertisement
which he gives presently after, Jbid. Infert. Qui potest capere capiat vt
vnusquisque consideret vires suas vtrum possit virginalia and pudicitiae
implere praecepta. Per se erim castitas blanda est, and quemlibet ad se
alliciens, sed considerandae sunt vires vt qui potest capere, capiat.
Christ says, He that can receive it, let him receive it, that every man may
consider his own strength whether he be able to fulfill the precepts of
virginity and continency: for continency is of it self a flattring thing,
and allureth every one to it; but men are to consider their strength, that he
may receive it who is able to receive it. What needs this consideration of
our strength, and the doubt of our being able, if we may resolve that every one
that asks and seeks, receives strength to be able. Yea and that the
obtaining of this ableness requires greater labor then every man's strength
can bear, appears by Hierome himself, who of himself confesses, how
Hieron. Vix eremi duritia refroenaui.
hardly by the hardness of the wilderness he attained to the bridling of
incontinent desire. Ad Rust. de viuendi forma. Incentiua vttiorum ardoremque
naturae far non poteram, que^ cum crebris ieiunijs frangerent men's tamen
cogitationibus aestuabat.
I was not able (says he) to bear the prouocations of vicious desires and
heat of nature, which when I repressed by often fasting, yet my mind was still
raging with thoughts. Ad Eustoch. de custod. virginit. Jn eremo constitutus,
etc. Putabam me Romany interesse delicijs, etc. Horrebant sacco membra
deformia, and squalula cutis situ^ Aethiopicae carms obduxerat. Quotidie
lachrymae, quotidie gemitus, and siquando repugnantem somnus imminens
oppressisset, nuda humo ossa vix haerentia collidebam. De cibis and potu taceo
cum etiam languentes monachi aqua frigida vtantur and coctum aliquid accepisse
luxuria sit. Jlle igitur ego, etc. scorpionum tantum socius and ferarum saepe
choris intereram puellarum. Pallebant orae ieiunijs and men's desiderijs aest
nabat in frigide corpore, and an^e homine^ suu^ tam carne praemoriua sola
libidinu^ incendia bulliebant.
I thought my self to be amidst the pleasures of Rome. My body was rough with
sackcloth, and my skin and flesh was become black; still I was weeping and
mourning; I slept not but as sleep oppressed me, and then I laid my bones
scarcely hanging together upon the bare ground. My drink was cold water, and
it was too dainty for me to have any thing boiled. Yet I who was thus the
companion of Scorpions and wild beasts, yet (in my mind) was many times present
among the companies of maidens. My face was pale with fasting, and my mind was
still raging with desires in my cold body, and my flesh being now dead before
my self, only the fires and heates of lusts were still boiling within me.
This he acknowledges as touching himself, and if he in that invincible
obstinacy against himself, yea in the wilderness, where his company was but
Scorpions and wild beasts, yet found so great difficulty to attain to that
that he sought for: what shall we expect of them who are tied to live there
where there is still casting of oil into the fire, and occasions mightily to
provoke that desire which so mightily provoke it self where there is no
occasion. Yea wheresoever men live, there is not one of a thousand that can
yield himself to the doing or suffering of that which Hierome describes in
himself, and therefore the vowing of continency is no other but even as the
casting of a man's self into the sea, where though sometimes men find means to
escape, yet there is certain and apparent danger and likelihood of being
drowned. Now the words of Hierom seem to be but the imitation of Gregory
Nazianzene, who as he chanteth the same song, to use M. Bishops phrase, so is
to have the same answer. Having rejected those fancies of destiny and fortune,
as also the opinions of men's free will for making themselves chaste, he says it
is given. Gre. Naz. orat. 36. Cu^ audieris, Quibus datu^ est, add, Volentibus
datum est and ijs qui animi melinatione ita feruntur.
But add, says he, it is given to them that are willing to it, and by
inclination of mind are thereto carried. He says that there must be in a man a
will and inclination for the obtaining of it, but does not say that every man
that has a will to it, does obtain it, which is the matter here in question.
Yea he makes that Ibid. Propositu^ quoque ipsu^ atque electio diuinum quodda^
beneficiu^ est, etc. Ipsum quoque velle a Deo est, etc.
will whereby it is obtained a special gift of God, and wholly his gift, so
that they who have not this special will inspired of God, though they have
vowed a thousand times, yet can never pray or labor effectually for the
obtaining of that which they have vowed. Chrysostomes exposition we reject,
being very manifestly contrary to the drift of our Savior in that place. He
makes this gift common Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 63 Hisdatu^ est qui sponte id
eligunt. Ostendit superiore auxilio nobu opus esse quod quidem omnibus paratu^
est si volumus in hac lactatione superiores euadere.
to all that will, whereas by Hierome before we learn that Christ therefore
said, He that can receive it, let him receive it, because all cannot so do. As
for S. Austin in the first place he says somewhat again M. Bishop, but for him
nothing at all. August. de adulier. coning. lib. 2. cap. 12. Nunc rectissime
dicitur, Qui potest capere, capiat; qui autem se non continet, nubat.
It is now rightly said, He that can receive it, let him receive it, but he
that contains not, let him marry: thereby plainly signifying that the words
of Christ do import that every one is not capable of that precept of
containing, and therefore that those expositions are not true which M. Bishop
has brought to prove that they are so. The second testimony is taken out of a
book which is Erasm. censur. in lib. de bono vtduit. Mira dictionisfacili as
and cander cla^tat non esse Augustini.
none of Austins, and the reason which he uses of husbands long absence from
their wives by traveling or like occasions, that if in such cases they can
contain, then they may also for keeping their vow, is insufficient. For we
have promise of Gods help in the necessities and temptations which his
wisdom and providence imposes upon us, but we have no promise of his help
in those temptations which we procure unto our selves, and wherein we tempt him
by presuming upon his help, to go one way when he has directed us to go
another. The last words which he cites, are spoken in general of vowing, and
we doubt not but that in those things which we vow lawfully according to the
will and word of God, the help of God who has given us a heart to promise our
service to him, will mercifully assist us accordingly, as we call upon him for
the performance thereof, but so to secure every man who wilfully voweth that
which God requires not of him, is a spice and taste of those dregs wherewith
Montanius as I said before corrupted the doctrine of the Church. He that
exhorts thee to vow, will help thee to fulfill it, but he exhorts none in
this case, but them that are able; He that is able, let him receive it, and let
him receive it, says he, but says not, let him vow it, and what is that to
move thee to vow, and to presume that afterward he will make thee able? Yea,
and what we are to conceive in this case, we are somewhat to esteem by Austine
himself, who in his confessions to God acknowledges those Aug. Confess. li.
10 cap 30. Vt anima mea no^ sit rebellis sibi atque vt in somnis etia^ non
solum non perpretret istas corruptelarum turpitudines per imagines animales
vsque ad carnis fluxu^ sed ne consentiat quidem, etc. Quid adhuc (in hac
aetate) si^ in hoc genere mali mei dixi Domino bono meo. etc.
night illusions and pollutions of the flesh, which in defect of marriage,
carnal concupiscence is wont to cause, which are so unnatural and loathsome,
as that no man should doubt but that chaste marriage is a thousand times rather
to be chosen, then to endure the custom thereof. And if Austine at those
years as he speaks of, and in so great devotion, could not be free from such
pollution, what shall we think of so many who in strength of body and heat of
blood, with ease and full diet do undertake that Popish vow of single life, but
that even in them it is true which S. Bernard says, Bern. in Cant: ser. 66.
T^lle ex ecclesia honorabile connubiu^ and thorum immaculatu^, no^ne reple^ ea^
concubinarijs, incestuosis, seminifluu, mollibus, masculorum concubitoribus,
and omni denique genere immundorum.
Take from the Church honorable marriage and the undefiled bed, and thou
fillest all with keepers of concubines incestuous persons, seed-loosers,
wantons, Sodomites, and all manner of unclean persons. And this to have been
the fruit and effect of that vow of virginity and single life, all ages by
experience have found. It has been always the trap wherein Satan has taken
men and women to hold them bond and captives to filthiness and uncleanness.
When they had vowed they might not marry, and yet not being able to contain,
they have fallen to whoredom; whence they grew to damnable practices, as
Tertull. de veland. virginib. Scit Deus quot tam infantes and perfici et
perduci ad partum integros duxerit, debellatos aliquandiu a matribus, etc. Haec
admittit slagitia coacta and inuita virginitas.
Tertullian in part shows, either to hinder conception, or to mar that
which they had conceived, or if they could not prevent the birth, yet the^ to
strangle and murder the child that was borne. Of the last whereof a notable
example was seen in the time of Gregory Bishop of Rome the first, as P^r^l to^
a^^d (...) V^^^^g (...) ^u^ qu^^a ^ie in ^^is triu^ suum propter pisces
^^^^sset et allata ^^de plus^ua^ six ^^^ll 1 infanium capita videret, ^ut^m 1
mox ductas paenne^tia ^^genitur, and factu^ ^ se de abstinentia de re^^m tat^
cedis causa confesses co^^g^o illu^d paenitentiae fructu purgauit.
Hulderichus the Bishop of Augusta mentions, when out of a poole which the
said Gregory caused to be drawn, there were taken above six thousand infants
skuls or heads, to his great grief at the sight thereof, and great repentance
of the decree that he had made against marriage. So Cyprian makes mention of a
notable abuse of such as professing to be virgins, yet Cypt. lib. 1. ep. 11.
Detectae sunt in eodem lecto pariter mansisse cum masculis.
would lie in bed and sleep with men, still taking upon the^, that they were
not defiled by the^, yea he has written Jde^ de singular. cler. Eunuchi nostri
dubitant sine faeminae sodalitate dormire.
a treatise of purpose against the^, who having vowed single life, yet would
not be without the company and conversation of women, even in their beds, and
were not ashamed by abusing examples of Scripture, to color their lewd course.
He alleges Qua^ti and quales episiopi et clerici noscuntur naufragasse cu^
volunt in naui fragile nauigare.
Bishops and Priests, many, and men of great worth, falling in that sort and by
that occasion. Chrysostom also has written a Sermon of purpose, complaining
Chrysostom. ser. Quod regulares faeminae viris cohabite^t. Deride^t and sales in
nos iactant, etc. vt posthac me^us sit ne virgi^es quidem esse quae sit
praeuar^ari attentent.
that women professing rule of continency, had men dwelling with them, and
affirms, that the behavior of virgins did cause such jests and scorns
amongst the Pagans, as that it were better there should be no virgins any more
to attempt to sin in the like sort. How often do we read Hierome taxing the
exceeding lightness and licentiousness of the Monks and professed virgins of
Rome, noting and reproving Monks for being in such sort with women, as that
Hiero^. a^ Rust ^ videas ^onnullos a mulieribus non posse disce l^re, etc. et
praeter vocabulu^ nupti tru^ omnia effe matrimonij.
save only the name of marriage all things were like as if they were married;
reproving virgins for becoming Ide^ ad Eustoch. vnde sinc nuptijs aliudnocten
vxe^u^? Vnde no^^u^ concubinaru^ genus? Vnde meretrices vniuirae? Eide^ domo,
vno cubiculo, saepe vno tenentur and sectulo and suspiciosos nos vocant si
aliquid existimamus.
wives in name without any wedding, yea terming them plainly concubines and
harlots. They will be (with men) says he, in the same house, in the same
chamber, yea oftentimes in the same bed, and they say we are too suspicious if
we think any thing thereof. So does Bernard report amongst the Clergy of his
time, Bern. de conuer. ad Cler cap. 29. Post fornicationes, post adulteria,
post incestus nec ipsae quidem apud aliquos ignomin^^ passiones desint.
fornications, adulteries, incests, yea and the passions of reproach, as he
calls their acts of Sodomiticall filthiness. Of the persons guilty he says,
J^^d Nec latere queunt prae mulitu ^ine nec prae impudencia quaerunt.
They cannot be hid they are so many, nor care to be hid they are so impudent.
Yea, the gloss of their Canon law before has told us, that few of them were
found free from fornication. Such were even of old the fruits of the unmarried
Clergy, as that some Bishops, as Hierome reports, though after his manner he
speaks of the^ with reproach, would Hieron. aduer vigil. Non (...) dia^onos
nisi prius vxores duxerint.
admit none into holy orders, unless they were first married. By the fruits
therefore it appears, that the vow of single life is no heavenly doctrine, as
M. Bishop calls it, but that it came first from hell, and tends wholly
thither, and that the defenders thereof after so great experience, are such as
S. Paul speaks of, who have their consciences burned with a hot iron, and are
thereby past feeling, and therefore far from spiritual discerning. As for that
which he says, that more filthy lechery would be found by authentical records
in ministers and their wives in this last age, then in their Priests in a
thousand years before, we must take the^ but as the words of an impudent and
shameless harlot, who being notorious and infamous to the world for her
abominable filthiness, yet doubts not to vaunt her self to a chaste and well
reputed matrone to be honester then she. Now M. Bishop persuading himself that
he has said much, when indeed to the purpose he has said little, grows
angry here that M. Perkins should say, that in two respects marriage is better
then virginity; yet only storming at it, he lets it pass, because he has
nothing to say against it. But to anger him a little more, I will say this to
him, that simply and absolutely to speak of the things themselves, marriage is
better the^ virginity. I prove it for that God in the state of man's innocence
and perfection said, Genesis 2.18.
It is not good that the man should be himself alone. That which in the state
of righteousness and innocency was good, is undoubtedly better of it self, the^
that that in that state was not good. Marriage was good in the state of
innocence, single life was not good. Marriage therefore is better the^ single
life. That virginity is become better the^ marriage, it is casual and
accidental, by reason of those evils, and distractions, and troubles, which
came into the world by sin, which should not have bin if there had bin no sin.
Let him take my words as they are, and not cross me with speeches of the
comparison of marriage and single life in the now corrupted state of man. As
touching Iouinian enough has bin said before. Those fathers who accounted
Iouinian for an Epicure and a monster, as M. Bishop says, for making marriage
equal to virginity, when he himself lived an unmarried and a chaste life, if
they had seen the things that have befallen since, would have changed their
mind, and have learned by further experience to reform their error, and to
give the name of Epicures and monsters to them whose doings by the witness of
their own stories have showed them so to be. Who under color of taking part
with those fathers in condemning Iouinian for an heretic, and carrying some
semblance of following them in that behalf, have from the highest of their
votaries to the lowest, made the earth to stink even as high as heaven, with
the abominable corruption and filthiness of their unmarried life. Whereas M.
Perkins says, that if any having the gift of continency do vow single life,
and the same gift remaining does marry, he therein sins, M. Bishop says that
this is flat contrary to his own second rule, which prohibites us to leese our
liberty, and to make that unlawful in conscience, which Christian religion
leaves at liberty. But the contrariety is not in M. Perkins words, but in M.
Bishops understanding. Christian liberty imports not a being free from
performing that which a man has vowed in things indifferent, but only a
freedom from any holy opinion of the thing it self which he has vowed. A man
knows in this case that to marry or not to marry is all one to God, but yet
he will not marry because he has vowed, and God makes him able to perform
his vow. To be short, he might have taken his answer from M. Perkins own words,
that a man is to know, that if he marry, he sins not in marying, but in
causles and unnecessary breaking his vow, when he may keep the same. Which if
he would not have taken from M. Perkins, he might have taken it from S. Austin,
who^ M. Perkins cites to that effect, or whosoever is the author of that book:
Aug de hono viduita. cap. 9. Non ipsa vel talium nuptia da^nandae iudica^tur
sed da^natur fracta voti fides.
The marriages of such are not to be judged damnable, but the breaking of their
vow. Their marriage therefore stands good, as he there disputes, though they
remain culpable for their former vow.

13. W. BISHOP.
Now to supply M. Perkins his default, who was accustomed to rehearse, although
many times untowardly, yet lightly always some reasons for the Catholic
party; which in this question he has wholly omitted, I will briefly prove by
an argument or two, that it is both lawful and very commendable for men and
women of ripe years and consideration, having well tried their own aptness,
to vow virginity, if by good inspirations they be thereunto inwardly called. My
first reason is this, that which is more pleasant and grateful unto God, may
very well be vowed to him, but virginity is more acceptable to God than
marriage. The first proposition is manifest, and has no other exception against
it, but that which before is confuted, to wit, if we be able to perform it.
The second is denied by them, which we prove in express terms out of Saint
Paul, 1. Cor. 7.
He that joins his virgin does well, but he that joins her not, does
better: and again of widows: They shall be more happy by Saint Paul's
judgment, if they remain unmarried: This may be confirmed out of Esaias, Isa.
56.
Where God promises the Eunuch that holds greatly of the thing that pleases
him, that he will give him in his household and within his walls a better
heritage and name, then if they had been called sons and daughters. I will
(says God) give them an everlasting name. And also out of the book of
Wisdom, Cap. 3.
Blessed is the Eunuch which has wrought no unrighteousness, etc. for unto
him shall be given the special gift of faith, and the most acceptable portion
in our Lords temple, for glorious is the fruit of God. Which is also plainly
taught in the Revelations, Reu. 14.
where it is said, that no man could sing that song but 144000. and the cause
is set down, These be they which have not been defiled with women, for they
are Virgins. To these latter places, M. P. answers, page 241. that to the
Eunuch is promised a greater reward: but, not because of his chastity, but
because he keeps the Lords Sabbath and covenant. But this is said
unadvisedly; for to all others that keep Gods commandments, shall be given a
heavenly reward: but why shall they have a better heritage, and more acceptable
portion then others, but because of their special prerogative of chastity?

M. P. then answers otherwise here: that the single life is better and more
happy, because it is freer from common cares of this life, and yields us
more bodily ease and liberty to serve God. But 1200. years ago S. Augustine of
set purpose confuted this error in sundry places of his learned Works,
specially in his treatise, De Virginitate, in these Chapters 13. 23. 24. 25.
where he accounts him no Christian that does co^tradict Christ promising the
kingdom of heaven to Eunuchs. Mat. 19.
And in the 25. Chapter more vehemently exclaiming: O impious blindness, why
do thou cavil and seek shifts? why do thou promise temporal commodity
only to the chaste and continent: when God says, Esa. 16.
I will give them an everlasting name. And if thou would perhaps take this
everlasting for a thing of long continuance, I add, inculcate, and often
repeat, that it shall never have end. What would thou more? This eternal
name, whatsoever it be, signifies a certain peculiar and excellent glory,
which shall not be common to many, albeit they be placed in the same kingdom,
etc. Which in the 29. Chapter he confirms out of that place of the
Apocalypse, cited above in these words: The rest of the faithful shall see
you, and not envy your state, but joy in it, and so be partaker of that in
you, which they have not in themselves: for the new song which is proper unto
you they cannot sing, but shall hear it, and be delighted with your so
excellent a blessedness: but you, because you shall both sing and hear it,
shall more happily rejoice and reign more pleasantly. Which may be also
confirmed out of the Apostle in the same place: where he assures that the
single life is better for the service of God, saying; that a woman unmarried
and a virgin, think of the things which belong unto our Lord; how she may
please God, and be holy both in body and spirit. And our blessed Savior
teaches, Math 19.
That some become Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven: which, to be taken there
properly for the reward in heaven. S. Augustine (with the rest of the Fathers)
teaches: De virginit. cap. 23.
What could be spoken more truly or more perspicuously? Christ says, The truth
says, the wisdom of God affirms them to geld themselves for the kingdom
of heaven, who do of a godly determination refrain from marriage: And
contrarily, humane vanity does contend by impious temerity, that they who do
so, do it to avoid the necessary troubles of matrimony, and that in the
kingdom of heaven they shall have no more then other men.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop here takes upon him to prove the vow of virginity to be lawful,
but yet we see it is with certain cautions and conditions to be therein
observed. First he will have them to be of ripe years and consideration, and
well to try their own aptness. Secondly, it is lawful, if by good
inspirations they be thereunto inwardly called. But put the case that these
cautions be not observed, that some vow rashly and unadvisedly, without trial
of their own aptness, and without any good inspirations calling them to it, or
having upon some trial judged themselves apt, yet afterward find it
otherwise, what shall they do, not being now able to keep that which they have
vowed? Marry let them sink or swim, let them burn till they be consumed, let
them be brothels and harlots, and what they will, they have vowed, and they must
stand to it, but marry they must not. As for that which he says of good
inspirations inwardly calling them, it is a mere begging of the question. We
deny that there are any good inspirations inwardly calling to that which we are
not outwardly taught by the inspired word of God. The spirit and word of God go
jointly together, and where the word gives us not warrant and direction for
that we do, they are illusions and not inspirations, by which we are led. Now
of vowing virginity or single life, the word of God has neither precept nor
example. All exercises of true righteousness we find amongst the people of the
Jews; we find amongst them all the spiritual intendments and significations
of their ceremonial vows; but of this vow of single life and virginity we
find nothing, save only amongst their sectaries in the corruption of their
state and religion, as namely the Pharisees, who for one of their exercises of
great holiness, Epiphan. haer. 16. Quida^ eoru^ cum se exercebant,
praescribehant sibi decennium aut octennium aut quadriennium virginitatis and
continentiae.
vowed continency and virginity, sometimes for ten years, sometimes for six
or for four years, as Epiphanius reports of them. But yet M. Bishops
argument will put the matter wholly out of doubt. That, says he, which is more
pleasant and grateful to God may be vowed unto God, but virginity is more
acceptable to God then marriage; therefore it may be vowed. He names an
exception to the first proposition, if we be able to perform it, and says
that it is before confuted, but his confutation comes too short, and it still
stands good, that continency is a thing whereof we cannot promise the ability
to our selves, and therefore cannot make any lawful vow thereof. But letting
that pass, let us examine the proofs of his minor proposition, that virginity
is more acceptable to God then marriage. He brings first the words of S. Paul,
1. Cor. 7.38.
He that ioineth his virgin in marriage, does well, but he that ioineth her not,
does better, and concerning the widow: Ver. 40.
she shall be more blessed if she so abide in my judgment. We hear the words,
but yet we see not any proof therein of that which M. Bishop would prove by
them. We know that liberty is better and more blessed then bondage, and yet
liberty is not more acceptable to God then bondage, or the freeman then the
bondsman. Act. 20.35.
It is a more blessed thing, as our Savior says, to give then to receive, and
yet it follows not, that he that gives is more acceptable to God, or more
blessed with God then he that receives. S. Paul himself gives us to
understand in what respects he means better and more blessed. First when he
says, Ver. 26.
It is good for the present necessity, that marriage be forborne by them that
can forbear. Hieron cont. Heluid. sub fine^. Quae est ista necessitas? Vae
praegnantibus and lactentibus in die illa. Jdeo sylua succressit vt postea
recidatur. Ideo ager seritur vt metatur. Iam plenus est orbis, terra nos non
capit. Quotidie bella nos secant, morbi subtrahunt, naufragia absorbent, etc.
What is this necessity, says Hierome? Woe, says he, to them that be with
child, and to them that give suck in that day. Therefore the wood grows that
it may afterward be cut down. Therefore is the field sowed that it may
afterward be reaped. The world is full, the earth contains us not, wars
are still hewing us down, diseases take us away, shipwrackes swallow us up. He
gives hereby to understand, that the Apostle means this necessity of the
troubles that are incident to the faithful, by persecutions and other temporal
calamities, the bearing whereof is so much the more easy, by how much the less
a man is distressed and distracted with care of wife and children, and has
thereby no hinderance, but that either by life or by death he may freely do that
that shall be according to God. Again, to signify his meaning the Apostle
further says: Ver. 28.
The married shall have tribulation in the flesh, but I spare you. Ver. 32.
I would have you to be without care. The unmarried cares for the things of the
Lord, how he may please the Lord: but the married cares for the things of the
world how he may please his wife. Ver. 35.
I speak for your commodity, that ye may cleave to the Lord without
separation. By all which words the Apostle imports that there are many cares
and distractions incident to marriage, whereby a man is holden to the respect of
the things of this life and of the world, that he cannot so wholly addict
himself to God. From these distractions single life, if a man will so use it,
is more free, and gives a man full liberty of applying himself entirely to
those things wherein consists the seeking of the kingdom of heaven. Thus
therefore single life is better and more blessed, because there is in it
greater opportunity of following those good things wherein consists the
attainment of eternal bliss. Thus the father does better, that continues his
daughter being so willing unmarried, because he leaves her at full liberty to
bestow her self to the Lords use. Thus the widow is more blessed if she so
abide, because she is more free to serve the Lord. But M. Bishop tells us,
that twelve hundred years ago, S. Austine of set purpose confuted this error,
and specially in his Treatise de Virginitate, whence he names sundry chapters
13. 23. 24 25. Where it appears that M. Bishop neither understands what we
say, nor what it is that S. Austin confuteth: S. Austines speech his against
the Aug. de sanct. Virgiuit. cap. 13. Qui putant continentiae bonum non esse
necessarium propter regnum coeloru^, sed propter praesens seculum, quod
scilicet ceniugid terrenis curis pluribus atque arctioribus distenduntur, qua
molestia virgins and continentes carent.
who think that the benefit of continency is not needful for the kingdom
of heaven, but only for this present world, because marriage is distracted with
many earthly and troublesome cares, the encumbrance whereof virgins and
continent persons do avoid: in a word, as afterward he expresses it, that
Ibid. cap. 24. Praesenti vitae v^le esse, non futurae.
it is profitable for this life, not for the life to come. Now when we say that
single life where the gift of continency is, is more helpful and yields
greater opportunity to the service of God, do we make it profitable for this
life only, and not for the life to come? Has the service of God a reference
only to this world, and do we follow Christ only for a benefit in this life?
Indeed we should be far wide if we thought that the end to which the Apostle
drives, should be an idie, and voluptuous life, but we determine that the
preferment of continency and single life so concerns this present life, as
that it specially respects eternal life. We reckon not of the preferment
thereof in respect of this life, but all the account that we make of it is in
respect of the life to come, knowing that by how much the more industriously
and incessantly we apply our selves to the work of God, so much the greater
reward of glory we shall have with him, not by reason of any merit or
desert, but by the heavenly disposition of that voluntary grace and mercy
which has promised, that 1. Cor. 15.58.
our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, because Cap. 3.8.
every man shall have his wages according to his work. S. Austin therefore in
confuting them that say, that the benefit of continency is only for this
life, says nothing against us. He accou^teth him no Christian, says M.
Bishop, that does contradict Christ, promising the kingdom of heaven to
Eunuchs. Though those be no words of Austin, yet we will ask him, for what
Christ does promise them the kingdom of heaven? Does he promise it to them for
being Eunuchs? Surely then many should come to the kingdom of heaven who
never had any belief thereof. It is not then their being Eunuchs that Christ
respects, but their more earnest seeking the kingdom of heaven. And thus the
other sentences which he alleges out of Austin, in the maine drift of the^
contrary nothing that we say: only in two respects we differ from him and he
from us. First, we hold the texts of Scripture which he brings to be very
insufficient for the proof of that which he inte^deth. For the words of the
Prophet Esaias are not spoken of Eunuchs, as for following some special kind of
life in the Church, but for embracing the common faith and religion of the
Church, and are properly referred to them who properly and truly are called
Eunuchs. M. Bishop to make them serve his turn, falsifieth and corrupts
them, the text being in this sort, Esa. 56:3.
Let not the son of the stranger which is joined to the Lord speak and say,
The Lord has surely separated me from his people, neither let the Eunuch say,
Behold I am a dry tree: for thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep
my Sabboths, and choose the thing that pleases me, and take hold of my
covenant, even unto them I will give in mine house and within my walls, a place
and a name better then of sons and daughters (or otherwise, better then to
the sons and daughters:) I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be
put out. Which words and the rest that follow, do manifestly tend to take away
from them of whom he speaks, all opinion of separation from the people of
God, or of being excluded from having name and portion in his house. The
Gentiles were Ephesians. 2.12.
aliens and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, and thereby strangers
from the covenants of promise, but God gives to understand, that in Christ
this difference shall be taken away, and whosoever of the Gentiles shall cleave
to the Lord and embrace his covenant, their prayers shall be acceptable unto
him, and they shall have like place in the house of God. Again, God gave it as
one part of his blessing unto Abraham, that Genesis 22.17.
his seed should be multiplied, and as one branch of that blessing, he
promised unto the seed of Abraham, Deuteronomy. 7.12.14
If they should hearken unto his laws and observe them, they should be blessed
above all people, and there should be neither male nor female barren amongst
the^. Wherefore to be barren and without children, was with them a matter of
much sorrow and shame, and as a token of not being beloved of God, but Cyril. in
Esa. lib. 5. com. 3. Gloria eorum in par^ubus and parturitionibus and
conceptionibus.
their glory, as Cyril cites, was in birthes and bringing forth and
conceiving. Now upon the Eunuch or gelded man the law of Moses had laid it as a
matter of curse and reproach, that Deuteronomy 23.1.
he should not come into the congregation of the Lord, he should have no place
amongst them in their assemblies which were sacred and holy to the Lord. This
therefore might seem to stand still as a bar against such, from being reckened
amo^ngst the people of God; but God signifies, that in Christ this bar also
should be taken away. Cyril expounds the words thus, Cyril vt supra. Siquis
sit Eu^uchus, id est, careus liberis and sobole, ne dicat apud seipsum, ego sum
lignum aridum, id est, ne moleste ferat orbitatem. Apud Deu^ enim nihil est,
nec eum veijciet.
If any man be an Eunuch, that is, wanting children and issue, let him not say
with himself, I am a dry tree, that is, let him not take grievously his being
deprived thereof. For with God this is nothing, neither will he for that cause
reject him. He says indeed afterward, Jbid. Nihil etiam nocet imo necesse
esse dico, vt mentionem faciamus nunc eorum qui se propter regnum coel^rum
Eunuchos reddiderun^, quibus cratio ae Deo hoc loco habita non abire
acco^modari potest.
It is not hurtful, yea it is necessary, I say, that we here make mention of
the^ who have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven, to whom the
speech here used by God may, not impertinently, be applied, but he plainly
enough imports, that the proper construction of the words is that that he
has before delivered. God therefore wills the Eunuch, not to account
himself a dry tree, as not Psalm. 91.12.
to be planted in the house of God, and as being deprived of the blessing of
the people of God, but to know, that howsoever there lay upon him a note of
exclusion by the Law, yet now if he would join himself in faith and religion
to the people of God, he should be altogether as one of the^, and howsoever his
name might seem to die for want of sons and daughters, yet he should have a
name better then the name of sons and daughters, even an everlasting name,
which shall never be put out, but be glorious with God for ever. Men joy much in
the continuance of their name by their issue and posterity, by sons and
daughters, but to be named amongst the people of God and called one of his, is
a far greater name then the name of many sons and daughters. Otherwise if
we read it a better name then to the sons and daughter, it has reference to
the people of the Jews, who for being of the seed of Abraham, were peculiarly
reckoned for the children, for sons and daughters. Thus is it said of them by
our Savior Christ: Mat. 8.12.
The children of the kingdom shall be cast out: and again: Cap. 15.26.
It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs. Therefore
he gives to understand, that the Eunuch by being the child of God, through the
faith of Jesus Christ has a more glorious name, then if he were named of
Abraham's seed, in the title whereof the Jews so proudly and vainly rejoiced.
In a word, the maine drift of the Prophets words generally of strangers, and
particularly of Eunuchs, is to signify in Christ the pulling down of the
whole Ephesians. 2.14.
partition wall of all legal separations, that we should know there is an end
of those differences and uncleannesses which the law imputed, and that now Gal.
3.28.
there is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male or female, (no difference
of maimed or whole) but all are one in Christ Jesus, and Act. 10.35.
in every nation (and of every sort of men) he that fears God and works
righteousness is accepted with him. This is the true and proper effect and
meaning of that place, neither can it without wresting and violence be
expounded of Eunuchs in that sense as S. Austin speaks of the^. And whereas S.
Austin so takes the words, as that God should give to these Eunuchs a better
name then to sons and daughters, which to express M. Bishop translateth very
falsely and corruptly a better name then if they had been called sons or
daughters, as making the name of sons and daughters an inferior name to that
that should be given to Eunuchs, it is altogether improbable and unlikely which
he conceiueth. The name of sons and daughters is the common name of all the
faithful, and not a name of meaner quality belonging only to some inferior
sort. Thus says God concerning all his people: 2. Cor. 6.17.
Come out from amongst them, and separate your selves, and touch no unclean
thing, says the Lord, and I will receive you, and I will be a father unto you,
and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord almighty. S. Austin
then might not say, that the Eunuchs should receive a better name then the
name of sons and daughters, because the highest honor that God gives to
the^ who touch no unclean thing, is to receive them for sons and daughters.
Therefore Clemens Alexandrinus not understanding the words of any special
place above the sons and daughters, but of a pre-eminence above them, who for
not doing the things there specified, are rejected from being sons and
daughters, says; Clem. Alexan. Serom. lib. 3. Si verbo obedierit Eunuchus, et
sab bata custodierit per abstinentiam a peccatis, and fecerit mandata,
honorabilior erit ijs qui absquerecta vitae institutione solo verbo erudiuntur.
If the Eunuch obey the word, and keep the Sabboths by abstaining from sin,
and fulfill the commandments, he shall be more honorable then they who without
ordering their life and conversation aright, are only taught and instructed by
the word. Another place S. Austine alleges to his purpose out of the
Revelation of S. John, where he sets down his vision of Revel. 14.1.
a Lamb standing upon mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four
thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads. Of them it is
said anon after, Verse. 4.
These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins: these
follow the Lamb whither so ever he goes; these are bought from men, being the
first fruits unto God and to the Lamb. In the applying of which place to
virgins according to the flesh, we cannot but find a great want of that
circumspection and judgment which S. Austin is wont to use, and take him to
have been much blinded and carried away with preiudicate and partial affection,
that could not discern his own error therein. Surely it is no light token of
vnheedinesse, that he reckeneth all to be defiled with women that are not
corporally virgins. What, shall we hold the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the
Apostles to be defiled with women because they were married men? Would he
account that a defilement which the holy Ghost pronounces to be Heb. 13.4.
an undefiled bed? Again, it is to be noted that of these hundred forty and
four thousand, it is said before that they were Revel. 7.4.
sealed of all the tribes of the children of Israel. The numbers accord, and so
Origin. in Exo. hom. 1. Ex singulis tribubus duodexa milliae, etc. qui se cum
multeribus non comquinauerint, sed virgins permanserint.
Origin refers them both to one, and if Origin will not serve, M. Bishops
masters of Rhem. Test. Annot. Revel. 14.1.
Rhemes acknowledge as much, giving a marginall note thus: Christ and the same
number of elect that were signed Chapt. 7. Now how could Austine understand
virgins according to the flesh amongst the tribes of Israel, amongst whom there
never was any such profession of virginity? Therefore as touching this place
we will oppose Ambrose against Austixe, who expounding the words of S. Paul: 2.
Cor. 11.2.
I have prepared you for one husband to present you a pure virgin to Christ,
says thus: Ambr. in 2. Co. cap. 11. Virgins vult eos esse in fide, vnde and
corruptores fidei zelatur ab his vt in die iudicij incontaminatos eos assignet
iudici Christo. Hinc est vnde in Apocalypsi Ioannis legitur, Hi sunt, inquit,
qui cum mulieribus non sunt coinquina^: virgins enim pernianserunt. Hi
sequuntur agnum quocunque ^erit. In mulieribus errorem significauit, quia error
per mulierem coepit, sicut and Iezabel mulurem dicit propter vxorem Achab quae
zelo Baal Dei Prophetas occidit: cum intelligatur idololatria qua corrumpuntur
mores and fidei veritas. Nam si mulieres mulieres intelligas, vt ideo putes
virgins dictas quia corpora sua intaminata seruauerunt, excludis ab hac gloria
sanctos, quia omnes Apostoli exceptis Ioanne and Paulo vxores habueru^t
He will have them to be virgins in the faith; by reason whereof he is jealous
in their behalf of corrupters of the faith, that he may at the day of
judgment present them undefiled unto Christ the Judge. Hence is it that we
read in the Revelation of S. John, These are they that have not defiled
themselves with women, for they are virgins, etc. By women he signifies error,
because error began by the woman, even as he names the woman Iezabel (chap.
2.20.) because of Ahabs wife, who in zeal of Baal slew the Prophets of the
Lord: whereas he means idolatry wherewith the manners of men and true faith
are corrupted. For if we understand women of women indeed, so that therefore we
think them to be called virgins, because they kept their bodies untouched, we
exclude the Saints from this glory, because all the Apostles except Paul and
John had wives. Thus S. Ambrose expressly and by good reason rejects that
exposition of S. Austine, and shows that virginity in that place is not
corporally to be understood, but spiritually, of being free from the corruption
of heresy and idolatry, the entisements whereof are like the entisements and
allurements of harlots, in which respect the city of Antichrist is called Reu.
17.1.2.
the whore of Babylon with whom the kings and nations of the earth commit
whoredom and fornication, and therefore they that hearken to such entisements,
and break their faith to God, they are said to be defiled with women,
according to the phrase that Moses often uses of Leuit. 20.5.
going a whoring after other Gods. As on the other side Orig. in Leuit. hom.
12. Anima fidei simplicitate and puritate actuum incorrupta probatur and virgo.
by synceritie of faith and purity of conversation, the soul (says Origin)
is approved for a virgin and vncorrupt. So the author of the Commentaries upon
the Revelation which go under S. Austins name, expounds the name of Virgins
in the same place to import Aug. in Apoc. hom. 11. Virgins hoc loco non solum
corpore castos intelligamus, sed maxim omnem Ecclesiam quae fidem puram tenet,
sicut dicit Apost^lus: Desponsaui vos, etc. nulla haeriticorum adulterina
commixtio^e pollutam, nec in male blandi^ and mortiferis huius mundi
voluptatibus vsque ad exitum vitae suae absque remedio poenitentiae infoelici
perseuerantia colligatam.
not such only as are chaste in body, but rather or specially every Church which
keeps or holds pure faith, not polluted with the adulterous commixtion of
heretics, nor unhappily continuing to the end without repentance in the
dangerously flattering and deadly pleasures of this world, and cites the place
before mentioned to the Corinthians for declaration thereof. Thus we dissent
then from Austin as touching the application of those places of Scripture which
he alleges to his purpose, and the reader may perceive, that it is not
without cause that we so do. Another thing wherein we cannot accord with him
is, that he assigns unto virgins a special glory peculiar to themselves, and
eminent above all others, which under correction of so learned a father, we
hold to be a very fabulous and vain conceit. For although virginity and
single life do yield the opportunity of greater reward by giving liberty of
greater work, yet it follows not, that they have any thing so appropriated
unto the^, but that in married estate they that do the like work may rest in
expectation of the like reward. The portion of all that Gal. 3.9.
are of the faith, is to be blessed with faithful Abraham, Luk 16.22.
to be carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, Mat. 8.11.
to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God.
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob were married men, and therefore virgins shall have
their place all one with those that have been married. Our Savior Christ told
his Apostles, who all save John were married, that Mat. 19.28.
they should sit upon twelve seats to judge the twelve tribes of Israel. He
gave them seats indifferently; he gave not John a special seat higher then
all the rest, and shall we think that other virgins shall have seats above
all them? They are mentioned as having Re^. 21.14.
their names written alike upon the twelve foundations of the Church, and shall
we say, that one of their names was written in letters of gold, and all the
rest with ink? Moses a married man, and Elias a virgin Luke 9.31.
appeared with Christ not in any diverse, but both in the same glory. Therefore
Ignatius a virgin also says of himself, Ignat. ad Philadelph. Opio dignus Deo
inue^tus ad vestigia eorum (qui nuptijs operam dederunt) in regno mutuirit
stiut Abraham, and Jsaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and Esatae, and alioru^
Prophetarum: si^ut Petri and Pauli, and alicru^ Apostolorum qui nuptijs opera^
dederunt.
I wish being found worthy of God, to be found in Gods kingdom at the feet of
them that were married, as of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Esaias and the other
Prophets, as of Peter and Paul (mark that he reckons Paul for a married man)
and other the Apostles who were married men. In a word, it was but S. Austins
too great opinion of virginity in the flesh, that made him without any good
grounds to entertain that conceit of some different and special glory in
name thereof to be assigned unto virgins. Truth says, the wisdom of God
says, that they who of religious purpose do forbear marriage, and use the gift
of continency, do make themselves chaste for the kingdom of heaven, but truth
does not say, neither does the wisdom of God say, that in name of virginity or
continency they have greater reward then others, but only as they use the same
more earnestly to seek the kingdom of heaven, which if the married do alike
as they, they shall have reward alike. But says M. Bishop, the Apostle
assures that single life is better for the service of God. And what? had not
M. Perkins said so much to him, and do not we say the same? but we add, that
it is better and more commodious where the gift of continency is, but where
the gift of continency is not, there marriage is much better for the service
of God. Again we say, it is most commonly, not always so, for Chrysostom. in 1.
Tim. hom. 10. Ita assum possunt nuptiae vt perfectiori vitae impedimento non
sint.
marriage (says Chrysostom) may be so taken, as that it shall be no hinderance
to perfect life; even as the Ecclesiastical history says of Spiridion a
bishop, that Soz omen. li 1. cap. 11. Vxorem habebat, and liberos, non tamen
propterea res diuinas neglige^tius obijt. (...).
he had wife and children, and was thereby no whit the worse about things
pertaining to God. As for the words which he cites out of the book of Wisdom,
beside that they are no canonical Scripture they make nothing for him. They are
an allusion to the words of Esaias, and only signify that to the Eunuch that
works righteousness, shall be given that excellent gift that belongs unto
faith, and a portion or state in the Lords temple, which is a thing acceptable
and blessed above all things, and that Psalm. 27.4.
one thing above all things to be desired, but as touching comparison of
portions in the house of God, it intends nothing.

14. W. BISHOP.
Secondly, all the Protestants doctrine for marriage, and against vows, is
notably confuted by S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5.
where he says: That there were then certain widows, who when they waxed
wanton against Christ, would marry, having damnation (says he) because they
made void and cast away their first faith: which was as S. Augustine De sanct.
vir. cap. 23.
and the rest of the Fathers expound it, they had vowed continency, but would
not perform it.

Now these young widows (if the Protestants doctrine were true) not having the
gift of continency, did very well to marry, and were in no sort bound to keep
their vows, which was not in their power: but the Apostle does not acquit them
of their vow, but teaches that they were bound to keep it in that he
pronounces damnation to them if they marry.

R. ABBOT.
To all that is here said I have fully answered before in the 7. Sectio^. The
Protestants indeed say, and they make it good, that those yo^g widows not
having the gift of continency, did well to marry, and were by the Apostle
willed to marry, lest happily any of them should by waxing wanton against
Christ, fall into the like damnation as some other had done. An impious and
devilish tyranny it is, when any have vowed rashly that that is not in their
power, to tie them to their vow, and so to cause them by filthy lust and
uncleanness to run into damnation, who by repentance of their unadvised
rashness and using the remedy ordained by God, should keep themselves in
pureness and peace of conscience to salvation.

15. W. BISHOP.
Thirdly, the example of our heavenly Savior, who would never marry: and of
the blessed Virgin Saint Mary, who Aug cap. 44. de virg. Bed. 1. Luc.
vowed perpetual virginity: and of the glorious Apostles, who as S. Hierome
witnesses, Clem. Alex: lib. 3. Strom. lib. 1. contra Iouin. In Apol. 2. ad
Aut. Tertul. apol. 2. cap. 9.
were in part Virgins; and all after their following of Christ, abstained from
the company of their wives. And of the best Christians in the purest
antiquity, who, as Justinius one of the auncientest Greek Authors among
Christians; and Tertullian his peer among the Latins, do testify, * did live
perpetual virgins.

Out of these examples, we frame this argument.

Our Captains and ringleaders, who knew well which was the best way, and
whose examples we are to follow as near as we can, vowing Virginity, we must
needs esteem that state for more perfect specially, when as the single man
cares only how to please God, and to be holy in body and mind (as the Apostle
writes) when as the married are choked with cares of this world. And unless a
man had made a league with hell, or were as blind as a beetle, how can he ever
persuade himself, that to wallow in fleshly pleasure, and satisfying of the
beastly appetites, is as grateful to God, as to conquer and subdue them by
Fasting and Prayer?

Finally, if Saint Paul give counsel to the married, to contain during the
time of Prayer 1. Cor. 7.
Priests and religious (that must always be in a readiness to minister the
Sacraments, and to think upon such things as belong unto our Lord) are
therefore upon a great consideration bound to perpetual chastity.

R. ABBOT.
To the first of these instances Clemens Alexandrinus answered long since, when
by heretics it was used as M. Bishop now uses it against marriage. Clem.
Alexan. Strom lib. 3. Dicunt gloriosi isti iactatores se Dominum imitari, qui
neque vxore^ duxit, etc. Nesciu^t causam cur Dominus vxore^ non duxerit. Primum
quidem sponsam habuit Ecclesia^ Deind^ vero nec homo erat communis vt opus
haberet etiam adiutore aliquo secundum carnem. Neque erat ei necesse procreare
filios qui manet in aeternu^, and natus est solus Dei filius.
These glorious braggers (says he concerning those heretics) tell us that
they follow the Lord who married no wife, nor possessed any thing in the world.
He answers: They know not the cause why Christ married not. First he was to
have the Church to be his proper spouse. Secondly, he was no common man that he
should need a helper according to the flesh. Again, it was not needful for
him to beget children who abides himself for ever, and is borne the only
Son of God. If M. Bishops wits had not greatly failed him, he would not have
brought the name of our Savior Christ into this question. We know that the
incarnation of the Son of God was a matter of divine dispensation, and directed
to special and certain ends and uses, and the marriage of a wife came not
within any compass thereof. Yet he would honor marriage by vouchsafing to be
borne in married estate, by choosing his Apostles almost all married men, by
being present at a marriage, and gracing the same with a special miracle, by
affirming the conjunction of marriage to be of God, and the bond thereof to be
inviolable. His second instance is of the Virgin Mary, who he says, vowed
perpetual virginity: but that is false, neither is there any ground or any
probability that she did so. He alleges S. Austin for proof thereof, but S.
Austins name is not sufficient, unless we have somewhat else to build upon.
The Angel declared unto Mary, that Christ should be borne of her: she asks,
Luke 1.34.
How shall this be seeing I knew not a man? This he says imported, that she
had vowed virginity, Aug. de sanct. Virg. cap 4. Non quaesisset promissum sibi
filium, quomodo foemina paritura esset si concubitura nupsisset.
because she would not have asked how she being a woman, should bring forth a
son being promised unto her, if she had intended by marriage to have company
with Joseph? But S. Austin here preiudicateth himself, in that he
acknowledges, that Ibid. Hoc Israelitaru^ mores adhuc recusaba^t
the manner or custom of the Jews did not then bear this vow: which being
true, how should we think that she should before hand grow into the opinion or
conceit of such a vow. Again, how improbable is it, that having vowed
virginity, she would betroth her self in marriage, when as amongst that people
it was accounted a matter of so great reproach to faithful women, to die
without issue, which she knew not then should in virginity befall her?
Moreover how unlikely is it, that having vowed virginity she would put her
self under 1. Cor. 7.4.
the power of a husband, unless it could be proved, which cannot, that Joseph
had vowed continency as well as she? Surely it cannot be doubted, but that in
sooth and simplicity at the first they intended their marriage according to the
usual manner of other faithful and godly persons. As for the reason that S.
Austine gives it is insufficient, because there might be cause of asking that
question without any intedement of such a vow. Thereof let M. Bishop be
informed by S. Ambrose who makes this the cause, Ambr. in Luc. 1. A^cipe
inquit signum tibi, E ce virg^t^ vt^s, etc. Legerat hoc M ria^dco credidit
suturum: sed qu^ modo si^ret ante no^ legerat Non enim quemaedmodum fi^ret
velianto Prophetae fuerat reuel^um.
The Prophet says, Take unto thee a sign: Behold a virgin shall conceive, and
shall bring forth a child. This Mary had read, and therefore she believed that
it should come to pass, but how it should be she had not read. For to so great
a Prophet it was not reueiled how it should be. Mary then knew well that she was
not to conceive him of whom the Angel spoke by the knowledge of man, and
therefore asks how it should be otherwise, seeing it should not be that way?
but as touching vowing virginity there is nothing here meant. M. Bishops third
example is of the Apostles, of which he says, part were virgins: but knowing
well that that part was a very small part, for there are none of them said to
have been virgins, but only Paul and John. And yet concerning Paul albeit some
say, that he was never married, as I alleged before out of Ambrose, yet some of
the more ancient affirm, that he was married, as namely we have seen Ignatius
Sect. 13.
before reckoning him amongst married men. So does also Clemens Alexandrinus
say, that Clem Alexan. Sirom lib. 3. Paulus certe non veretur in quadain
Epist^la suam appellare coniugem, quam non circumserebat quod no magno eiopus
esset ministerio.
Paul is not abashed in one of his Epistles to speak to his wife, which he did
not lead about with him, because he needed not much to be ministered unto. The
words which he means are to the Philippians: Phil. 4.3.
I beseech thee faithful yoke fellow help those women which labored with me
in the Gospel. It is true, that in respect of that power that he had of
himself for containing, he says: 1 Cor. 7.7.
I would that all men were even as I my self am, but these authors (as we see)
have holden that for no necessary proof, but that Paul might be married also
as the rest were. Yea but all of them (says M. Bishop) after their following
of Christ abstained from the company of their wives. But that is more then
Master Bishop can prove, yea Clemens Alexandrinus against those Heretics
before mentioned condemning marriage, asks thus: Clem. Alex. vt supra. An
etiam Apostolos reproba^i? Petrusenim and Philippus filio^ procrearu^t:
Philiopus autem filias quoque suas viris tradidit.
Do they also reject the Apostles? For Peter and Philip begat children, and
Philip bestowed his daughters to husbands. And this of Peter is confirmed by
the legend of the Roman Church, which amongst many notable lies and
counterfeit stories lighted no doubt upon some truth. The Legend records that
Peter had a daughter named from his own name given him in his Apostleship,
Petronella, which in the time of the persecution by Domitian the Emperor, was
much desired by Flaccus a noble man, and thereby appears to have been then
but young, whereas if she were not born after the time that Peter was an
Apostle, she must needs be above threescore years old, it being no less from
the time that Peter was called, to the time of that persecution. And to give
the more likelihood hereof, we find it certain that Peter led his wife with
him from place to place where he preached, as did also other of the Apostles,
whereof the Apostle S. Paul speaks manifestly: 1. Cor. 9.5.
Have we not power to lead about a sister being a wife, as well as the rest of
the Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord and Cephas? M. Bishop will say he
meant it not of wives, but of other devout women: as though it were not more
likely, that the Apostles having wives should lead about their own wives
rather then strange women. Yea and the words of the Apostle convict it so to be
understood, who would not be absurd in speech, to say a sister being a woman,
and therefore must needs be taken to say a sister being a wife: and therefore
they that take it otherwise are feign to falsify and misplace the Apostles
words as the vulgar Latin does. And whereas they are wont to say that those
devout women should go about with the Apostles to minister unto the^ of their
substance, as some did to our Savior Christ, it cannot be the meaning of the
Apostle here, because he speaks here of a power whereby he might burden the
Church with himself and his: but the going about of such women with the^ had
been the disburdening of the Church. Yea and such women should have bin said to
have followed them, not to be led about by the^, neither would the Apostle have
spoken singly as of one, because it could not but have caused suspision and
obloquy, to go one with one, save only with their own wives. And thus Clemens
Alexandrinus in the place before cited understands it of the Apostles wives,
and shows the cause why the Apostles took the^ with them, Clem. Strom. lib 3
Ministraturae apud mulieres quae ^^mos custo^tebant. per quas etiam in
gynaecaeum alsque reprehensione malaue suspitione ingredi posset doctrina Domini
to minister to women which kept the houses, and that by them the doctrine of
the Lord without reproof or evil suspicion might enter into the closets of
women. This was the special cause of their leading the^ about, and in that
respect Clement says, that Jbid. Non vt vxores, sed vt soreres circumducebant.
they led them not as wives but as sisters, not in regard that they were wives
only, but for that they were also sisters in the faith of Christ, and in the
hope of the Gospel, and thereby meet for that use, which was the thing
properly intended in the leading of them. But hereby he shows, that certain
it is, that the Apostles led their wives about with the^, and so namely the
Apostle S. Peter, of whom he has before said as we have heard, that he also
begat children: and when afterward his wife was put to death for the faith of
Christ, he was there present, as the same Clement also testifies in another
place, and did Idem Sirom. lib. 7. Cum vides. sei vxorem su^a duci ad mortem,
etc. exhortanis and consolando proprio nomine eam compellans dixit: Heus tu,
memento Domini. Tale erat beatorum matrimonium, and vsque adamiciss^ma perfecta
affectio. Vide Eusebius. hist. lib ^. cap. 27.
exhort and comfort her, and calling to her, said: O wife remember the Lord
Jesus. Such (says he) was the marriage of such blessed persons, and their
perfect affection, even to the greatest amity. Now last of all M. Bishop for
example names the best Christians in the purest antiquity living perpetual
virgins: he cites for it Justin Martyr and Tertullian, when he takes it
indeed from the fantastical dream of his own idle head. Of the best Christians
neither of them says a word, only they say that some did live virgins and
unmarried amongst the^, to show how far they were from the fornications and
incests, which were usually practiced amongst the Pagans. Justin having said,
that by the doctrine of Christ he that looks upon a woman to lust after her,
has committed adultery with her in his heart, and that not only the
committing of adultery, but also the will and desire thereof makes a man
rejected of him, infers these words: Just. Apol. 2. (...).
Surely many with us both men and women of threescore or seventy years, who
from their childhood have learned the doctrine of Christ, do continue
vncorrupt, and I glory that in all sorts of our men I can show such. The
Translator to vncorrupt, has added coelibes, unmarried, but there is no reason
by the words of Justin to understand any thing else, but that they kept
themselves vncorrupt from fornication and uncleanness, which it was hard to
find, that any amongst the Pagans to such years had done. But yet of that I
will not contend: only I say, that taking the words of unmarried persons, here
is nothing said that either they were the best, or better the^ any other. No
more is there in the words of Tertullian, who taxing the fornications and
incestuous filthiness of the Pagans, says: Tertul. Apolo. cap. 8. cap. 9. Nos
ab ifto euentu diligentissima and fidelissima castitas sepsit. quantumcun^ a
flupris and omni post matrimoniu^ excessu, tantum and ab incesti casu
iutisumus. Quidam multo securiores totam vim huius erroris virginea continentia
depellu^t, senes, pu^ri.
Most diligent and faithful chastity has hedged us in from such event, and as
far as we are from fornication, and al excess beyond marriage, so far are we
from the case of incest. Yea some both old and young do put away the whole force
of this error by continency of virginity. Now what is there here whereupon M.
Bishop should say, that the best Christians lived in perpetual Virginity? But
we must not stand upon such matters: either we must give hime leave to do
thus, or else he must write no more. Well, we see now that his examples are
far from serving his turn, and therefore in stead of his blind argument
gathered of selfe-conceipts we will argue thus: that seeing none of our
captains and ringleaders whom God has set before us as examples to be
followed, have given us any example of the vow of virginity, therefore we must
condemn it as a blind, a wilful, and superstitious vow. Nay we will argue
further: Abraham our Father, Romans 4.12.
in the steps of whose faith we are to walk, and into whose bosom we shall be
gathered, was a married man, not once only, but twice married. So were the
rest of the Patriarchs married men; and so the Priests, the Prophets, the
Apostles, and almost all that the Scripture sets before us as examples of
perfection. Therefore they are lewd hypocrites and no true teachers, that bear
us in hand that Christian perfection cannot stand with marriage. Yea but the
single man, says M. Bishop, cares only how to please God, and to be holy in
body and mind, as the Apostle writes, when as the married are choked with the
cares of this world. But the Apostle only tells us, what may be by the
condition of single life, and the right use thereof, not what always and
necessarily is. For we know that the married many times less cares for the
things of the world the^ the unmarried, and the unmarried many times less cares
to please God then the married does. What, did M. Bishop and his fellows care
only how to please God in that heat of spirit, whereby they were carried
against the Jesuits? or do the Jesuits, yea their Popes and Cardinals and
Bishops, care only to please God? Good men, they have all quite given over the
world, and they breath nothing but only heaven. A man may wonder at the
impudency of this man, who doubts not to speak so contrary to his own
knowledge both in himself and the rest of them. It is true, that single life
has ordinarily more opportunity and liberty to the service of God then marriage,
which is the thing that the Apostle means, but seldom is it so used or
never, but that marriage in some attaineth to as great holiness and perfection as
single life. But M. B. in great anger goes forward saying: Unless a man had
made a league with hell, or were as blind as a beetle, how can he ever persuade
himself, that to wallow in fleshly pleasure and satisfying of the beastly
appetites is as grateful to God as to conquer and subdue them by fasting and
prayer. Where we see a beastly filth out of a profane mouth and stinking
breath, so speak of sacred and holy matrimony, as if there were nothing therein
but wallowing in fleshly pleasure, and satisfying of beastly appetites. What,
is it a matter of sacrament with the^ to wallow in fleshly pleasure and
satisfying of beastly appetites? Does he teach their married Catholic disciples
that they wallow in fleshly pleasure, and sati^fying of beastly appetites?
Surely the ancient Church of Rome held Tertul. de pud. E^usque tame^o ^uit vt
moderatio libidinum pudicitia credatur.
the moderation of lusts (by marriage) to be chastity, as Tertullian in behalf
of Montanus vpbraideth them, and Paphnutius informed the Council of Nice and
they received it, that the Socrat. hist. lib 1. cap. 8. Viri cum legitima vxore
concubitu^ castimoniam appellatut.
company of a man with his own wife is chastity, and what then shall we think
of a filthy carrion, that accounts nothing to be in marriage but wallowing in
fleshly pleasure, and satisfying of beastly appetites, thereby blaspheming the
sacred institution of God, and traducing all those holy men of God, of whom
before was spoken, that lived in married state. Now further he tells us, that
S. Paul gives counsel to the married, to contain during the time of prayer,
where I leave it to thee, gentle Reader, to esteem whether the man were sober
in so reciting the words of the Apostle. S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 7.5.
Defraud not one another except it be with consent for a time, that ye may
attend to fasting and prayer. Which words have manifest refere^ce to
extraordinary occasions of humbling our selves to God, and of testifying unto
him the grief and sorrow of our hearts, by depriving our selves of the use of
all those things whereof we take any joy or delight according to the flesh, or
to any special occasions of gathering our spirits and souls more nearely unto
God, whereby it concerns us to depart as I may say, so much the further from
our selves. In this sort God when he was to give the law to prepare the people
to due reverence and attention, commanded them three days before Exodus 19.15.
to be sanctified, to wash their clothes, and not to come at their wives.
Another time being greatly offended with them, he commands them Cap. 33.5.
to lay aside their costly raiment, that they might show the sorrow of their
hearts by a neglect and carelesnes of the attiring of their bodies. And thus we
know, that fasting in such cases is usually adjoined to prayer, that the
afflicting of the body may sharpen and give edge to the affection of the soul.
Upon such occasions the Apostle permits some withdrawing of the husband from
the wife, but yet with this exception, that it be by consent, and but only for
a time, and then come together again, says he, that Satan tempt you not for
your incontinencie. Where when he requires consent, he gives to understand,
that where there is necessity of fasting and prayer, and yet consent of
defrauding cannot be obtained, there fasting and prayer is to be used without
defrauding, because defrauding may not be without consenting. Now these words
belonging to special occasions, and being only conditional, the Romish
hypocrites will have to concern all times, and to be absolutely so meant, as if
ordinarily there could be no prayer where there is the company of man and wife.
As if the Apostle would say, Let the husband give to the wife due benevolence,
and likewise the wife to the husband, and yet tell them withal, that if they
do so they cannot pray. But the Apostle S. Peter in this and all other respects
wills 1. Pet. 3.7.
husbands to dwell with their wives as men of knowledge, giving honor to the
wife as to the weaker vessel, that (says he) your prayers be not interrupted.
So far was he from thinking the society of the faithful husband and wife to
be the interrupting of their prayers, as that he instructs carefully to
preserve it, that their prayers may not be interrupted. And who doubts but
that those lessons of holy Scripture whereby we are taught Luke 18.1.
to pray always, and not to wax weary, 1. These. 5.17.
to pray continually, 1. Tim. 2.8.
to pray every where, do concern the married as well as the unmarried, and
therefore do import that marriage hinders not but that we may so do. Surely it
concerns the holy men of God to pray as much as it concerns us, even the
Patriarchs and Prophets, and other just and righteous men, neither can we doubt
but that religiously and holily they performed that devotion unto God, and yet
they lived in marriage, and their wives were partakers with them in this godly
service. How is it come to pass, that marriage is a blot and hinderance to our
prayers, seeing it was none to theirs? or if marriage be no bar against the
prayers and devotions of other faithful people, what ayle Priests and
religious persons, that they cannot pray and perform other service to God if
they be married? Until the time of Solomon who first ordered the attendance of
the Priests by turns, the high Priest of the Jews who^ it concerned to be
most pure and holy of any creature under heaven, yet in married estate, and
performing the offices thereof presented himself daily unto God, bearing the
figure and person of Jesus Christ our high Priest the Son of God, and wearing
a frontlet wherein it was engraven, Exodus 28.36.
Holiness to the Lord. Moreover, after the dividing of their courses, it is
not found that ever the Priests in the time of their ministration were
forbidden the company of their wives. What then is it but superstitious
hypocrisy, that makes Romish Priests to say they cannot holily do their
service unto God, if they be married as they were? It is well observed by
Clemens Alexandrinus, that Clem Serom. lib. 3. Apostoli epistolae cum de
matrimonio and liberorum procreatione innumerabilia praecepta contineant
nusqua^ honestu^ moderatumque matrimonium prohibuerunt sed legis cum Euangelio
servants conuenientiam vtrunque admittunt, etc.
the Apostles Epistles though giving innumerable precepts of marriage, and
procreation of children, and governing the house, yet do no where forbid or
abrogate honest and modest marriage, but keeping an accord betwixt the law and
the Gospel, do admit both of the married and the unmarried. Now if there be an
accord to be kept in this behalf betwixt the law and the Gospel, and that the
Apostle did keep, then it is manifest that he determined not marriage to be any
hinderance to sacred ministrations in the Gospel, because in the law it was
not so. In a word, both Priests and religious, if they have not the gift of
continency, are by marriage to be fitted to the service of God, which in the
pollutions of incontinencie they cannot do as they ought to do. Master Bishop
says, they are bound to chastity, but that is not true. They are bound from
marriage, but to chastity they cannot be bound. If they have not the gift of
continency, they cannot be chaste, but are polluted and defiled both in body
and soul, with unchaste and lewd affections. But such pollution and
uncleanness is no let with them to the service of God, only marriage is a let:
polluted and defiled let them be, but married they may not be.

16. W. BISHOP.
We will close up this point with some sentences taken out of the ancient
Fathers, in praise of Virginity, which M. P. in all this question vouchsafes
scarce once to name, as though Virgins and Virginity were no English words, or
not as plain as continency.

S. Cyprian, De habitu Virginum, intitleth Virgins to be the most noble and
glorious persons of Christ's flock: and adds, that they shall receive of God
the highest reward and greatest recompense.

S. Chrysostom Lib. 3. cont. vitup. vit. neces.
cites, Virginity to be the top of perfection, and the highest tippe of
virtue.

And Athanasius, De Virginitate, in the end bursteth out into these words: O
Virginity, a treasure that wastes not, a garland that withers not; the
Temple of God, the Palace of the holy Ghost, a precious stone, whose price is
not known to the vulgar, the joy of the Prophets, the glory of the Apostles,
the life of Angels, the Crown of Saints.

S. Ambrose Lib. 1. de Virginibus paulo post init. Virginity is a principal
virtue, and not therefore commendable that it is found in Martyrs, but because
it makes Martyrs: Who can with humane wit comprehend it, which nature does not
hold within her laws? it has fetched out of heaven that it might imitate on
earth: neither unfitly has it sought a manner of life in heaven, which has
found a spouse for her in heaven.

This surmounting the clouds, the stars and Angels has found the word of God
in the bosom of his Father, etc. See who list to read more to this purpose the
rest of the Fathers in their works of virginity; of which most of them have
written. And S. Jerome, who is behind none of the rest in his books against
Iouinian and Heluidius, all which do most diligently exhort to vow virginity,
do teach how to keep it, and most vehemently inueigh against all them that do
break it. And if any be so mad as to credit rather our fleshly ministers, than
all that honorable and holy Senate of the ancient Fathers, he deserves to
live and die in perpetual darkness.

In this matter I have stayed somewhat longer, because our carnal teachers,
with the lewd example of their dissolute Disciples, have corrupted our age with
fleshly and beastly liberty: In the other points, I will recompense it with
breuity.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins rather names continency then virginity, because virginity notes
properly the state of the body, but continency is the virtue of the mind,
which governs and preserves the integrity of the body. As for those great
commendations which the fathers by him mentioned, and other of them do give to
virginity, we so much the less respect them, by how much the more the same
fathers have made it appear unto us, as Sect. 12.
before we have seen, that those commendations were but snares and advantages
taken and used by Satan for the intangling of many thousand souls to sin, and
to their own damnation. Their immoderate and excessive opinion and extolling
thereof, drew many thousands to undertake the profession of single life, who
when they neither could perform what they had undertaken, nor might without
reproach and infamy leave their course, were content even to cast themselves
into the devils mouth, and by practice of lewd and unclean life, to work
their own confusion and overthrow. Albeit we would ask M. Bishop what it is,
for which they commended virginity in so high measure and degree? If they
respected the integrity of the flesh, what was it more then was to be found
amongst heathen idolaters, as in the vestall virgins and others, or then is now
to be found amongst the Turks? If he will say that they respected it as
dedicated to God, why should they make that a service to God, wherein they that
knew not God, might glory as well as they, and wherein for it self there was
nothing that concerns the service of God? If he will say that they conceived
it not as in it self to be a service of God, but only regarded the employing
of it to those things whereby God is served, they meant nothing against us,
because we also conceive the power of virginity to be an excellent gift, and
worthy to be admired and honored, where according to the freedom and liberty
that it gives, it is faithfully bestowed to the service of Jesus Christ. An
excellent gift I say, as the gift of learning, the gift of eloquence, the gift
of tongues and such like, which may be in the evil as well as in the good, and
therefore are no otherwise acceptable to God, but only in their use. Now as
excellent gifts are very seldom and rare, so is it in this; many may be
willing, but few attain unto it; and therefore it was the great oversight of
many of the fathers, so promiscuously to entertain multitudes, and by such
bonds to tie them to that kind of life, whereto so many were unable, and
whereof they found that to be true which Hierome confesses, that Hieron. adu.
Iouin. lib. 1. Jn^^pere plurimorum est, perseuerare paucorum.
it was in very many to begin, but in few to persevere. As touching their
sayings which M. Bishop alleges, they need not much to be stood upon. If
they speak of virginity in the two former sorts now mentioned, they fall of
themselves. If in the last meaning I answer, let virgins be according to the
pattern which they describe, Cyprian. de hab. virg. Quibus desideria ta^
carnis and corporis nullae sunt. Sola in vobis quae sunt virtutis and spiritus
ad gloriam remanscrunt.
that there be in them no desires of the flesh and of the body, and there
remain in them only the things of virtue and of the spirit for the receiving
of heavenly glory, and we will honor them as the more excellent portion of
the Lords flock, and the top of Christian perfection, not for their virginity
but for their piety, whereof notwithstanding they have the better opportunity by
virginity; and only so as that if married persons shall equal them in piety,
they shall stand as high as they. The saying of Athanasius as he alleges it
is a counterfeit, neither was Athanasius the Author of any so base a work. The
words here cited do show the singular vndiscretion both of the Author that
wrote them, and M. Bishop that cited them, in that he calls virginity the
joy of the Prophets, and the glory of the Apostles, when in a manner all, both
the Prophets and Apostles were married men and not virgins; and the life of
Angels, when it is a thing nothing concerning Angels. These are but flourishes
of vain wits which respect not how substantial, but how glorious their words
be. And to such Rhetorical amplifications, Ambrose as touching that matter of
virginity is too much affected, and appropriateth those things to the devotion
of virgins, which nothing hinders, but that they should be common to the
faith and devotion of married estate. He so speaks, as if heavenly life were
only to be found in virgins, whereas in married persons the Scripture sets
before us the special examples and patterns thereof. As for Hierome, he
needs no censure of ours, being of old sufficiently censured by the Church of
Rome, as before has been showed. We reverence his learning, but yet we cannot
but acknowledge in him some want both of modesty and piety, where in a
proposterous humor of extolling virginity, he speaks basely and rudely
concerning marriage, and doubts not to transcribe into his works those
sentences and arguments, which Tertullian in his heresy used to the same
purpose against the Church, as to him that compares his epistle ad Gerontiam
de Monogamia, and first book against Iouinian to Tertullians book de
Monogamia, will easily appear. To be short, all the exhortations and rules
that they could use for the keeping of virginity, could not avail, but that
the stink thereof has always been loathsome to the world. They set banks
against a stream that could not be stayed, and thereby caused a deluge and
ouerflowing of great uncleanness. Which if Chrysostom saw to be such, as that
he held it better there should be no more virgins, as before was showed, what
shall we but take them wilfully to dwell in darkness, who after so much
further experience, continue to maintain that damnable vow, which all
Christian ages from the time that it first began, have had cause to rue. As for
the ministers, they live in chaste and lawful marriage, as the Prophets and
Apostles have done, and can for that be no more accounted carnal and fleshly
then they were, yea and they think that the walls of the stews and Surgeons
instruments beyond the seas, and the confession closets of many female
Recusants at home will bear witness at that day, that they have not been so
carnal and fleshly as Romish Priests.

17 W. BISHOP.
Concerning the vow of poverty and monastical life, in which, as M. Perkins
acknowledges, men bestow all they have upon the poor, and give themselves to
Prayer and Fasting: yet he is not ashamed to avouch that this vow is against
the will of God, and assayeth to prove it: Acts cap. 20. verse. 35. It is a
more blessed thing to give, than to receive.

Answer. As the very proposition (that it is displeasing to God to cut off all
cares of the world, and to betake our selves wholly to his holy service and
contemplation of heavenly matters) is in it self profane and ungodly, so the
proof thereof is deuoid of natural wit and sense. Mark the Argument: It is
against Gods will to give away all, because it is more blessed to give than to
receive: Why, if it be a more blessed thing to give; than they please God
better that give. So that this his proof, improoues flatly his own assertion:
But the dreamer means perhaps, that if you give all at once, you shall not be
able to give afterward, but rather stand in need to receive.

Reply. But no such humane prudence can be drawn out of that sentence, which
encourages rather to give for the present, then to provide for hereafter.

The true meaning of the place, is to exhort Christians to labor and travail,
at vacant times to get their own living, and to provide something also to
bestow upon them who stand in need rather then to be idle, and to stand in
need of alms, as S. Paul himself did: which they did best perform, who had
sold all they had, and distributed it to the poor, as the example of Paul
himself, and the first Christians does sufficiently declare, who sold all, and
laid the price at the Apostles feet. Act. 4.


R. ABBOT.
He has promised us here to be short, and I will promise him not to be very
long, because of this matter sufficient has been said before, in Sect. 18.
answer of the epistle to the King. This vow of poverty, as was there said, is
but a branch of the heresy of the Euchites or Messalian heretics, who in like
sort as Popish Monks did profess Epiphan. haer. 80. Videntur vt qui
renunciauerint mundo et de proprijs bonis secesserint, etc. No^ habent
possessione^, vt inquiunt, in terra, etc. Extendunt manus and petunt velut
victu carentes et nihil possidentes, etc. Orationibus va^antes. etc.
to renounce the world, and to depart from their goods, having any thing of
their own, nor any possession upon earth, and therefore stretching forth the
hand, and begging as having nothing whereof to live, otherwise giving
themselves wholly to prayer, and Aug. de haeres. Tantu^ orant vt e^ qui hoc de
illis audiunt incredibile videatur,
praying so much, says S. Austin, as might seem incredible to the^ that hear
of it. They carried as goodly a show as that is that M. Bishop here alleges,
but their renouncing of the world and praying was adjudged heretical, and so is
that that he defends, and so much the more damnable for the superstitions and
blasphemies that are added to it, as touching heavenly perfection, satisfaction
for sins, merit of supererogation, whereby they are able to give spiritual
help toward the saving of the souls of other men. He talks of cutting of
worldly cares, and betaking men's selves wholly to the service of God, and
co^templation of heavenly matters, but he knows that their vow of poverty
has not cut off worldly cares, but has sent their begging Friars up and down
the country, and has set them a work to be scraping and craving, that they
have had small leisure to the contemplation of heavenly matters. The
contemplation of heavenly matters is a goodly speech, but alas it is a matter
that they for the most part are little acquainted with; their rising was the
fall of all learning, and it was grown to a byword, Vide. Hospin. de Orig.
Monachat. lib. 6. ca. 18:
More unlearned the^ a Monk, and therefore very unfit were they for the
conte^plation of heavenly matters. In a word, it is well known that without the
vow of poverty, men have more fruitfully given themselves to the contemplation
of heavenly things, then ever they have done in the profession of that vow.
They have lewdly abused the world, and under pretense of poverty, have
bestirred and busied themselves by begging, to engrosse and claspe into their
hands the riches and pleasures of the world, and whilst they had nothing in
propriety, they had in community whereof to live like Epicures and
belly-gods, and were nothing less then that they would seem to be. But to
come to the point, Master Perkins against the vow of poverty or beggerie,
alleges the words of Christ, Act. 20.35.
It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive. Master Bishop says, that
this proof is deuoide of natural wit and sense, and calls him dreamer for
the alleging of it. But would not a man think Master Bishop himself to be
out of his wits, that would give this answer, and by and by confess that
Master Perkins cited the place in other meaning? He well knows that the vow
of poverty imports a condition and state of life for the time to come, and
implies giving but only accidentally, because a man that has something, must
needs give that away before he can be in state to have nothing, but if he have
nothing, he can give nothing, and yet that is no impeachment to his vow. The
argument then stands good, that because it is a blessing of God to be in
state to give rather then to receive, therefore for a man to renounce that
state, wherein God has made him able to give, and by a vow of poverty to bind
himself to a state wherein he must beg and receive of others, is wilfully to
renounce the blessing of God, and witlesly to undertake that which God
threatens to the wicked for a curse, Psalm. 109.10.
Let his children be vagabonds and beg their bread. The words of Christ do
plainly instruct us to take such course, and to maintain so far as we can
that condition of life, wherein we may have to show our charity and love, as
occasion serves, to our brethren that stand in need. But this M. Bishop
calls humane prudence; and tells us that the sentence rather encourages to
give for the present, then to provide for hereafter. The sentence indeed
encourages to give, but it teaches a man so to give, as remembering always,
that it is a blessed thing to give rather then to receive, and therefore so to
give, as that still he may give, and not wilfully to put himself in case to
receive only or beg, and not to give. And this is not to be careful of
providing for hereafter, but only not to tempt God by carelesnes, and by
wilful vnprouiding and depriving himself of that which God has provided for
him whereof to do good, and to show mercy both for the present and for
hereafter. Now he that vpbraided M. Perkins even now to be deuoid of natural
wit and sense, is himself here so witless and senseless, as that he sees
not his own answer to make directly against himself. For if the place do
teach men to labor and travel, that they may have to bestow upon others that
need, then surely it condemns them who make a vow, that they never will have
any thing to give to the^ that stand in need. S. Paul labored that he might
have of his own to supply his own necessity, and to help others. So did they,
says M. Bishop, that sold their lands, and laid the price down at the Apostles
feet. So does S. Paul teach all men: Ephe. 4.28.
Let him that stole, steal no more, but let him rather labor and work with
his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give unto him that
needs. But the vow of poverty and beggary, disableth a man for ever from
being capable of any thing of his own, whereof he may minister to them that
need. This vow therefore is contrary to those rules and precepts which the
Apostle gave for the direction of Christian life.

18. W. BISHOP.
The next place is, Pro. 30.8.
Give me neither riches nor poverty.

Answer. The Prayer is good, and fitteth the persons of honest men who live in
the world, and was of some perfection too in the state of Moses law, in which
it was made, as dissuading from covetousness of great riches, but it comes
too short of the perfection of the Gospel, wherein we are counseled to
esteem as dung all worldly riches.

R. ABBOT.
He blamed M. Perkins answer in the former Section, as deuoid of natural wit
and sense, but I pray thee, gentle Reader, if thou light upon him to ask him,
where his wits were when he gave this answer. To the one part he answers,
Pro. 30.8.
Give me not riches, but to the other part, Give me not poverty, which is the
thing urged against him, he answers nothing. We are counseled in the Gospel,
he says, to esteem as dung all worldly riches. True, and therefore we say, Give
me not riches. But yet in the Gospel we are taught to pray for that that is
convenient according to our place and condition, when we say, Give us this day
our daily bread, and therefore we say, Give me not poverty, whereupon it is
added; Feed me with food convenient for me. The prayer, says he, fitteth the
persons of honest men that live in the world. Hypocrite who taught thee this
distinction of prayers? Has the spirit of God set it down as a prayer of the
wisest man, and is it now come to be posted over to I know not what honest men?
It was of some perfection, he says, in the state of Moses law, but comes too
short of the perfection of the Gospel. Hypocrite, the Apostle has taught us,
that Romans 15.4.
whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our learning, and
must we upon the word of an idle Sophister be persuaded, that that prayer is
too base for us to learn? And what? were not men taught in the state of Moses
law, to esteem as dung all worldly riches? Did not David say: Psalm. 62.10.
If riches increase set not your heart upon them. Did not Solomon say of
riches, Prou. 23.5.
Will thou cast thine eyes upon that that is nothing? Did not Esaias say, Esa.
40.6.
All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as the flower of the field?
Were they not as fully taught to despise the world, and to joy in God as we
are? But the man so dreameth of perfection, perfection, as that we may very
well think, that there is some very great imperfection in his head. In a word
therefore, God has taught a man to say, Give me not poverty, but they teach a
man to say, I will vow poverty, and what do they then but teach a man to
contrary that which God has taught?

19. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins his third reason is taken out of Deuteronomy. 28.22. where poverty is
numbered among the curses of the law, none of which are to be vowed.

Answer. It is one thing to be punished with poverty for transgressing of Gods
law, and another (I trow) for the love of God to give away all we have to the
poor: The former was a curse in the law of Moses, the latter is a blessing,
and the first blessing in the Gospel: Luc. 6.
Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: Which sentence,
albeit it may be applied very well unto humility, yet more literally signifies
voluntary poverty, as by the sentence opposed against it is manifest: Ver. 23.
Woe be to you rich men, etc.

R. ABBOT.
The words of Moses are, Deuteronomy. 28.44.
The stranger shall lend to thee, and thou shall not (have to) lend to him.
Ver. 48.
Thou shall serve thine enemies in hunger and thirst, and in nakedness, and in
need of all things. Christ has taught us before, that it is a blessing to have
whereof to give; and Moses teaches us that it is a curse to be in want, and not
to have whereof to lend; and what is then the vow of poverty but the renouncing
of a blessing and the voluntary undergoing of a curse? M. Bishop answers,
that it is one thing to be punished with poverty for tra^sgressing the law of
God, another for the love of God to give all to the poor. But then is it done
for the love of God, when God calls us to the doing of it; otherwise it is no
matter of the love of God, but of humane presumption and selfwil. Therefore his
answer here is al one, as if he should say, It is one thing for a man to be
accursed of God, another thing voluntarily to lay Gods curse upon himself; and
how well that serves his turn, let himself judge. Yet he will prove that it
is a blessing, yea the first blessing in the Gospel. And how? forsooth because
Christ says, Luke 6.20.
Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. We may see the
poor man was driven to poor shifts, when he was feign to use this text for
the making good of his vow of poverty. If his leisure had served him he would
have turned to the fifth of Matthew, and there have seen our Savior expounding
himself, Mat. 5.2.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Now a
man would think that M. Bishops learning should have taught him long before
this, that a man may be rich in worldly goods, and yet poor in spirit; and
that undoubtedly Abraham the father of all believers was such a one. Yea says
he, it may well be applied to humility, yet more literally it signifies
voluntary poverty. And how may that appear? forsooth by the sentence opposed
against it, it is manifest, Woe be to you rich men. But I marvel what strings M.
Bishop has to tie this argument together: Christ says, Woe be to you rich men:
therefore that which he says before, Blessed are ye poor, must necessarily be
understood of volu^tary poverty. What, does Christ absolutely mean woe to all
that be rich? When he expounds the poor to be poor in spirit, does he not
teach us proportionably to understand the rich? This childish collection is
reproved by our Savior Christ, when his disciples being astonished at that
which he said, Mark 10.23:
How hardly do they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God: he
answers Ver. 24.
Children (thereby reproving their weakness of understanding) how hard is it for
them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God? The woe then is not
to all that are rich, but to such as trust in riches; but there are men who 1.
Tim. 6.17
are rich in this world, who yet are not high minded, and trust not in
uncertain riches, but in the living God. Christ having showed the end of the
man that trusted in riches, adds, Luke 12 21.
So is every one that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich in God. Woe
be to them that are rich in this world and are not rich in God, but a man may
be rich in this world, and yet rich in God also by acknowledging spiritually
his own poverty in himself, and receiving all things of Gods mercy. Seeing
therefore a man may be rich according to this world, and yet none of them to
whom Christ says, Woe be to rich men, surely nothing hinders but that a man
may be rich, and yet may be one of those poor whom Christ pronounces to be
blessed, and therefore M. Bishops argument is idle, and proves nothing less,
then that Christ's sentence is to be understood of voluntary poverty, so that
still it remains good, that the vow of poverty and beggary is the voluntary
casting away of the blessing of God, and the undertaking of his curse.

20. W. BISHOP.
Thus M. Perkins his texts of Scripture against poverty failing him, he
fetches about another way, saying that it is a rule of the holy Ghost: He that
will not labor (namely in some special and warrantable calling) must not eat
These. 2.
.

Ans. I allow both the text and the gloss, and find nothing there against
religious persons, whose calling is special perfect, and therefore best
warrantable: not so (says he) because they give themselves to prayer and
fasting. What a profane stupiditie is this? Is not a life given to prayer and
fasting agreeable to the will of God and laws of his church? albeit many
religious men do over and besides very great services to Gods church, in
preaching, teaching and writing of most learned books. But suppose they did
nothing else but fast and pray, did they not very well deserve their
sustenance? yes much better then they which travel all the year about the
providing of it. For in vain do men labor if God bless not their work with
seasonable weather, which he does rather at the prayer and instance of such
good innocent souls that are to be fed with it, then for the Plough-mans own
labors sake. And if by their fasting, watching and such like afflictions of
their bodies, they do partly satisfy for our superfluous pampering of the
flesh, and teach us by their good example to bridle and correct it: do they not
deserve at our hands bodily sustenance? And who better performs all duties of
the second table then they, being most obedient to all their superiors, and
not hurting their neighbor in life, person, or any manner of their goods? And
so in their several callings offend no honest men, and do much good both unto
the Church and Commonwealth.

R. ABBOT.
If S. Paul when he said, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
He that will not labor, let him not eat, did take praying to be laboring, then
the Messalians had as well to answer for themselves as the begging Friars,
because they took as great pains in praying as the begging Friars ca^ do; yea
those idle loiterers, concerning who^ the Apostle speaks, had sufficient to
answer for them selves, that there was reason for them to eat because they did
pray. Surely M. Bishop is a good proctor for such thriftles drones, who will be
content to pray apace, and as much as the Friars do, if that may be reckned a
labor for which to require their meat. But prayer is a common duty and service
of all callings, and not a distinct labor of any one. Till M. Bish. blotted
this paper, I think it was never read, that prayer and fasting was a calling,
save only in the conceit of those Euchites or Messalians, of who^ I spoke,
albeit they indeed fasted not. But whereas M. Perkins says, that men living
apart, and giving themselves only to prayer and fasting, do live in no calling,
M. Bishop because he cannot prove the contrary, beggeth it. What a profane
stupiditie is this, says he? Is not a life given to prayer and fasting (put in
as it should be, only to prayer and fasting) agreeable to the will of God and
laws of his Church? You should not have asked the question M. Bishop, but have
proved it so to be, because therein stood the question, which it was your
stupidity not to see. The argument propounds to you, that it is necessary for
every man to labor in some calling, that he may have according to Gods
ordinance whereof to eat. It alleges that to live apart and to be given only
to prayer and fasting, is not to labor in a calling; and do you answer al with,
Is it not so? To make up the matter, he adds that many religious men do over
and beside very great services to Gods church, in preaching, teaching and
writing of most learned books. Ye say well M. Bishop, such me^ because they
labor, may justly eat, but these matters are accidental, and their vow and
religion may stand without them, and therefore the matter is not answered by
them. I admit that which he says, but there might here worthy stories be told
of the preachings of their Friars of all sorts. But M. Bishop himself knowing
that this is but impertinent goes on; Suppose they did nothing else but fast
and pray, did they not very well deserve their sustenance? If they did nothing
but fast and pray, it should be with them according to the Apostles rule,
because then they should eat nothing. But now beside fasting and praying they
eat also, which the Apostle says they should not do, because they do not
work. They fast a little, that they may eat enough, and there is no idle
lozell but would be content with their fasting, so that he may have their diet
otherwise. In a word, M. Bishop may keep his opinion to him self, but the
Apostle sufficiently teaches us, that because they labor not, therefore they
do not so well deserve sustenance as they who labor all the year for the
providing of it. As for the blessing of God, it depends not upon the prayers
of such who have no warrant for the state of life wherein they pray; and the
ploughmans prayer is more acceptable to God then theirs, because he follows
that rule of life which God has taught, who never prescribed any rule of
Monkish trade. Good innocent souls, says he, whereas by all stories it
appears that there has not been a more stinking vermin upon the earth: even
some of their own men have discovered them so to be. But M. Bishop is not
satisfied, unless to folly he add blasphemy, saying, that they satisfy for
our superfluous pampering of the flesh. Impious man, Christ is the satisfaction
for our sins; what have we to do with the satisfactions of wretched men, who
damnably sin in those things wherein they take upon them to satisfy for
others sins? And what, M. Bishop, is there any superfluous pampering of the
flesh to be found amongst you? Alas how have ye deceived us all this while? We
thought that you had been nothing but spirit, and that superfluous pampering of
the flesh had been only amongst us. But your teeth would have bit your tongue,
if ye had not somewhat told us truth. Take it to ye M. Bishop, for it belongs
to none more rightly then it does to you, and the example that ye lay before ye
fitteth accordingly. But to shut up all this matter, he tells us that none
perform all duties of the second table better then they. As how? They are most
obedient to their superiors. God has commanded them to obey and honor their
parents, their princes and gouerners, and they leave these at six and seven as
they say, to perform obedience to other superiors superstitiously devised of
their own. They many times impiously with the Jews cast off the respect of
their parents by pretense of their vows; they withdraw themselves into lurking
dens from service to their princes and public state, yea many times they
nourish rebellion and treason against them, and yet they are most obedient of
all other, being not at all obedient to them whom God has commanded them to
obey. Again he says, they hurt not their neighbor in life, person or any
manner of goods. Yea but the life of a Christian man consists not in doing no
hurt only, unless he also do good, and what good do they? It is doing good
that Christ shall commend at the last day, Mat. 25.35.
I was hungry and ye gave me meat, and thirsty and ye gave me drink. On the
other side, he shall object the want of doing good, Ver. 42.
I was hungry and ye gave me no meat, and thirsty and ye gave me no drink.
And what shall the Monks then say? O Lord, though we did thee no good, yet we
did thee no hurt. We had wherewith to feed thee and to clothe thee, and to
harbor thee, but we gave all away at once, and made a vow that we would never
have any thing again to do thee good: thou should therefore starve and
perish for hunger and cold, but look for nothing further at our hands. We were
content to fast and pray according to our rule, and to spend our time in such
witless observations as our founders directed us for matters of great
perfection; but as for those things which thou have required, we left them to
men of more base and imperfect state, as nothing at all concerning us. This is
their begging Friars condition of life, and this is that performing of the
duties of the second table which M. Bishop speaks of. They fast and pray, but
do no good at all, neither to Church nor commonwealth, neither has any kind of
men be^e generally more offensive and pernicious then they have been.

21. W. BISHOP.
After all this waste wind, M. Perkins confesses, that a man may upon a
special calling sell all his goods, as the Apostles did. What then (good Sir)
shall become of your former arguments? May one then vow a curse of the Law, and
leave off prayer for neither poverty nor riches, and say that it is not a
blesseder thing to give then to receive?

All these arguments which were whilome of great force, must now be nothing
worth, because it pleases M. Perkins, the wind now sits in an other corner,
such weathercocks surely are to be much respected.

He says further, in time of persecution a man may also leave all: he should
rather have said, he must leave all, or else lose al, for the persecutor will
not spare him. Lastly, he does not condemn old ancient Monks, who lived by
the sweat of their brows, and were married many of them, as he says; but his
authors cited say not so, neither shall he be able to cite one ancient allowed
and approved writer, who says that the ancient Monks lived with their
wives, if perhaps they had been married before. But no marvel if fleshly
Ministers think it no life without their fleshly mates. As for laboring at
vacant times, it was always, and is to this day in practice among many
religions. If other do in good studies, writing or teaching, employ that time
of labor, no doubt but they do far better.

R. ABBOT.
There is no man but easily conceiueth, that those things many times which of
themselves are unlawful and wicked in us, yet arelawfull and necessary when
God commands them. It had bin a wicked thing in Abraham of his own head to
attempt the killing of his son, but it was an act of religious and godly
obedience when God required it. It is desperate wickedness for a man wilfully
to cast away his own life; but at Gods commandment to offer and yield his
life, it is right and just. It was uncleanness in Moses law to touch any
excrement or dung; yet when God appointed Ezech. 4.12.
Ezechiel so to do, it was no uncleanness. The Jews did sin grievously in
binding themselves by vow not to honor their parents; and yet when Christ
calls, no man may say Mat. 8.21.
Let me first go and bury my father: yea Luke 14 26.
he that hates not father and mother, says Christ, he cannot be my disciple.
Even so albeit it be superstitious and sinful of our own heads to relinquish
the state of life whereunto God has called us, under pretense and color of
giving our selves idly to prayer and fasting, yet it is sacred and holy
obedience to leave all when God calls from all, who yet never calls us in
the leaving of all things to vow the never having of any thing again. These
cases are sensible and manifest, neither was there cause for M. Bishop to talk
of wind and wethercocke in M. Perkins, but rather to wish better discretion and
understanding to himself. As for the ancient Monks, albeit many of them were
very absurd and senseless hypocrites, yet we deny not but many that went under
that name were just and holy men, trained up as in our universities to virtue
and learning, that they might afterward serve for the ministry of the Church.
M. Bishop would gladly attribute to their Monks some imitation of them, but it
sticks betwixt his teeth, and he knows not well how to bring it out. They
are so unlike them, that they are scant worthy to be accounted as apes in
comparison of men. That which M. Perkins says of married Monks, is taken out of
S. Austin, though he cite not the place, who setting down the heresy of them
that were called August. haer. 40. Apostolici qui se isto nomina arrogantissime
vocauerunt quod in communionem sua^ no^ reciperent vtentes co^iugibus and res
proprias possidentes quales habet Catholicae Ecclesia and Monachos and Clerecos
plurimos.
Apostolici, says, that arrogantly they so called themselves, for that they
received not into their communion, VTENTES CONIVGIBVS, such as had company with
their wives, and possessed any thing of their own, such (says he) as the
Catholic Church has many, both Monks and Clergy men. Let M. Bishop tell us
the English of vtentes coniugibus, and then tell us whether those Monks lived
with their wives. As for the Ministers, they have no fleshly mates, but lawful
wives, as they had of whom S. Austine speaks; but M. Bishops former
acknowledgement concerning themselves of their superfluous pampering of the
flesh, does fully assure us, that for lawful wives they betake themselves to
fleshly mates, and that it is true of them now which in the Parliament of
England upon the complaint of the filthy Sodomie that was found amongst them,
was said of their unmarried Clergy, that Chemni. de coelib sacerd. Delicata
^ibaria viroru^ Ecclesi isticoru^ vel naturalem purgatione^, quaerere vel
petorem.
the dainty fare of the Clergy men did require either a natural purgation or
a worse.

22. W. BISHOP.
In defense of the Catholic party, M. Perkins has not a word, wherefore I will
briefly supply his want, and prove it to be very grateful to God to sell all
and give it to the poor.

I omit the example of our B. Savior (who would not have any poor cottage of
his own, so much as to rest his head in, but would wholly live of alms) and
come unto this heavenly doctrine. Mat. 19.
He teaches a young man whom he loved, in flat words, That if he would be
perfect, he should go and sell all he had, and give it to the poor, and come
and follow him, and then should have a treasure in heaven. These words are so
express and evident, that there can be but one way to shift from them, which
M. Per. flies unto, page 244. to wit, that these words were only meant unto
that young man, and not to be applied unto any others, no more then those words
to Abraham of sacrificing his son Isaac. But this silly shift of our poor
Protestants is confuted manifestly in the same chapter of S. Matthew, where a
little after S. Peter says, Lord, behold we have left all things and have
followed thee, what reward shall we therefore have? We have done (as S. Hierom
expounds it, and the very sequel of the text does plainly require) that which
thou commaundedst in the words before to that young man What answer made our
Savior? That his commandment was only meant unto that young man, and that they
had done foolishly in so doing? nothing less, but promises that they shall
therefore sit with him in twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And that whosoever would forsake father, mother, lands, goods, etc. for his
sake, should receive an hundred fold, and possess life everlasting. Can any
thing be more plain out of the word of God it self, then that not this or that
man, but whosoever shall forsake all for Christ does very blessedly. And if need
were, I could cite most of the ancient Fathers teaching those words of Christ,
Go and sell all, to be an heavenly counsel given generally to all. S. Antonie
took them spoken to him, In vita eius apud Athanas. Saint Augustine to him ad
Hilarium Epist. 89.
: to omit later religious men, I will only cite S. Hierom, who does briefly
both declare our Catholic doctrine, and shows also who was the author of the
Protestants opinion, Lib. cont. Vigil.
saying thus, To that which thou affirmest, that they do better, who use their
goods, and do by little and little distribute to the poor the profits of their
possessions, then others who selling them give all at once, not I, but our Lord
shall answer, If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, and give
it to the poor. Christ speaks to him that will be perfect (not to the young
man only) who with the Apostles forsook both father, ship and nets. That
which thou Vigilantius commendest, obtains the second and third degree: so
that the first (which is to sell all at once) be preferred before the second
and third: which is, to give by little and little the fruit of our revenues to
the poor.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop here propounds to prove, that it is a grateful thing to God to
sell all and give it to the poor; but that comes too short of the vow of
poverty, which is, that a man never more shall have any thing of his own. A
man may by occasion forgo all that he has for Christ's sake, and yet not bind
himself never to be owner of any thing more. But this is the thing that M.
Bishop should prove, that it is grateful to God to vow never to have any thing
of his own. A thing that troubled the Friars, but specially the Franciscans,
who vowed poverty in the highest degree, because by this means they were
proved thieves, and could not devise how to shift it off. For what is he but
Vide Hospinia^. de Orig. Monac. lib. 6. cap. 16.
a thief, that eats, and drinks, and clotheth himself with that that is
none of his own, nor can be by any right? But they by no right or title might
have any thing of their own. Other beggars eat and drink their own, because
by gift it becomes theirs. But these Friars by their rule might have no right,
title, or interest in any thing to be their own; their good founder Francis
having laid it down, that without any construction, gloss or interpretation
they should have nothing of their own. Now this in part is the thing that M.
Bishop must prove, that it is pleasing to God, that men vow to live like
thieves, to eat and drink and wear that that is none of theirs. Let us see
then what he can allege for proof thereof. His first example comes not
within compass of this disputation, because we know that our Savior Christ
submitted himself to the bearing of our curse, that he might purchase a
blessing for us. 2. Cor. 8.9.
He being rich, for our sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might
be made rich. Yet neither is there here any thing of any vow, neither can we
question but that Christ possessed as his own whatsoever was ministered unto
him, and therewith John 13.29.
bought whatsoever was needful, to use the same as his own, which the vow of
poverty admits not. Now to the example of Christ, he adds the lesson that
he gave to the young man, Mat. 19.21.
Go sell all that thou have, if thou will be perfect, and give it to the poor,
and come and follow me, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. But still we
fail of that that we require: we hear not Christ here saying to him, Vow thy
self hereafter to perpetual poverty and beggary, that thou may never
hereafter have any thing of thine own. This is the very point, and of this the
sentence of Christ imports nothing. Well, let this go, but of that speech of
our Savior M. Perkins answers, that it tended to discover the secret
corruption of the young man's heart, and therefore was a commandment not common
to all, but special to him, as was to Abraham the commandment of offering his
son. And to this effect Clemens Alexandrinus understands it, saying, Clem.
Alexan. stromat lib. 3. Cu^ dixit, si vis perfectus esse, etc. refella eum qui
gloriatur quod omnia a iuue^tute praecepta seruauerit: non enim impleuerat
illud, Diliges proximu^. etc. Tunc autem vt qui a Domino perficeretur docebatur
co^municare and impertiri per charitatem. Pulchre ergo non prohibuit esse
diuitem unjust and inexplebiliter.
When Christ says, If thou will be perfect, sell what thou have and give to
the poor, he disproueth him that glories that he has kept all the
commandments from his youth; for he had not fulfilled the commandment, Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. But then as being to be perfected by the
Lord* he was taught charitably to communicate and bestow. Notably therefore he
forbids not to be rich, but to be rich unjustly and unsatiably. Clement then
says as M. Perkins says, that the words are directed to a particular
occasion, and had their special use in respect of him to whom they were
spoken, to discover his erroneous conceit and opinion of himself. This is not
then a silly shift of the poor Protestants, but the true exposition of an
ancient and learned Father. But what does he allege for the confuting of this
silly shift? Marry that Ver. 27.
S. Peter a little after says, Lord we have forsaken all, and have followed
thee, what reward shall we have? And what is that? We have done (says he) that
which thou commandedst in the words before to the young man. But that is not so;
for we do not find that they sold all to give to the poor, as he was
commanded to do, much less that they vowed never after to have any thing, as
M. Bishop would prove by it. For it is apparent, that though the Apostles then
had left the care and the use, yet they had not left the propriety and right
of all. They meddled not with any thing they had, they attended not to any
business of their own, they gave over their nets and their ships, and the
following of all worldly affairs, that they might wholly follow Christ, but yet
that they had still their own, it appears by the words of Christ, John 16.32.
Ye all shall be scattered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone. So
is it said of John, that when Christ said to him, Behold thy mother, meaning it
of the blessed virgin, Chap. 19.27.
he thenceforth took her to his own home. Yea and by the last chapter of his
Gospel it may well be conceived that they had still their ships and their nets
to go a fishing as they had before. But howsoever that be, these words make
nothing against M. Perkins answer, because the disciples had had a like
special calling to follow Christ as this young man had, and they do hereby but
profess their yielding themselves to that special calling of Christ, as this
young man should have done to this calling directed particularly to him. Albeit
therefore this commandment were here intended only to the young man, yet there
was no cause why Christ should say that they had done foolishly in doing that
they had done, because they had received the like commandment in effect
before, and by virtue thereof had before this forsaken all and followed him. Now
as those callings of the disciples, and Christ's commandments to them of
following him, were particular to themselves and not common to al, nor could be
understood as belonging to this young man, so neither can this commandment to
the young man be understood here as spoken in common to the disciples, or
belonging unto us. In a word, Christ called him to be one of his disciples, as
the rest were, and his calling cannot be understood to belong unto us any more
then their calling does. Now as Christ says peculiarly to the disciples, that
they having left all at his commandment and followed him shall sit upon
twelve seats to judge the twelve tribes of Israel: so he makes a common and
general promise to all, that whosoever for his names sake and for the Gosp^ls
sake shall forsake all, that is, shall be content to yield all into the
persecutors hands, and to loose all rather then to deny the name of Christ and
to forsake his Gospel, he shall now receive an hundred fold, and in the world
to come eternal life. This is true, we doubt not hereof, but M. Bishop
himself must perforce confess, that this makes nothing at all to prove that
the former words spoken to the young man do belong to us. For that forsaking of
all which Christ here speaks of for his names sake and for the Gospels sake,
is a necessary duty, without the performance whereof Luke 14.26.
a man cannot be Christ's disciple. Mark 8.35:
Whosoever (in this case) will save his life, says Christ, shall lose it; and
whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and for the Gospels sake, he shall
save it. But M. Bishop tells us, that that selling of all and giving to the
poor, is no commandment but a counsel, a matter not necessary but voluntary,
which a man may choose whether he will do or not. He that forsakes not all in
such sort as Christ speaks thereof in the latter words, sins grievously
against Christ: but M. Bishop says, that a man may forbear to sell all and
give to the poor, and yet sins not. Here by then we may see how untowardly
he deals, in taking from one of these a confirmation of the other, and so it
appears that hitherto M. Perkins answer stands good, that those words of
our Savior Christ to the young man, were intended only in particular to him,
and concern no other in proper meaning, but only such to whom they were in
particular directed, as they were to him. But yet that M. Bishop may know that
we have somewhat more to say then M. Perkins has said, and can make it good
that they most wickedly abuse this place to the maintenance of their vows and
opinion of perfection, I will somewhat more fully examine the circumstances
thereof. I shall seem happily here to go against the stream, and to be somewhat
preiudicated by the opinion of sundry of the Fathers, but yet (gentle Reader)
let not names of men carry thee away from that which thou thy self can
manifestly discern to be the truth. Remember what has been already said, that
the words of Christ literally and in proper understanding belonged peculiarly
to the young man, but yet we deny not but that as the calling of the rest of the
Apostles, so the calling of this young man by deduction and moralization is to
be applied unto us, only the question is, in what meaning it does concern us.
Let it be observed what meaning M. Bishop intends of it, that Christ here
recommendeth a matter of counsel, not necessary for all Christians, but
voluntarily to be followed as a matter of special perfection by such as will;
so as that without this a man may be saved and come to eternal life, but by
the doing of it he meriteth a release of his own and other men's sins, and an
eminent and more then ordinary degree of glory in everlasting life. But the
text plainly shows that this cannot be there meant, and that the lesson that
Christ taught him did concern a duty necessary for the obtaining of eternal
life. The question that he moves to Christ, is, Mat. 19.16.
Good master what shall I do to obtain eternal life? Our Savior answers,
If thou will enter into lift, keep the commandments. He professes himself
so to have done from his youth, and adds, what lack I yet? What is it
whereto he supposes somewhat yet to be lacking? Every man sees whereto it is
to be referred, What lack I yet to the obtaining of eternal life? Accordingly
then the answer of Christ is to be construed, If thou will be perfect, that is,
lacking nothing to the obtaining of eternal life, go sell all that thou have
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and
follow me. That this is the meaning of the perfection here spoken of, appears
by the two other Evangelists, who thus set down the answer of Christ, Mark
10.21:
One thing is lacking unto thee; Luke 18.22.
Yet lackest thou one thing, sell all that thou have, etc. Whereto did he lack
one thing, but to that whereof he made the question, to the obtaining of
eternal life? Christ's words then in effect are, Thou have not yet all that is
needful to the obtaining of eternal life, but if thou will be perfect lacking
nothing thereto, go sell all that thou have, etc. Now if we understand it as M.
Bishop would have us, then there was no cause why the man should go away so
sorrowful at that that Christ said. For the thing that he desired, was to have
eternal life, and if he might have had eternal life without the forgoing of
his riches, it would have fully satisfied him. But by M. Bishops doctrine it
might be said to him that he troubled himself in vain, for the words of
Christ were but a counsel and not a commandment, and that there was not any
necessity of doing that that was said unto him. They that would be of a high
degree of perfection above others, must so do, but if he would rest in a lower
degree, he might continue as he was, and yet obtain eternal life. But the
young man conceived not so; he knew that Christ's words imported a condition of
obtaining eternal life, according to the question that he had moved to him, and
therefore was very sorrowful. And hereto accord the words of Christ ensuing,
Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. Why does Christ use these words, but
that the young man's respect of his riches did hinder him, not from a state of
perfection above others, as M. Bishop dreameth, but wholly from entering into
the kingdom of God? Furthermore it is to be considered how improbable a thing
it is, that to a man who knew as yet only the Jewish religion, and had no
knowledge of the faith of Christ, our Savior would give at first a direction of
perfection above others in Christian profession. He was as yet no disciple of
Christ, he believed not in him, and is it credible that he would teach him at
the first dash, of a ruler* according to M. Bishops understanding, to become a
Monk? Nay it appears plainly, that whereas the man had a zeal of God, and
no doubt in true meaning did walk according to the Law so far as he had the
true understanding thereof, our Savior Christ would instruct him that that was
not sufficient for the obtaining of eternal life, but he must be content upon
his calling and commandment to renounce all that he had, to cast off al vain
love and confidence of worldly things, and to become one of his disciples and
followers. In a word, he teaches him to be of the same mind that the Apostle
S. Paul professes as touching himself, Philip. 36.8.
As touching the righteousness of the law I was vnrebukable, but I think all
things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord* for
whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to be dung that I might
win Christ. For so it is, that moral works, whether of Jews or of Gentiles,
are not auailable in the sight of God; they want their form, and life, and
perfection, until the same be given unto them by the faith of Christ. Ambr. in
psalm. 1 Virtutes sine fide folia sunt: videntur virere, sed (...) non (...)
Virtues without faith are bu^ leaves, says S. Ambrose, they show green, but
they cannot profit us. Therefore the faith of Christ teaches us to renounce
all trust and confidence thereof, and to trust only upon him. This is the
perfection whereto Christ calls this young man, as if he should have said unto
him, Thou do well in that which thou do, but that is not enough: if thou will have good of it, become my disciple, and to that end be content to forgo
all that thou have, and come and follow me. Where to know how these words do
belong to us, it must be considered that this man was called to a corporal and
outward following of Christ according to the flesh, by means whereof he must
necessarily forgo the use of those great possessions that he had. Thus the
Apostles had partly done already, and were afterward fully and wholly to do,
being to be corporally employed to preach the Gospel through the world; and
thus Christ calls this young rich man to do the same. But our following of
Christ now consists not in changing of our places, but in giving him our
affections, neither is performed by the foot but by the heart, neither is it a
matter of special duty belonging only to some, but universally concerns
all that belong to him. As is then our following of Christ, so is our selling
of all that we have, a matter of the heart and affection, whilst in the midst
of all that we have, we have our minds so untied and free from the love and
respect of worldly things, as that we are ready to forgo all when the cause of
Christ and his Gospel shall require us so to do. And this M. Bishop out of
their own grounds must be forced to confess whether he will or not. For by
Bellarmine we understand, that to be a Monk is Bellar. de Monach. cap. 2.
Status Episcoporum est status perfectionis adeptae: status religiosorum est
status perfec^ionis acquire^dae.
a state for the gaining of perfection, but to be a Bishop is a state of
perfection already attained, and therefore that perfection already attained
stands without literal or actual selling of all, because their Bishops may be
rich, and many of them are so rich Frasm. in epist. Hieron. ad Heliodor. in
antidoto. Quid dicemus de ^et egregijs Episcopis qui vel cu^regibus certare
possunt opule^tia?
as that for wealth they are able to compare with kings. If these Bishops were
formerly Monks, how do they keep their vow of doing perpetually that which
Christ speaks of in this place, unless it be so meant as I have said; to say
nothing that these are notable fellows to tell us of a perfection in
renouncing the world, and yet of a perfection too in returning afterward to
the world again. If they were not Monks, as a number never were, and yet
attain to a state of perfection, then it is not necessary to perfection
literally to sell and to forsake all, but it is sufficient according to our
construction, habitually in disposition and affection to be ready thereto if
cause require. Yea M. Bishop himself will confess, that it is not a thing
necessary for us for the obtaining of eternal life, literally and actually to
forsake all. But it was put to the young man as a necessary condition literally
to be performed for the obtaining of eternal life, as before was showed. The
words of Christ therefore are not literally to be applied unto us as they were
to him. To be short, Gulielmus de sancto Amore very truly against M. Bishops
vow of beggary expounds the words of Christ concerning Hospin. de Orig.
Monac. lib. 6. ca. 17. ex Antonino. Mandatu^ esse ibi paupertatem habitualem
non actuale^ flagitare Christum a nobis non vt ia^ omnia abijciamus quae
habemus, sed vt cum confessio diuini nominu et gloriae Christi postulauerit,
tum propter eum omnia deserere parati simus, etc.
habitual not actual poverty: namely, that Christ requires of us not
forthwith to cast away all that we have, but that when the confession of the
name of God and the glory of Christ requires, then we be ready to forsake all,
even as when Christ requires of his followers the hatred of father and mother,
and of their own soul, he does not simply bid not to honor their parents,
much less to hate them, but that occasion so requiring they be ready for
Christ's sake to neglect all. Now this duty concerns all, and therefore the
words of Christ in application to us do belong to all, and are very falsely
abused for the establishing and defending of Monkish vows, which are peculiar
to some, and if men list may without sin be none at all, as M. Bishop himself
has before made plain unto us. But he is content to tell us that the words
concern all, yet as a counsel only, not as a commandment; they are a heavenly
counsel (says he) given generally to all. But this is not so; they were a
commandment given to him to whom they were given, as M. Bishop himself a
little before has termed them, and as they concern us, they are a commandment
to us also. The young man sinned in refusing to do that that Christ directed
him, and it is sin to us not to do that that herein is intended concerning
us. If S. Anthony and S. Austin in that sort took it to be said to them, they
did rightly therein; but otherwise if Christ did not say to them, Come and
follow me, in the same sense wherein he spoke to the young man, then they had no
reason to think that Christ said to the^, Go sell all, in the same sense that
he did to him. If their coming to Christ, and fellowing of him were a matter
not outward but inward, the^ their selling all was to be a matter not outward
but inward, until the following of Christ by love and affection with in, could
not stand with the keeping of those things that are without. As for Ieroms
reproof of Vigila^tius, it moves us little in a cause that by the text it self
is clear and plain. His choler and heat in those matters that were
questioned betwixt S. Austin and him, do bewray that he could not endure that
any man should dislike what he approved. He calls Vigilantius in another
place, a holy Priest, and we find not that he has said any thing but what
stands with the holiness and truth of the word of God, and we approve that
which he here says, that Hieron. aduers. Vigil. Asseru eos melius facer^ qui
vtu^tur rebus fuit and paulatim fructus possessionum suaru^ pauperibus diuidunt
quam illos qui possessionibus diuendit^ semel omniae largiuntur.
they do better who use their own goods, and by little and little divide the
fruits of their possessions to the poor, then they who sell their
possessions, and give all at once. These make Christ a great feast for once,
and leave him afterward to hunger and thirst, but the other have care
continually to minister comfort and relief unto him. As for Hieromes
distinguishing of degrees, we admit not of it, because it has no ground in the
text which he alleges, yea and so much the less, because in the church of
Rome it self, as has been showed, the state of perfection, which is the
highest degree, stands with the enjoying of those goods, to the forsaking
whereof Hierome attributes that perfection.

23. W. BISHOP.
I might confirm this former argument with the example of the foresaid best
Christians, Acts 4.
who having possessions and lands, sold all, and brought the price of them, and
laid it at the Apostles feet: and more yet enforce it by the fact of Ananias
and Saphira his wife, who having sold all theirs, presented but part of the
money unto the Apostles, and reserved the rest unto themselves. Belike they
were of M. Perkins his mind, that it is better to give then to receive, and
therefore kept part to that purpose; but they therefore were both punished with
present death: which proves inuincibly, both how laudable it is to sell all,
and how dangerous to halt in such holy works.

But to avoid prolixitie, I do but point at the places: and that Ananias, as
the rest had promised this to God (which is a vow) it appears in the text,
where it is said, that he lied not unto men, but unto God, in not performing
his promise.

And here we deduce very clearly, that such a vow is much pleasing unto God,
thus: That which* is commended by our Saviors own both example and doctrine,
and was practiced by the Apostles and most holy Christians, that may be vowed
very laudably: but to sell all, and give it to the poor, is such.

R. ABBOT.
It cannot be proved, neither does the text say, that those foresaid best
Christians sold all that they had. Let him take his own Rhemish translation,
and tell us which way he can make good that which he says. Acts. 4.34.
As many as were owners of lands or houses, sold and brought the prices of
those things which they sold, and laid it before the feet of the Apostles. The
text says, they sold and brought the price of that they sold; it says not
that they sold all, and brought the price of all. Philip was one of them, and
yet Philip had his Cap. 21.8.
house still, and I hope M. Bishop will not think but that he had something in
his house also, wherewith he gave entertainment to Saint Paul, and those that
were with him. And who doubts but that the rest kept their dwelling houses
furnished for their own use, and for the use of other godly and faithful
brethren, as occasion should serve? So it is said of Barnabas, that Cap. 4 37.
whereas he had a field or a piece of land he sold it, but it is not said that
he sold all. So Ananias and Saphira Cap. 5.1.
sold a possession, or a piece of land, but they are not said to have sold all
that they possessed. And whereas Master Bishop says, that the same Ananias
and his wife made a vow, because it is said that Ver. 4.
they lied unto God, he talks idly. They lied unto God, because they
pretended to bring the whole price of that which they sold, when they brought
but a part thereof. But those other faithful Christians did that which the
common state and necessity of the Church did then require. Many poor
doubtless were then converted to the faith of Christ, who being now joined to
the Church, could expect no relief but from the Church. They therefore who had
wherewith to relieve the necessity of such, were to testify their faith and
love, by communicating and imparting to them of that they had. Here was no
matter of Monkery; it was an example of the common fruit that should be of true
Christianity and piety, whenever like occasion should require. He shows not
himself a lively and feeling member of the body of Christ, who in the public
want of the Church, cannot find in his heart to dispossess himself of
somewhat for the succor and comfort of other members. Letting these things
briefly pass as M. Bishop does, let us see what argument he collecteth of
these examples. That which was commended by our Saviors own both example and
doctrine, and was practiced by the Apostles and most holy Christians, may be
vowed very laudably. But to sell all and give it to the poor is such. We deny
his second proposition, because it pronounces that absolutely and simply,
which in the other proposition is understood respectively only, and with
exception. Hieron. ad^. Iouin. lib. 2. Antisthenes venditis quae habebat and
public distributis nihil sibi quam palliolum reseruauit.
Antisthenes the Philosopher, who was master to Diogenes, sold all that he
had, as Hierome mentions, and made public distribution thereof. So does the
same Hierome mention a sect of Philosophers called Idem in Math. cap. 10.
Bactroperitae, contemp^ores seculi, and omnia pro nihilo duce^tes cellariu^
secum vehebant.
Bactroperitae, who were contemners of the world, and set all things at naught,
only carrying a bag or wallet with them, and yet these did not that which
Christ commended, or the Apostles practiced. Christ has commended it, and the
Apostles and faithful Christians by their practice have taught it, when it
concerns us necessarily for the following of Christ; when the commandment of
Christ and his cause and Gospel does require it. But to do it voluntarily and
of our own heads, when no such cause requires it, it is not a matter of
commendation with Christ, but of our own superstitious and fond presumption.
The former way we may lawfully and laudably vow it, yea and we do all vow it in
our baptism, to forsake all rather then to forsake Christ; to keep nothing,
the keeping whereof should keep us away from Christ. But when the having of
our wealth hinders not, but that in mind and affection we may follow Christ,
and keep our selves faithful unto him, then to vow the relinquishing thereof,
is a superfluous and rash vow, no service of God, but a pleasing of our own
fancy, and no where commended by Jesus Christ.

24. W. BISHOP.
Now one word of obedience before we end this question. This vow says M.
Perkins, is against Christian liberty, whereby we have granted us a free use of
all things indifferent, and therefore to be bound to certain meats and
apparel is intolerable: but this reason has been reproved already: Gal. 5.10.
he adds, Stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has made you free: Does
your breath or heart fail you Sir, that you stop thus in the midst of a
sentence, the rest belike discovers the fraud of it: And wrap not your selves
again in the yoke of bondage, to wit, bind not your selves to the observation
of Moses law, as ye shall do if ye be circumcised. All this is good; but does
it follow hereof, that in the law of grace, we should not obey our superiors,
nor observe such good orders as holy Church has approved? nothing less: but
happy is that necessity, as Saint Augustine witnesses, which holds us close
to those things which be better to do, than to leave undone, otherwise our
weakness would quickly shrink back. And again, if Christ's sufferings
without his obedience (as M. Perkins himself testifies, Page 61.) had not
been available for our justification, no doubt, but those works which are
garnished with the virtue of obedience, are more acceptable in Gods sight.

Finally, M. Perkins says, that we magnify these three vows of chastity,
poverty, and obedience. And good reason have we so to do, as has been showed:
but says he, for the vow of Baptism, we have made no such account of it, as
they do; which is not so. We hold indeed that the covenant which we make in
Baptism, is no vow, but a full and assured promise to believe in God, to
renounce the devil and all his works, and to keep all Gods commandments,
which we keep or do our best endeavor to keep; at least we teach not as the
Protestants do, that they are impossible to be kept, for that is enough to
discourage any man from endeavoring to keep them. And as touching the vow
which he says we made in our creation, we remember nothing of it, nor never
heard speak of it by any good author, not that we make, or mean we any vows
when we receive the B. Sacrament. These be but novelties of words, and the
rauing of some decayed wits.

R. ABBOT.
Christian liberty has not only set us free from the rigor and curse of the
law, but also from the yoke of external observations, that is, from placing
religion and holiness, the worship and service of God, and from reputing
cleanness or uncleanness toward God in any external or outward things.
Concerning this liberty against the Monkish vow of obedience, M. Perkins
alleges the Apostles words, Gal. 5.1.
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. Here Master
Bishop being somewhat pleasurable, asks: Does your breath or heart fail you,
Sir, that you stop thus in the midst of a sentence? Why, I pray, what is the
rest of the sentence? And wrap not your selves again in the yoke of bondage.
And what means that? Marry bind not your selves to the observation of Moses
law, as ye shall do if ye be circumcised. And was it then the meaning of the
Apostle, that they should not wrap themselves in the yoke and bondage of Moses
law, which was given of God, but they might wrap themselves in the yoke and
bondage of the laws of men? Did God ease us of his yoke, to give men liberty
to yoke us again with their devises? What an idle exception is this of his,
and why does he not remember, that the Apostle makes this instruction general
against all yokes of humane imposition, where he says, 1. Cor. 7.23.
Ye are bought with a price; be ye not made the servants of men. S. Austine
lamenteth it as touching the condition of his time, that Aug ep^st. 119. Ipsam
religione^ qua^ paucissimis and manifestissimu celebrationu^ Sacramentis
misericordia Dei esse libera^ voluit seruilib^s oneribus premunt vt
tolerabilior sit conditio Iudaec^u^ qui etiamsi te^pus libertatis no^
agnouerint, legalibus tamen sarcinis non humanis praesumptionibus subijciuntur.
whereas the mercy of God would have religion to be free, having very few, and
those very manifest Sacraments or mysteries of observations, men did so
oppress it with servile burdens, as that the state of the Jews was more
tolerable, who albeit they knew not the time of liberty* yet were subject to
the burdens of the law of God, and not to humane presumptions. It is plain
then by S. Austines judgment, which therein is very true, that the liberty of
Christian faith and religion, is not only from the burdens and yokes of Moses
law, but also from all burdens of humane presumptions, and therefore M. Bishops
answer is very insufficient to our objection. The insufficiency whereof will
the better appear in considering the other place alleged by M. Perkins and
omitted by M. Bishop, Col. 2.16.20.
Let no man judge you in meat and drink; why are ye led with traditions or
decrees, Touch not, taste not, handle not? which all perish in the using, being
after the doctrines and commandments of men. By which words he plainly
shows, that by the liberty of Christ no rules may be set down, whereby men
should be judged in conscience about meats and drinks, about touching,
tasting, handling, or any thing decreed by the doctrines and precepts of men.
And what does he then but thereby condemn all Monkish institutions, whereby
the consciences of men are burdened and entangled with so many observations
about meats, drinks, apparel, and other matters reckoned as a purchase of
the forgiveness of sins, and the merit of eternal life? This cannot be
avoided but that since the doctrines and co^mandemens of men as touching meats
and drinks, and such other things be condemned therefore Friar Frauncis and his
fellow Dominicke, with the rest of them, were superstitious hypocrites to
prescribe rules, and to require obedience to be performed unto them in such
things. Yea, and let M. Bishop be reckoned with them, who sets such before
us under the name of superiors to be obeyed, and calls those good orders
which the Apostle rejects because they are but men's traditions, and names
that a holy Church, which contrary to the Apostles doctrine approves such
orders. As for that which S. Austine says, Aug. epist. 45. Foelix est
necessitas quae in meliora compellit.
Happy is the necessity that compels to the better, it is true where the
thing is good whereto we are compelled, but unhappy is the necessity whereby
we tie our selves to those things which are superstitious and offensive unto
God. Where he says, that if Christ's sufferings without his obedience had not
been available for our justification, no doubt but the works which are
garnished with the virtue of obedience, are more acceptable in Gods sight, he
notably plaieth the hypocrite, to make Christ's obedience to his father, a
cloak for their Friarly obedience to superstitious and absurd men. It is true
indeed which S. Austine says, that Aug in Psalm. 70. Nihil tam expedit animae
quam obedire.
there is nothing so expedient for the soul as to obey, but it is then true,
when we obey them who according to God are to be obeyed. Origin. in Ca^tic. hom
2. Ornamentum and monile ceruicis ecclesiae obedientiae Christi est.
The obedience of Christ, says Origin, is the ornament and jewel of the
Churches neck, and therefore in Christ's behalf we are to obey none, but
only them in whom we obey Christ. We are to obey them who Math. 28.20.
teach the things which he has commanded, not those things which they
themselves have devised. Tertul. de praescript. Nec ipsi (Apostoli) quicquam ex
suo arbitrio quod inducerent elegerunt.
The Apostles, says Tertullian, gave themselves no liberty to bring in any
thing of their own will, and we are to follow none but such as have followed
the Apostles to deliver faithfully Christ's words, not presumed rules and
orders of their own invention. Ibid. Sed ne eligere quod aliquis de suo
arbitrio induxerit.
We are not, says he, to choose (or follow) any thing, which any man of his
own discretion has brought in. Matthew of Paris tells a story of Math.
Parisan Henr. 3 anno. 1227.
Friar Frauncis, that when he delivered his rule to the Pope to be viewed and
confirmed, the Pope considering the same, and beholding the deformed condition
of the man, bid him get him to the swine, and wallow with the^, and bestow his
pains to preach to them. The Friar presently went where swine were, and
tumbled himself amongst the^, and from top to toe beraied himself all over with
mire and dirt. In this habit he goes to the Pope again, saying, My Lord I
have done as thou commandedst, I pray thee now to hearken to my request. The
Pope admired the man, and being sorry for that he had said to him, granted him
the confirming of his rule. Were not here two fools well met, and may we not
make it a question whether was the greater fool, whether the Friar for so
doing, or the Pope for approving that which he did? Yet this brainsick and
drunken trick of a dirty beast goes with M. Bishop for a virtue of obedience,
and was one of those worthy acts, for which of a Friar he became a Saint. Such
is the rest of the obedience that their vow tieth the^ to, even to a number of
mad and witless fancies, such as that a man may well think the^ to be
bewitched of Satan, in that they place devotion and holiness in such toies. We
leave their obedience to the^, and not only of these absurdities, but of those
other matters which carry some better show of sobriety and gravity, we say as
S. Ambrose has said, Ambros. de Virg. lib. 3. Nos nou^ omnia quae Christus no^
docuit, iure da^namus quia via fidelibus Christu^ est. Siergo Christus non
docuit quod docemus nos illud detestabile iudicamus.
We justly condemn all new things which Christ has not taught, because Christ
is the way for faithful men. If Christ have not taught what we teach, we hold
it worthy to be detested. Now therefore let them magnify their three vows
whilst they will, but because Christ never knew them for his, we condemn them
as superstitiously devised, and blasphemously maintained to the injury and
wrong of the cross. We magnify the vow of baptism as the only Christian
vow, approving no other vows but what are implied and contained therein,
because therein for the whole course of our life we vow and dedicate our selves
wholly unto God. M. Bishop says, that that is no vow but a full and assured
promise, and yet in the former section he has told us, that to promise to God
is a vow. We vow our selves therein to the keeping of Gods commandments, and
we endeavor to keep them, and by the grace of God we attain to the keeping
of the^, but yet so as that we know it to be one of Christ's commandments to
say daily unto God, Aug. cont. 2. epist Pelag. lib. 3 ca. 7. Ita dixerim,
mandata f^cerunt vt ipsa mandata memi nerimus pertinere ad oratione^ in qu^
veraci^or quotidie dicunt sancti fi^u^ promissimis fiat voluntas tua and,
D^miti^ nobis, etc.
Forgive us our trespasses, because we do not so keep his other commandments,
nor can so keep them in the infirmity of this flesh, but that Iam. 3.2.
in many things we offend all. This we teach, and this is so true, as that M.
Bishop himself in his own conscience is forced to subscribe it, and yet by a
wilful spirit of contradiction bends himself to dispute against it. The vow
of baptism we always renew in receiving the Lords supper, because therein we
profess our selves to be of his retinue, and renew the promise of being holy
unto him. As for that which Master Perkins says of a vow made in our creation
as touching our obedience to God, in what meaning he spoke it, I cannot
determine. There may be nouelty in the word, but 1. Tim. 6.20.
profaneness which is the thing that the Apostle condemns, there is none.
He might suppose Adams promise thereof before his fall, or the bond and duty
arising of our creation, whereby we are no less tied then by a vow. Of his
terms of rauing and decayed wits, we will leave him to consider further,
presuming that one day he will think that in all this matter he has but
raued, and that his wits were not right in taking upon him the defense of so
bad a cause.

CHAPTER 9. OF IMAGES.
Our consents. We acknowledge the civil use of Images, M. Perkin^.
as freely and truly as the Church of Rome does. By civil use, I understand
that which is made of the^ in the common society of men, out of the appointed
places of the solemn worship of God: And this to be lawful appears, because
the arts of painting and grauing are the ordinances of God, and to be skilful
in them is the gift of God, as the example of Bezaleel and Aholiab declare.
Exodus 35.
This use of Images may be in sundry things. First in adorning and setting
forth of buildings; so the Lord commanded his Temple to be adorned with Images
of Palme-trees and Pomegranates; of Bulls, Cherubs, and such like. Secondly,
they serve for distinction of coyns. Thirdly, Images serve to keep in memory
friends departed who^ we reverence, and therefore in the days after the
Apostles, Christians used privately to keep the pictures of their friends
departed; which afterward (says he) by abuse came to be set in Churches and
worshipped, of which hereafter.

Second conclusion: We hold the historical use of Images to be good and
lawful: that is, to represent to the eye the acts of Histories, whether they
be humane or divine; and thus we think that the histories of the Bible may be
painted in private places.

Third conclusion: In one case it is lawful to make an Image, to testify the
presence or effects of the majesty of God; namely, when God himself commands
it: so was the brazen Serpent made to represent Christ crucified, John. 3.
and the Cherubs over the Mercy seat, to represent the majesty of God, whom
the Angels adore: And therefore it is said: Thou shall not make to thy self
(that is upon thine own head) any graven Image: This by the way is a very
wilful perverting of those words (to thy self) which cannot signify, but, to
thine own use, that is, to adore them, as is plainly declared in the text
following.

The fourth conclusion: The right Images of the new Testament, are the doctrine
and preaching of the Gospel, wherein Christ and his benefits are lively
represented unto us: but these be metaphorical Pictures, not belonging to this
purpose: for it is one thing to describe in words, another to express in
lively colors and lineaments.

1. W. BISHOP.
These conclusions contain, as M. Perkins affirms, the doctrine of the
Church of England; which I would believe, if I did not see the Magistrates
publicly to take away Pictures from Catholics, to tear and burn them, which
were kept but in private places: yea, their more fervent disciples cannot abide
a Cross standing by the high-way-side, or in any, never so profane a place,
but either they beat and hale them down, or most despitefully deface them:
bewraying indeed unto all moderate men, their cankred stomakes against him
that died on the Cross: who will one day (when he pleases) confound them. But
to cover this their malice, they cast over it the mantle of zeal, saying that
the Papists make them their Gods, and that therefore they are to be abolished.

O men blinded with spite against true devotion. We Catholics are a thousand
times more zealous of the true honor of the living God, than any Protestants
ever were or will be: And that small reverence which we yield unto Images, is
more different from the honor and obedience due unto Almighty God, than the
cope of heaven is distant from the center of the earth.

R. ABBOT.
They say the devil never goes away but he leaves a stink behind him. M.
Bishop as it appears, had given over this work at the question of
satisfaction, but better remembering himself, he took the matter in hand
again, and then would by no means give over till he had left us this stink
of Images. This is one of the gross and palpable abominations of the kingdom
of Antichrist, the filth whereof there is no man but sees, save only they 2.
Cor. 4.4.
in whom being unbelievers, the god of this world has blinded their minds,
that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the Image of
God, should not shine unto them. By this the Church of Rome has matched all
the idolatries of the heathen, and brought all their iugling devices into the
Church, abusing the ignorance and simplicity of the people as grossly and
damnably as ever they did. But in this field I have walked at large before in
Sect. 12.
answer of the Epistle to the King: and therefore I will here tie my self to
those things which Master Bishop gives us occasion to consider of. M. Perkins
in his third conclusion affirms a lawfulness of making Images, to testify
the presence and effects of the majesty of God, when God himself has so
commanded, as he exemplifieth in Moses his making of the brazen serpent in
figure of Christ crucified, and the Cherubin set over the mercy seat, God
there promising his presence, and signifying the attendance of Angels to do him
service. Concerning this point Tertullian being urged by idol-makers with the
example of the brazen serpent, answers very rightly: Tertul. de Idol. Been
quod idem Deus and lege vetuit similitudinem fieri, and extraordinario
praecepto serpentis similitudinem interdixit. Si eundem Deum observes, habes
legem eius. Ne feceris similitudinem Si and praeceptum factae postea
similitudinis respicis, and tu imitare Mosen. Ne feceris aduersus legem
similitudinem, nisi and tibi Deus iusserit.
It is well that the same God both did forbid by law, that any likeness should
be made, and by extraordinary commandment did appoint the likeness of a
serpent. If thou worship the same God, thou have his law, Thou shall not make
the similitude or likeness of any thing: if thou look to the commandment of
making a similitude afterward, do thou imitate Moses, do not against the law
make an image, unless God command thee also. God gives not laws to himself
but to us: what he commands to the contrary by his own authority, is no
justification of our presumption. For this cause M. Perkins observes, that in
the commandment it is said: Thou shall not make (TO THY SELF) any graven
image: to thy self, that is, (says he) upon thine own head, or upon thine
own will and pleasure. M. Bishop says, that this is a wilful perverting of
the words, which cannot signify, but to thine own use, that is, to adore.
Thus he cannot abide that they should be restrained from doing somewhat of
their own heads, and at their own will: it is death to them to be hedged from
that walk. Yet Moses gave it for a lesson from God, Deuteronomy. 12.8.32 vulg. Hoc
tantu^ facito Domino.
Ye shall not do every man what seems good in his own eyes, What I command
thee that only do to the Lord; thou shall put nothing to, nor take ought
therefrom. Whereby it appears, that M. Perkins exposition contains a truth,
that to the Lord, or by way of service to God, no image might be made but what
God himself commanded, neither does the text declare any thing to the
contrary, but that that is the true meaning of the words which he expounds.
In his fourth conclusion he says, that the right Images of the new Testament,
are the doctrine and preaching of the Gospel, and all things that by the word
of God do thereto appertain, whereby Gal. 3.1^
Jesus Christ is described before our eyes, as the Apostle says, even as
crucified amongst us. This (says he) is an excellent picture whereby Christ
with his benefits is lively represented unto us. These are Metaphorical
pictures, says M. Bishop, not belonging to this purpose. But why does he admit
that which M. Perkins cites out of Origin affirming that Christians have no
other. Origin. contra Celsum lib. 8. Simulachra Deo dicanda sunt non fabrorum
opera, sed a verbo Dei dedolata formataque in nobis, videlicet virtutu ad
imitationem primogeniti totius ereaturae in quo sunt iustitiae, temperantiae,
fertitudinis, sapientiae, pietatis, caeterarumque virtutu^ exempla. Hae sunt
statuae Deo dicata in animu^ virtutes exertentium, quibus dece^ter honorari
credimus omniu^ huiusmodi statuarum archetypum primu^, etc.
The images to be dedicated to God are not the work^s of Carpenters, but hewed
by the word of God and framed in us, namely, virtues to the imitation of him,
who is the first borne before all creatures, in whom are the examples of
justice, fortitude, temperancie, wisdom, piety and other virtues. These are
Images dedicated to God in the minds of them that exercise such virtues,
wherewith we believe the principal of all such Images, the image of the
invisible God, who is God the only begotten, to be conveniently honored. He
knew no other images lawful amongst Christians, but only such as wherein we
bear the image of God and of his Son Jesus Christ, but this M. Bishop thought
not good to take knowledge of. As for that which he says, that he believes
not our doctrine to be as M. Perkins has set down, because the Magistrates
publicly take away pictures from Catholics, and tear them down and burn
them, he must understand that it is nothing to us, what he believes. Our
Magistrates know how to put difference betwixt the lawful use of things, and
the unlawful abuse: they know well how such pictures and images are by Papists
turned to Idols, and therefore to show the detestation of the dishonor that
thereby is done to God, they burn them, and tear them, and deface them being
found with them, that they may no more be abused to such idolatry. Where
otherwise they are found, and are not subject to their superstitious and false
devotions, our Magistrates do nothing against them, because they are not
offended at the having, but at the abusing of them. By reason of those
idolatrous fancies, it is, that our more fervent disciples, as he calls the^,
cannot abide a Cross standing by the high way side, or in any other place.
They carry therein a true zeal to God, though not always so advisedly managed
as it ought to be. But if any of private fancy proceed to the demolishing and
destroying of such public monuments, we approve it not, and they that do it,
deservedly receive their check. We are well enough persuaded, that they who
first began the erecting of those Crosses, did it merely in the honor of the
name of Christ, that where before had stood the ensigns of false and idol
Gods, Ezec. 16.25.
at the head of every way, there might be lifted up a trophee and standard as a
monument and token of the exaltation of him that died upon the Cross. They
were far off from Popish idolatry: they had learned not to worship that that
is made with hands, being converted from worshipping stocks and stones, they
knew they were not to return to the same again: they carried the same mind as
did Helena, when she found the Cross whereon Christ was crucified: Ambr. de
obitu Theodos. Regem adorauit non lignum, vtique quia hic gentilis est error
and vanitas impioru^ sed adorauit illu^ qui pependit in ligno.
She worshipped the King (says Ambrose) verily not the wood: for this were
heathenish error, and the vanity of ungodly men: but she worshipped him that
was hanged upon the wood. But what they erected only for historical
ostentation of the advancement of the kingdom of Christ, that Popery turned
to heathenish abomination, and gave to the Cross the honor that belonged
only to him that died upon the Cross. In respect whereof public authority
has done that, that seemed necessary for the taking away of such idolatry.
It has removed what contained open and apparent scandal to true religion, and
has left the rest to fall of it self, applying it self to the rule of S.
Austin, Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 6. Prius agimus vt idola in eorum cordibus
confrin. gamus.
We first labor to break the idols in men's hearts, knowing that where the
heart is reclaimed from idolatry, it learneth to esteem of things outward as
they are. And thus (thanks be to God) men have now learned to behold Crosses,
and go by them without those superstitious opinions and vsages which before
have been had and observed toward them. Now where public authority cease,
it is not for private men to begin again, neither can it be warranted, that
men in show of zeal carry themselves tumultuously for the reforming of such
errors. S. Austin could say of breaking the Pagan Idols, Ibid. Vbi nobis non
est data potestas, non facimus: vbi data est, non praetermittimus.
Where power is not given us, we do it not; where it is given us, we omit it
not. Much more are we to observe the same rule in those things which are deemed
in their original to have contained nothing prejudicial to the faith. Yea and
by common experience we see, that by such private opposition, beside that it is
injurious to public government, men do but enkindle the minds of their
opposites to a more earnest affecting of those things, which before they have
seemed very lightly to set by. But yet the ground whereupon either publicly or
privately we or any of us have been moved to the defacing of any such
superstitious Images, is that which M. Bishop names, because the Papists have
made them Gods, and therein robbed God of that devotion and service which
peculiarly belongs unto him. Here he cries out, O men blinded with spite
against true devotion! but we on the other side give most humble thanks to
God, that by his word he has given us light to see what true devotion is, and
has freed us from their yoke, who under the name of Christian devotion held us
in the bondage of heathenish abomination. As for them, whether they be zealous
of the true honor of the living God, their fruits do show, who in all things,
and specially in this matter of Images, carry themselves so contrary to the
express word of God. And whereas he says, that the small reverence which they
yield to Images is more different from the honor due to God, then the cope of
heaven is distant from the center of the earth, he shows that he has learned
of the Jesuits to equivocate with God, as they are wont to do with men. How
does he call it a small reverence which they do to Images, when it appears
not, but that they do the same to Images that they do to God? They kneel to
them, they pray to them, they vow vows to them, they offer offerings to them,
they swear by them, and yet M. Bishop would make us believe, that there is
great difference betwixt the worship that they do to images, and that which
they do to God. But forsooth we must think that by a mental reservation they
make a difference, and though all things outwardly seem the same, yet in mind
and understanding they prefer God before their Idols. Thus they would have us
to think, when as notwithstanding Andradius their great defender of the
Council of Trent, freely confesses, that Andrad. Orth. explicat. lib. 9. Non
tamen inficiamur hac nos Latriae adoratione Christi praeclarissimam crucem
colere and venerari.
with the worship of Latria (belonging they say to God only) they worship the
cross of Christ. Yea Polydore Virgil another of their own fellows, has told
us how they have observed this difference: Polyd. Virgil. de invent. rer. lib.
6. cap. 13. Eo insaniae deuentum est vt haec pittatis pars parum differat ab
impietate Su^t enim been multi rudiores stupidioresque qui saxeas vel ligneas,
marmore ^s, aeneas, seu in parteribus pictas varijsque coloribus litas imagines
colant, non vt figuras, sed perinde quasi ipsae sensum aliqu^m habea^t and ijs
m^gis fia^ne quam Christo. and alijs ^uis quibus di^atae sunt, etc.
Men are grown to that madness (says he) that this part of piety is little
differing from flat impiety. For there are a many of the more rude and
ignorant who worship images of stone or wood, of marble or brass, yea and
painted and garnished with colors upon the walls, not as figures, but even as
if they had verily sense, and do put more trust in them then they do in Christ
or other Saints to whom they are dedicated. We doubt not but he would speak of
his own as favorably as he could, and therefore we may well conceive what
horrible impiety it was that wrested from him this confession. There follows
more to that purpose, wherein he shows how the masters of that Image-craft
made their profit of it, drawing on the people in that simplicity to offer
richly unto them, but what he said, he is made now not to say, the Spanish
Censors having taken order by their Index Expurgatorius, that all that matter in
their editions is left out. Thus they take care that their Idolatry may
continue still, providing so near as may be, that nothing may be extant
amongst them for the discovery thereof And hereby it appears, that it is but
for bashfulnes that M. Bishop tells us of so great difference of worship, and
howsoever he and such other as he is, can plead for themselves a mental
reservation, even as the Philosophers and learned amongst the heathen did, yet
they suffer the people to run on in this abomination to worship their Images
with as great devotion, as if they were very Gods.

2. W. BISHOP.
And that these hotter brethren may see what reason Master Perkins had to allow
of the civil and historical use of Images, I think it expedient to note
here, how in the purest antiquity, Images were made and respected.

That famous Image of our blessed Savior, which the woman cured of the bloody
flux, Mat 9.
set up in brass at Caesarea Philippi, upon a pillar of stone, is not unknown
unto any that have read the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, Lib. 7. cap.
14. And how God did approve it by giving virtue unto an herb when it did grow
to touch the hemme of that Picture, to cure all manner of diseases. Which Image
Eusebius himself did see standing until his days, which was 1300. years
ago, as he there testifies as also, that he saw diverse others, namely, of
Saint Peter and Paul.

This goodly stature being most memorable both for antiquity of it, being made
our Savior yet living, and for the miracles wrought by that herb, growing at
the foot of it, Julian the Apostata for malice against our Savior, caused to
be broken down, and set up his own image in the place of us but his was
presently with lightning and thunder from heaven consumed into ashes, and our
Saviors, by the Christians carried into their Church, as witnessech Zozomenus.
Lib. 5. hist. cap. 20.


Another picture of our Saviors visage, he himself is reported to have sent
unto Abgarus Prince of Edessa, as witnesses Metaphastes In vita Constantini,
Damascene Lib. 10. de Imaginibus.
, and Euagrius, Lib. 4. hist. c p. ^.
who does in the same chapter rehearse a notable miracle, wrought by the same
Image, to deliver the town from the sacking of the Persians. And in his fifth
book and 18. chapter, records another miracle done by the image of the
blessed Virgin Marie in a prison at Antioch.

The third Image representing our blessed Savior, is said to have been made by
Nicodemus his secret Disciple, which afterward was taken by the Jews, and in
despite of Christ was crucified, and to their confusion, much blood issued out
of it.

This history is in the work of S. Athanasius that sound pillar of the
Church, entitled, De passione imaginis, and is either his, or some other very
ancient and grave writer: For it is related in the seventh general Council,
act. 4.

That Saint Luke the Evangelist drew the picture of our blessed Laedie, is
registered by Theodorus Lector 1000. years ago, and Lib. 1. collecta^.
Metaphrastes, In vita Lucae, and Nicephorus Li. 14 hist 1, 2.
.

Tertullian, an author of the second hundredth year after Christ, has left
written, Lib. 2. de pudic.
that the Image of Christ in shape of a shepherd carrying a sheep on his
shoulders, was engraven upon the holy Chalices used in the Church. In the time
of S. Chrysostom, they were so common, that they were carried in rings, drawn
on cups, painted in chambers. See Theodoret. in histor. relig. in vita Simeonis
Stelitae. August. lib. 2. de cons. Euang. cap. 10. And the 7. Synod. Act. 4.

R. ABBOT.
This Section M. Bishop writes, neither against M. Perkins nor against us, but
only against some hoter brethren, indeed against his own shadow, because I
know none that do not allow of the civil and historical use of Images. But
yet it shall not be amiss to note somewhat as touching some of the examples
that he brings, because albeit by his own words it appears and is true,
that they are nothing to his purpose, yet his drift is by such examples of
Images, to gain some credit to their corruption and abuse of them. It is true
that Eusebius makes mention of such an Image set up Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap.
17.
at Caesarea Philippi by the woman whom Christ cured of the bloody issue, and
that an herb grew at the foot of it, which when it grew to a certain
height, cured all diseases miraculously, but that he himself saw it, he says
nor, neither does he speak of any religion or devotion in any sort done unto
it. If Popery had then swayed, what a work would there have been about that
Image? what pilgrimages, what offerings, what kneeling, what censing, and no
end of superstition? But there was no such matter, nor any manner of service
done for the honor of it. Of the erecting of that Image Eusebius himself
there says: Ibid. Nec mi rum videri d^^^^ eos qui ex gertibus olim a Seruatore
nostro curata suntasta seciss^, quando and Apostolorum illus imagines, Pauli
videl. cet and Petri, con^que and apsius Christi^^. tabul^ colorious depicta^
ass^ruari vidimus quod veteres ex ge^tili consuetudine eos quos seruatores
put^rum hunc in modum honorare solui sunt.
It need not seem strange, that those of the Gentiles who of old were cured
by our Savior Christ did such things, for that we have seen the Images of his
Apostles Peter and Paul, yea and of Christ himself, kept painted with colors
in tables, for that of old they have been wont by a heathenish custom thus to
honor them whom they took to be preseruers and saviors of them. Where it is
duly to be noted, that Eusebins refers the original hereof to the
Gentiles, to heathenish custom and imitation, not to anie-institution of
Christ, or of his Apostles and Evangelists, or other Pastors and Bishops of
the Church. Again, that which he says of other Images of Christ and Peter and
Paul, he says as of a matter very seldom and rare; We have seen such,
says he, as importing it was no common and ordinary thing. As for that which
M. Bishop makes the special commendation of this Image, which is the herb
growing at the foot of it, it makes me greatly to suspect, that in the report
of it somewhat is amiss: do thou judge gentle Reader, whether there be not
just cause of such suspicion. First Eusebius himself reports the matter
only by hearesay: Ibid. Domum eius ostendi, beneficijque Seruatoris illam
collati admira^da trophaea durare serunt, etc Hanc statua^ imaginem Iesis
habere dicu^t, etc Ma^sit ad nostra vsque tempora, sicut and vinere potest ab
ijs qui in illam citatate^ commigrant.
They say, says he, that the woman's house is yet showed, and that there
continues a notable monument of the benefit done to her by our Savior; they
say that the same has the Image of Jesus. It has continued even until this
time, and may be seen of them that travel to that City. If he had reported
this matter as of his own sight and knowledge, some more reason there had been
to give credit to it, but he does not so report it, and therefore we cannot so
firmly rest upon that which he says. Secondly we so much the less believe it,
for that it has no other testimony but only his hearesay, there being no other
of the ancient fathers that gives us any record or witness of it. M. Bishop
cites Sozomen, making mention of that herb also, but he does it only upon
Eusebius his credit, other proof or knowledge of it he brings none. Now it
is not possible that so famous a testimony and justification of the name of
Christ should be omitted by Justin Martyr, by Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin,
Tertullian, Arnobius, Minutius Felix, and others in their Apologies and
defenses of Christian religion against the heathen: yea in the expounding of
the story of that woman in the Gospel, neither Origin nor Chrysostom, nor
Hylarie, nor Ambrose, nor Hierome make any mention of such a matter. This I
suppose should much weaken the credit and opinion of the miracle by him
reported, to say nothing that if any such matter had been known, which could
not but be known, it is not credible that it could have stood for the space of
those three hundred years in so many terrible persecutions, wherein nothing was
left unattempted or undone to take away all things that might give any glory
to the name of Christ. Some speech it seems there grew afterward concerning
it, at leastwise of the standard or Image which in likelihood stood there,
which so soon as Sozomen. hist. lib. 5. cap. 20.
Julian the Apostata heard, he sent to have it taken away, and his own Image
to be set up in stead thereof. Which being done in despite of Christ, no
marvel if by thunder and lightning from heaven God revenged it, and turned
topsi-turuie the Image which that renegate set up against the name of Christ.
Yea we doubt not concerning Popish Idols and Images of Christ and his Saints,
but that Gods revenge shall follow them, who destroy them in contumely and
reproach of Christ, and in despite and hatred of his name, howsoever they
themselves are abominable also in the sight of God, who are the makers and
users of them. For he who amongst the heathens so notoriously revenged the
sacriledges that were done to idoll-gods, when they were done to the^ under the
name of gods, will undoubtedly revenge the contempts that are offered and done
to sacrilegious Idols in the name of Christ, because their malicious purpose is
therein directed against Christ himself. The ten tribes being divided from
Judah, built themselves altars wherewith to sacrifice to God, expressly
contrary to the law of God, who admitted Deuteronomy. 12.11.13.14.
no altar but in the Temple at Jerusalem, but yet when Ahab and Iezabell pulled
down those altars in contempt of God, and in behalf of Baal, Elias the
Prophet complains unto God: 1. King. 19.10.
Lord they have dug down thine altars. That therefore which Sozomen
reports of the destruction of Iulians image, serves not to add any credit
to Popish Images, if at least it be true which he alone also reports, who in
the same place reports some other very fabulous and vain things. The next
example of Images is so much the more impudently alleged, for that in their
own Decrees those two Epistles Did. 15. cap. Sancta Romana. ex decret. Gelas.
1. Council. tom. 2. Epistola Abagari regis, ad Iesum Apocrypha: Epistola Jesus ad
Abagarum regem apocrypha.
of Abgar to Christ and of Christ to Abgar, whence that fable is taken, are
condemned for an apocryphal or counterfeit device. It is to be noted also, that
Eusebius. hist. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Eusebius mentions Abgarus sending an Epistle to Christ, and Christ's answer
to him, but of this matter of Christ's image he says not one word. The tale it
appears was then begun, but it was not come to perfection till afterward
Damascen that notable Idol-monger added to it another piece, and to that piece
Nicephorus added yet another piece, and so now it serves M. Bishop and his
fellows for an authentical and good record. As for the miracles that he
tells us of, they little avail with us, because the one stands wholly upon a
false ground, and for the other or rather for both, we know that Euagrius
sometimes shows too little discretion in the entertaining of such tales. The
third instance M. Bishop himself distrusteth, and naming first Athanasius for
the reporter of it, comes in presently with either it is his, or some other
very grave and ancient writers. And why? for, says he, it is related in the
seventh general Council, namely wherein they seemed every man to have put on
a vizard upon his face, that they might not be seen to blush at those lewd and
shameful forgeries wherewith they then almost eight hundred years after
Christ, labored to set up the worshipping of Idols and Images, by the
instigation and furtherance of a wicked Empress, usurping and tyrannizing in
the minority of her son. We shall have afterward further occasion to
speak concerning this Council; in the mean time it is to be understood, that
Sigebert. in Chron. anno 765.
Sigebert mentions this matter of the Image of Christ to have befallen as the
report was, 400. years after the time of Athanasius, in the year of our Lord
765. at which time much good drink was in brewing to make men drunk with the
opinion of that Idol-seruice which Satan then by might and maine labored to
bring in. Yet M. Bishop so directed by his master Bellarmine, is not ashamed
to cite this as under the name of Athanasius, by his name to gain some credit
to a lie. Such another tale does he tell us out of Theodorus Lector, and
Metaphrastes and Nicephorus, of the Image of the virgin Marie, taken by Saint
Luke the Evangelist, of whom we read that he was a Physician, but that he was
also a Painter we read not. This matter has no record at all for six hundred
years after Christ, and we must believe it upon their words who so long after
have devised it of their own heads. They come too late to inform us what
Saint Luke did, and because it has no better witness we reject this also for
a lie. The rest I omit, importing only a civil and historical use of Images,
as M. Bishop propounds, which we question not, only against the seventh
Synod we except as an unfit witness in this cause, which from historical use
lifted up Images to be adored with religious and holy worship.

3. W. BISHOP.
This briefly of Images in general: now a word or two of the sign of the
Cross, which our Protestants have banished from all their followers:
nevertheless it cannot be denied to have been in most frequent use among the
best Christians of the Primitive Church.

Tertullian has these words, De corona militis.
At every going forward and return, when we dress us and pull on our shoes,
when we wash and sit down, at the lighting of candles, and entering into our
chambers, finally when we set our selves to any thing, we make the sign of
the Cross on our foreheads.

Saint Ambrose Sermon. 84.
exhorts us to begin all our works with the sign of the Cross.

S. Augustine. 118. in Joan.
What is that ensign of Christ, which all men know, but the Cross of Christ,
the which sign, unless it be made on the foreheads of the faithful, yea, on
the water by which they are regenerate, and on the Oil and Chrisme wherewith
they are anointed, and on the sacrifice wherewith they are nourished, not one
of them are orderly and duly administered. Our Protestants then that have
neither holy Oil, nor sacrifice to make the Cross upon, are in pitiful
taking.

But hear also what some of the best Greek Doctors do say of this same sign
of the Cross.

S. Cyril Catech. 4.
agrees fully-with Tertullian, saying: Make this sign of the Cross both
eating and drinking, both sitting and standing, and walking and speaking, in
sum, at all times.

S. Basil De Spir. sanct.
accounts this making the sign of the Cross, among some of the principal
traditions of the Apostles.

Origin Hom. 8. in ca. 15. Exodus
yields one reason why we make this sign, affirming that fear and trembling
does fall upon the evil spirits, when they see the sign of the Cross made
with faith.

S. Gregory Nazianzene Orat. 1. in Iul.
reports, that the wicked Apostata Julian, being frighted with spirits, made
the sign of the Cross, which he had renounced, and yet it delivered him from
them.

S. Chrysostom most largely discourses of the glorious use of the Cross,
Orat quod Christus sit Deus. See the place, among an hundred other
commendations of it, he has these words: That the heads of Kings are not so
decked with their Diademes, as with the sign of the Cross, and concludes,
that all men strive to pass other in taking to them this admirable Cross, and
that no man was ashamed of it, but esteemed themselves more beautified with
that, then with many Jewels, borders and chains, garnished with Pearl and
precious stones.

Heu quantum mutamur ab ipsis: Alas, what a pitiful change is this, that that
which was of the best Christians reputed dear and holy, should now be
accounted a point of superstition and plain witchcraft?

By all which we learn, that the best Christians both used always and highly
esteemed of holy Images, even from our Saviors own days, and God himself
has by divine testimony of miracles recommended them unto us, not only for
the civil and historical uses of them, but more to honor them whose pictures
they were: for no man in his right wits can deny, but that it is and always
has been reputed as a great honor done to the deceassed, to erect him an
Image, to eternize the memory of his noble acts: as also that it is great
encouragement to all beholders of such Pourtraits, to endeavor to imitate their
glorious examples. The very sight of the Image of Polemon, a most chaste and
holy personage, moved an unchaste woman to change her life, as out of S.
Gregory Nazianzene is related Synod. 7. act. 4.
.

Having so great testimony for the ancient use of Images, and such manifold
commodities by the discreet and holy practice of them, he must needs be
furiously transported with blind zeal, that makes war against Crosses, and
burns holy pictures, as of late the Superintendent of Hereford did in the
market place openly.

R. ABBOT.
Of the sign of the Cross enough has been said before in answer to M.
Bishops Epistle to the King. We condemn it not being taken as an arbitrarie
and indifferent ceremony, voluntarily upon occasion accepted by the discretion
of the Church, and left free to the like discretion as occasion requires,
either to be wholly relinquished, or the use thereof to be moderated and
abridged without opinion of any violation or breach of religion toward God.
So long as it was kept within compass of being only a matter of admonition, a
token of profession, and occasion of remembrance of the name of Christ, so long
there was no reason for any man to contend concerning the using of it. But
since it has grown from being a mere ceremony, to be accounted as a
Sacrament of grace and salvation, an instrument of sanctification and
holiness, containing a spiritual virtue and power of blessing, and ministering
inward strength against our spiritual enemies, it has concerned the godly
discretion and wisdom of the Church, to use due care to redress those
erroneous and superstitious conceits thereof, which tend to the detriment and
wrong of the faith and name of Jesus Christ. We have received no commandment
thereof from God, no institution of Jesus Christ, no word or warrant of the
Apostles, and therefore being brought in by men, it ought to be subject to the
judgment of the Church, and not the Church tied to any bondage of the use of
it. Our Church therefore has used her liberty in this behalf, and though we
deny not but that the sign of the Cross were in most frequent use, as M.
Bishop says, in the primitive Church, yet considering it to be a thing
injurious to the faith and cross of Christ where it is made a matter of
mystical consecration and blessing, has discharged us of it where it was
taken in that sense; and yet that we seem not wholly to explode that which
antiquity has approved, has there retained it where it may carry no show
of being subject to that construction. We use it not to our selves, to our
meats and drinks, to the water of baptism, to the bread and wine of the
Lords Supper, or any otherwhere where it was used with that meaning as in
Popery it was used in all these: we use it in baptism with the application
first intended, and to them which yet know not the use of it, that that which
is done to them may be a remembrance to us, and to them also when they shall
hereafter know and see the same in others, not to be ashamed of Christ
crucified, and of the bearing of his cross, but with courage and constancy to
follow him whose in baptism we have vowed our selves to be. We know the
Papists themselves are not so frequent in the use of the cross in their
ordinary conuersasation, as some ancienter times have been, and therefore as
they themselves have done in part, so they must give us leave further also as
occasion requires to relinquish the custom of i^ (...) as touching the
testimonies of antiquity which M. Bishop alleges for the approving thereof,
first Tertullian and Ambrose and Cyril do simply note the vulgar use of it,
which in them and in those times we condemn not; they had their reason for the
using, and so have we for the leaving of it. S. Austin goes further and says,
that Aug. in Joan. tract. 118. Quod signum nisi adhibeatur sieve frontibus
credentium, sieve ipsi aquae qua regenerantur, sieve oleo qu^ Chrismate vnguntur,
sieve sacrificio quo aluntur, nihil eorum rite perficitur.
unless the sign of the Cross be applied to the water of baptism, and to
the sacrifice wherewith the faithful are nourished, neither of them is rightly
or orderly done, but he means rightly or orderly in respect of the order and
custom of the Church, not as touching any ordinance of God, even as if we
would say, that baptism is not rightly administered with us without adding
afterward the sign of the cross, who yet account no religion or holiness at
all in the adding of it, and neither hold baptism to be the better in the
having, nor the worse in the wanting of it. The sacrifice of which S. Austine
there speaks, the Protestants want not, howsoever in respect of Popish abuse
they forbear the name. He speaks of a sacrifice wherewith the faithful are
nourished, which is our Sacrament whereof they are communicants and partakers,
not the Popish sacrifice where they are only lookers on. See what has been
said hereof before in Sect. 27.
answer of the Epistle to the King. As for Chrisme or holy oil, as M. Bishop
terms it, spoken of in the same place by S. Austin, the Protestants are in no
pitiful taking for the want of it, because they want nothing thereby that
Christ has commanded to be had. The ancient Churches used their ceremonies at
their discretion. Faber. Stapul. in Dionys. eccles. hierarch.
Faber Stapulensis notes many ceremonies of old time used, which are now quite
omitted in the Church of Rome. We leave out Chrisme by the same authority
whereby they have left out of their ceremonies so many publicly received in
ancient time. But so much the rather do we forgo this, that we may not seem to
uphold that abomination of Popery, whereby in their coniurations and
benedictions they give power to these impotent creatures of water, oil, salt,
and such other like, to serve for souls health and for forgiveness of sins,
and for resisting the power of the devil, which are no other but blasphemous
devices, mere illusions of Satan, drawing men to put their trust in these
trumperies, that they may neglect true faith and trust in Christ himself.
Basil. de Spir. sanct. cap. 27. Vt (...) eos qui sp^^^^ stum collocarunt
signemus, etc.
Basil mentions the sign of the cross no otherwise but in baptism as we
use it. As for his speech of Traditions, what we are to attribute unto it, has
been before showed in the question thereof. (...) Origin do nothing concern
the outward sign of the cross made with the hand, but the inward sign and
print thereof consisting in faith. Orig in Exodus hom. 6. Quid timent demones?
quid tremuns? si ^e dubio crucem Christi in qua in umphati sunt, in qua exuti
sunt principatus coru^ and potestates. Timor ergo and tremor cadent super eos
cum signum in nobis viderint crucis fideliter fixum, and magnitudine^ brachij
illius quod Dominus expendit in cruce. Non te ergo aliter timebunt nisi videant
in tecruce^ Christi; nisi and tu poteris dicere, Mihi absit gloriari, etc
What do the devils fear? what do they tremble at? Undoubtedly at the cross
of Christ, whereby they were triumphed over, whereby they were stripped of
their principality and power. Therefore fear and trembling shall fall upon
them, when they shall see faithfully fastened in us the sign of the cross,
and the greatness of that arm which the Lord stretched forth upon the cross.
Therefore no otherwise will they fear thee, except they see in thee the cross
of Christ, except thou can say, God forbid that I should rejoice but in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is then the cross or sign of the cross
where at the devil is dismayed, even the faith of Christ crucified, and our
glorying and rejoicing in him only, whereby we are inwardly signed and marked
to be his. That which Gregory Nazianzene reports of Julian the Apostata we
are somewhat doubtful of, because it may be a matter either misreported or
misconstrued. Julian and his coniurer go into a dark cave to consult with the
devil about getting the Empire. The devil begins after his wonted manner to
appear. Julian being afraid signeth himself with the cross. The devil
hereupon departs away. Being brought again, he departs again upon the
same occasion. The coniurer tells Julian, that it was not for fear that the
devil went away, but because he detested his making of the sign of the cross.
Now the question is, how this matter comes to be known, for here was no body
but Julian and the coniurer and the devil, and we cannot well imagine who
should be the true reporter of it. Again, it is doubtful whether the
historians do make right construction of this accident if it were so. Julian
was a vile miscreant, a wretched caitife, even a limme of the devil, and what,
shall we think that with the sign of the cross one devil drives away
another? It is likely that the coniurer knew well the meaning of the devil,
that it was not for fear that he went away, but only for that he could not
abide that any that came to ask counsel of him, should make any show of
having to do with Christ. Whatsoever the matter there were, we undoubtedly
resolve, that it is but a mee^e illusion of the devil, to seem to go away at
the sign of the cross, when in the heart there is no faith or belief in the
cross of Christ, as in Julian there was none. As for that which he cites out
of Chrysostom, that Chrysostom. hom. Quod Christus sit Deus. Neque enim sic
regia corona ornatur caput vt cru^^. etc.
the heads of kings are not so decked with their diademes as with the sign of
the cross, our most noble King James will confess no less, and we will
subscribe the same, that the greatest honor of his Crown is the sign of the
cross, as an acknowledgement of the Son of God that died upon the cross.
The glory of pearls and precious stones is mortal and transitory, but
immortal is the glory of that which his Majesty professes, by bearing the
ensign of the cross upon his Imperial Crown. That otherwise the sign of
the cross is not now so affected and admired as Chrysostom there describes,
it is partly for that there is not so great occasion thereof now as then there
was, when as Christians lived so commonly amongst the heathens: partly for that
Popery has so intollerably abused it, and by sinister and superstitious
fancies and opinions of it, has put it into the hands of coniurers,
sorcerers, witches, charmers, who most damnably have made it one of the
special instruments of their devilish and wicked practices. Now therefore it
is enough for us, that in substance of faith concerning Christ crucified, we
agree with the ancient Church: as for the change of an accident or ceremony,
it is not sufficient to put any difference betwixt them and us. The house of
God ceasseth not to be the same, for taking away a piece of an appentise which
has been so beaten with wind and rain, as that it is quite rotten, and
yields to the walls neither ornament nor defense. The change therefore
arises not so much of us, as of the thing it self, which howsoever it was
aunciently reputed of, yet has since been made, though Master Bishop will not
have it so thought, a point of superstition and plain witchcraft. The ancient
Church would not be thought Tertul. Apol. c. 16. Qui crucit nos religiosos
putat, etc.
to make a religion of the Cross, and Tertullian yet continuing sound,
acquitteth them thereof. Minut. Felix in Octau. apud Arnob. Cruces nec colimus
nec optamus: vos plane qui ligneos deos consecratis, cruces ligneas vt deoru^
vestrorum parts forsitan adoratu.
We do no worship to Crosses, says Minutius Felix imitating and more
plainly expressing the meaning of Tertullian, but you, says he to the Pagans,
who consecrate wooden gods, do happily worship wooden crosses as pieces of your
gods. Ambrose makes this the use of the sign of the cross, that Ambros
epist. 77. Per mome^ta singula fronti propria contemptum mortu inscribit,
vtpote qui sciat sine cruce Domini salutem se habere no^ posse
thereby a Christian man every while writes upon his own forehead the
contempt of death, as who knows that without the cross of Christ he cannot
be saved. When Julian objected to Christians the use of the Cross, Cyril
makes no more thereof but this, that Cyril cont. Iul. lib. 6. Pretiosi ligni
crucem facimus in memoria^ omn^ boni and omnis virtutu.
they made it in remembrance of all goodness and all virtue. Whatsoever they say
of the cross or of the sign of the cross, they refer it to the faith of
Christ crucified, not to the cross it self, but to the inward cogitation of
the benefit of his cross. Iaem in Joan. lib. ^. c. 17. Cruce insignita men's
coelesti alimonia and Spiritus sancti gratia affatim pascitur, etc. Quisquis
oculos animi ad Christu^ cruci affixum conuerterit, ab omni vulnere peccati
ilico curabitur.
The mind marked with the cross, says Cyril, is plentifully fed with heavenly
food, and grace of the holy Ghost: whosoever turns the eyes of his mind to
Christ nailed to the cross, he shall be forthwith cured from all wound of
sin. They used the outward sign only to turn the mind to the beholding of
the cross of Christ, thereby hoping to receive comfort and defense. But
Popery has taught men so to conceive, as if God had given to the sign of the
cross some formal power to do great wonders for us, and in this sense have
witches and charmers borrowed it from the^, as was before said. Yea Popery has
taught men most blasphemously to say to the wooden Cross: Breuiar. Romans
sabbat. quarto quadrages. O crux aut spes vnica Hoc passionis tempore, Auge
pijs iustitiam, Reisque dona veniam.
All-haile, O Cross, our only hope
In this time of the passion:
To godly men increase righteousness,
And to offenders grant forgiveness.


They have made the people to worship it, to pray to it, to do to it all manner
of religious devotion, as if the wooden cross were to be taken for Christ
himself. Upon pretense that he hanged upon a cross, they have attributed that
to the cross which belongs to Christ only. Consider the prayer which they
make for consecration of the cross; Oramus te Domine sancte Pater, etc vt
dignerus benedicere hoc lignum crucis tuae, vt sit remedium salutare generi
humano, sit soliditas fidei, bonoru^ operum profecius and redemptio animarum:
sit solamen and protectio and tu^ela aduersus saeua iacula inimicorum, etc.
We beseech thee O Lord, holy Father, that thou will vouchsafe to bless this
wood of thy cross, that it may be a saving remedy to mankind, strength of
faith, furtherance of good works, and a redemption of souls; that it may be a
comfort, protection and defense against all the cruel darts of the enemies,
etc. This is nothing else but to set up a block or a piece of wood in stead of
Christ, and to cause men to say unto it, Thou art our redemption and salvation,
even as the Israelites said of the golden Calfe, Exodus 32.4.
These are thy Gods which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. These and such
other like both impious blasphemies and superstitious fancies, have caused us
to content our selves with the faith of Christ crucified, and to forbear the
outward ceremony of the cross, which was of old used only as a token of the
profession of that faith. For conclusion of this matter of the Cross thou must
note, gentle Reader, that it is but only a Cross whereof they all speak whom
he has alleged; of the Crucifix they say nothing. And so indeed they used
barely the Cross, but the Crucifixe in those times was yet unknown. Beat.
Rhen. in Tertul. Apologet. ca. 16. Apparet Crucifixi effigiem sculptilem aut
pictam id temporis crucino^ solita^ addi, etc. Id a gentilibus natum videtur,
conniuentibus sanctis patribus vt vel sic ad Christiamsmum pertraherentur.
That seems to have grown from the Pagans, says Beatus Rhenanus, the
fathers winking at it, that so they might be drawn to Christianity. That
which came in by conniuence and winking at Pagan fancy, the Church of Rome has
since taken hold of, and turned it according to the manner of the Pagans to
extreme abomination. Now albeit full little it be which M. Bishop has
hitherto said in the behalf of his Images, and that upon so broken and hollow
grounds, as that we may think him scarsely well in his wits that would build
any thing thereupon, yet he is well persuaded of that he has said, and tells
us that we may learn thereby that that yet we cannot see, that Christians
have always highly esteemed of Images, that God has reco^mended them by
miracles, and that not only for the civil and historical use, but more to
honor them whose pictures they were. The sign of the cross indeed belongs
not to this question, but otherwise what a poor deal has he brought us,
lies and all, that serves any way to justify their Popish usage of Images. He
has told us of certain pictures of Christ, and Peter, and Paul, which we also
have; he brings but one only example of any standing Image, and that
acknowledged to be of heathenish custom, and imitation of Paganism. The
miracles that he reports what slender and uncertain proof they have, it
appears by that that has been said. Surely if Popery had been then in the
world, M. Bishop would have been able to have brought us many famous authors,
and pregnant examples of all Churches for the same which they now do. Many
carts are not able to bear the Legends that might be written of Images, and
their miracles since the Church of Rome first undertook the patronage of them,
and shall we believe that the ancient Church was of their mind, when there is
so scant and silly show of any authority or testimony for warrant thereof? We
may therefore see what a special faculty M. Bishop has in making a
conclusion, and how workmanlike he can build a large house upon a little
ground. But out of that wit which he has showed therein, he tells us, that
no man in his right wits can deny, but that it is, and always has been
reputed a great honor to the deceased, to erect him an Image to eternize the
memory of his noble acts. Where if his own wits had been right, he would have
remembered that this of old was a heathenish reputation, but no such honor done
to the deceased amongst the people of God. There was no such honor done to
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, to eternize the memory of their noble acts, not
to Moses, nor Iosuah, nor David, nor any other of those holy men. And what,
shall we think that Solomon had not his right wits, who in the building of the
Temple neglected to set up Images for all these, to eternize the memory of
their noble acts? This conceit of Master Bishops is profane and foolish, and
sauouring wholly of Paganism, neither do we find that the holy men of God have
ever reputed this as an honor to be done unto dead men. Nay, he herein
points to the very root from whence idolatry first sprung. Men being by
death deprived of them whom they loved, would comfort themselves by making
their pictures and images, thereby to keep some kind of sight and memorial of
them. Thus the father did by his deceased son, and men to them at whose hands
they had received great benefits, or whom they would seem in special manner
to admire. From humane affection they proceeded to opinion and exercise of
religion, and whilst they doated upon the Images of the dead, they would
thereby do some honor and service to them. The heart of man being gone astray
from God, grew more and more in the liking of this device, and the devil
ceased not by all means to further the same, until he had brought it to the
height of all abominable idolatry, and found means to have devotion done to
himself thereby under the name of God. Thus S. Austine notes, that August.
cont. Faust. lib. 22. cap. 17. Ex desiderio mortuotum constitutae sunt imagines
vnde simulachrorum vsus exortus est, and maiore adulatione diuini honores
deferebantur tanquam in coelum receptis, pro quibus se in terris daemoniae
colenda supposuerunt and sibi sacrificari a deceptis and per diti^ flagitarunt.
of desire or love to the dead images were set up, whence the use of Idols
began, and by greater flattery divine honors were done to them, as being taken
up into heaven, in steed of whom the devils here on the earth did substitute
themselves, and required of deceived and wretched men, to have sacrifice done
unto them. Here of the book of Wisdom says: Wised. 14 13:
The vainglory of men brought in Idols into the world. When a father mourned
for his son that was taken away suddenly, he made an image for him that was
once dead, whom now he worshippeth as a God, and ordained to his servants
ceremonies and sacrifices. Here is the original and effect of that
fantastical device which Master Bishop mentions of eternizing the memory
of men, and of their noble acts, by making Images and pictures of them. As for
that which he adds of great encouragement hereby given to all beholders of
such pourtraites, to endeavor to imitate their glorious examples, they are the
glorious words of a vain man babbling his own conceits. If God had seen this
to be a fit means for encouragement to virtue, he would not have failed to
give to his people a commandment thereof, neither would he by special law
have taken away from them all use and practice of this encouragement. He
tells us a tale out of their second Nicene Council, of a lewd woman
reclaimed by the sight of Polemons picture, but he must bring us a better
authority if he will have us to believe him, because we know it to have been
the practice of that Council, to tell their own lies under the Fathers names.
Surely we must think that she was well prepared before, that by the sight of
a picture could be moved to leave her vicious and unchaste life. Out of doubt
amongst all the pictures and Images of their Romish Church, Master Bishop
cannot give us one example of the like. But he tells us that the manifold
commodities of Images, stand in the discreet and holy practice of them, and it
is likely that that discretion and holiness is worn out from amongst them,
and for that cause not one Curtizan learneth by the Image of our Lady that
which that unchaste woman learned by the Image of Polemon, and so much the less
for that sometimes some gallant Curtizan is chosen to make our Ladies Image to
her likeness. Foolish vain man, what discretion can there be in that, in the
practice whereof God has pronounced men to be Esa. 44.19.
void of understanding? What holiness can be in that which he affirms to be
Ibid.
an abomination? what profit in that which he has taught us to be Ver. 10.
profitable for nothing? what teaching by that which he calls Ierem. 10.8.
the doctrine of vanity, concerning which he has said, Habac. 2.19.
Woe unto him that says to the dumb stone, Rise up, it shall teach thee?
Which things considered, the Superintendent of Hereford, says he, but good
manners would have taught him to say, the Lord Bishop of Hereford did justly
that which he did to take away crosses and pictures from such as make Idols of
them, and openly to burn them, not transported therein with blind zeal, but
led thereto with mature judgment and discretion, not being like the Trent and
Romish Bishops, who for the most part are like the Idols which they worship,
carrying a name of that they are not; but a man of learning, and gravity, and
wisdom, giving honor to the place wherein he is, as the place has done to
him.

4. W. BISHOP.
The difference. Now to the points in controversy, which are three, as M.
Perkins delivers: The first is, in that the Church of Rome holds it lawful
to make Images to resemble God; though not in respect of his divine nature, yet
in respect of some properties and actions: We contrarily says M. Perkins hold
it unlawful to make Images any way to represent the true God. For the second
commandment says plainly, * Thou shall not make to thy self any graven
Image, nor the likeness of any thing in heaven, etc. The Papists say that the
commandment is meant of the Images of false Gods; but it must needs be
understood by the Image of the true Jehovah, and it forbids to resemble God,
either in his nature, or in his properties and works; for so says the Roman
Catechism upon the second commandment.

Answer. This passes all kind of impudency, to quote the Roman Catechism in
defense of that opinion, which it does of set purpose disprove. It teaches
indeed, that the very nature and substance of God, which is wholly spiritual,
cannot be expressed and figured by corporal lineaments and colors, and
alleges the places produced by M. Perkins, to prove that unlawful; yet by
and by annexeth these words: Let no man therefore think it to be against
religion, and the law of God, when any person of the most holy Trinity is
purtraited in such sort as they have appeared, either in the old or new
Testament, etc. But let the Pastor teach, that not the nature of God, but
certain properties and actions appertaining to God, are represented in such
pictures. If the man be not past grace, he will surely blush at such a foul
error. His texts of Scripture are taken out of the same place of the
Catechism, and do prove only, that Gods proper nature cannot nor may not be
resembled in any corporal shape or likeness.

Then Master Perkins returns to confute the answer made him; that Idols are
there only prohibited and says, that we then confound the first and second
commandment. For in the first was forbidden all false Gods which man frames
unto himself, by giving his heart and the principal affections thereof unto
them. (Good) and in the second, (admitting it to be the second) is forbidden to
draw into any material likeness, that Idol which the heart had before framed
unto it self, and to give it any bodily worship: which is distinction good
enough to make two several commandments. Now the Roman Catechism, following
Clement of Alexandria: Lib. 6. Stromat. and Saint Augustine Quest. 71. super
Exodus, and Ep. 119. cap. 11. and the Schoole-doctors in 3. Sent. distinct. 37.
does make two commandments of the Protestants last, distinguishing desiring
thy neighbors wife, from coveting thy neighbors goods, as they do: Thou shall
not commit adultery, from, Thou shall not steal; and make but one of the
first two, because the former does forbid inward, and the second outward
Idolatry: and the outward and inward actions about the said object are not so
distinct, as the desiring of so diverse things, as a man's wife for lechery,
and his goods of covetousness: And yet besides, add another reason very
probable, that the reward and punishment belonging alike to all the
Commandments, cannot in good order be thrust into the middle of them, but must
be placed either with the first or last. Now comprehending the two former in
one, the reward is annexed conveniently to the first; whereas, if you make them
two, it is out of order, and without any good reason put after the second. This
I say, not to condemn the other division, which many of the ancient writers
follow: but to show how little reason Master Perkins had to trust to that
answer of his, that we should confound the first and second, which he saw the
very Catechism cited by himself, does make but one of both.

R. ABBOT.
M. Bishop does much amiss here to put M. Perkins to the blush for an
ouer-sight, as touching the Roman Catechism, and therein very ill provides
for himself, who in his own book has scarcely written one leaf, wherein
there is not cause for himself to blush. Verily, he has little cause to be so
angry with M. Perkins, for thinking better of the Roman Catechism then it
does deserve; he only pointed at it in a marginall note by memory, which
oftentimes deceives the carefullest man. Albeit it may be that M. Bishop and I
are both deceived, and so is it very likely, that by ouer-sight of the writer
or the printer, the marginall note is put after, which should be applied to the
words before. The Papists say the commandment is meant of the Images of false
Gods. But the point of question is, whether it be lawful to make an Image to
represent God. We say it is not lawful, because God has wholly forbidden it,
when he says, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc. That
hereby God forbids the making of any Image to him, we prove, for that God
after the giving of the law, aduertiseth his people by Moses, as to declare the
intent of this commandment, that therefore Deuteronomy. 4.15.
they saw no image in the day that the Lord spoke unto them in Horeb out of the
midst of the fire, because they should take heed unto themselves, not to
corrupt themselves by making them a graven Image, or representation of any
figure. Again, by the Prophet Esaias he expostulateth the matter with idolaters
saying, Esa. 40.18.
To whom will ye liken God, or what similitude will ye set up unto him? M.
Bishop answers, that those texts do prove only that Gods proper nature
cannot or may not be resembled in any corporal shape or likeness. But if
these places prove only this, what do they prove more then the heathen
idolaters themselves freely confessed, such at least as were of any capacity or
discretion amongst them. They knew their Images to be but corruptible things,
having beginning and end, and therefore that they could not express the nature
and condition of the Godhead, which they knew to be immortal. Hermes
Trismegistus as Cyrill alleges, said, that Cyril. cont Julian lib. 1.
Jncorp^reum corpore significare impossible, and perfectum imperfecto
co^prehendere non possibile, and sempiternum confer cum momentaneo d^fficile.
it is impossible to signify the incorporeall God by a body, or by a thing
imperfect to comprehend that that is perfect, or to compare that that is
eternal, to that that is but for a moment. Zenophon a follower of Socrates,
acknowledges that Minut. Felix in Octa. apud Arnob. Zenopho^ Socraticus forma^
Dei very neg ac videri posse, and ideo queri non oportere: Aristo Chius
comprehendi omnine non posse: vterque maiestatem Dei intelligendi desperatione
senserunt.
the form of the true God cannot be seen, and therefore is not to be enquired
of; as also Aristo Chius, that the same cannot be comprehended. They both,
says Arnobius, perceived the majesty of God by despair to attain to the
understanding of him. Antisthenes the Cynicke affirmed, that Clement Alexand.
in pro^^ept. Antisthenes dicit Deum nulli esse similem; quare eum nemo potest
discere ex imagine.
God is not like to any, and therefore that no man can learn him by an image.
So does Euripides for the notifying of God use these words; Ibid Qui cuncta
cernu, ipse sed no^ cernitur.
Who sees all things, and himself is not seen. Plato says: Ibid. Vniuersi
huius pa^rem and effectorem and inuenire diffi^ile est and cum inueneris fieri
non potest vt enuncies.
It is hard to find out the father and maker of the world, and when thou have
found him, it is impossible to declare him; yea he says further, that Cyril.
cont. Iul. lib. 1. De vno Deo Plato dixit nomen illi nullum congruere, nique
humanam cognitionem posse co^prehe^dere, sed appellationes quae de ipso
dicuntur a posterioribus esse, abusiueque de ipso dici.
no name is fitting to him, and that no knowledge can comprehend him, and the
names that are given him are taken of after-effects, and abusiuely spoken of
him. It were infinite to allege all that might be here brought, to show that
the Pagans and Heathens took the proper nature of God to be incomprehensible,
and therefore made not their images as to express the deity, but only as
signs and shadows fitting the condition and state of men. And if the heathen
idolaters conceived thus, much more are we to think so of the Jews, that they
well understood that the majesty of the immortal God could not be set forth
by the figure or form of any creature. What, when they made Exodus 32.4.
the golden Calfe, and worshipped it, does M. Bishop imagine them to be such
Calves, as to think God himself to be like a Calfe? They knew their Calfe
could not set forth the proper nature of a Calfe, and therefore must needs be
far off from thinking that it could resemble the proper nature of God. So was
it likewise as touching the Calves that were set up at 1. King. 12.28.
Dan and Bethel; they were set up as visible signs at which they should
worship God, but never did they think that the proper nature of God was
described or resembled by the. As the Romans at first worshipped Clem:
Alexand. in protrept Romae antiquitus statua^ Martis fuisse hasta^ dicit
script^^ Varro.
Mars their God of battle by a spear, not because they thought him to be like
a spear, but because the spear imported his property and act, so the Jews
worshipped God by a Calfe, not thinking him to be like unto it, but thereby
only to betoken him, who by the Ox in the tillage of the ground, ministers
bread for the sustenance of the life of man. Now therefore Master Bishop
yields unto them a good Apology and defense of all their idolatry committed
in these Calves. For they had to say for themselves, that they trespassed not
the commandment of God, because they did not intend by their Images to
resemble the proper nature of God, but did only represent him in his effects,
which the commandment forbids not. But this device served not the turn,
neither did the people of God ever dream that by this distinction they might
take liberty to fet up any Image unto God. Yea, and therefore does Moses tell
them, as before was alleged, that they saw no image in the day when the Lord
spoke unto them, because they should make none, no not to represent him in his
properties and actions, because the appeared in no such. Therefore does he by
the Prophet disclaim the likening of him, and the setting up of a similitude
unto him, because he will no way be likened, nor will have any similitude to
represent him in his properties and effects. Therefore Origin tells Celsus
the Pagan, Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 3. Communis sensus cogitare nos iubet no^
delectari Deum hoc honor imaginum quae effigiem eius aut significationem
reprasentent aliquam.
that common sense does will men to think that God is not delighted with
honor of images made by men, to represent his likeness or any signification
of him, yea Ibid. li. 7. Quis ^anamentis non rideat eum qui post egregias illas
et valde Philosophicas de Deo sieve dijs disputationes statuas respicit et aut
preces eis offeri aut per earum contemplationem tanquam signi a^euius co^spicui
cenatur animu^ ^rigere ad imaginationem intelligibilis numinis?
who, says he, that has his right wits will not laugh at him, who after those
excellent and very philosophical disputations concerning God or the Gods does
look to Images, and either offers prayers unto them, or by the contemplation
thereof, as of some visible sign goes about to lift up his mind to the
cogitation of God thereby to be understood? Thus he wholly explodeth all use of
Images for any signification of God, or any representing of him, as thereby to
be remembered or understood of us. We may not therefore so understand the
commandment of God, as to leave men at liberty to commit idolatry, and to hold
themselves sufficiently excused, for that they mean not by their Idols to
resemble the proper nature of the Godhead. But they further tell us, that God
by that commandment forbids only Idols, that is as M. Bishop expounds,
either Images that are taken for Gods, or Images of false Gods. So then take
away false Gods, and here is no forbidding of Images at all: they shall be a
part of the religion and worship of the true God both in himself and in his
Saints, only we must take heed that we do not admit by them any false God.
Thus they circumcise and pare the commandments of God, and force them by their
constructions into such compass, as that they may do what they list, and yet
not seem to be within any check of them. But to this M. Perkins answers,
that this should be to confound the first and second commandment, the one
forbidding all inward, the other all outward idolatry, which M. Bishop
acknowledges to be distinction good enough to make two several
commandments, and yet will not be content to rest upon that distinction. He
will not condemn it, but yet neither will he commend or follow it, because he
well knows that it condemns them of heinous impiety and sacrilege against
God, for that they then in their ordinary Primmers and Catechismes, do wholly
leave out one of Gods commandments, and cannot deny but they do so. Now they
have some color for that they do, as setting down but a brief and the
capital matter of the commandment; but if that distinction be admitted, they
have nothing to excuse themselves of leaving out the whole commandment. And
thus they do indeed to the uttermost of their power suppress and conceal this
second commandment; and whereas they cannot prevail but that some will be
reading, yet they so order the matter that they shall take no knowledge of that
in their reading, least thereby they grow to any dislike or suspicion of their
idolatry. But the distinction of those two commandments is manifest, God in
the one condemning all false gods, in the other all false worship, as namely,
in making any image unto God, or in way of devotion and service to him, or the
image of any other thing whatsoever, to yield thereto, or otherwise without an
image to yield to the thing it self any part of devotion and religion, which
is a thing belonging to God only. And we cannot doubt but that there is one
commandment for preserving the external worship of God entire and pure, to
which as to the head (these ten commandments Philo Iud. de Decalog. Leges sunt
and capitae legum particularium.
being not only laws but also heads or capital points of particular laws,
as Philo well notes) all the particular laws as touching that matter of the
worship of God are to be referred. Which because they cannot be taken to be
contained in any of the other three commandments, therefore we must
necessarily take this as a distinct commandment to which all those
particulars must belong. And thus the Jews, whose testimony in this behalf
is of great moment, took them to be distinct, as appears by Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 3. cap. 4. Primum praeceptum Deum esse vnum and hunc solum; colendu^:
secundu^ Nullius animalis simulachru^ adorandu^. Sic Philo de Decalogo.
Josephus and Philo, reckoning the first commandment, that there is one God,
and he only to be worshipped: the second, that no image of any creature is to
be adored. In the same sort does Athanasius distinguish them, Athanas. in
Synop. Exodus Primum est. Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus. Alierum. Non factes
tibijpsi simulachru^ etc.
The first is, I am the Lord thy God: the second, Thou shall not make to thy
self an image or any likeness. Origin says, that Orige^ in Exodus hom. 8.
Haec omnia nonnulli putant vnum esse mandatu^. Quod si ita putetur, no^
complebitur dece^ numerus mandatoru^, and vbi tam erit Decalogi veritas?
some took those two commandments to be one; but if we so take them, says
he, we shall not make up the number of ten commandments, and where then shall
be the truth of the name of the Decalogue, namely, which signifies ten
commandments? He saw well that there can be no reason of dividing the last
commandment as we reckon it into two; and therefore that there can be but nine
unless we distinguish the two first in such sort as has bin said. But the
Roman catechism M. Bishop tells us does otherwise, following therein the
division of Austine and Cl^mens Alexandrinus, dividing the Protestants l^st
commandment into two. Where we see the course that they follow in the use of
the Fathers writings, namely, that howsoever they profess to stand to the
general accord and agreement of them, yet if some one or two varying from all
the rest do serve their turn, they leave all the rest, and the matter shall
go with them. As for the Schoole-doctors, M. Bishop did but put them in to fill
up the room; for little reason is there that the streams of our religion
should be taken to run out of puddles that have been so lately dug, and as
well might he have named himself and his fellows as have named them. But by
reason he will make it good, that there is more reason to confound the two
first commandments, then to make one of that which we call the last; because
the first forbidding inward, and the second outward idolatry, the outward and
inward actions about the same object are not so distinct as the desiring of so
diverse things, as a man's wife for lechery and his goods of covetousness. Which
reason of his is already overthrown by that that has been said of the
difference of two first commandments. For thereby we see that as God and the
worship of God are two distinct things, so the commandments must be diverse
which instruct us to conceive of our duty in respect of both. The first
commandment requires of us an acknowledgement of one true God; the second
requires the true worspping of him. A man may acknowledge one only God, and
that he only is to be worshipped according to the first commandment, and yet
break the second commandment by worshipping him amiss, as by setting up an
image whereby to worship him, which he there forbids to be done. Therefore
those terms of inward and outward idolatry, do not sufficiently distinguish
those two commandments, because the first commandment is broken by outward
idolatry, in the outward professing and following of any false god; and there
is inward idolatry against the second commandment in the inward framing of
idol-seruice unto the true God. Here is then very material ground of
difference betwixt the first and second commandment, but a silly reason is it
to allege a difference of things coueted and desired, to make thereby a
division of the last commandment. The thing there forbidden is lust and
concupiscence as the root and fountain of all sin and wickedness, and
therefore the Apostle sets down for the whole effect of that commandment,
Romans 7.7.
Thou shall not lust, and calls it often Ver. 8, 9, 10.
the commandment, the commandment, as to note that it is but one
commandment which says, Thou shall not lust. He exemplifieth lust in the
commandment by some objects, leaving the rest to be understood; but if we will
divide the commandment of lusting, because the things are diverse that are
lusted after, there must be a necessity of making more commandments, because
as there are lusts tending to covetousness and lechery, so there are also that
tend to disobedience, to murder, to lying and slaundering, and such like, and
therefore by M. Bishops reason there should be so many several commandments
against lust. But to show that that division which they follow is not good, we
may note that whereas they make the ninth commandment, Thou shall not covet
thy neighbors wife, and the tenth, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house,
etc. which order may not be broken if we will divide the commandments as they
do: Moses himself does alter the same, and sets it down as it was first
endited thus, Exodus 20.17.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his servant, etc. as it was after repeated thus, Deuteronomy. 5.27.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
house, nor his servant, etc. and by so indifferent placing of those two
branches, infallibly proves that they are not two commandments but one only.
If M. Bishop will not yield this, we would know how he will order the
commandments, as in the twentieth of Exodus they were first delivered from the
mouth of God? If he will make the ninth commandment, Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house, then he must say that the ninth and tenth do both serve to
forbid the coveting of our neighbors goods. If he will not say so, he must
accord with us that those two which they divide are but one commandment, and
therefore that which they make but one, must be divided into two. His other
reason is of the same moment as the former, that reward and punishment
belonging alike to all the commandments, must be placed either with the first
or with the last. But Master Bishop considers not, that there is a
punishment or threatening annexed also unto the third commandment, and yet it
is no argument to say, that therefore it must be the first. Again, he
considers not that God annexeth that promise and threatening to the second
commandment, not for the order but for the matter of it, to move his people
so much the more attentively to regard it, as giving to understand that it most
highly provoke him, to have the honor that belongs to him given to stocks
and stones, and that men should fall down to the works of their own hands.
And this the Scripture most plentifully teaches us, that God in so high manner
detesteth this above other sins, as that for this Rom 1.24.26.28.
he gives men over to their own hearts lusts, to vile affections, to a
reprobate sense, to do those things that are not convenient, that by all
filthiness and uncleanness they may dishonor themselves who have in so base
and vile sort dishonored him. Very pregnant example whereof we have in the
Church of Rome, which since it gave entertainment to this idolatry, has made
it self a very sink of sin, stinking and loathsome both to Christians and
Infidels, never ceasing running headlong from one corruption to another, from
one wickedness to another, until it had made up a full measure of all
abomination, and became according to the words of S. John, John 18.2.
an habitation of devils, the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird. Now therefore God knowing how prone and ready his
people were to this gross idolatry, whereof they presently gave example in
worshipping the golden Calfe, gives them a special warning in this behalf,
tells them that he is a ielous God; and thereby signifies, that as the
jealousy of the husband cannot endure that the wife under any pretense yield
the usage of her body to another, nor can be satisfied by having it answered to
him, that she does it not as to her husband, but only as to her husbands
friend, and for love to her husband, so he cannot brook the communicating of
his worship under any pretense to idols and images, to blocks and stones, nor
takes it for answer that we account them not as gods, but do it thereby to
honor God, but most severely reuengeth this filthy polluting of the religion
that is due unto him. This is the cause of annexing the threatening to this
second commandment; and very simply does the Roman Catechism gather thereof
the confounding of it with the first.

5. W. BISHOP.
But M. Perkins goes on and says, that our distinction between Image and
Idol (that an Image represents a thing that is, but an Idol a thing
supposed to be but is not) is false and against the ancient writers, who make
it all one. We prove the contrary, first by the authority of the ancient
Doctors, Origin Hom. 8. i^ Exodus
and Theodoret Qu. 38. in Ex.
, who in express words deliver the same difference of Image and Idol, which
is taken out of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 8.
saying that an Idol is nothing in the world, that is, such idols as the
heathen take for their gods, are nothing formally, that is, though they be
great pieces of wood or stone materially, yet they represent a thing that is
not, that is, such a thing to be a god, which is nothing less. Let M. Perkins
but quote one place in the whole Bible, where they are used both for one.

I will cite some, where if you use the one for the other, you must offend all
good Christian ears: as where a man is said to be made after the image of God,
may you say after the idol of God? Christ is said to be the image of his
Father; will you call him the idol of his Father? Surely he cannot deny but
the seventh general Council holden about nine hundred years past and gone,
is so far off from making Image and Idol all one, that it does accurse all
them who call the image of Christ and his Saints, Idols.

But Tertullian De Jdolol^^
( says M. Perkins) affirms them to be all one: not so neither: for he
makes Idolum a divinity of eidos, which signifies a form or similitude: so
that Idolon is but a small similitude or slender image, not so much for the
quantity, as for that it represents but darkely.

Eustathius an excellent Greek interpreter, upon the eleventh book of Homers
Odissea, describes Idolum to signify a vain and vanishing image, as the
shadow of a man, a ghost, or fantastical imagination. And so it cannot be
that all profane Authors use these two words indifferently, seeing both in
proper signification, and by the declaration of the learned there is great
difference between them.

But Saint Stephen calls the golden Calfe an Idol, so it was indeed: What is
that to the purpose?

And Saint Hierome says, that Idols are the images of dead men, (add) that
are taken for gods: True, many Idols be Images: all such as truly represent any
person that was once living here, but no Images be Idols, unless it be taken
for a god: And so Idols requires besides the Image, that it be made a god, or
the image of a false god.

R. ABBOT.
Here is nothing but fraud and falsehood, and a ridiculous shifting of the
commandment of God, by an idle distinction of Idols and Images. They tell us
that the second commandment forbids Idols only and not Images, when as in
truth every Image to which devotion or worship is performed, is no other but an
Idol. The word (...) in Greek signifies originally the same that Imago does
in Latin, that is, an image, form or shape, as appears by the use of the
word generally amongst all profane authors. But by Ecclesiastical use, the
signification thereof is restrained, and it is made the proper name of those
Images to which any religious service or devotion is done. The name of an Image
then continues more general in signification, noting every form or likeness
of any thing described or shaped to whatsoever purpose or intent, as is the
Princes Image upon the coin, and the likenesses of men, beasts, birds, trees,
flowers, wherewith embroderers, painters, grauers, caruers adorn and beautify
their works, and in a word every impression and form whereby one thing
carries the resemblance of another. The Image then of it self is but an Image,
and serving barely to resemble any creature, it has no offense in it, but add
worship unto it and spiritual devotion, and it becomes thereby an Idol, and
the devotion that is done unto it is idolatry, that is, the worship of an
idol. Howsoever therefore the words originally are in meaning the same, yet
because the custom of the Church has appropriated the one to special
signification, we accordingly distinguish them; in such sort notwithstanding as
that where the name of Image implies that for which an Image is called an
Idol, as in this question of Images it does, there we take an image and an
idol to be the same, and no difference betwixt them. But the truth of this
matter will appear in examining the particulars which here M. Bishop has set
down for the justifying of their Idols. The difference that he makes betwixt
an Idol and an Image is this, that an Image represents a thing that is, an
Idol represents a thing supposed to be, but is not. Where I pray thee
(gentle Reader) to mark well how handsomely they deal in the contriuing of this
matter. An Idol forsooth is a representation only of such things as have no
being, and the second commandment forbids only idols; it therefore must be
understood to condemn only representations of such things as have no being.
Which being so, we marvel what those words import which are added in the
commandment, The likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the
earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth; or what Moses meant speaking
yet more particularly, a Take heed that ye make not the representation of any
figure, the likeness of man or woman, the likeness of any beast that is upon
the earth, the likeness of any feathered foul, the likeness of any creeping
thing, etc. We would know of M. Bishop what it is that Moses here condemns,
whether Images or Idols? If he say Images, then Idols only are not forbidden
by this commandment. If he say Idols, then Idols are not only representations
of those things that are not, because all the things here mentioned have their
real existence and being in the world. But we can use no better means to
circumuent him, then by the authorities which he himself alleges, where
following the example of his master Bellarmine, he refers his Reader to the
places, but sets not down the words, because he well knows that they
fully make against him. First, Origin having set down that Orige^. in Exodus
hom. 8. Long aliud sunt Idola and aliud dij; and rursu^ differentiae idolorum
et similitudinu^ Aliud est ergo facere idolu^, aliud similitudinem. Siquis in
quolibet metallo auri vel argents, vel ligni vel lapidis faciat spec^em
quadrupedis alicutus vel serpentis vel auis and statuat illam adorandam, non
idolum sed simelitudinem fecit, vel etiam sipicturam ad hoc ipsum statuat. etc.
Idolu^ vero facit ille qui secundu^ Apostolum dice^tem quia idolum nihil est
facit quod non est. Quid est autem quod non est? Species quam non vidit oculus,
sed ipse sibi animus fingit. Vt siquis humanis membris caput can^^ aut artetis
forniet, vel rursu^ in vno hominis habitu duas facies fingat aut humano pectori
postremas parts equi aut piscu ad^^^ngat. Haec and ijs similia qui facit, non
similitudinem sed idolum facit Facit enim quod no^ est, nec habet aliquid
simile su^, etc. Quae sermo Dei vniuersacomplectens simul abiurat and abijcit
and non solum idolum fieri verat* sed and similitudinem omnium quae in te^ris
sunt and in aquis and in coel^.
Gods and Idols differ much; and again that there is difference of Idols and
resemblances or images: he prosecuteth the latter in this sort, It is one thing
to make an Idol, another thing to make a similitude or image. If in any metal
of gold or silver, or wood or stone, a man make the form of any foure-footed
beast, or serpent, or bird, and set up the same to be worshipped, he has not
made an Idol, but an image or similitude: or if he set up a picture for that
purpose, he is to be said to have made a similitude: but he makes an Idol,
who according to the Apostle, saying that an idol is nothing, makes that that
is not. And what is that that is not? It is a shape which the eye has not
seen, but the mind fancieth to it self. As for example, if to the body of a
man one frame the head of a dog or of a ram, or to one shape of a man make two
faces to a man's likeness so far as the breast, do add the hinder parts of a
horse or of a fish. He that makes these or such like, makes not a similitude
but an idol. For he makes that that is not, nor has any thing like unto it.
All these the word of God comprising together, condemns and rejects, and
does not only forbid an idol to be made, but also the similitude of all
things that are in the earth, and in the waters, and in heaven. Theodoret
imitating Origin, speaks to the very same effect: Theod. in Exodus quaest. 38
Qui differunt idolum and similitudo? Idolum nihil representat quod su^sistat,
similitudo vero est abcui^^ imago and effigies. Cum ergo Graeci quida^ forma^
minime subsistentes effingunt veluti Sphingas, Trit^nas, Centauros, Aegyptij
vero homines canina facie, babalove capite tales reru^ non subsistentiu^
fictiones idola vocat, similitudines autem reru^ subsistentium imagines veluti
Solis, Lunae, stellarum, hominu^, beluaru^, rep^iliu^ and his similium, quae
omnia verat adorare aut (animo) colere.
How differ an Idol and a similitude or likeness? An idol represents
nothing that has being, but a similitude is the image or shape of some thing
being. When then some of the Greeks do fancy shapes that are not; as Sphinxes,
Tritons, Centaures; and the Egyptians, men with dogs faces or heads of oxen,
such fictions of things that are not he calls idols, but similitudes he
calls the images of things that are, as of the Sun, the Moon, the stars,
of men, of beasts, of creeping things, and such like, all which he forbids
to worship, either outwardly by gesture, or inwardly by mind. Thus these
authors, the latter of them taking occasion by the former, apply the name of
Idols only to such imagined forms and shapes which have nothing answerable to
them in the creatures of the world, as Sphynx bearing in the face the shape of
a maid with wings, and all the rest of the body like a Lion; Triton or Dagon
being the forepart of a man and the hinder part of a fish; the Centaures being
in one part men and the other horses; Anubis having an oxe-head to the body of
a man, and sundry other such like. Now what a trouble would it be to M. Bishop,
if the honest man with whom he questioned Chap. 3. sect. 2
before, should come to him, saying, Good sir, you asked me a question a while
since, I pray let me make bold now to ask you another. What, were all the
idols that we hear and read of such antickes and counterfeits as you tell us
out of these authors, forms and shapes to which nothing in the world has
correspondence? We took it that the Act. 7.21.
golden calfe which the Israelites made and worshipped in the wilderness had
been an Idol, which yet was Psalm. 106.20.
the similitude of a calfe or bullock that eats hay. So did we think of
their Ezech. 16.17.
Images of men, which the Prophet Ezechiel says, they made, and committed
whoredom with them (which S. Hierome expounds to have been Hiero^. in Ezec.
lib. 4. cap. 16. Omnia const^uit Jerusalem and. vertit in idola Bilis sieve
Baalis, Chamos, etc.
the Idols of Bell or Baal, Camosh, Astaroth and Melchom, and the ordinary
gloss Glossa ordin. ibid.
of Priapus). And thus we see the author of the book of Wisdom, bringing in
Wisd. 14.14.16.
a father making the image of his son, and the people counterfetting the
visage, and making the gorgeous image of a king, which he calls expressly Ver.
11 15.
idols, and notes therein the beginning of them. Thus does David in the Psalm
describe them by the parts and members of man's body, Psalm. 115.5.
They have mouths and speak not, eyes have they and see not; they have ears
and hear not, noses have they and smell not, they have hands and handle not,
feet have they and walk not, neither make they any sound with their throat. If
these be rightly called Idols, as we suppose they are, we desire (good sir) to
know how it stands good which your authorities report, that the name of Idols
belongs only to such fantastical shapes as before are spoken of. The honest
man here puts M. Bishop to a blanke, having nothing to say but by the
renouncing of his own authors. For if he say that those be no idols, every man
sees that he speaks untruth: if he say they be, then he contrarieth his own
allegation for himself. Now what impudency is this both in his master and
him, thus colourably to cite the names of Origin and Theodoret, when they
themselves well know, that that which they say is contrary to the Scriptures,
contrary to the rest of the Fathers, contrary to the perpetual consent and
current language of the whole Christian Church? But yet (gentle Reader) I would
have thee to question with him somewhat further, What, M. Bishop, are only
Idols forbidden by the second commandment whereof we speak? Yea, says he.
Yea but your authors, M. Bishop, tell us, as appears by their words before,
that not only Idols which are shapes of things that are not, but also all
images and representations of things that are, as of men or any other
creatures, are thereby forbidden, Orige^. vt supra. Vtrumque resecat sermo
diuinus, vt nec affectu colas nec specie adores.
that neither by mind or affection we worship them, nor by outward show and
gesture bow unto them; how can it be then which you say, that only Idols are
forbidden? Here M. Bishop is plunged again, and knows not what to say,
because his images also which he thought to have pulled out, are by his own
authors brought within the compass of the second commandment, so that
howsoever they seem to vary from the rest in a curious device of the
signification of a word, yet for the condemning of Popish idolatry they say the
same that all the rest say. The translation which his authors herein follow, is
the translation of the Septuagint, Thou shall not make to thy self an Idol,
nor the likeness of any thing, etc. where that which they call idol, is in the
Hebrew (...) Pesel, which in many other places they translate (...), and is the
same as in latin sculptile, which imports a thing carved or graven to the
likeness of any thing, or as we call it a graven image, so as that Arias
Montanus a Papist translateth it, Deuteronomy. 5.8. Ar. Mont transl. interlinear^.
Non facies tibi dolaturam omnis effigiei: Thou shall not make to thy self any
carved work of any likeness. By reason that Idols were for the most part
carved or graven work, therefore the holy Ghost may seem to take that word as
most common and general, under that, according to custom of speech, to
comprehend all the rest, only adding by way of exposition, or the likeness of
any thing, etc. Yea the words in Deuteronomie being set down without any
particle coniunctiue or disjunctive, Thou shall not make to thy self a carved
or graven work the likeness of any thing in heaven above, etc. do plainly
argue that those words are added as an exposition, as if he had said, Thou
shall not make to thy self Pesel, that is, the likeness of any thing, etc.
The Septuagint therefore respecting that Pesel by use was grown to signify
generally Deuteronomy. 7.25. and 123 Where by Pesilim, the graven images of their
gods, al manner images of their gods are to be understood.
the images of the heathen gods of whatsoever kind, would in the Greek
according to the intendment of the commandment set down a word of the like
large extent and signification, and thereto made choice of (...), an idol, as
serving to express all forms and shapes which men set up to do worship unto
them. And that the most ancient Church conceived there no otherwise of the
name of Idol, appears by Justinius Martyr, who disputing with Tryphon the
Jew, reads Image instead of Idol, saying that Justin. Maert. dial. cum
Tryph. Deus is erat qui per Mosen sanxit ((...)) nequa omnino fieret vel imago
vel similitudo, neque eorum quae in coelo, etc.
God commanded by Moses to make neither image nor similitude either of things
in heaven above or in the earth beneath. Hereby therefore it appears that
that which Origin and Theodoret say, is built wholly upon a false ground, and
cannot by any other authority be made good. Yet M. Bishop tells us that that
which they say is taken out of the Apostle, where he says, ^. Cor. 8.4.
that an idol is nothing in the world, which Origin indeed cites to make
good that meaning which before has been expressed, although serving nothing at
all to that effect. But see here the treachery of this our false and faithless
Sophister, who making Origin his author, brings the words in one meaning when
as Origin applies them unto another. For Origin when he alleges that an
Idol is nothing in the world, means (as we see in his words before) that it
is a shape, to which nothing answers amongst the creatures of the world; for
those Sphynxes, Tritons, Centaures, and such like, are mere fancies, neither
is there any such thing at all; but M. Bishop says, that an idol is nothing,
that is, it is no god. It is nothing formally (says he) that is, though they
be great pieces of wood or stone materially, yet they represent a thing that is
not, that is, such a thing to be a god which is nothing less. But it is one
thing not to be, another thing not to be a god; neither can a thing be said to
be nothing because it is no god; and therefore very wretchedly does he pervert
the words of Origin by drawing them from things understood simply not to be, to
things understood only respectively to be no gods. Yea he hereby overthrows
all that Origin there says, because if by representing that that is not, he
mean the representing of such a thing to be a god, which is nothing less,
then those images and resemblances which he there speaks of, of men and
beasts and birds, set up amongst the Gentiles to be worshipped, shall be said
also to be nothing, and to represent a thing that is not, because they
represented such things to be gods which are nothing less, which is wholly
repugnant to that which Origin has set down. Thus either Origin and Theodoret
both must be taken with one breath instantly to cross another, or else we must
take M. Bishop to be a lewd man, who seeks to father a bastard upon them,
which is begotten by himself. Albeit neither can we approve that construction
which O^igen makes of the Apostles words, as if an idol were only a
representation or form to which there is nothing correspondent in the world.
For who is ignorant, that the idols of the Gentiles were for the most part the
images of men, and set up in the names of men deceased, in the like sort as
Popish images? Thus Tertullian vpbraideth the Pagans, that in their own
Tertul. Apolog. cap. 10. Prouocamus ad conscientia^ vestra^, etc. illa nos
damnet si poserit negare omnes istos deos vestros homines fuisse, etc.
testimonium perhibentibus and ciuitatibus in quibus na^^ sunt, and regionibus
in quibus aliquid operati vestigia reliquerunt, in quibus etiam sepulti
demonstrantur.
consciences they knew well enough that the gods which they worshipped were but
men, that it was to be proved in what places they were borne, where they had
lived, and left remembrance of their works where they were buried. Therefore
he tells them of their custom of making gods, Cap. 11. Quos ante paucos dies
luctu publico mortuos sunt confessi, in deos consecrant.
They consecrate them for gods whom a little before by public mourning they
confessed to be dead. Thus did parents take upon them to honor their own
children that were dead before them, as Lactan Instit. lib. 1. cap 15. ex M.
Tull. lib. de consolat. Approbantibus dijs immortalibus ipsis in eorum caet^^
locatam ad opinionem omnium mortalium consecrabo.
Lactantius shows that Tully did his daughter. Thus did the lover to his
beloved, as did the Emperor Adrian to his paramour Origin. contra Cells lib. 3.
Antinous, building a temple to him, and causing him to be worshipped. So did
the children consecrate their parents, as Lanctant. us supra.
Bacchus, Apollo, Mercury and Pan did their father Jupiter, and their children
afterward the like to them. And this Cypr. de Jdolo. vanit. August. de ciuit.
Dei. lib. 8. cap 5.
Cyprian and Austine note to have been revealed to Alexander the great as a
great secret by Leo an Egyptian Priest, that not only their petite gods
Hercules, Aesculapius, Romulus, and such like, but also those of the higher
rank, Jupiter, Juno, Saturnus, Vesta, Vulcanus and the rest were but men and
women to whom such honors had begun to be yielded after they were dead, it
being by custom received when men were renowned either for strange acts or
good deserts, to honor them as gods when they were dead, by setting up their
images, and doing sacrifice and devotion to them. Hereupon Lactantius says, as
noting the most usual shape and form of their idols, Lactan. Instit. lib 2.
cap. 18 Simulachra quae colunt effigies sunt hominum mortuorum.
The idols which they worship are the shapes or images of dead men. Yea they
who conceived better of the condition of their gods, acknowledged that M. Tull
de not. deor. lib. 1. Quis ^aem caecus in contemplandis rebus vnquam fuit, vt
non videret species istas hominum ^ollatas in deos aut consilio quodem
sapientu^ quo facili^s animos imperitorum ad decrum cultum a vitae prauitate
coo^erterent, aut superstitione vt essenisimulachra quae venerantes deos ipsos
se adire crederent.
the shapes of men were applied unto them, and that either by the advice of
wise men, that they might the more easily turn the minds of ignorant men from
naughtiness of life to the worship of the gods, or of superstition, that there
might be images which the people coming to should believe that they came to
the gods themselves. It is plain therefore that Origin erred in understanding
the Apostle, to say that an idol is nothing, that is, a shape fitting to
nothing in the world, because idols were most commonly the shapes of men, and
set up as popish images in remembrance and honor of dead men, supposed for
their merits and good deserts to be advanced to heaven. And in this respect S.
Austine preferred the Pagans and heathens before the Manichees, for August.
contra Faust. li. 20. ca. 5. Pagani colunt etc. quae sunt, sed prodijs colenda
non sunt, etc. Vos ea colitis quae omnino non sunt, sed vestraru^ fallaciu^
fabularum vinitate finguntur.
the Pagans worship things that be, though they be not to be worshipped, but
you (says he) worship those things which be not at all, but are fained by the
vanity of your deceitful fables and tales. The meaning then of the Apostles
words, An idol is nothing, is that which the Scripture elsewhere tells us,
Esa. 44 10.
it is profitable for nothing, chap. 41.23.
it can neither do good nor evil, neither save nor destroy, neither make
clean nor unclean. August. ibid. Sunt and idola sed ad salutem nihil sunt Es
cap. 9. Ad salutem vel aeliqua^ vtilitate^ nihil sunt.
Idols are, says Austin, but to salvation they are nothing: to steed us or
profit us they are nothing. Chrysosti in 1. Corin homil 20. Sunt quidem, sed
nihil possunt non magis intelligu^t qua^ alij lapides.
They are, says Chrysostom, but they can do nothing: they have no more
understanding then other stones. Hitherto then all that M. Bishop says, is but
an Idol according to his own construction, making show to be somewhat when
indeed it is nothing. But yet he makes a further challenge, Let M. Perkins
quote but one place in the whole Bible where (an idol and an image) they are
used both for one. This he says, presuming upon his masters word, and though
we quote many places, all will be one; for he is sworn to his master, and will
be true to him. But if he turn his Bible he shall find Samuel saying to Saul
according to their own translation, 1. Sam. 15 23, Quasi scelus idololatriae
nollo acquiescere.
Not to obey is as the wickedness of idolatry: it should be, is iniquity and
idolatry. The Hebrew word which is there translated idolatry is (...) which
their own latter translator Arias Montanus puts into the text, but in the
margent to express the true and proper signification of the word, sets
down imagines, images. The words then literally are, To transgress is
iniquity and images. Let M. Bishop then tell us whether an Image here do
signify the same as an Idol, and be put in place thereof or not, for we
think that he will grant that the meaning is this, To transgress is
iniquity and idols, that is to say, idolatry. Shall we quote any more then
one? He shall find then that Micahs god called Pesel, an idol, as he will have
it translated, Judge. 18.31.
is called also Chap. 17 5.
(...) an Image; and the Israelites are said to destroy 2 Kings 11.18.
(...) the images of Baal, which their own translation elsewhere calls
Judges 10 6.
the idols of Baal: and Ezechiel in one place obiecteth to the Israelites Ezech
7.20.
Tsalmei, the images of their abominations and of their idols, which in
another place he calls Chap. 16.36.
the idols of their abominations: and again he calls them Ibid. Verse. 17.
the images of men, which were the idols of Baal, Chamosh, and the rest, as
has been before said; and the author of the book of Wisdom says of the Idol,
Wisd. 13.16.
It cannot help it self, because it is an image that has need of help: and
the ancient Church in the second commandment for Idol, as the Septuagint
translated it, did translate Image, as before I showed out of Justinius Martyr.
Accordingly the ancient Fathers commonly use the name of Images concerning
Idols, as Lactantius calls them Lactan. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 18. Ipse
imagines sacrae, etc.
sacred or holy images, and Tertullian Tertul. Apolog. ca. 12. Imagines
frigidas mortuorum suorum simillimas non adoramus.
cold images like to their dead principals: and of Sidrach, Misach and Abednego
refusing to worship the Idol which king Nabuchodonosor set up, he says, Idem
de Idolol. Honore^ imaginu eius respuerunt.
they refused to honor his image. So says Cyprian of the devils, Cypr. de
Idol. vanit. Sub consecratis imaginibus delitescunt.
They lurk under sacred or consecrated images: and Austine, August. de ciu.
Dei. lib. 8. ca. 24. Daemones per artem nescio quam imaginibus inditi, hoc est,
visibilibus simulachris.
They, by I know not what art, are put into images, that is, visible shapes or
representations. So says also Minutius Felix, that Minut. Felix in Octa. apud
Arn* Quis dubitat horum imagines consecratas vulgus crare? etc.
the common people pray to the consecrated images of dead men. It were infinite
to allege all that might be brought out of the Scriptures and Fathers to show
this promiscuous and indifferent use of the words or names of idols and images,
and putting off the one instead of the other, Images for Idols, where the
circumstance gives occasion to understand such images to which religious
service and devotion is performed. But M. Bishop tells us that he can bring
some places, where if we use the one of those words for the other, we shall
offend all good Christian ears, as if we should say that man was made after
the idol of God, or that Christ is the idol of his Father. Where we may see,
that it is much that he can do, and yet when he has all done, it is nothing to
the purpose. What does he herein but confirm that which I have before said,
that ecclesiastical use has restrained the signification of idol to be taken
in the evil part only of Images superstitiously and sacrilegiously abused, and
therefore that it cannot now be so generally applied as originally it might be?
And yet further his wisdom should have considered, that we speak here of
images as they are incident to the second commandment, which are the work of
men's hands, and are set up for devotion and religion, and therefore if he would
have spoken pertinently, should have brought us an example out of the
Scripture, where there is any mention of such an image that is worshipped,
which is not also to be called an idol. If he could show us such an example,
it made somewhat for their Images, but those which he brings are impertinent
and avail him nothing. As for Christ, he is the substantial image of his
Father, and to be alike worshipped with him, and of him S. Austine somewhere
says, that August. Nulla imago Dei coli debet nisi illa quae hoc est quod
ipse. Epist. 119.
no image of God is to be worshipped which is not the same that God is: and
thereby condemns Popery of idolatry. And if any other image of God were to be
worshipped, it should be man, who was created after the image of God, rather
then a senseless block that has only some outward shape and proportion of a
man. But to press us yet further with a matter of no weight, he tells us
that the seventh general Council nine hundred years past, does accurse all
them who call the images of Christ and his Saints Idols. He means it of the
idolatrous second Nicene council which was An. Dom. 789.
almost eight hundred years after Christ and about eight hundred years past,
where he to make it seem the more ancient adds almost an hundred years. Of
this Council we shall see more in the end, but here it is to be noted in what
meaning they pronounce that curse, and how according to that meaning, as men
carried with a spirit of giddiness and frenzy they utterly circumuent and
overthrow themselves. If they had meant images simply, we would accord with them
that the images of Christ and his Saints are not to be called Idols, for such
images we have, and thereby show that we condemn them not. Yea where they are
put in the Churches, we say as Charles the great and his Council said for
answer to that Nicene Council, Lib. Carol mag. contra Synod. pro adorand.
imagine. No nos imagines in basilicis pesitas idola nu^cupamus sed ne idola
^uncupentur, eas adora^e and colere recusamus.
We call not images put in Churches by the name of Idols, but that they may not
be called Idols, we forbear to adore and worship them. But the meaning of that
Council is otherwise, that the images of Christ and his Saints being
worshipped, yet are not to be called idols, and in this sense do they accuse
them that confound them both in one. Concerning which it is to be observed that
the same Council amongst sundry other heresies Nice^. 2. Act 7. epist ad
Constan. et Iren. Audemus anathentatizare Arij insantam, etc. Nestorij
idololatriam in homine.
accurseth the idolatry of Nestorius in or concerning the man Jesus Christ. The
heresy of Nestorius stood in the dividing of the manhood of Christ from the
Godhead, whereby he made two distinct persons distinctly and severally to be
acknowledged and worshipped. He made the Godhead only an assistant to the
manhood, and more eminently and effectually showing it self in him then in us,
but otherwise no more united to the manhood then it is to us. Therefore he
denied that the virgin Mary might be called (...) the mother of God, or that it
might be said that God suffered for our sins, albeit the Scripture so plainly
says, Luke 1.35.
That holy thing which shall be borne of thee shall be called the Son of God:
and again, Acts 20.28.
Feed the church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. Now
because he made a distinct person of the manhood of Christ, and yet
acknowledged to worship the man Christ, he was hereby charged to beak the
first commandment, Thou shall have no other gods but me. Cyril. de rect. fide
ad Reg. Lege^ iguurirrita^, etc. Irrita^ faceremus legem quae vni vere Deo
adorationem offeri, vt and sapientiam loquimur etc. Vere homines a cognitione
Dei abducit and mundum hominis cultum docet.
We should be so doing (says Cyril) make frustrate the law which gives
worship to one only who is truly God, and affirms that this is to lead men
away from the knowledge of God, and to teach the world ((...)) the worshipping
of a man. This is it which that Nicene Council calls the idolatry of
Nestorius, which they could not but condemn under that name, if they would
carry any countenance of truth, because by the Council of Ephesus and the
Catholic and godly Bishops (as appears by Cyril) it had been before in that
sort notoriously condemned. Here then we say, if the manhood of Christ being
taken severally and without personal union of the Godhead become an idol (for
that the name of idolatry imports) by being worshipped, what should let but
that the image of Christ being worshipped is much more justly to be called an
idol, which has no manner of union neither to God nor man. In what respect
the name of Idol is so applied, shall be showed afterward, but in the mean
time we desire to know how it should be Idolatry to worship the manhood of
Christ, and yet it should be no idolatry to worship the image of Christ, and as
the image of Christ, so the images of the Saints also. We cannot conceive this
point, and therefore we expect M. Bishop, in this behalf to be resolved by
you. Well then, leaving him to demurre upon it for the saving of the credit of
their Council, let us come to the consideration of his next authority. M.
Perkins alleges Tertullian, saying, that every form or representation is to
be termed an idol. Not so neither, says M. Bishop, for he makes Idolum a
diminutiue of eidos which signifies a form or similitude, so that Idolon is
but a small similitude or slender image, not so much for the quantity, as for
that it represents but darkely. It seems that it was somewhat dark when he
looked upon Tertullian, or that he took Tertullian for such a dark author, as
that he was loath to trouble himself to look upon him at all. Tertullian
indeed says, that Tertul. de idol. (...) graece formam sonat, ab eo per
diminutione^ (...), deductu^ aeque apud nos formulam fecit.
(...) signifies a form or similitude, and that from thence by diminution is
derived (...), which proportionably with us makes or imports a little form,
but by that that follows he gives to understand, that as in Latin Paxillus,
a nail; figulus, a potter; mandibulum, a iaw, and many other like, so (...) in
Greek is a diminutiue only in form and sound, not in the signification and
meaning of the word. For he infers thus, Ibid. Igitur omnis forma vel
formula idolum se dici exposcit. Inde idololatria omnis circa omne idolu^
famulatus and seruitu^.
Therefore every form or lesser form requires it self to be called an
idol, and thence is idolatry, which is all manner devotion and service about
any such idol. It is plain then that he makes the name of an Idol to extend
to all forms or representatio^s, whether greater or lesser, expressly saying
that Nihil interest quale sit, qua de materia, qua de effigy, ne qui pu^et id
solum idolu^ habendum quod humana effigy sit consecratum.
it skilleth not what a one it be, of what matter or what shape, that no man
may think that that only is an idol which is consecrated in the shape of man.
To whatsoever form then or likeness we yield devotion or service, we therein
commit idolatry, and it is that which properly we call an idol. But to make
this yet more plain, he adds further a little after, Omnia colit humanus
error praeter ipsum omniu^ conditore^. Eorum imagines idola^ consecratio
imaginum idololatria.
Humane error worshippeth all things save him that made all The images of those
things are idols; the consecration of images is idolatry. Idols then by
Tertullians Judgment are all manner images set up to represent either men or
any other creatures, and consecrated to have religious duty performed unto
them. And so elsewhere he says of deifying men by their images after their
death; Jdem de Coro. mil. Mortui idolastatim fiunt habitu and cultu
co^secrationis.
Being dead they are made Idols by their habit and service of consecration. It
is consecration then or dedication, that of an image makes an Idol, and
therefore are Idols termed sacred images and consecrated images, as before I
have showed out of Lactantius and other writers. Hereby then we may conceive,
that M. Bishop surely wrote in the dark, when he set down Tertullian
affirming Idol to import representing darkly, when he says not any one word
tending to that effect, but leaves them the same as are the representations of
Popish images. Neither does Eustathius make any more for him then the rest, who
when he calls the ghosts of dead men Eustath. in Hom. Odyss. lib. 11 Genus
diuinationis Ethnicis vsitatum quo videbant hominum mortuorum idolae obscura
and euanida, etc.
obscure and vanishing Idols, imports thereby the large signification of the
word Idols, as belonging to all manner shapes and representations, both which
are solid, and constant, and abiding, and those also that are aierie, and
darksome, and lightly vanish and pass away. For if the word Idols had imported
only such dark and vanishing shadows, to what end should he add those
Epithetons, the force whereof was already contained in the signification of
the word? And if Homer or any other do apply the name of Idols, to fancies, and
dreams, and shadows, it is nothing against us, who know and confess that the
word (...) in the original signification, extends so largely as to be fitly
used thereof, even as the word image may also, as appears by S. Austine who
of the words of Christ, The son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees
the father do, etc. says, that Aug. in Joan. tract. 19. Quaesi intelligantur
secu^dum humanu^ sensum carnaliter, nihil aliud nobis facit animae plena
pha^tasmatis nisi quasdam imagines velut duorum hominu^, patris and filij,
vnius oste^dentis, alterius videntis, vnius loquentis, alterius audie^tis, quae
omnia idolae cordis sunt.
if they be understood carnally according to humane conceit, the soul full of
fancies does no other but frame certain images as of two men, a father and a
son, the one of them showing and the other seeing, the one speaking and the
other hearing, all which, says he, are the idols of the heart. In a word
whatsoever he can seem to allege out of profane Authors concerning the
signification of the word Idol, it avails him nothing, the case standing as
I have showed, that ecclesiastical custom of speech has termed every
consecrated image by the name of an Idol, neither can he allege any, whose
testimony is in this case to be regarded, with whom an Image to which worship
is done, is any other then an Idol. M. Perkins further alleges, that the
golden calfe of the Israelites was an Idol. What is that to the purpose, says
M. Bishop? Very much against that toy of his, that an Idol is that that
represents a thing that is not; for a calfe is a thing that is, and therefore
the golden calfe cannot be said to represent a thing that is not. Yea, but
says he, it represented that to be a God which was nothing less. But that is
a sophistical perverting of the words of his authors, as has been before
showed, and being but his own foolish fancy, what is it to us? His authorities
make only that an Idol, which represents in shape a thing that simply is
not. Albeit neither will that shift of his rid him from this objection; for it
is manifest that the Israelites made the golden Calfe to be unto them a visible
sign and representation of the true God, by which they would have some token
of his presence amongst them, and his conducting and guiding of them. By their
first propounding the matter, it appears that they would have the Idol in
place of Moses, by whom because he was as it were a Mediator betwixt God and
them, they conceived God to be present with them. Therefore they say, Exodus
32.1.
Make us Gods to go before us, for as for this Moses which brought us out of
the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him, making the want of Moses
the only cause why they required Gods. When the Idol is made, they say, Ver 4.
These be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. They
had said before, this Moses which brought us out of the land of Egypt, and they
knew well that the Calfe being newly made, was not it that brought them out of
the land of Egypt. Therefore as they acknowledged Moses only as the minister of
that God, by whom they were brought out of the land of Egypt, so they require
the Calfe only as a sign and representation of that God by whom they were
brought out of the land of Egypt, and only in that sense they say, These be thy
Gods o Israel, etc. Therefore they proclaim accordingly, Ver. 5.
To morrow shall be the holy day, not to the Calfe or to any other god but to
Jehovah the Lord, which was the proper name of the only true God. And thus
Abulens. in Exodus ca. ^2. q. 7. Deus qui te eduxit. etc. iste est quem hic
cerni^; id est, in isto corpore aureo laetet eius virtus.
Abulensis the great Schooleman upon that place confesses, that by the Calfe
they intended to worship God, as does also Ferus. in Act. ^ap. 7.
Ferus their own Preacher at Mentz, yea and the Roman or Trent catechism
before spoken of, which affirming that to resemble the Godhead by an image, is
the breach of the commandment, to show that the Israelites committed this
breach infers thus, Catechis. Trideut. in explicat. praecept. 1. Quocirca
Israelitae qui ante vituli simulachru^ clamabant, Hi sunt dij tut, etc.
idololatrae sunt appellati qui mutaru^t gloriam suam in similitudine^ vituli
comedentis faenum.
Wherefore the Israelites crying before the image of a Calfe, These are thy
gods, O Israel, etc. were called idolaters because they changed their glory
(which was their God) to the similitude of a Calfe that eats hay. Which words
are altogether inconsequent, unless it be taken that the Israelites in their
Calfe intended the worship of their God. And this appears further in the
Calves that were set up at Bethel and Dan, to the worship whereof when Jeroboam
would induce the people, he propounded unto them as Josephus reports it,
Joseph. Antiq. li. 8. ca. 3. Nullus locus Deo est vacuus and is nulla certo
loco includitur sed vbique notae exandit and vbique cultores suot respicit.
Quare no^ placet mihi vos Hierosolyma proficisci religionis ergo, etc. Ega duas
vnulas aureas consecravi. altera^ in Bethelis, altera^ in Dana vt pro locoru^
opportunitatet ex propinquioribus oppidu ad eas confluentes illie Deum rite
adoretis.
that God is absent from no place, nor is included or compassed any where, but
as he knows all things, so hears every where, and every where respects
them that worship him; therefore that he liked not that for exercise or
religion they should go up to Jerusalem, but he had consecrated two golden
calves at Dan and Bethel, that at either of those places according to their
dwelling, they might more near at hand in due manner worship God. By which
words it is plain, that in the worship of the Calves he made show of no other,
but thereby to worship God, and therefore Iehu destroying the worship of Baal,
for the upholding of the worship of those Calves, vaunteth of 2. King. 10.16.
the zeal that he had for Jehovah, the Lord, and the Samaritans accepting of
the same worship, are said thereby Ibid. ca. 17.32.
to serve the Lord. Hereby the^ it is plain, that an Idol is not that only
which represents that to be a God which is not, but also that wherein is
intended the representation and worship of the true God. Last of al, M. Perkins
alleges, that Hierome says that Idols are the images of dead men. Add,
says M. Bishop, that are taken for Gods; for many Idols be images, says he;
all such as truly represent any person that was once living here, but no image
is an Idol, unless it be taken for a God. But that this is very false, it is
manifest because the Pagans themselves, at least the wiser sort of them never
took their images to be Gods, yea they scorned them that thought them to be so
witless as to understand the^ so. Origin. cont. Cells. li. 7. Quis nisi sit
totus fatuus haec Deos credit, no^ dijs dicatas statuas?
Who, says Celsus, unless he be altogether out of his wits takes them for
Gods, and not for images dedicated to the Gods? Ibid. li. 1. Probabile non est
inter Deos ce^seri nequa^ artificu^ et pleru^que scelestoru^ hominum opera.
It is not probable or likely, says he, that the works of base artificers and
who are oftentimes lewd me^ should be reckoned amongst the Gods. So Olympius
another Pagan Philosopher, when he saw the people of his part dismayed at the
casting down of their images, Sozom. hist. lib. 7. ca. 15 Hortatur ne a
religione deficerent assere^s simulachra and statuas nihil aliud esse quam
materia^ corruptibile^, ac proinde in nihilu^ potuisse redigi; inhabitasse
aute^ his virtutes qu^s^am, and eas iam in coelum auolasse.
exhorts the^ not to fall away from their religion; for as for those images,
they were no other but corruptible matter, and therefore might be brought to
naught, but there had dwelt in the^ divine powers, and those were now gone to
heaven. Thus Arnobius brings them in, excusing themselves, that Arnob. adu.
Gent. li. 6. Deos inquitis per simulachra veneramus.
by the images they worshipped the gods; and Austine, Aug. in Psalm. 85. Jsta
non co limus; haec signae sunt.
We worship not these things; these are but only signs. So Athanasius
mentions that they pleaded for their images, that Athan. adu. Jdola. A^unt
tiltusmodi simulachra pro elementis literarum humano generi esse quae number
leguni, Dei notitiam condiscere possi^t.
they served for letters, which whilst men did read, they might thereby
learn the knowledge of God. Seeing then that the heathen images were Idols,
and yet were not holden to be very gods, it is hereby manifest, that an image
may be an Idol, though it be not taken to be a God. If Master Bishop will say
that the multitude notwithstanding took the images themselves to be gods, we
answer him that so the vulgar people do amongst them also, as before I showed
out of Polydore Virgil, but the heathen were of his mind, to have their
religion esteemed according to the understanding of such wise men as he is. But
in the conclusion he will mend the matter, saying that an Idol requires beside
the image that it be made a God, or the image of a false God. So then though it
be not taken for a God, yet it must be the image of a false God. Where to omit
what has been already said for disproofe hereof, by the example of the golden
Calves, and to say nothing of Micahs mothers idol, who says of the silver
wherewith she would make it, that for that use Judge. 17 3.
she had dedicated it to Jehovah the Lord, thereby showing that she meant to do
it as a service to the true God, to let these go, I say, we find Hierome
alleging that where we read in Genesis, Gen 4.26.
Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord, Hieron tradit. Heb. in
Genes. Plerique Hebraeoru^ arbitra^tur quod tunc primum in nomine Domini et in
similitudine eius fabricata sint idolae.
most of the Hebrew writers did so take it, that then Idols were first made in
the name of the Lord, and to resemble him. By which testimony it is plain that
the name of Idols belongs not only to the images of false gods, but to those
images also that are set up in the name of the Lord, and to resemble him. In
which sort Synod. Nicen 2. Act. 4. in epist. Germa^. Hoc vnu^ arbitrati non
esse Deum neque veru^ neque falsum nisi cuius idolu^ formatum videant.
Germanus the patriarch of Constantinople says of the Israelites, that they
thought him not to be a God neither true nor false, of whom they saw not an
Idol framed before them, plainly calling that an Idol also which is framed
and set up in the name of the true God. And that this may the better appear
unto us, we may observe that the Idols of the Gentiles were not condemned by
the fathers only, for that they were the images of false gods, but upon
supposall that those were truly gods who^ they worshipped, yet they dispute
against images, as things too base, and vile, and unfit to be used for service
of the^ to who^ they would yield the acknowledgment of being gods. Arnob. adu.
Gent. lib. 6. Si certu^ est Deos esse quos remini, atque in summis coe^i
regionibus degere, quae causa, quae ratio est vt Simulachra ista fingantur a
vobis, cum habeatis res certat quibus preces possitis offundere and auxiliu^
rebus in exigentibus postulare? etc: Quid fieri pote est iniuriosius,
co^tumeliosiu^, durius quam Deum alterum scire and rei alteri supplicare: open
sperare de numine and nullius sensus ad effigie^ deprecari?
If it be certain that those be Gods who^ you think so to be, says Arnobius,
and that they dwell in the highest regions of heaven, what cause, what reason
is there that you should make these images (or as they will have it these idols)
seeing ye have otherwise to who^ to pray, and of who^ in extremities to request
help? What can there be more injurious, reproachful, intolerable, then to
know one to be God, and to make his supplication to another; to look for help
of the divine power, and to make his prayer to a senseless image? So
Lactantius says; Lactaent. Justitut. li. 2. cap. 2. Quid simulachra volunt
quae aut mortuorum aut absentiu^ monumenta sunt, etc. Si dij absentes esse non
possunt, qui quoniam diuini sunt in quacunque mu^di part fuerint vident et
audiu^t vniuersa, supernacua ergo sunt simulachra illis vbique praesentibus cu^
satis sit audientiu^ nomina precibus aduocare.
To what end are images which are the tokens either of them that are dead, or
of them that are absent? Now if the Gods cannot be absent, who because they are
Gods (or of divine nature) in whatsoever part of the world they be, do hear
and see all things, then are their images vain, they being every where,
because it is sufficient in their hearing to pray unto them by their names. And
to this purpose do they object unto them out of their own books the sentences
of their own writers, condemning the worshipping of their Gods by images, as
Austin brings in Varro, acknowledging that Aug de ciuit. Dei. lib. 4 ca. 31.
Dicit Varro antiquos Romanos plusquam annot centum and septuaginia Deos sine
simulachro coluisse quod si adhuc, inquit, mansisset, castius dij
obseruarentur, etc Dicit qui primi simulachra Deorum populis posuerunt and
me^u^ dempsisse and errorem addidisse, prudenter existiman^ Deos facile posse
in simulachrorum stoli^itate contemn^.
the Romans for above a hundred and seventy years worshipped their Gods
without images, and that if they had still so done, the Gods should have been
more holily and purely served or regarded; and that they who first set up the
images of the Gods, for the people did both take away fear and added error,
wisely esteeming says S. Austine, that the Gods in that blockish senselessness
of images, might easily be contemned. Much more might be said to like effect
out of Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Cyprian, Athanasius, and others in their
tracts against the Pagans, but by these it is sufficiently to be understood,
that the co^de^nation of their idols arises not only of being the images of
false Gods, but of that being images they were worshipped, howsoever the Gods
might be supposed to be true Gods which they worshipped thereby. And who would
doubt but that the Carpocratia^ heretics Epiphan haer. 27 Carpocrat Habent
imagines Pythagorae, Plat^nis Aristotelis, etc cum quibus etiam imagines Jesus
collocant collocatasque adorant and gentium mysteria perficiunt, etc.
sacrificium atque alia, etc. August de haeres Colobant adorando incensumque
ponendo Iren. li. 1 ca. 24.
setting up the images of Jesus and Paul, and withal of Pythagoras, Homer,
Plato, Aristotle, and doing worship, offering sacrifice, burning incense unto
the^, did commit idolatry, and make idols of these images, albeit they were so
far from taking the^ to be Gods or images of Gods, as that it was one part of
that heresy to deny August ibid. Iesum hominem tantummodo putasse perhibetur.
the godhead of Christ? Thus the name of Idols and Idolatry are sometimes
metaphorically applied to those creatures which are unlawfully worshipped,
albeit they be either not supposed, or expressly denied to be Gods. In which
sort the Council of Laodicea Theodoret. in Col cap. 2 Laodicenae synodus lege
cauit ne precarentur Angelos.
forbidding to pray to Angels, as Theodoret briefly expresses the effect of
that Canon, adds; Laodic. Council. ca. 35. Quicunque autem inuentus fuerit
occulte huic idololatriae vacan^ anathema sit quoniam derelinque^s Dominum
nostrum Iesum Christum filium Dei accessit ad idola.
Whosoever shall be found giving himself secretly to this idolatry, accursed
be he, because forsaking our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, he has made
access to Idols. By which words it is plain, that by praying to Angels, men
make Idols of the^, though they do not think the^ to be Gods, because prayer is
a devotion that belongs only to God. The like M. Bishop must confess
according to the opinion of Arius, even of Christ himself. For if the first
commandment forbid only Idols, as M. Bishop will have it, and Arius in
impugning the divinity of Christ, and yet acknowledging to worship him, did
break the first commandment, then it cannot be denied but that by the
doctrine of Arius Christ must become an Idol. That Arius therein brake the first
commandment, appears by Theodoret, Theodoret. in Exodus q 37. Qui Trinitatis
vnam substantiam co^fitentur, diuinae vocis legem obseruant: nihil enim aliud
pro Deo coli permittunt excepta diuina naturae. Qui vero errore^ sequuntur Arij
atque Eunomij manifest in diuinam legem committunt, confitentes quidem vnum
filium, sed creatum esse asserentes and a diuina substantia alienu^. Cu^ aute^
Deus dicat, Non erunt tibi d^ alij praeter me, isti profecto Deum aliu^
introducu^t.
They, says he, who confess one substance of the Trinity, do observe the law
of the word of God, for they permit nothing to be worshipped for God, save only
the nature of God. But they which follow the error of Arius and Eunomius, do
manifestly trespass against the law of God, confessing that the Son is one,
but affirming him to be created and a stranger from the substance of God,
Whereas God then says, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, these verily
bring in another God. M. Bishop therefore must necessarily grant that Arius
made an Idol of Christ, whom notwithstanding he denied to be God, and
therefore that the name of an Idol may belong to that which yet is not taken
to be a God. Therefore does Athanasius say of them, that by their opinion Athan.
cont. Arian. orat 4. Cur sese non adnumerant gentilibus siquidem ambo Creatore
omisso creaturae inseruiant?
they were to be reckoned with the Gentiles, because together with them in
steed of the Creator, they worshipped the treasure, which as it was idolatry in
the Gentiles, so it must be in them also. The like we have heard before of the
Nestorian heresy, condemned of idolatry for worshipping the manhood of Christ,
without acknowledging the personal uniting thereof to the Godhead. To be
short, S. Austine says of the works of the flesh reckoned up by the Apostle,
fornication, uncleanness, etc. Aug. de verb. Apost. ser 3. ista in nobis
ta^quam idela frangenda sunt.
These are we to break in our selves as Idols; and again tells the
Manichees, Ide^ cont. Faust. lib. 14. ca. 11 In phantasmatibus fabularu^ suaru^
idola colunt.
that in their fabulous fancies they worship Idols, and Hierome generally says
of heretics, that Hieron in Zachar. ca 13. Haereticeru^ peruersa doctrina
quodcunque simulauerit vertit in Idolum.
whatsoever they devise or feign, they turn it to an Idol, not for that men
have any opinion of Godhead in their lusts and fancies, but because they yield
them that affection and service which they owe to God. By all this then it
appears, that because the name of Idols is metaphorically applied to things
for being worshipped, or devoutly and affectionately embraced and followed,
which yet are not holden to be Gods, therefore the proper use thereof belongs
to Images, in respect of worship done unto them, though the same Images be
neither taken for Gods, nor be the Images of false Gods, whence it follows
that Popish Images because they are worshipped, must necessarily come under the
name of Idols.

6. W. BISHOP.
Now to those few authorities which M. Perkins cites in his favor: To them of
the counsel of Eliberis and Epiphanius, which seem to speak against setting
up of Images in Churches: I will answer in their place. To that out of
Lactantius lib. 2. instit. ca. 19. Where Images are for Religion sake, there is
no Religion, the force lies in false translation of Images for Idols: Put,
where Idols are for Religion, there is no Religion: But what, suppose he spoke
against worshipping of Images in general, it were not proper to this purpose,
where we speak only of making Images, and not of all sorts of Images neither,
but of an Image only to represent some properties or actions of God.

That out of Origin Cont. Cel. lib. 7.
is yet far wider; We suffer not any to worship Jesus at Altars, Images, or
Temples, because it is written: Thou shall have none other Gods. Here is
nothing concerning the making of Gods Image; only Christians are forbidden to
go unto the heathen Temples, and there at their Altars or Idols to worship
Jesus, who has no affinity, nor can endure any fellowship with Idolaters.

R. ABBOT.
The words of Lactantius are, Lactan. instit. li. 2. ca. 19. Non est dubium
quin religio nulla sit vbicunque simulachrum est.
It is undoubted that where Images are, there is no religion. M. Bishop
charge us with false translation of Images for Idols. A poor shift, but it
must serve where there is no better; yet how vain it is appears by the
reason which Lactantius adds: Ibid. Na^ si religio ex rebus diuinis est,
diuini aute^ nihil est nisi in coelestibus rebus, carent ergo religione
simulachra quia nihil potest esse coeleste in ea re quae fit ex terra.
for if religion consist of things divine, and there be nothing divine but in
heavenly things, then images are void of religion, because there can be
nothing heavenly in that that is made of earth. Now we suppose that M. Bishop
can put no difference betwixt Idols and Images, in respect of being made of
earth, and therefore must needs confess that Lactantius meant to make no
difference betwixt Images and Idols. But that the folly of this exception may
the better appear, to say nothing that the Fathers usually call heathen Idols
by the name of Images, as by some examples I have showed in the former section,
let us observe the reasons which Lactantius himself uses against them in the
chapter next before, and we shall plainly see that Simulachra and Imagines,
Idols says M. Bishop, and Images are put both for the same thing. Jbid. cap.
18. D^^m religiones Deorum triplic: ratione vana^ esse. Vna quod simulachra
ipsa quae coluntur effigies sieve hominu^ mortuoru^: est aute^ peruersum and
inco^gruens vt simulachrum hominis a simulachro Dei colatur.
I have showed, says he, that the religions of the Gods are vain for three
reasons. First, because the Images which are worshipped are the shapes of dead
men, and it is disorderly and unfitting, that the image of a man should be
worshipped of man who is the image of God. Images, we say, but if M. Bishop
will say it must be Idols, then let him translate the rest also in like sort,
because the word is the same, It is unfitting that the Idol of man should be
worshipped by the Idol of God. Which if he will not then let him acquit us of
false translation, and confess that Lactantius speaks here of Images, as
indeed he does. And if he will not acknowledge it by the first reason, yet we
hope he will by the second, where he sets down the very name of Images.
Altera quod ipsae imagines sacrae quibus inanissimi homines seruiunt omni sensu
carent quia terra sunt. Quie aute^ non intelligat nefa^ esse rectu^ animal
curuari vt adoret terram?
Another reason is, says he, for that (ipsae imagines sacrae) the holy Images
which vain men serve, are altogether without sense because they are earth, and
who understands not that it is a wicked thing that a creature made upright,
should bow down it self to worship earth? Where calling those imagines which
he had called before Simulachra, he shows that Simulachra are as we translate
them Images, and that in this point Idols, as M. Bishop calls them, and
Images are all one, the reasons which he alleges standing alike against
Popish Images, as they do against heathen Idols. The other part of his
exception is but another part of a shift, M. Per. propounding to prove not only
that it is unlawful for us to make any image any way to represent the true God,
but also that we may make no Image of any thing in way of religion to worship
God, much less the creature thereby. M. Bishops supposall then that Lactantius
there spoke against worshipping of Images in general, makes the place directly
to serve to that purpose, for which it was alleged. The words of Origin are
applied also to the same end, who where Celsus obiecteth, that Orig. co^t.
Celso lib 7 Non ferunt templa, aras, and statuas inspicere; ne Scythae quine^
and Numidae, etc.
Christians not enduring to look at temples, altars, and Images, are therein
like to the Scythians, Moors, Persians, and such like barbarous nations,
answers, that the barbarous nations do it otherwise and for other respects,
but Christiani tempera^t ab his propter illud Legis, Dominum Deu^ tuu^ timebis,
etc. and alia similia quae adeo nos prohibent ab aris and simulachris vt etiam
emori: ubeant citius qua^ contaminemus nostram de Deo fidem talibus
impietatibus.
Christians forbear these things, says he, because of that which the Law
says, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, and thou shall not make to thy
self an image, etc. and thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only
shall thou serve, and many other like speeches which do so forbid us altars and
Images, as that they require us rather to die then to defile the faith that we
have concerning God with such impieties. M. Perkins rather pointed at the place
then cited it, and M. Bishop was loath to take the pains to look into it, and
therefore returns an idle tale, that Christians were forbidden to go to
heathen temples, and there to worship Jesus at their altars and Idols, as
though in the mean time they might have Idols and Images of their own,
whereas the thing that Celsus objected was, that they could not abide Images at
all, and as afterward he speaks again, Lib. 8. Celsus ait nos ararum,
statuarum templorumque dedicationes fugere.
did shun the dedicating of altars, Images and temples; and the very words
here alleged do plainly express, that they wholly abhorred Images as an
impious defiling of religion, and condemned by the law of God. And therefore by
and by after he says, Li. 7. Impossibi le est vt qui Deu^ norit supplex fiat
statuis; stulium est siquis preces simulachris offerat: Nos ideo qucque non
honoramus simulachra, quia quantum possumus caueamus ne in ea^ credulitatem
incidamus vt and his tribuamus diuinitatis aliquid.
It is impossible that he that knows God should make supplication to Images;
it is a foolish thing that a man should offer prayers to Images: we honor not
Images, because we take heed so much as we can lest we fall into any such
conceit as to attribute any divine matter unto them. It is evident then that
Origin wholly condemns Images as touching all uses of religion, to which M.
Bishop would approve them.

7. W. BISHOP.
Having confuted the Protestants arguments against the making of Images to
represent some property or action of God, I now come unto Catholic proof of
the^. The first reason set down by M. Perkins I reserve to the next point: the
second is; God appeared in the form of a man to Abraham Genes. 18.
, and to Daniel, Who saw the ancient of days sitting on a throne Dan. 9.
. Now as God has appeared, so may he be purtraited and drawn: M. Perkins his
answer is, Not so, unless it be expressly commanded by God.

Reply. This first is flat against his own second conclusion, where he holds
it lawful to represent to the eye in Pictures, any histories of the Bible in
private places, both the foresaid apparitions be in the old Testament, and
therefore may be painted in private places, which cannot be truly done without
you do represent God in the same likeness, as there he appeared. And what reason
leads in words to represent those actions of God, the same serves to
express them in lively colors. Not so, says M. Perkins, because when God
appeared in the form of man, it was a sign of Gods presence, for that time
only, and for no longer. Be it so, it might notwithstanding be recorded in
writing, that the memory of such majesty joined with loving kindness might
endure longer. And if it pleased God, that this short presence of his should be
written to be perpetually remembered, even so the same might be engraven in
brass, to recommend it to us so much the more effectually: For as the famous
Poet does by the light of nature sing: Segnius irritant animos demissa per
aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus.
Such worthy acts as by the ears are to the mind conueyde,
Do move us less then that which is by faithful eye descryde.


This argument may be confirmed by the pictures of Angels, of Virtues, and
other such like spiritual or accidental nature: for if such things as have no
bodily proportion or shape, may notwithstanding be counterfetted and resembled
in some qualities, why may not some property or actio^ of God be in like
manner represented? That thou may (Reader) understand the better what we
mean, observe that pictures represent after three sorts. Some express to the
quick, the very shape, proportion, and color of the pattern; as the lively
picture of man, or of any such corporal thing: others represent things as they
did appear and were acted, as if the Painter should express the meeting of
God with Abraham and his entertainment, he must then resemble God in the same
likeness of a man in which he showed himself to Abraham.

Thirdly, an Image of a spiritual thing, may be drawn not to resemble the
nature of it, but to lead our understanding by such a similitude, into some
better knowledge of that thing: so are Angels painted like goodly young men with
wings, to teach us that they be of an excellent pure nature, ever flourishing,
and most ready to dispatch with all expedition any employment to which God
sends them; and so may God the Father be pourtraited as a goodly old grave man,
sitting in his throne of majesty, attended upon by millions of Angels, (as he
is described in Daniel 9.) to instruct us how he is eternal, infinite, wise,
and of most redoubtable majesty. In either of these two latter sorts we hold
that God may be represented, and so in the seventh general Council, the
drawing of the holy Ghost in form of a Dove, as he appeared, Mat. 3. is
approved.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop tells us what they hold, but as for proof of that that they
hold, which in so weighty a matter should specially have been regarded, he
brings none, nothing out of the old or new Testament, no example of any
Patriarch, Prophet, Apostle, Evangelist, not of any of the godly Princes, or
righteous and faithful servants of God, there being not one of them found to
have made an Image to represent God since the world began. Yea he brings us
neither Father nor Council for the space almost of eight hundred years after
Christ, and that which he brings then, so uncertain and insufficient, as
that we may justly wonder at their wilfulness who will affirm or hold so
important a matter upon so small ground. Their allegation is, that God appeared
in the form of a man to Abraham and to Daniel, and as he has appeared so he
may be pourtraited and drawn. Now albeit we approve a civil and historical
use of Images as he alleges, yet we deny that the same extends so far as
to warrant an Image of God, because howsoever it has pleased God to appear at
any time, yet he has given to us an express charge, that we presume not to
set up an image in any sort or meaning to represent him. Therefore albeit God
had appeared to Abraham in the form of a man, whence the Israelites might take
occasion to figure him in that sort, yet to prevent their so doing Moses
tells them, as before has been showed, that Deuteronomy 4.15.
they saw no Image in the day when the Lord spoke unto them in Horeb out of the
midst of the fire, that they might not corrupt themselves, and make them a
graven image, the representation of any figure, the likeness of male or
female, etc. Verse. 23.
Take heed, says he, lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord your God which he
made with you, and make you any graven Image, the likeness of any thing, as
the Lord thy God has charged thee. Where if the Israelites had been skilled in
M. Bishops distinction of making Images, this had hindered them nothing at all,
but that at the first they might carue, or grave, or paint God in the likeness
of a man, because he had so appeared to Abraham, or afterward See hereof after
in sect. 1^.
of a goodly old grave man, as this hypocrite speaks, and I abhor to
repeat, because he appeared to Daniel also in the form of a man, under the
name of the Ancient of days. But they knew not this kind of learning; they
took the commandment simply as it was intended, and therefore perpetually
through all their generations, save only when they fell away from God, they
held it unlawful to make any Image under any pretense to represent God. If
they had understood the commandment of God as M. Bishop does, undoubtedly they
would have left some examples of doing that which he says may be done. But
king Agrippa told Caligula the Emperor when he would have had his Image set up
in the Temple of Jerusalem, Philo Iud. de legate. ad Caium. Hoc temptu^ iam
inde ab initio nullam vnquam admisit manufacta^ effigiem, cum sit Deo
domi^ilium: pictorum enim atque statuarioru^ opera sunt sensibilium deorum
imagines: illum autem inuisibile^ pingere aut fingere nefas duxerunt maiores
nostri.
This Temple even from the beginning never admitted any Image made with hands,
because it is the house of God: for the works of painters and caruers are the
Images of sensible Gods, but our forefathers have holden it a thing unlawful
to paint or carue him that is invisible. Accordingly the Christian Church
received and practiced, denying that Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 7. Deum incorporeum
and inuisibilem nulla figura circumscribimus.
God who is without body and is invisible, may be described by any figure, as
Origin says, no not to represent any signification of him, as I observed Supra
sect. 4.
from him before. Thus Theodoret says, that Moses Theodoret. in Deuteronomy. qu. 1
Instruens eos ne te^tent vnquam diuinam imagine^ effingere, cum arc^etypi
speciem minime viderint, etc. vt nullam imaginem construant inuisibilis Dei.
instructed the Jews that they should not at any time attempt to frame any
Image of God, seeing they had seen no likeness of him; that they should not
set up any Image of the invisible God. In like sort Clemens Alexandrinus
sets it down for the doctrine of Moses which he says Numa by him
instructed taught the Romans, Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 1. Numa ex ijs quae a
M^se tradita su^t adiuius prohibuit Romany ne homini aut animali simile^ Dei
facerent imaginem, etc. quod ad quod est optimu^ non alia ratione quam sola
mente vlli licet attingere
that we are not to make any Image of God like to man or any other thing,
because no man may any otherwise meddle with God who is the sovereign good but
only by the mind, and therefore the same Clement affirms as by the words of
the Apostle, Jbid lib. 6. Nobis nullum est simulachrum in mundo quoniam in
rebus genitis nihil potest Dei refer imagine^.
We have no Image in the world, because in the creatures there is nothing that
can represent the Image of God. Because there is nothing that can represent
God, therefore they admitted no Image of God at all. As for M. Bishops goodly
distinction of painting and describing, it is no other then the Pagans
themselves would well like of for their defense. He excepteth no otherwise
against making Images of God, but only the first way, as the Image should be
understood fully and to the quick to resemble God, and in that sort the very
heathens denied the resembling of God, or making any Image of him, as has been
before said. Yea Zeno the Stoicke in that respect condemned the making of
Images to their Gods, as Clemens Alexandrinus also shows, Ibid. li. 5. Dicit
Zeno oportere nec templa facere nec imagines: nihil enim quod sit compositum
esse Dijs dignum.
because nothing that is compounded is worthy of the gods. Now therefore they
will say to M. Bishop, that he cannot deny but that God has appeared in the
likeness of a man, and therefore that nothing hinders, but that according to
that apparition they may paint their gods like men, though they know them to be
of more excellent nature then can be fully expressed thereby. Yea and if they
add any other thing thereto, or worship them in any other shapes, they do it
not as to resemble the nature of the gods, but to lead men's understanding by
such similitudes into some better knowledge of them. They set forth Mars with
helmet and ^arget and other complements of fight, Apollo with a glistering
Crown on his head, and bow and arrows in his left hand, Mercury with wings
at his feet, and a rod or mace in his right hand, Cupid bl^nd with a dart also
in his hand, but Philo de ligat. ad Caium. Haec gestamina simulachris adduntur
vt significent vtilitates ab his Dijs exhibitas humano generi ^uisque
cultoribus.
these badges, says Philo Iuda^us, are added to the Images to signify the
benefits that these gods yielded to mankind and to their worshippers, or
otherwise some special properties and effects severally belonging to every of
them. With the same mind and respect they sometimes worshipped Jupiter in the
likeness of a Swan, Aesculapius of a Serpent, Mercury of a Dog, Pan of a
Goat, Apis of an Ox, not thinking them to be like to any of these, but
either for that they were said sometimes to have appeared in such likenesses,
or for that they would herby express somewhat that was memorable concerning
them. To be short, there was nothing so absurd in their idolatries, but they
had their Hieroglyphicall and Physical interpretations to salve the device and
practice thereof, and therefore M. Bishop has no reason to except against
them, because they profess to have been led by the same reasons by which he
seeks to uphold the idolatry of his own part. But that he may seem not
altogether without authority to say that which he says, he alleges unto us
the second Nicene Council, approouing the drawing of the holy Ghost in form
of a Dove, because he is read in the Gospel so to have appeared. Where it
seems to me, that he should have done much more wisely for himself, not to
have alleged that record at all, because undoubtedly his Reader must needs
think, that it is a very bad matter that he has in hand, for defense whereof
for almost the space of five thousand years from the beginning of the world
there is no example to be found. If he had cited nothing, it might happily have
been supposed that he had notwithstanding somewhat to cite, but no man will
imagine that for his proof he would have come down so low as that Council,
if he had had any better authority to rest upon. But the mishap is, that that
Council also fails him, insomuch as it says nothing positiuely for the
drawing and painting of the holy Ghost in the form of a dove, and does approve
those speeches which generally condemn the resembling of the godhead in any
form. A relation is made of one Seuerus, who at Daphne took away the Doves
framed in gold and silver and hanged over the fonts as in figure of the holy
Ghost, saying that they ought not to use the name of the holy Ghost concerning
any such form of a Dove. Hereupon Tharasius ready to apprehend every thing
that might make for their Image-idolatrie, answers thus: Nicen. 2. Act. 5 Si
in nomine sancti Spiritus dedicaetas columbas sancti Patres receperunt, quanto
magis corpus incarnati verbi and in terris in corpore visi recipiendum?
If the holy Fathers received doves dedicated in the name of the holy Ghost,
how much more is the body of the incarnat Word seen upon the earth in a body
to be received; meaning the image of the body of Christ. If they did he says,
but he says not that they did it lawfully if they did so. A man may say, if a
Popish Priest may be permitted to keep a concubine or a harlot, much more
should it be thought lawful for him to marry a wife, and yet does not
therefore approve, that it should be lawful for a Popish Priest to keep a
concubine or harlot. And that the Council did not approve it as a thing
lawful, it is manifest by those narrations and authorities which they do
approve and allege for the approving of their Images. They allege a Sermon of
John Bishop of Thessalonica containing a disputation betwixt a Pagan and a
Christian, where the Pagan obiecting in defense of their Images, that
Christians also did make Images, not only to their Saints, but also to their
God: the Christian answers as touching God thus: Ibid. ex Ser. Joan. Episc.
These. Dei aute^ imaginem (dico Seruatoris nostri Jesus Christi) quemadmodum
ipse super terra^ eum hominibus conuersatus est, pingimus, non vt ipsae natura
Deus est. Quae enim posset esse Dei similitud^, aut quae figura incorporei,
ineffigiabilisque verbi Patris? Deus enim (vt scriptum est) spiritus est.
Quoniam visum est Deo Patri vnigenitum filiu^ suum e coelis demittere quo pro
nostra salute ex Spiritu sancto and in^olata virgin D^^para incarnaretur, nos
eius humanitate^ ea ratione pingimus, non illius incorpoream Deitatem.
The image of God, I mean of our Savior Jesus Christ, we make according as he
was conversant with men upon the earth, not as by nature he is God: for what
likeness can there be of God, or what figure of the word of the Father which
is without body, and not to be expressed by any shape? for God (as it is
written) is a spirit. Because it seemed good to the Father to send down from
heaven his only begotten Son, that by the holy Ghost he might be incarnate
of the pure Virgin the mother of God, therefore we paint his humanity in that
sort, but not his incorporall Godhead. Afterward out of Leontius there is read
a disputation betwixt a Jew and a Christian, the Jew professing to believe,
that Christ is the Son of God, but that he was offended to see Christians
contrary to the commandment to fall down before Images, and the Christian
thereto answering: Ibid. ex Leont. Deo vt talis est Scriptura iubet non esse
facienda^ similitudinem, ne que aliquam imaginem adorandam esse vt Deum.
Imagines enim quas vides ad memoriam Jesus Christi salutaris nobis incarnationis
pinguntur Personam illius humanitatis ex primentes. Sanctoru^ aute^ imagines
eodem modo vniuscuiusque praelia contra diabolum and mundum victoriasque
significant.
The Scripture commands, that to God as he is God, no similitude or likeness
shall be made, and that no image shall be worshipped as God: but the images
which thou see are made to the remembrance of the incarnation of Jesus Christ
which has yielded salvation to us. But the Saints images do in like sort
signify the battles and victories of every of them against the Devil and the
world. Again, it is alleged out of the confessions of certain Martyrs, thus:
Ibid. ex Constable. Diacon Chartophyl. Non enim diuinu^ simplex existens and
incomprehensibile formis and figuris assimilamus, neque cera and lignis
supersubstantiale^ and ante principia existentem substantiam honorare
decreuimus.
We do not by forms and shapes resemble God: being simple and
incomprehensible, neither have we intended by wax and wood to honor the
substance whith is above all substance, and has his being before beginning. By all which it is evident that they wholly disclaimed the painting and picturing of
the Godhead, so that their whole decree throughout the Council proceeds
only as touching the images of Christ, Jbid Act. 7. Epist. ad Consta^. and
Iren. Quatenus scilicet perfectus homo suit.
as he was perfect man, and of the Angels and Saints, as appears also by
their Synodall Epistle in the end of the Council, but of images of the Godhead
they decree nothing. Whereby we see that M. Bishop is a man of an evil nature
and disposition, who will thus make a bad matter worse then it is. A good mind
will make things better and not worse, but whereas the Council was bad enough
in decreeing worship to the images of Christ and his Saints, he makes it worse
then it was, by fathering upon it the approving of the images of the holy
Ghost. We see then that he has no proof at all for making an image of God,
and therefore it was but a point of indiscretion in him to tell us in what
manner and meaning they picture and resemble God, it being alleged that it is
not lawful many manner or meaning so to do. As for his discourse of motives
that come by sight, it sauoureth of the gross conceit of all idolaters, who
cannot endure to be without babies and puppets and no longer think they have a
God, then they have a God to look upon. To hear of God or to read of him in
his word, and to behold him in his works it is not sufficient, but by an image
they must needs have him set forth more nearely to feed their eyes. Surely if
the wisdom of God had thought it fit, that we should have learned him by
painting and caruing, he would not have failed to have given us instruction
thereof. But since he has not so taught us, yea since he has taught the
contrary, and condemned them, (as has been before showed) who have pretended
to be instructed by such means, what a simple man does Master Bishop show
himself, to reason against God, and to say, If Angels and virtues may be
figured and represented, why may not some property or action of God be in like
manner represented? A simple man indeed, that has not learned to put a
difference betwixt the creature and the Creator, nor understands that that
which is yielded to the pleasing of our curious fancy in the one, yet may
justly be condemned as a wicked presumption to be attempted in the other. God
has forbidden to make any similitude to him. He has not limited us any
meaning wherein we may do it. What is it but wilful contempt in us to say, that
in this or that meaning we will do that which he has absolutely said we shall
not do?

8. W. BISHOP.
The first point then being obtained, that such images of God may be made; I
come to the second: That all holy Pictures may be placed in Churches: which I
prove by the argument that M. P. made for our first objection. In Salomons
temple were erected Cherubins, which were images of Angels, on the mercy
seat, where God was worshipped, and upon the walls and very doors of the
same pictured. To this M. P. answers, that they were erected by special
commandment from God, who prescribes the very form of them, and the place
where they should be set, and thereby Moses had a warrant to make them, let them
show the like warrant for their images, if they can.

Secondly, (says he) the Cherubs were placed in the most inward place of the
Temple, and so were removed from the sight of the people, and the Cherubs
without the veil, though they were seen, yet were they not worshipped.

Reply. This man's wits were gone a wool-gathering, when proposing to himself
the Cherubs erected in Solomon's Temple: he answers of the Cherubs made by
Moses 350. years before: a most gross oversight and a shameful shift: but
such as men desperately defending untruths, must needs use. For if he had
answered directly, he had not had a word to say: for neither did God prescribe
the form of them, nor give any special commandment to Solomon, to make and
erect any such Cherubs, as he that pleases to read the Chapter may see, and
there they were placed not only in the inward, but also in the outward parts
of the Temple, upon the walls and very doors, that they might be seen of all
the people: which M. P. finding, flitted from thence, and did fly unto
another, which because it spoke of Cherubs, he thought would serve to blind his
simple followers.

Moses indeed had an express precept for the making of them, as he had for the
Curtains and Curtain-rods, and every particular belonging to the Tabernacle.
But Solomon without any special commandment out of his high and holy
wisdom, understood that he might most lawfully and laudably imitate that
heavenly pattern of Moses: and as the building was far more sumptuous and
stately, so in the number and quantity of pictures exceeded, which is a
sufficient instruction and warrant for all men after his days to make and set
Images in the Church. And this finally M. Perkins seems to grant, when he
says, that these Cherubs without the veil, were there to be seen, but not to
be worshipped: so that we have gotten one step further, that Images may not
only be made, but also be set up in the Churches: which is fortified by the
testimony of Tertullian, in the place cited before: where he says, that our
Savior was pictured upon holy Chalices, which were used at the Altars: and of
Sozomenus, who witnesses that our Saviors picture was taken into the Church.

S. Gregory Naz. Epist. 49.
makes mention of images in the Church of Diocaesarea, trimmed up by himself.

Saint Basil Orat. in Barl.
points to that holy man's picture, standing in the Church.

Damasus In vita Silue.
shows how Constantine in the Church of S. John Laterane, erected a silver
Image unto our Savior.

Saint Chrysostom in demonstrat. quod Christus sit Deus. And S. Aug. Ser. 19.
de Sanct.
do teach, that the Cross was on the holy Tables, and used at all holy
functions. And the reason why images should principally be set in Churches, is
very pregnant. For where should holy pictures of holy men be more properly
bestowed, then in holy places: and the Church being a resemblance of heaven (as
S. Paul teaches, Heb. 9.
) is most conveniently decked up with Images: the representations of heavenly
creatures: that men entering into that holy place, may by the view and
consideration of such an heavenly show, retire their minds from worldly
business, and lift them up unto the sovereign Monarch of both heaven and
earth.

R. ABBOT.
There is some wit in gathering wool, but M. Bishop spends his time in
gathering moss, and therein is little wit. For some color of setting up their
idols in Churches to be worshipped, they full simply allege the Cherubins that
were set up in the temple which Solomon built, which M. Bishop says were the
images of Angels, and that they did represent the Angels we will not deny, but
Joseph. Antiq. lib. ^. cap. 2. Hae Cherubicae effigies qu^na^ specie fuerint,
nemo vel con^^cere potest vel eloqui.
of what shape they were, no man, says Josephus, can conjecture or affirm any
thing. Our English translation reads one where, that they were 2. Chr ^.10.
like children, but by the testimony of Josephus being himself an Hebrew, it
appears that that signification of the Hebrew word is not certain, and the
same word being no where else found in the Hebrew text leaves it the more
doubtful what construction may be made of it. And the doubt is so much the
greater, for that in the vision of Ezechiel there is expressly noted a
difference betwixt the face of a Cherub, and the face of a man, Ezech. 10.14.
Every beast (says he) had four faces, the first was the face of a Cherub,
the second was the face of a man, etc. But to let that pass, to the objection
M. Perkins answers, that those Cherubins were erected by special
commandment of God, who had prescribed both the form of them, and the place
where they should be set, and thereby Moses had warrant to make them, which
they have not for their Images. Here M. Bishop alleging that M. Perkins
proposing to himself the Cherubins erected in Solomon's temple, answers of
the Cherubins made by Moses 350. years before, falls into a great rage, and
cries out, a most gross oversight and shameful shift, but such (says he) as
men desperately defending untruths must needs use, and if he had answered
directly he had not had a word to say. Now who would think that so wise a man
would take so great pains to bewray his own ignorance? who would think that
in such heat he would charge another man with gross oversight, when he
himself does so grossly ouersee himself? God commanded Moses to make the
Arc, and the propitiatory or mercy seat, which was the cover of the Arc
according to the fashion that he had showed him. Withal he appointed him to
make two Cherubins, one at the one end of the mercy-seat, and the other at the
other end, so as that with their wings stretched out, they should cover the
mercy-seate. Which done he says, Exodus 25.22:
There will I declare my self unto thee, and from above the mercy-seate
between the two Cherubins which are upon the Arc of the Testimony, I will
tell thee all things which I will give thee in commandment unto the children
of Israel. According to this commandment Moses did, but what was done with
those Cherubins which Moses set up, it is uncertain; whether by the enemies
taking of the Arc, as most likely it is, they were taken away, or whether they
fitted not the place of the Temple where they should stand, the Tabernacle and
furniture thereof being before made portable to be removed from place to place.
Howsoever that were, this is certain, that Solomon by virtue of the same
commandment, and to observe that which by Moses was prescribed, made two
Cherubins to stand in the same place as the other did, and to the same use. The
work therefore being finished 1. King. 8.5.6:
king Solomon and all Israel being assembled together, the Priests brought the
Arc of the covenant of the Lord into his place, into the oracle of the house,
the most holy place, even under the wings of the Cherubins: for the Cherubins
stretched out their wings over the place of the Arc, and the Cherubins covered
the Arc. Inasmuch then as God had by the law directed in what sort this should
be done, Solomon needed no further special commandment for the doing of it,
but had trespassed against God, if being appointed to build a house unto God,
he had not done it according to such rules as the law before had limited for
the doing of it: so idle a fancy is it which M. B. here delivers, that out of
his own high wisdom only he thought it lawful for him to imitate that which
Moses had done before, and consequently so vain a cavil is it which he uses,
that the objection being moved of the Cherubins made by Solomon, M. Perkins
answers by the commandment given thereof to Moses, when as there was the
very same respect of both, and Solomon renewed them by the same commandment,
by which Moses at first made the^. Now these 2. Cherubins of which the question
is specially moved, were erected in the most holy place, whether, as the
Christian says to the Jew before spoken of in the 2. Nicen counsel, Nycen.
Synod. 2. Act. 5. ex Leont. Quo sane nulli mortalium dabatur accessus
praeterquam summo Sacerdoti, idque semel in anno.
it was granted to no mortal man to have access, but only to the high priest,
and that once only in the year, yea and there was also Exodus 26.33. 2. Chron.
3.14*
a veil drawn before to make a separation betwixt the holy place, and the
most holy, so that no man had the sight of any thing therein. Very falsely
therefore and unhonestly does M. B. deal to confound these Cherubins with the
rest as touching their place, and generally to say, There they were placed not
only in the inward, but also in the outward parts of the Temple upon the
walls and very doors, that they might be seen of all the people, it being
evident that these were never to be seen of the people nor of any, save only
the high Priest, and consequently were such as can give no warrant at all to
setting up of Popish images. As for the rest of the Cherubins which the text
mentions they were of other sort, wrought in the curtains, and feeling of
the walls, and upon the doors and vessels only for garnishing and beautifying
the works, but Cherubins that were standing images there were none but only
those two. The veil of the most holy place was 2. Chro. 3.14.
wrought with Cherubins, Kings 6.29.
the walls were carved with graven figures of Cherubins, palm trees, and other
graven flowers: Ver. 35.
the doors also with the like, Cap. 7.29.
the bases whereupon the caldrons were to stand were graven in the borders with
Lions, Bulls, and Cherubins. Here it is plain then, that the Cherubins were of
no other respect or use, but as the figures of palm trees, Pomgranats,
Flowers, Lions, Bulls and other such like, not in any sort for exercise of the
devotion of the people, but only for the adorning of the house. Yea and to
these also the people had no access within the house, being prohibited to come
any further the^ to the door, near to which stood the altar to which they
were to tender their sacrifice, the Priest receiving the same, to do with it
according to the law, but they themselves might not go in. There was one part
of the Temple which was called Exodus 26.33. Heb 9.6.7.
the holy place, into which the Priests and Levites ordinarily went to perform
their ordinary service: another part was called the most holy place into which
only the high Priest went once a year, and these two parts are most properly
called Luke 1.21.
the Temple, in which Solomon bestowed all that curiosity of work. But
without these was the vast room into which the people resorted, where they
waited Ver. 10.
in prayer whilst the Priests performed the service, wherein they were
accustomed to be taught, and our Savior Christ and his Apostles preached unto
them, going also in general under the name of the temple, yet not having in
any sort that glorious beauty of workmanship that the other parts had, neither
can M. B. tell us of any Cherubins therein. Seeing then there were no standing
Cherubins in Solomon's temple but only two, which were wholly removed out of
sight, and the rest had no other use but only the same as the figures of
Lions, and Bulls, and Flowers, and Palm trees, and such like and of dead men
there were no images at all, not of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or any other, we
should think that that temple yields so small grace to Romish Idols, as that
like Dagon they must fall to the ground and break their necks, unless there
be some better means and help found for the upholding of them. As for the use
whereto Solomon intended those works of his, who is there that makes question
of it? Who doubts but that by curiosity of Imagerie of caruing and grauing,
and painting, men may beautify either their houses or their Churches in the
like sort as he did? Yea M. Bishop well knows that we do not thrust Images
wholly out of our Churches, because we have in Westminster, in Paul's, and
commonly in the rest of our Churches throughout the land many images of our
deceased Kings and Queens, of our Nobles and States higher and lower, which we
preserve, and add more to them from day to day. We determine nothing
absolutely against Images, but we determine against images in case of
superstition and idolatry or in peril thereof. Take away the fear of
superstition, and against images or pictures we say nothing. If therefore some
of the Fathers not fearing or suspecting that heathenish abomination would get
place in the Church, were more secure in this behalf, and doubted not to
adorn their Churches or other places with pictures and images of Christ and
his Apostles, of Saints and Martyrs, we wonder not thereat: but yet how rare a
matter this was, may appear by the poor store of examples that M. Bishop
brings thereof. That of Tertullian was only Tertul. de pudicitia. Proceda^t
picturae Calicum vestrorum, si vel in illis perlucebit interpretatio pecudis
illius: (ouis perditae a Domino requisitae and humeris eius reuectae.)
a picture upon the chalice, of a shepherd carrying his lost sheep upon his
shoulder, as in figure of Christ seeking mankind, and recovering him to God, of
which kind of picture no man makes any question. The second example is of the
Image that stood in the street at Cesarea Philippi, which in the time of Julian
the Apostata was broken in pieces by the Paganes, and the Christians Sozomen.
hist. lib. 5. cap. 20. Christiani cum eius fragmenta collegissent, in Ecclesia
posueru^t
took up the fragments thereof, and set it in the Church. Gregory Nazianzene
mentions certain Gregor. Naz. Epist. 49. Nequ^ enim si statuae deijciantur
hoc nos excruciat, etc.
images in the Church of Diocaesarea, but what they were, or whose they were it
appears not, but by his words of trimming, not the images, but Templu^ quod
exstruximus, omneque nostrum in eo exornando studium.
the Church, it appears that they were only for the ornament thereof. Basil
only mentions an image or picture that did represent the Basil Orat. de
Barlaam. Abibo certaminum ac victoriarum Martyris a vobis posita imagine
victus, etc. Video manus ad ignem luctam exactiu^ a vobis descriptam, etc.
burning of the hand of Barlaam the Martyr, more lively set forth then he
could by words declare it, of which kind M. Bishop may see many in the stories
of our Martyrs. Their Pontifical is but a bastard witness and of too late
years to tell us what Constantine did: he must bring us better proof, or else
we believe not that which he reports by it, though to us it be nothing. The
last instance out of Chrysostom. demonstrat. Quod Christus sit Deu^. In front
nostra figuratur: sic in sacramensa, in sacerdotum ordinationibus, sic iterum
cum corpore Christi in mysticis caenis fulget.
Chrysostom and August. de sanct. Ser. 49. Cum crucis charactere Altaris
sacramenta confistuntur.
Austin (though that out of Austin de Sanctis be a mere forgerie) concerns
only the sign of the Cross used at the Sacrament as before was said, not any
standing image either of the Cross or of him that was crucified, and therefore
is wholly impertinent to the matter here in question. Hereby then the Reader may
suppose that the use of Pictures and Images in the Primitive Church was not
great, but specially of those standards whereof our question is principally
intended, and by which idolatry has specially been committed, inasmuch as
there are so few certain and pregnant examples thereof to be found. But
whether it were greater or less, experience has since taught us to misdoubt
that which they misdoubted not. We have found it to be true which the author of
the book of Wisdom says, that Wisd. 14.10.
images are a snare to the feet of the unwise, and that Cap. 15.5.
the sight of an image stirs up the desire of the ignorant, so that he is in
love with the form that has no life, even of a dead image. August. Epist. 40.
Cum his sedibus honorabili sublimitate locantur vt a precantibus and
immolantibus attendantur, ipsa similitudine animatorum membrorum atque sensuum
quam uis insensata and exanima affi^iunt insumos animos vt viuere ac spirate
videantur.
When they are honorably set up in places aloft, says S. Austin, that they may
be beholden of men praying and offering unto them, even by the very semblance
of living members and senses, albeit they be senseless and without life, they
so affect weak minds, as that they seem to be alive and to take breath. Idem
in Psalm. 113 Ducit and infirmo quodam affectu rapit infirma corda mortalium
formae similitudo and membrorum imitata compago: and post, Quis adorat vel orat
intuens simulachrum qui non sic assicitur, vt ab eo se exaudiri putet, and ab
eo sibi praestari quod desiderat, speret?
The similitude of the form, says he again, and imitation of the frame of
the members leads and draws by an infirmity of affection the weak hearts
of men; and who worshippeth or prays beholding an image, but he is so
affected, as that he thinks the same hears him, and hops that that which
he desires shall thereby be done for him? Having then found this by experience
to be true, we are careful to shun all the danger of such superstition, and
therefore where we find Images subject to such abuse, as in the hands of Popish
Recusants, we deface and destroy them, and otherwise that there may be no
occasion of such abuse, we eschew and avoid the setting up of the like as have
been usually worshipped amongst the^, choosing rather to garnish our Churches
with sentences of Scripture or with such Imagerie as Solomon did the temple,
whereof there may be no danger, then with glorious standards and images of men
which may again give occasion of stumbling and falling to the weak minds of
simple and ignorant men. As for M. Bishops reason why images of holy men should
be placed in Churches, it stands upon so fickle ground as that it must needs
fall. He alleges that the Apostle ( Heb. 9.) makes the Church to be a
resemblance of heaven. But that which the Apostle there says is not of our
Churches, nor can be drawn thereto, but is spoken of the Sancta sanctorum, the
most holy place of the temple of Jerusalem, into which only the high Priest
entered in figure of Jesus Christ once in the year, whereby (says he) Heb. 9.8.
the holy Ghost signified, that the way into the holiest of all, (that is, into
heaven) was not yet opened, while as yet the first tabernatle was standing.
Hence then we argue against M. Bishop out of his own grounds, that seeing in
the most holy place of the temple which was indeed the resemblance of heaven,
there were admitted no images of holy men, therefore in our Churches though
they be granted to carry a resemblance of heaven, which he cannot prove, yet
it follows not that Images should be admitted to have any place. Yea and the
use of our Churches is not for gazing and staring, but for prayer unto God, for
hearing of his word, and receiving of his Sacraments, to the devotion whereof
the mind does the less bestow it self when it is auerted and withdrawn by
the business of the eye. And since in the outmost Court also of the Temple,
whither the people resorted, this heavenly show of M. Bishops was altogether
wanting, either we must condemn the wisdom and discretion of him by whom the
temple was built, or else we must reject this device as fantastical and
childish, to which M. Bishop ascribes the retiring of our minds from worldly
business, and lifting them up to God. Nay, images serve not to lift up the
mind, but to depresse it and keep it down, and this was one special argument
whereby the Fathers impugned the Images of the Pagans, Aug. in Psalm. 113.
Valent ad curuanda^ infoelicem animam etc. Cyprian. contra Demetr. Lactani.
instit. lib. 2. cap. 2.
for that by the eye they held the mind doting and dreaming upon an Idol here
on earth, when by spiritual contemplation and devotion it should be lifted up
to heaven: so ill hap has M. B. that he can say nothing for Popish Images
which has not been before impugned in Pagan Idols.

9. W. BISHOP.
Now let us come to those two objections of M. P. which seems to be against
the erection of images in Churches. The first is out of the Council of
Eliberis cap. 36. which commands, that nothing should be painted on the walls
of the Church, that was adored of the people.

Answ. That if the Council speak of the image of God (in which sense M. P.
cites it, and the word (adored) does insinuate) then it may be said, that the
Council inhibiteth that sort of Gods images which are made to express the
divine nature: if it be extended unto all sorts of images, I answer, that they
were then forbidden to be drawn upon the Church walls, but not to be set in
Tables upon the altar, or in any other place. The reason is, because that
Council was holden in time of persecution, as appears by the twenty fifth
Canon of it: and then, if the persecutors had found out the place of their
assembly, as they often did, those pictures must needs either have been
defaced by themselves, or left unto the derision and despite of the heathens;
and pictures also painted upon such poor walls as they had then to their
Churches, would either by the moisture of the walls, or other incommoditie,
have been quickly disfigured: wherefore to the greater honor of such sacred
things, those grave Fathers thought it not meet to have them drawn upon the
Church walls, there being many more meet places for them in the Churches.

R. ABBOT.
It seems that they are much troubled with this Canon of the Eliberine
Council, which makes them to turn it and wind it one way and another way, to
set some such meaning upon it, as that it may not seem to make against them.
The Canon is this: Council. Eliberi. Can. 36. Placuit in Ecclesia picturas esse
non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur in parietibus depingatur.
It has seemed good to us, that there shall be no pictures in the Church, lest
that which is worshipped or adored be painted upon the walls. Bellarmine
alleges out of their Writers four several answers, and being satisfied with
none of them falls in the end to the discrediting of the Council, Bellar. de
ima. sanct. Quicquid Conciliu^ statuerit, etc. contra nos tantum esse potest
Concilium 19. Episcoporum quod prouinciale fuit and minime confirmatum and in
alijs decratis videtur errasse.
Whatsoever it decreed, it was but a provincial Council, and of but nineteen
Bishops, and was never confirmed, and seems to have erred in other decrees.
This trick of his masters M. Bishop thought not good to use, thinking it to be
somewhat too homely, but out of those rejected answers patcheth up somewhat to
serve the turn till he can provide better. First, he tells us that the
Council inhibiteth that sort of Gods images which are made to express the
divine nature. But Ibid. Non videtur satisfacere tum quia Concilium loquitur de
picturis in genere, cum etia^ quiae non erant in vsu eo tempore inimo^ nec
vnquam fuerunt in ecclesia tales imagines quae sunt vera idola. Concilium aute^
loquitur de eo quod fieri solebat and interdicit ne deinceps fiat.
this, s ith Bellarmine, seems not to serve the turn, both for that the
Council speaks generally of pictures, and also because there never were any
such images used in the Church which are very Idols; and the Council speaks
of that that was wont to be done, and forbids the doing of it any more. As
for M. Bishops reason of the tying of the Canon to the images of God, namely
that the word (adored) does so insinuate, it makes much against himself. For
if the Council intended, as indeed it did, that adoration belongs only to
God, then by the judgment of this Council, the second Nicene Council decreed
idolatry, and the Church of Rome now practices it, in giving adoration to
Saints and their images, as also to other images whatsoever, because none of
them are gods. M. Bishop finding no hold in this answer, goes to another,
which is a scrap of Doct. Sanders answer, set down also by Bellarmine, that
the Council decreed that which time and place then required, because there was
doubt least the Pagans should think that the Christians worshipped flocks and
stones, and again least in those times of persecution, the images should by
the persecutours be reproachfully used. Of this answer Bellarmine says, Fateor
ratione^ illam Canonis (Ne quod adoratur, etc) no^ multum quadrare huic
expositioni.
I confess that the reason of the Canon, Least that which is adored and
worshipped be painted upon the walls, does not well agree to this exposition.
But M. Bishop to show his cookery, dresseth this answer in a little other sort,
and whereas Doct. Sanders understood images for those reasons to be wholly
forbidden, he tells us that they were forbidden to be drawn upon the Church
walls, for then they must be forced to deface them themselves, or else must
leave them to be disgraced by the enemies, but did not forbid them to be set in
tables upon the Altar or in any other place. Their only care then was to have
their images at liberty, that if occasion of persecution required, they might
be packing bag and baggage, and like Aeneas his Gods might be shipped away to
another Country, if they could not find safety in their own. Thus whereas
Doctor Sanders his conceit was, that for fear of persecution, they were to
have no images, Master Bishop is of another mind, that they might have them
standing upon the Altar or in other places, only they might not have them
painted upon the wall. But the wise man had forgotten the first part of the
Canon, It seems good to us, that there shall be no pictures in the Church,
not that there shall be no pictures upon the Church walls, but that there shall
be no pictures in the Church. Whereby it appears plainly, that they supposed
no other being of them in the Church, but only by being painted upon the walls;
and if they had intended the having of them any otherwise in the Church, as
upon the altar or in any other place, they would not have forbidden the having
of them in the Church, by a flat contradiction to that which they intended.
There were yet no standards of images in the Churches; only they had begun to
adorn them with historical pictures and paintings. The fathers thinking it a
dishonor to him whom we adore and worship, to be pictured upon a wall, to take
away that abuse, forbid the having of any pictures in the Church, referring
their words to that kind of images, because there was no other kind to which
they had occasion to direct them. But Bellarmines exception stands still good
against this answer, that the reason of the Canon fitteth not to it, which is
not for any fear of the pictures, falling into the hands of infidels, but that
that which we worship be not painted upon the walls. And by the same reason he
excepteth also against the third answer, which is taken out of Alanus Copus,
that Christians worshipped their images as Gods, and in that sense the Council
did forbid them, for then says he it should not have been said, least that
which is adored be painted, but rather least that which is painted be adored.
The last answer to which he says the reason of the Canon does most fitly
agree, is that good stuff which M. Bishop here adds for supply, that
pictures painted upon such poor walls as they had then to their Churches, would
either by the moisture of the walls or other incommoditie (he knows not what)
have been quickly disfigured; therefore for the honor of such sacred things,
those grave Fathers thought it not meet to have them drawn upon the walls,
there being many more meet places for them in the Church: So then those grave
Fathers are forced in effect to say thus, We will not have any pictures in the
Church, because there are many meet places for them in the Church, and they
will soon be disfigured being painted upon the walls. We think good to have
no pictures in the Church, that that which is worshipped may not be painted
upon the walls, that is, We will have pictures in the Church, and that painted
which is worshipped, only for fear of being too soon disfigured, our Church
walls being subject to much moisture, it shall not be done upon the wall;
albeit if that inconvenience may be prevented, we do not dislike, but that
that which is worshipped may be painted upon the wall. Hypocrite, what do
thou with that soul which Christ has so dearly bought? will thou sell it
wilfully to lies and falsehood? The Canon directly forbids the having of
pictures in the Church. The reason is, because they would not have that which
they worshipped to be painted upon the walls. They knew it might as well be
painted on the wall as any where else, but they were acquainted with no other
having of pictures in the Church, but only by painting on the walls. Therefore
to exclude them wholly out of the Church, which is the thing that they propound,
they give reason of an vndecencie and unfitness, that that which is worshipped
should be painted on the walls. Bellarmine therefore seeing well that none of
those answers can satisfy any reasonable man that reads the Canon it self,
thought it best for a farewell to disgrace the Council in such sort as I have
before showed; and much better should M. Bishop have done the same, and
acknowledged that the Council speaks against them but they regard it not,
then thus to seek to smother a truth with a manifest and wilful lie.

10. W. BISHOP.
The second objection is out of a postscript of Epiphanius letter, unto John
Patriarch of Jerusalem, in which is written, as M. Perkins falsely reports:
that it is against the authority of Scripture, to see the pictures of Christ,
or of any Saint to hang in the Church.

Answer. It is there only, to see the picture of a man. Now that he should
mean of Christ or of some Saint, is only gathered, yet M. Perkins makes no
bones to thrust them both into the Text: even so do we think that some old
enemy of images added that postscript unto Epiphanius letter. Our reasons
are, because it has no coherence with the former letter or style. Again, in
the seventh Council, when all that could be found out of antiquity, was cited
against images, no tidings there of this place, which if it had been true,
might have been one of the principal. Thirdly, in the same Council, Act. ^.
other two places brought, as it were out of Epiphanius works, were found to
be none of his: And for images was alleged, that Epiphanius own disciples
erected an image to their master, and set it in the Church; which they would
never have done, if he had taught them to be against the Scripture so to do.

M. Perkins observes a special reason in Epiphanius other counterfeit
testimony: That images must not be suffered in the common house, because we
must carry God in our minds. To which we answer, that images must be suffered
in all places, that we may the better carry God in our hearts, being by the
sight of them, both often put in mind of him, and much moved to honor and
love him.

R. ABBOT.
That all this answer is but a mere shift, appears by Alphonsus de Castro,
who confesses that Epiphanius did hold this error, as he calls it, against
images, as did also after him Serenus Bishop of Massilia, in the time of
Gregory the great, but makes this excuse for them, Alphon. adu. haeres. lib.
8. tit. Imago. Res non erat adeo aperta nec de illa re, quod scia^, vnqua^
ecclesia illo te^pore definierat: quapropter liberu^ tunc erat eis ^itra
haeresis notam ita sentire.
that the matter was not then so manifest, neither had the Church at that time
defined any thing of it, and therefore it was free for them, without any note
of heresy to be of that mind. I pray thee, gentle Reader, here to observe,
that the worshipping of images was no point of Christian faith or doctrine in
the time of Gregory the great, that is, for six hundred years after the time
of Christ, and that it was free for men without being questioned of heresy,
all that while to speak against it. Hereby then esteem who they are that are
to be accounted new masters, bringers in of new doctrines, and setters up of
new religions in the Church of Christ. M. Bishop is loath to deal plainly as
Alphonsus did, and therefore will by no means have it thought that Epiphanius
was of that mind, but brings us certain wooden devices, to persuade men
that he meant some other matter, or rather that the testimony alleged, is
none of his. Master Perkins briefly alleges that Epiphanius says, it is
against the authority of the Scriptures, to see the image of Christ, or of any
Saints hanging in the Church. Master Bishop says, that it is there only, to
see the picture of a man: that he should mean of Christ or of some Saint, is
only gathered, and both are thrust into the text. Whether it be so or not, let
it appear by Epiphanius himself. Epiphan. epist. ad Ioanne^ Hierosolymit.
Inueni ibi velum pendem in foribus eiusde^ ecclesia tinctu^ et depictu^ and
imaginem habens quaesi Christi vel sa^cti eu^usda^; no^ enim satis memini cu^^s
imago fuerit. Cu^ ergo vidissem in ecclesia Christi co^tra authoritatem
scripturaru^ hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud and magis dedi co^silium
custodibus eiusdem loci vt paupere^ mortuum eo obuoluerent and efferrent, etc.
I found there (in the Church at Anablatha) a veil hanging at the doors of the
Church died and painted, and having the image as it were of Christ or some
Saint, for I do not well remember whose image it was. When therefore I saw that
contrary to the authority of the Scriptures, there was the image of a man
hanging in the Church, I cut it, and advised the wardens of the place, that
they should bury some poor man in it. It is here very evident, that of the
image of Christ or of some Saint, he says that it is against the authority of
the Scriptures, to see the image of a man hanging in the Church. M. Bishop
would seem to be blind, but indeed he saw this well enough, and therefore
seeks other shifts, because this could not serve. He would make us believe
that some old enemy of images added that postscript unto Epiphanius letter,
calling that a postscript which is a just and substantial part of a letter or
Epistle, and seeking to have it accounted an addition by another man, which all
copies both of Epiphanius his works in Greek, and Hieromes translation of
that Epistle into Latin, do uniformly deliver as written by Epiphanius
himself. But yet it shall not be amiss to consider his reasons. First, it
has no coherence with the former letter. As though it were so strange a thing
to write of two matters in one letter, whereof the one has no coherence with
the other. But otherwise all things very justly accord. The thing was done as
Epiphanius and John the Bishop of Jerusalem, to whom the Epistle was written,
were going together to Bethel. It was in the diocese of the said John.
Epiphanius had promised the people of the place, to send them another veil for
that which he cut. He sends it to the Bishop, and requesteth him to cause the
same to be received by the ministers of the place, and them withal, Ibid Et
dein ceps praecipere in ecclesia Christi istiusmodi vela quae contra religionem
nostram ventunt, non appendi.
to give charge that such veiles which make against our religion be not hanged
up in the Church of Christ. Thus therefore having other occasion to write to
John Bishop of Jerusalem, to clear himself as touching some grieuances which
the said John had conceived against him, there was apparent occasion and reason
of the adding of this matter. As for the difference of style, it is a very fond
and frivolous allegation, there being no manner of ground whereupon he should
conceive it, or whereby he can affirm it. His second reason is, because in the
seventh Council when all that could be found out of antiquity was cited
against images, there was no tidings of this place, which might have been one
of the principal if it had been true. But therein again his master does
exceedingly abuse him. For in the Council of Constantinople related by that
seventh Council, and to whose citations it is that Bellarmine refers that
speech, there are set down but only eight authorities or testimonies of
former antiquity, and that eight testimonies are not all that can be alleged
out of antiquity against images, I hope M. Bishop will easily conceive and
find by this discourse. Yea, and the Fathers of that Council profess Synod.
Consta^tino. tom. 5. apud Nicen. 2. Act. 6. Ex multis pauca testimonia
coll^cauimus ^reliquis quae infinita sunt vole^tes supersedimus, vt qui velint
ipsi requirant.
to set down but few testimonies of many, willingly passing over the rest
which, say they, are infinite, that they who will may search them themselves.
And as touching Epiphanius citing one place out of them, they add, Jbid. Idem
in alijs quoque sermonibus suis de Imaginum subuersione multa dixit quae
studiosi quaerentes facile inuenient.
The same Father in other of his Sermons, has said many things for the casting
down of Images, which they that are studious by search shall easily find. It
appears therefore that those Fathers had no meaning to bring all that might
be brought, and it is a wilful falsehood to say that they did so. And that
there was more to have been alleged out of Epiphanius, it is plain, not only
for that he calls Epiphan. de haer. cap. 1. Nondum erat inuentum aliquod
aliud quam sola scortatio and excogitatio simulaechrorum. Sic in Ancorato.
the devising of images, a whoredom or fornication, and sets it down for a
matter of the Carpocratian heresy, that amongst other they worshipped the
image of Christ, as before was said, but also for that he condemns the
Collyridian heretics for making the image of the virgin Mary, and offering to
it, whose heresy for that cause he calls Jdem haer. 79. Huius
simulachrisicae haeresis radicibu^ excisis, etc. Et post. Simulachrificum hoc
studium and diabolicus conatus. Praetextu enim iustitia semper subiens hominum
mente^ Diabolus, mortalem naturam in hominum oculis deificans, statuas humanas
imagines praeseferentes per artium varietatem expres sit. Et illi quidem mortus
sunt qui adorantur: ipsorum vero imagi ne^ quae nunqua^ vt ^erunt, etc.
adorandas introducunt, adulterante mente a solo and vno Deo, velut commune
scortum ad multam multiplicis coitus absurditatem irritatum, and quod
temperantia^ legitimi coniugij vnius viri detriuit.
the image-making heresy, or an heresy given to making of images, and calls
the desire of making images a devilish practice. For the devil, says he,
stealing into men's minds under pretense of righteousness, deifieth the mortal
nature in the eyes of men, and by variety of arts frames standards bearing in
show the images of men. And they verily who are worshipped are dead, but they
bring in their images to be worshipped which never were alive, the mind going a
whoring from the true and only God, even as a common strumpet absurdly desiring
variety of carnal company, and is past being content with the lawful marriage
of one man. Hereby appears the falsehood of that which Epiphanius the deacon
in the place here cited by M. Bishop, says as touching this Epiphanius the
Bishop, that in his book against heresies, he set down none as touching
images; when as expressly he condemns in those heretics the making of the
image of the virgin Mary, as I have said, and offering to it, as their manner
was to offer to it a cake; whence they had that name of Collyridians given to
them. And hereby may be conceived what account we are to make of M.B. third
reason that in the same Council other two places were brought as it were out
of Epiphanius works, which were found to be none of his. Where M. Bishop
turns one place into two, and the same one more likely to be forged by him
that mentions it, if it were forged, then by any man else. The words are
cited as out of an Epistle of Epiphanius to Theodosius the Emperor, in the end
whereof he says these words were; Synod. Nicen 2 Act. 6 Epiphan. resp tom. 5.
Saepe cum comministris meis de ablatione imaginu^ egi, sed ab iijs no^ receptus
sum, neque vel in pauci^ vocem meam audire sustinuerunt.
I have often dealt with my fellow Ministers for the taking away of images, but
I have not been accepted of them, neither would they suffer, that in some few
words I should speak unto the^. These words, or rather the whole Epistle
Epiphanius the deacon affirms not to have been written by the other
Epiphanius, but alleges nothing to prove it so. Only like a wily Sophister he
reckons up of the Bishops that lived in the time of Epiphanius diverse chief
men, as Basil; Gregory Nazianzene, Gregory Nyssene, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
Amphilochius, and Cyril, so carrying the matter, as if these were the men with
whom Epiphanius had dealt, and hereupon inferring that if these so worthy men
would not yield to him for the taking away of images, the^ there should be no
reason now to take them away, whereas he had no reason at all, whereupon to
imagine that these or any of these should be the men whom Epiphanius meant. Now
beside that Epistle, he imports that some other writings there were alleged
of Epiphanius directed against Images, which, that being the readiest way to
put them off, he without any proof at all affirms to be counterfeit, but
seeing we have found him false as touching those works which he confesses to
have been written by Epiphanius, we can give him no credit for the denial of
the rest. Whatsoever they were we see they have taken course to make the^ away,
and indeed what has lien in them they have labored to suppress whatsoever
most clearly did make against them, and in place thereof to f^ist in bastards
and counterfeits such as are fit to serve their turn, but are altogether
unworthy of them whose names they are forced to bear. The last reason of
Epiphanius his scholars, erecting an image to him, and setting it in the
Church, of what weight it is may be esteemed by that that has been said. It
rests only upon the credit of Epiphanius the Deaco^, and that is little in
this case. Epipha. the Bishop of Cyprus lived 400 years before this Epiph. the
deaco^, that is, before the time of that 2. Nicen Council. If they would have
bin believed as touching a matter four hundred years before, they should have
brought meet proof and testimony thereof, which since they did not, we
cannot hold it for truth, inasmuch as otherwise we find them so many ways
culpable of untruth. But whereas Master Bishop says, that those Scholars of
Epiphanius would never have done so, if he had taught the same to be against
the Scripture, it is his bare presumption, and not any necessary conclusion,
because though Moses had taught the children of Israel from God, that they
should make no Idols or worship them, yet when he was but a little gone from
them, they made them, yea Aaron himself made for them a golden Calfe. As
touching the other sentence of Epiphanius cited by Master Perkins out of the
Council of Constantinople it is this; Synod. Constantinop. apud Nice^. 2. Act.
6 Estote memores dilecti filij ne in ecclesia^ imagines inferatis, neque in
sanctorum caemeterijs eas statuatu; sed perpetuo circu^ferte Deum in cordibus
vestris. Quinetiam neque in domo co^mmuni tolerentur. Neque enim fas est
Christianum per ^culos suspensu^ teneri sed per occupatione^ me^tis.
Be mindful beloved sons, not to bring Images into the Church, neither to
set them in the Churchyards, but always carry God about in your hearts. Yea,
let them not be suffered in the ordinary house, for it is not fit for a
Christian man to be holden by the eyes, but by the occupation of the mind. M.
Bishop answers, that Images must be suffered in all places, that we may the
better carry God in our hearts, being by sight thereof put in mind of him. But
how vain this answer is hereby appears, for that we find in the
Scriptures, that the setting up of such Idols is propounded to be the Deuteronomy.
4.23.25.
forgetting of Gods covenant, and the corrupting of our selves, but find it no
where commended in the Scripture, to be a means of remembering him. He has set
before us the heaven and earth as a glass, wherein we may behold Romans 1.20.
his power and Godhead, and thereby be moved to make inquiry after him. He
has given us his word to answer us what is needful when we enquire of him.
He has appointed the Sacraments for seals of that grace and mercy, that he
has revealed in his word. He sets the spectacles of his providence, and
mercy, and judgment continually before our eyes. By these means he has
taught us to be put in mind of him, and to learn to carry him in our hearts,
but to be put in mind of him by an Image, it is only a vain and frivolous
pretense of Idolaters, and no direction or instruction of the holy Ghost. It is
enough for us, that the people of God who were to remember God as well as we,
yet never found it lawful to set up an Idol to remember him thereby.

11. W. BISHOP.
Now I come unto a third point, which M. Perkins makes the second of our
difference; that images may be not only made and set in churches, but also
worshipped.

M. Perkins holds the contrary: and his principal ground is the second
commandment; which contains (says he) two parts. The first forbids the
making of images to resemble God: the second, the worshipping of them or God in
them, in these words, Thou shall not bow down to them.

Answ. If it be only forbidden to make the image of God, and to adore it, then
the making and worshipping of the image of Christ, or of any other creature, is
not there prohibited: and so this second commandment more then thrice
alleged, will not serve the turn against any other Image but God only. And
in plain reason, according also to M. Perkins his own confession, the
commandments of the first table touch only our duty toward God, that we
give him all his due honor, and do not give any part thereof unto any thing
else whatsoever. Wherefore divine and godly worship is only there spoken of,
and not such worship as we give unto any creature, or to the picture of it. And
consequently there is nothing there against the worshipping of our holy images.

Observe that there is a sovereign worship due to God as to the creator and
governor of all the world, and to give this to any creature is idolatry.
Another honor, by infinite degrees inferior, yet absolute in it self, is
ascribed unto Angels, and men as creatures endued with reason, and made after
the likeness of God, and to exhibit this to whom it is due, is civility and
not idolatry. This honor may be divided into two parts, because these
creatures are like to God, as well in their natural powers and qualities, as in
their supernatural. And that honor which is given to man or Angel, in respect
of any natural quality, may be called moral or civil: but that which is
attributed unto them in regard of their supernatural gifts, may well be called
religious and spiritual, because it is due unto the^ only for their
spiritual and religious qualities.

There is a third kind of worship, yet meaner then the other, which is a kind
of dependant and respective worship; as when a servant is honored or
cherished, not for his own but for his masters sake. And this is that worship
which we allow unto images, which for the Saints sake whom it does represent,
we do either reverently regard, or take off our hat, or bow our knee unto it.
This third kind of worship being all we allow unto pictures, were he not that
understands it more then half frantic, that should think it a great
desparagement unto the incomprehensible worship of God, that to one of his
servants pictures I should yield some such petty reverence: or that God should
forbid this in the forefront of his ten commandments? nothing less.

R. ABBOT.
It is true that the commandments of the first table do touch only our duty
toward God, requiring that we give him all his due honor, and do not give any
part thereof to any thing else whatsoever. Therefore the second commandment
for preserving entirely the honor of God forbids the making of any image
whereby to represent or resemble him, and not only so, but any image
whatsoever to bow down to it or to worship it, yea and not only the making and
worshipping of Images, but also the worshipping of the creatures themselves,
any whatsoever either in heaven or earth. Both the words of the commandment
and the Scriptures of particular laws that are referred unto it, do plainly
show that all these things are to be understood therein. Now then seeing the
law says both of images and of creatures, Thou shall not bow down to them nor
worship them, it must follow that they who make the images of Saints and do
bow down to them and worship them, do trespass against this commandment, and
therefore the commandment is by M. Perkins rightly and well applied against
Popish Images. But M. Bishop tells us, that only divine or godly worship is
there spoken of, and not such worship as they give to any creature or to the
picture of it. And we acknowledge that only divine and godly worship is there
spoken of, but divine or godly worship we say is all manner worship pertaining
to godliness and religion, and therefore that they in giving religious worship
to Saints and to their images, do contrary to the commandment give unto them
divine and godly worship. But M. Bishop with a distinction of worship takes
upon him as do his fellows to mock God, and albeit they commit all absurdity of
idolatry yet by a school-trick will make him believe that they do him no wrong
at all. He tells us of a sovereign worship due to God, and of ae religious
or spiritual worship due to Angels and Saints, and of a dependent and
respective worship due to Images. But what, is not the sovereign worship of
God a religious and spiritual worship? or what do they make of their worship
of images? is there no religion therein, and do they account it only a profane
and carnal service? If on all parts there be religious and spiritual worship
as he will not deny, what a wise part does he play to give us a distinction of
three members whereof one comprehends all? Well, howsoever he fumble in his
terms, yet we must take upon us to understand his meaning well enough, namely
that they make three kinds of worship, one belonging to God, another to Angels
and Saints, and a third to Images. They are wont to make but two kinds, latria
to God, and doulia to Angels and Saints, and both these severally to be
performed to their images, and we can hardly take M. Bishops word for any
warrant that they are now minded otherwise. It has been their common rule,
that Thom. Aquin. p. 3. q. 25. art. 3. ex Damascen. Honor imaginis ad
prototypum peruenit.
the honor of the image redoundeth to him whose image it is. Therefore Thomas
Aquinas resolves that Jbid. in corp. Eade^ reuerentia exhibetur imagini
Christi and ipsi Christo. Cum ergo Christus adoretur adoratione latriae
consequens est quod eius imago sit adoratione latriae adoranda.
the same reverence is given to the image of Christ and to Christ himself, and
because Christ is to be worshipped with the worship of latria (that is, divine
and godly worship) it follows that his image also is to be worshipped with
the same worship of latria. Therefore Andradius says as has been Sect. 1.
before showed, We deny not but that we worship the cross of Christ with this
worship of latria. So then inasmuch as the Saints are to be worshipped with the
worship of doulia, therefore they hold that their Images are in like sort to be
worshipped. Bellarmine simpereth somewhat at the matter, and tells us, that
Bellarmin. de Imag. sanct c. 23 Admitti potest imagines posse coli improprie
and per accidens eodem genere cultus quo exemplar ipsu^ colitur.
it may be admitted that improperly and accidentally images may be worshipped
with the same kind of worship wherewith their principals are worshipped: but
one of his fellow Jesuits affirms simply and plainly, that Azor. In^^itut.
lib. 9 cap. 6. Constans est Theologorum sententia imagine^ eodem honor and
cultu coli quo colitur id cuius est imago
it is the constant opinion of their Divines, that the image is worshipped with
the same honor and worship wherewith he is worshipped whose image it is. M.
Bishop therefore, but only that he has the countenance of so great a
Cardinal as Bellarmine, might happily receive a check for doing some disgrace
to holy Images, by putting them to a lower and inferior kind of worship then
the common opinion of their Divines does attribute unto them. Which indignity
he makes the greater by making images as servants or serving men to them whose
images they be, to Christ and his Saints, or to God if they be images of God.
As when a servant is honored not for his own but for his masters sake: so is
that worship (says he) which we allow to images, which for the Saints sake
whom it does represent, we do either reverently regard, or take off our hat, or
bow our knee unto it. But what reason is it to make servants of them who are
more trimly decked and more loftily set up then ever their masters were? A
servant is to be regarded for his masters sake, but what reason is there to
give to the servant that honor that appertains to the master, yea which the
master has holden unlawful to be done unto himself? Athanas. contra Arian
ser. 3. Petrus adorare volentem Corneliu^ inhibuit, etc. Angelus quoque Ioanne^
in Apocalypsi se adorar^ volentem non admisit, etc. Quocirca solius numinis est
adorari, neque id ab Angelis ignoratur, qui quanqua^ caeteros gloria
transcendunt creaturas tamen se esse, neque in classibus adorandorum sed
adorantiu^ agnoscu^t se comput^ri debere.
Peter forbad Cornelius (says Athanasius) when he was about to worship him,
saying, For I also am a man. The Angel also when John would worship him,
suffered him not, saying, See thou do it not, for I am the fellow-seruant of
thy brethren the Prophets, and of them that keep the words of this book;
worship God. Wherefore it belongs to God only to be worshipped, says he,
neither are the Angels ignorant thereof, who albeit they exceed others in
glory, yet acknowledge themselves to be creatures, and that they are to be
reckoned in the rank of them that are to worship, and not of them that are to
be worshipped. Now if Angels and Saints have refused to have worship done unto
them, because they are but men and fellow-seruants with us to God, how may it
be thought lawful for us to do it to their servants, that is, to idols and
images, as to their servants for their sakes? Surely we cannot see how this by
any reason can stand good. Albeit we hold it also an unmannerly and rude part
in M. Bishop thus to thrust servants upon them without their will. Where does
it appear unto him that they have promised entertaiment to any such servants?
what covenant have they made with them? what wages do they pay them? what
service do they require of them? nay what service should they expect of
senseless blocks, Psalm. 115.5.6. Revel. 9.20.
which have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, hands and handle not, feet
and walk not, throat and speak not, which cannot Mat. 8.9.
go when they are bid go, nor come when they are bid come, nor do what they are
bid do. And if they be of no service, if they be good for nothing, why are they
set forth to us by a comparison of servants to be well entertained and used for
their masters sake? M. Bishop then has here made a wise hand, to set down a
distinction of worship, the particulars whereof are neither pleasing to us nor
to his own friends. Albeit it is withal to be understood, that these
distinctions of worship, whether M. Bishops or any others, belong to the
theoremes of their schools, not to the practice of their Churches. They tell
us of diverse kinds of worship in their schools, when as in their churches
there is no difference to be seen; but what they do to God, the same they do
to Saints, the same also to the images of the Saints. Wherein that their
absurdity and the vanity of their distinction may the better appear, let us
examine what things they are that belong to divine and godly worship, which
they call Latria, which if they be found to give in common to their Saints and
images, then it shall be manifest that their distinction is used but only for
a show to blind the unadvised and ignorant Reader, but cannot with any
intelligent mind acquit them of that idolatry which we impute unto them. To
divine or godly worship, Cyril and Austin do reckon to be belonging August. de
ciu. Dei, lib. 7. cap. 32. Sacra, sacerdotia, templum, altaria, sacrificia,
ceremoniae, dies festi, and quicquid aliud ad latriam pertinet, etc. Cyril.
co^tra Iulia^ lib. 4. Sacrificia, festiuitates, hymni, gratiaru^ actiones, etc.
adoratio, etc. preces, confessiones, celebritates, etc. Vide Aug. de ciu. Dei.
lib. 10 cap. 4.
sacred devotions, priesthood, temples, altars, sacrifices and offerings,
ceremonies, festival days and solemnities, vows, prayers, praises and
thanksgiuings, adoration and worship, confessions, all which the devils did
procure to be given to them when they sought to draw unto themselves the honor
of God. S. Austin again expounds latria to consist Augus. de ciu. Dei. lib.
10. ca. 1. Vt sacra faciamus and sacrificemus, vel aliqua nostra seu nosipsos
religionis ritibus co^secremus. Hic est enim deitati debitus, etc. Latriam
nostri interpretati sunt.
in doing sacred devotions and sacrifices, or consecrating any thing that is
ours or our selves by any rites or ceremonies of religion. Now what is there of
al these things which they yield not to their Saints, and in the name of the
Saints to the images of the Saints? They worship them, they pray unto them,
they make confessions and vows to them, they give thanks to them for
benefits received, they perform sacred devotions and ceremonies to them, and
thereto consecrate themselves and their goods, they keep holy days and
fasting days in the worship and honor of them, they set up lights before
them, they put precious and costly garments upon them, they make pilgrimages to
them, and no end is there of religious rites and duties which with all holy
observation they yield unto them. Ide^. contra ser. Arian. cap. 29. Si
aliquibus terrae molibus Spiritui sancto templum fabricaremus, quis dubitaret
ei nos latriae seruire?
Who doubts (says Saint Austine) but that to whomsoever we build a temple,
we serve him with latria, that is, the worship of God? Jdem. contra Maximin.
lib. 1. Si templum alicui Angelo excellentissimo de lignis and lapidibus
faceremus, etc. creaturae exhiberemus eam seruitutem quae vni tantum debetur
Deo.
For if to any of the most excellent Angels (says he) we should of wood and
stone build a temple or church, we should yield to the creature a service which
is due to God only. But this they did as Erasmus there notes Erasm ibid. in
margin. Hoc nun^ fit quibus libet diuis
to every of the Saints, accordingly as Boniface the fourth Platinan Bonif a
Pantheon a Phoca obtinuit con^ecrau^tque in honorem beatae virginis omniu^que
martyrum.
consec^ated the Pantheon of the Romans to the honor of the blessed Virgin
and all the Martyrs; according as they are taught to pray at coming into a
Church, Horae virg Mariae secund. vsum Serum. Sancti dei in quorum honor and
commemora tione haec sancta dedicata est Ecclesia and haec altaria consecrata,
etc.
O ye Saints of God, in the honor and remembrance of whom this church was
dedicated and these altars consecrated, etc. Where it appears also that they
consecrated altars to the Saints and to their honor, yea insomuch that in
Churches they had many times their peculiar chapels and altars, and Priests,
our Ladies chapel, our Ladies altar, our Ladies Priest, and so for other
Saints, whereas S. Austin also testifies, that to be honored with an Aug. de
verb Do. ser 6 Quod pro nomine accipiant illam statuam, ara testatur. Quid
illic faciat ara si illud no^ habetur pro numine?
altar is a thing proper to God only. Albeit here they except that they offer
not their sacrifice to any but to God only, namely that in their mass they do
not say, Triden. council. sess 6. cap 3 Vnde nec sacerdos dicere solet, offero
tibi sacrificiu^ Petre vel Paul, etc.
We offer unto thee O Peter or Paul, but reserve this as peculiar to him only
who has crowned them. A goodly matter, that of all the worship that belongs
to God they keep one only act or office entire unto him. Albeit here they do
but halt and dally with God, because howsoever they pretend to offer to God
only, yet they profess Bellarmin. de sanct. beatitud. cap. 7. Sacrificia tam
Eucharistiae quaem laudum et precum i^ eorum honorem Deo public offeruntur.
to offer to God in honor of the Saints: and whereas our Savior Christ has
instituted that sacrament to be celebrated as a divine and godly worship, 1.
Cor. 11 24.25.
in remembrance of him, they herein join the Saints in fellowship with him,
and profess the same holy celebration to be performed and done Council.
Tride^t. vt supra. In honorem and memoriam sanctorum ecclesia missas celebrare
consueuit
in remembrance of them. And yet it is to be observed further that sacrifice is
not to be understood only of propitiatory sacrifice, as they affirm their
mass to be, but of all consecrated and holy offerings, concerning which
generally God has said, Exodus 22.20.
He which sacrifices or offers to other gods but to the Lord only shall be
slain. Where Lyra. ibid Per immolationem hic prohibitam intelligitur prohibita
oblatio, libati^, ^hurificatio, and talia quae fiebant in templo ipsi Deo
direct.
by immolation or sacrifice (says Lyra) is understood to be forbidden
oblation, drink offering, burning of incense, and such other things, which in
the temple were done directly to God himself. Hereby then it is plain that
all manner of religious and holy offering is to be accounted a peculiar honor
of God alone, and therefore did Epiphanius condemn the Collyridian heretics
as making a god of the Virgin Marie, in that by way of devotion Epiphan.
haeres. Panem proponunt and offerunt in nomen Mariae, etc. Sanctum erat Mariae
corpus at non Deus, etc.
they offered a cake unto her or in her name. But this the Church of Rome does,
and teaches men to do; they offer to their idols and images all manner
offerings of gold and silver, and jewels, and whatsoever else may serve for the
use of them who make their profit of those offerings, and therefore cannot be
cleared of offering sacrifice to the Saints and their images, that is, of
giving them in this respect also the worship that belongs to God only. Thus
as Prou. 30.2^.
the harlot in the Proverbs eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have
committed no iniquity, so the harlot of Rome going a whoring from God,
bestows upon her idols all the worship and honor of God, and does to them
all that she does to God, and in the mean time pretends that it is not
divine or godly worship, but only an inferior kind of worship that she does
assign unto them. Which because it is more manifest then that it can be
denied, the Valentian Jesuit to take away the inconvenience thereof arising,
that they are guilty of Idolatry, frames us a new definition of Idolatry,
that it is not the giving of the worship of God to a creature, but Greg. de
Vale^. de idololat lib. 2. cap. 1. Idolatriae genuina ratio creaturae diuinu^
honorem habere sicut Deo.
the giving of the worship of God to a creature as to God, thereby thinking that
they are to be acquitted of idolatry, for that albeit they give divine honor
and worship to their images, which he could not deny, yet they give it not to
them as taking them to be Gods. But S. Austin simply says, that August. de
Trin. lib. 1. cap. 6. Idololatrae dicuntur qui simulachris eam exhibent
seruitute^ quae debetur Deo.
they are called Idolaters who give to Images that service that is due to God,
which they doing by his own confession, must consequently be affirmed to be
idolaters. Neither ca^ the distinctions used by M. Bishop and the rest,
whatsoever colors they set upon them, excuse them in this behalf, because
howsoever they term it an inferior worship which they do to Saints and
Images, yet it is religious worship or worship of religion, and worship of
religion is peculiar to God alone. August. contrae Faust. lib. 14. cae. 11.
Apostolus and creaturam laudat, and ei tamen cultum religionis exhibere vetat.
The Apostle (says S. Austine) forbids that worship of religion be yielded
to a creature. Jdem. contrae 2. epist. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 4. Quis dicat non
debere obseruare Christianos vt vni Deo religionis obsequio seruiatur.
Christians (says he) are to observe that with duty of religion they worship
God only. Therefore he says as touching the Saints, Idem de vera relig. cap.
55. Non sit nobis religio cultus hominum mortuorum etc. Honorandi sunt propter
imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem, etc. Honoramus eos charitate, non
seruitute.
Let it be no religion with us to worship dead men; they are to be honored for
imitation, not to be worshipped for religion: we honor them by way of love,
not by way of service. To this purpose the same S. Austine very fitly
observes, that Jbid. Et vni religantes animas nostras, vnde religio dicta
creditur.
religion is so called of tying our souls to God only, that we may conceive
that as Lactantius says, Lactan. instit. lib. 1. cap. 20. Religio et veneratio
nulla alia nisi vnius Dei tenenda est.
no religion or worship is to be holden but of God only. In respect whereof
having condemned images, he uses this exhortation, that Ibid. lib 2 cap. 18.
Nihil aliud adoremus, nihil colamus nisi solum artificis nostri parentisque
vnicum numen.
we adore nothing, worship nothing but the only Godhead of our maker and
Father. August. contra Faust lib. 20. ca: 5. Solus ille colendas est quo solo
fruens beatus fit cultor eius.
He only is to be worshipped, says S. Austine, in the enjoying of whom alone
he becomes blessed that worshippeth him. Origin. contra Cells. lib. 1. Et
adhibemus animum qui docet solum hunc colendum esse, caetera nihil esse, aut
esse quidem sed honor tantum digna, non cultu atque adoratione quae nulli
creaturae concedi potest absque diuinitatis miu^^a.
We hearken to him (says Origin) who teaches us that God only is to be
worshipped, and as for other things that they are nothing, or that they are
indeed, but are worthy of honor only, not of adoration and worship, which can
be granted to no creature without injury unto God. Now then what do they but
mock us in telling us of a diverse kind of worship to be performed by way of
religion to God, to Saints and Images, when as in religion there is no worship
to be done to any but to God alone? They tell us they give not the same worship
to Images or to the Saints as they do to God, when as religion teaches us that
no worship at all is due either to images or Saints, but to God only. Albeit
they lie therein, as has been showed, inasmuch as by the common opinion of
their Divines, the images of God and of Christ are to be worshipped with divine
worship, because divine worship is due to them that are represented thereby.
Now therefore whereas M. Bishop says, that all the worship which they do to
Images is but reverently to regard, to put off the hat and to bow the knee to
them, he speaks as a man ashamed of that which every where and in all places
is practiced amongst them. And it may be that he speaks it but only by
equivocation in respect of the very image it self, for in Bellarmin. de
Imagine. sanctor. cap. 21. In ipsa imagine vere inest aliquid sacrum, nimirum
similitudo ad rem sacram, and ipsa dedicatio sieve consecratio diuino cultui.
Ergo ipse in se and non solum vt prototypi vicem gerunt honor dignae sunt.
the very image it self (says Bellarmine) there is some sacred matter, namely
the liknesse to a holy thing, and the dedicating or consecrating of it to
divine worship, and therefore Images themselves in themselves are worthy of
honor, and not only as they represent or bear the person of the principal.
His proposition more fully expresses the same, Jbid. Imagines Christi and
Sanctorum venerandae sunt non solum per accidens vel improprie, sed etiam per
se and proprie, ita vt ipsa terminent venerationem, vt in se considerantur, and
non solum vt vicem gerunt exemplaris.
The Images of Christ and of the Saints are to be worshipped not only
accidentally or improperly, but properly and in themselves, so as that they
determine the worship themselves as they are considered in themselves, and not
only as they supply the place of their principal. Thus happily M. Bishop by a
cunning distinction tells us that they give no more worship to images then
that which he mentions, because in one meaning they give no more as they are
considered in themselves, but let him make the meaning what he will, he knows
well that in the devotion of the people they have all the same worship and
service done to them as is done to God himself. Albeit that which he himself
mentions is a witless, a senseless and drunken devotion, like to the
superstition that was derided in the Pagans, who Minut. Felix in Oct. apud
Arno. Simulachro Serapidis denotato (vt vulgus superstitiosus solet) manum ori
admouens osculu^ labijs pressit.
at the sight of the image of Serapis (or such like) were wont going by to
kiss the hand, namely in token of doing reverence thereto. What a brutish and
beastly absurdity is it, that an understanding soul should deiect it self to
do reverence to a block? God has said, Thou shall not bow down to them: and
again teaches man to say, Esa 44.19.
Shall I bow to the stock of a tree? The Prophet says of Idolaters, Chap.
2.8.9.
They worship the work of their own hands which their own fingers have made,
and a man bowed himself, and a man humbled himself, therefore spare them not.
He denounces the vengeance of God to them who to stocks and stones, to the
works of men's hands will do even those petty reuerences which M. Bishop
speaks of. Therefore whereas he says, This third kind of worship being all
that we allow unto pictures, were he not that understands it more then half
frantike, that should think it a great disparagement unto the incomprehensible
worship of God, that to one of his servants pictures I should yield some such
petty reverence, or that God should forbid this in the forefront of his ten
commandments? I answer with his own words, Nothing less. We see that like
Caiaphas he speaks the truth, and is not aware. Indeed it is nothing less
then a frantic humor to be instructed by Gods commandment, and thereupon to
deny the doing of any worship to pictures and images; but to affirm the same,
and to do such reuerences to pictures, is a plain token that Idolaters are
like the idols which they worship, altogether void of understanding, and
without the light of common sense. Therefore rightly the Prophet says, Psalm.
115.8.
They that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that put their
trust in them.

12. W. BISHOP.
But let us go on with M. Perkins his argument. His second is, The brazen
Serpent was an image of Christ crucified, appointed by God: yet when the
children of Israel burned insence unto it, Ezechias brake it in pieces 4. Reg.
18.
.

Answ. So when Christians generally give godly honor to images, as those
Israelites did to the serpent, let them also be broken by their lawful
superior if no better remedy may be found. But as that very brazen serpent
duly worshipped many hundred years by the same people before they fell to
idolatry, as witnesses S. Augustine Lib. 3. de Trini. cap. 10.
, where he reckons the brazen serpent among those signs which are worthy of
religious worship: so good Christians may worship all sorts of holy pictures,
so they think no god to dwell in them, nor put any trust in the pictures, but
use them only to stir up devotion, to keep their minds from wandering after
their domestical affairs, and to conserve the memory of Gods happy servants.

R. ABBOT.
We are desirous to know where the superiors of the Romish Church have broken
any images, to which godly honor has been given. That it has been given to
them, it is confessed by Polydore Virgil, as I have before showed,
acknowledging that Polyd. Virgil. de invent. rer. lib. 6. cap. 13.
that part of piety did little differ from impiety, and that the people did
worship images not as figures but so as that they did put more trust in them
then in Christ and the Saints to whom they were dedicated. These words they
deface and blot out, with many other following which serve to the laying open
of this wicked abuse, but of the reforming of any abuse herein committed, we
can yet understand nothing. And seeing Greg. de Val. plainly confesses that
they give divine worship to Images, as has been showed in the former section,
we must take this speech of M. Bishop to be used but for a shift without any
meaning to have their idols so roughly dealt with as he pretends. Nay as the
Pagans were made believe that Ruffin. hist. lib. 2. cap 23. Persuaesio dispersa
quod si humana manus simulachru^ illud contigisset, terra dehiscens illico
solueretur in Chaos, and repent coelum rueret in praeceps.
if the image of Serapis were hurt or touched, all the world would presently be
dissolved: so the Romish politicians persuade themselves that their golden
world will soon come to naught if once they should offer to lay violent hands
upon their sacred and holy images. As for that which he says of the brase^
serpent duly worshipped many hundred years, it is a most impudent lie, neither
is there so much as any show of any thing whereupon he should so affirm. The
children of Israel had bin accustomed 2. Kings 18.4.
to burn incense to it. Ezechias took knowledge of it (which it seems some
other godly kings before him had not done) and condemned it as wicked and
unlawful, and to take away utterly the occasion of that idolatry he brake the
same brazen Serpent in pieces, calling it in contempt because of the abuse of
it, a piece of brass. That it was worshipped then we find, and for that cause
was destroyed, but that it was ever lawfully worshipped, there is nothing to be
found. Yet M. Bishop very leudly seeks to father this conceit upon S.
Austine, Aug. de Trinit. lib. 3 cap. 10. Aliqua^do ad hoc fit eadem species vel
aliquantulu^ mansura, sicut potuit serpens ille aeneus exaltatus in eremo,
sicut possunt and literae; vel peracto ministerio transitura, sicut panis ad
hoc factus in accipiendo sacramento consumitur, sed ista quia hominibus nota
sunt quia per homines fiunt honorem tanqua^ religiosa habere possunt, stupore^
tanqua^ mira non possunt
As witnesses Saint Austine, says he, where he reckons the brazen Serpent
among those signs which are worthy of religious worship. The thing that S.
Austine says is this, that to declare somewhat to us from God sometimes a
form or kind of thing is made either to abide for a while as might the brazen
Serpent that was lift up in the wilderness, and as letters or writing may; or
else to pass away as the service is performed, as the bread made for that use
in receiving the sacrament is consumed. Hereupon he adds, But these things
being known to men because they are done by men, may have honor as matters
appertaining to religion, but wonder as matters of marvel they cannot have.
And what is here now whence M. Bishop should affirm that S. Austine accounted
the brazen Serpent worthy of religious worship? What does he say more of the
brazen serpent then he does of letters and writing, and will M. Bishop say that
he will have letters and writing to be worshipped? Things appertaining to the
use of religion are to be honored by decent and seemly usage, as our Churches,
pulpits, vestiments, cups, books, and such like, and yet they are not to be
worshipped. Saint Paul says, 1. Tim 5.17.
The elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, and yet we hope M.
Bishop will not upon a good opinion of himself take upon him to be worshipped.
August. contra ser. Arian. ca. 23. Honorat omnis qui adorat, non autem adorat
omnis qui honorat.
Every one that worshippeth, honors, says S. Austine, but every one that
honors does not worship. Therefore Epiphanius says of the blessed Virgin,
Epiphan. haeres. 97. Sit in honor Maria, Pater and Filius and Spiritus sanctus
adoretur. Mariam nemo adoret, Deo debetur hoc mysterium, etc. Sancta est and
honorata, at non ad adorationem,
Let Mary be in honor; let the Father, Son and holy Ghost be worshipped: Let
no man worship Mary; this mystery belongs unto God. She is holy and
honorable, but is not to be worshipped. The brazen serpent then might be
honored by being carefully kept, as Manna was for the remembrance of the
benefit thereby received, but thereupon to assign to it religious worship is
a collectio^ somewhat strange. Seeing therefore the brazen serpent was never
lawfully worshipped, M. Bishop has no argument from thence to prove that good
Christians may worship all sorts of holy pictures, but M. Perkins argument
stands good, that since the brazen serpent erected by the commandment of God
himself, yet when it was worshipped was therefore destroyed and abolished;
therefore much more all other images being erected only of humane curiosity
without commandment from God are to be defaced and destroyed when religious
worship or service is done unto them. As for M. Bishops uses of his images to
stir up devotion, to keep the mind from wandering, to conserve the memory of
Gods happy servants, they are (as I have before showed) the vain pretenses of
Idolaters, neither is there any good effect to be expected from them, to say
nothing that these things are nothing to the point in hand, which is the
worshipping of them.

13. W. BISHOP.
Now to the third argument, which is jolly, and worthy the wild wit of a mad
minister. Christ would not so much as bow his knee unto the devil, although he
would have given him the whole world for doing of it: therefore we must not
adore images. True, if the Image were M. Bezaes ensign, or of their master the
devil, or any of his hel-hounds.

R. ABBOT.
Here M. Bishop was disposed to play the Sycophants part, or else he might have
seen that M. Perkins meaning was otherwise then to frame any such argument as
he has hewed his words to. The point in question is the worshipping of Images.
M. Perkins for our principal ground against it, alleges the second
commandment. To declare the meaning of the commandment he alleges the
example of our Savior Christ, who when the devil requires him Mat. 4.9.
to fall down and worship him upon promise to give him the whole world, takes
exception against him, not by the indignity of his person, but by the
commandment of the law, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
thou shall serve, importing thereby, that the law does forbid the doing of that
which the devil required to any save to God only. He rejects him, I say, not
in the name of a devil, but generally in the name and condition of a creature,
teaching by the law that no creature, none but only God is to be holden capable
of that which he demanded to himself. Now then if M. Bishops wits stand
right, the argument stands good, that since Christ by the law challenges to
God only that which the devil required of him, which was to fall down and
worship him, we are thereby to learn that we are not to fall down and to
worship any creature, not the Saints themselves, much less the vile idols that
are set up in their names. Here I know what they are ready to except, that
Christ says not there, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God only, but Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and leaves only to the other part, Him only
thou shall serve, as not denying but that other things may be worshipped beside
God, but only denying unto the^ the service of latria, the word there being
(...), whence latria is derived, which they say is the service peculiar unto
God. But how vain this exception is, appears by considering the original
words of the law, which says in like sort of both, Deuteronomy. 10.20.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and thou shall serve him, adding the word
only to neither part. The name of fear is more general, and contains all
religion and devotion toward God, but in steed thereof our Savior Christ
names worship, which is a part of that fear, fitting the words to the present
occasion, and yet not forcing the law, because the challenge that God makes to
the whole, must necessarily be understood of every part. Now whereas the
sentences in the law are set down without the limitation of the word only,
our Savior Christ to show the meaning of the Scripture in such speeches
concerning God, adds that limitation to the latter part, not as to make that
only peculiar to God, and to leave the former in common to others, but in the
one teaching us what we are to understand in both, because by what reason the
one is appropriated to God, by the same is the other also, and leaving us to
conceive that whatsoever God challenges as a part of his worship and glory,
the same is to be given to no other beside him. To which purpose Tertullian
very well says. Tertull aduer. Hermog Veritas sic vnum Deum exigit defende^do
vt solius sit quicquid ipsius est: ita eum ipsius erit si fuerit solius.
Truth so requires in the defending of one God, that what is his, be his
alone; for so shall it be his, if it be only his. And so did Ambrose
understand the words of Christ, when he says, Ambros. de Spir sanct. lib. 2.
cap. 12. Neque adorandum quic quam praeter Deu^ legimus quia scriptum est,
Dominu^ Deum, etc.
We read that nothing beside God is to be worshipped, because it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve. And to
take it otherwise, takes away the force of Christ's exception against the
devil; for it is no sufficient reason to say, I will not worship thee, because
it is said, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, if other things may be
worshipped beside God. If to make good the answer of Christ they will rest the
strength thereof upon the latter part of the words, they confound themselves,
and make our assertion good. For if in the words of the law (...), Him only
thou shall serve, be an exception against that which the devil requires of
Christ, to fall down and worship him, it must necessarily be granted, that to
fall down and worship, is (...), to perform a service of latria; to do that
service which belongs to God only. Wherefore will they, nill they, they must
confess that the law intends to say, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God
only, and thereof we rightly gather, that because God only is to be worshipped,
therefore we may not worship any creature whatsoever, but least of all dead and
senseless blocks. M. Perkins wits therefore were not wild in the propounding
of the argument, but M. Bishops honesty failed in the collecting of it, and
that because his wits failed for the answering of it. As for his other terms I
will briefly answer him, that M. Beza is there now where he is free from being
touched with the barking of such dogs, and that they have the devil for their
master, to who^ that belongs which S. John says, Revel. 9.20:
They worshipped devils and idols of gold and of silver, and of brass, and of
stone, and of wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor go, which has no
where to be verified but in the Popish Church: and lastly that they are to be
accounted the devils hel-hounds, who have given themselves wholly to the devil,
as many of M. Bishops holy fathers have done, and namely for the present
Platin. in Syluest. 2. Totum se diabolo tradiderat. Pontificatu^ adiuua^te
diabolo co^secutus est, hac lege vt post morte^ totus illius esset
Syluester the second for the gaining of the Popedom.

14. W. BISHOP.
M. Perkins his fourth reason. A man (says he) may be worshipped with civil
honor, not with religious, which is wholly prescribed in the first table, and
yet the meanest man is a more excellent image of God then any painted one.

Answ. A man may be worshipped with religious honor, in respect of his
supernatural gifts, as well as with civil honor of his natural properties,
as has been before declared: and no other religious honor is either prescribed
or proscribed in the first table then such only as is proper to God.

But (says he) Thomas of Watering 3. Part. qu. 25. art. 3.
holds that the Crucifixe is to be adored with the same honor that Christ is.
Leaving Thomas of Watering and of Wapping to them that deserve it: I answer to
the place of Saint Thomas of Aquine, that he speaks (like a most learned
Philosopher and Divine) very profoundly, that the image may be considered in it
self, and so he says, it is not to be worshipped at all, or as it does convey
our mind unto that which it does represent: and so because there is but one and
the same motion of our understanding and will toward Christ and the crucifix,
we do adore them both at once with the same act of adoration, but in a far
different degree, for Christ we adore properly as the true God, but the
crucifixe accidentally as a thing joined with Christ. Even as (says he,
expounding himself) art. 4. when one does his homage unto the king, he
worshippeth withal his purple garment, not that any worship is due to the
robe, but the whole is given unto the person, which cannot be separated from
that which is so closely joined to the person: even so the divine person of
Christ is properly adored, but improperly all things conceived together with
it, are said also by that deep doctor to be adored. He that has an ear of
hearing let him hear: for our purpose it suffices to know that he assigns
very small worship to themselves.

R. ABBOT.
M. Perkins argues, that they which will worship an image of God should rather
worship man then any other image, because the meanest man is a more excellent
image of God then all the images of God and of Saints that are devised by men.
And if it be unlawful with religious honor to worship a man, then much more is
it unlawful to worship an image that is made by man. To this M. Bishop full
wisely answers, that a man may be worshipped with religious honor in respect
of his supernatural gifts. Now we doubt not but he thinks himself to have
some supernatural gifts, and is he so very a natural as to think that we may
fall down and worship him in respect of his supernaturals? Cornelius in
respect of supernatural calling and gifts worshippeth S. Peter, and he
refuses it, saying Act. 10.26.
Stand up, for I my self am a man. S. John in respect of supernatural gifts
worshippeth the Angel, and he also disclaimeth it, saying, Revel. 19.10.
Do it not, I am thy fellow-seruant, worship God. What, is M. Bishop so
witless as to think that Cornelius took Peter to be a God, or that John
took the Angel so to be? No, but they took them to be excellent servants of
God, and in that respect worshipped them; yet they renounced (...) being done
in that respect, and give us to understand, that religious worship is not to be
given to Apostles because they are but men, nor to Angels because they are but
fellow-seruants, but is proper to God only. It sauoureth therefore of a very
natural wit, to say that a man may be worshipped with religious worship in
respect of his supernatural gifts, and because there is no religious worship
but what is due to God only, therefore very idly does he say that there is
no other religious worship either prescribed or proscribed in the first table
then such only as is proper to God. There is no other prescribed, because in
right there is no other, and that is proscribed and condemned when it is given
to any other. But specially is it condemned when it is given to stocks and
stones, to pictures and images, and therefore justly does M. Perkins censure
Thomas Aquinas for affirming very impiously and idolatrously that the Cross is
to be worshipped with godly worship, even with the same that is due to Christ
himself. M. Bishop seems here to show some sign of grace, and to be ashamed
of this damnable and wicked position, and feign would salve the matter, but it
will not be. Thomas Aquinas propounds the question, Thom Aquin. sum. p. 3. q
25. art. 4. Vtrum crux Christi sit aedoranda adoratione latriae? etc. Illi
exhibemus cultu^ latriae in quo ponimus spem salutis. Sed in cruce Christi
p^nimus spem salutis: cantat enim Ecclesia, O Crux, aue, spes v^ica, etc. Ergo
crux Christi est adoranda adoratione latriae.
Whether the cross of Christ be to be worshipped with the worship of latria?
He determines that it is, because we give the worship of latria to that
wherein we put the hope of our salvation. But we put the hope of our salvation
in the Cross: for the Church (says he) sings, All hail, O Cross, our
only hope, at this time of the passion; To the godly increase righteousness,
and to the guilty grant forgiveness. Therefore the Cross is to be worshipped
with latria, that is, the worship that is due to God. Mark it, gentle Reader,
that they put the hope of salvation in that cross to which they say, All
hail, O Cross, etc. and therefore do worship it with latria, with divine and
godly worship. M. Bishop makes the matter somewhat dainty with his
distinction of properly and improperly; but Thomas like a plain meaning man
speaks downright, albeit otherwise he be as full of distinctions as any
other. As for that which M. Bishop says, it is a tale which he has learned
out of Bellarmine, and puts it out under Thomas Aquinas his name, but Thomas
himself says nothing to that effect, whose name notwithstanding must sway
more then Bellarmines can do. His resolution more largely and distinctly set
down is this, that Jbid. in corp. Creaturae insensibili non debetur honor vel
reuerentia nisi ratione rationalis naturae, and hoc dupliciter, vno modo
inquantum repraesentat rationalem natural, alio modo inqua^tum ei quocunque
modo coiungitur. Primo modo co^sueuerunt homine^ venerari regis imaginem,
secu^do modo eius vestimentum. Vtrunque autem venerantur homines eadem
veneratione qua venerantur and regem.
to a thing without sense, a reverence may be due in respect of a reasonable
nature two manner of ways; first in that it represents the same reasonable
nature; secondly, in that it is in any sort joined to it. The first way, says
he, me^ are wont to worship the Kings image, the second way the Kings garment;
but they worship both with the same worship wherewith they worship the King
himself. Here is good stuff, but yet it is such as Thomas his head could
devise to set up the cross to be worshipped like a God. A pretty problem might
be moved hereupon, and worthily debated, if there had happened to be a lowse in
the Popes garment somewhat nearly joined to him, when Thomas should come to
worship him, whether he should be said to worship the Popes lowse, and that
with the very same worship as the Pope himself. If being joined in any sort to
that which is worshipped, do put that that is so joined in case to be
worshipped alike, then surely the Popes lowse must be worshipped if he happen
to have one, as by the same reason must also the worms that breed in their
rotten wooden gods. But to apply this to the cross he says: Ibid. Si ergo
loquamur de ipsa cruce in qua Christus crucifixus est, vtroque modo est a nobis
veneranda, vno scilicet modo inquantum repraesentat figuram Christi extensi in
ea, alio modo ex contactu ad me^bra Christi and ex hoc quod eius sa^guine est
perfusa. Vnde vtroque modo adoratur eade^ adoratione latriae, et propter hoc
etia^ cruc^n^ alloquimur and deprecamurqua^ si ipsum crucifixum. Si vero
loquamur de effigy crucis Christi in quacunque alia materia. etc. Si^
veneramur crucem tantum vt imaginem Christi quam veneramur adoratione latriae.
If then we speak of the very cross whereon Christ was crucified; we are to
worship the same both ways, namely one way as it represents the figure of
Christ extended upon the cross; another way for touching the members of
Christ, and for being embrued with his blood. Whereupon in both respects it is
worshipped with the same worship as Christ himself, that is, with the worship
of latria, and therefore do we speak and pray to the cross as to Christ
himself that was crucified. But if we speak of the image of the cross in
any other matter, as stone or wood, or gold, or silver, we then worship the
cross, only as the image of Christ, which we worship with the worship of
latria. We heard before of Helena, that when she found the cross whereupon
Christ was crucified, she worshipped not the cross, Ambros. de obit^
Theodosij Supra sect. 1.
because that, says Ambrose, had been a heathenish error, and a vanity of
ungodly men, but she worshipped only him that died upon the cross, but Thomas
if she had lived in his time, would have taught her a new point of divinity,
that in two respects before mentioned she should have worshipped that cross
with the very worship of Christ himself, and in one respect every cross that
is made in likeness of that cross. Thus the Popes Angelical Doctor has
determined; this the Church of Rome has believed; this the common opinion of
their divines as we see before, has maintained, and this the people
accordingly have practiced. Now this can by no means be excused of idolatry,
for it is idolatry to give the worship of God to that that is no God. But the
cross is no God, and therefore it must needs be idolatry to give to the
cross the worship of God. Of God it is said as touching divine honor and
worship, Him only thou shall serve. Now as S. Austine says, Aug. cont. ser.
Arian. ca. 29. Hanc seruitute^ non exhibebintus Filio side Patre dictum est. Et
illi soli seruies; aut non exhibebimus Patri si de Filio dictum est. Et illi
soli seruies, etc.
If it were said of the Father, Him only thou shall serve, we might not give
this service to the Son, or if it were said of the Son, Him only thou
shall serve, we might not give it to the Father. If then by these words used
concerning the Father, there should be an exception against the Son, who yet
is the lively and substantial image of the Father, and the same that the
Father is, how much more when it is said of one God, the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, Him only thou shall serve, are we to take it for an exception
against a senseless and dead image, that no divine worship or service be done
unto it? Bellarmine therefore after so many ages, seeing that this can by no
means be acquitted of idolatry, though he could not reform it in the Church,
yet has showed his good will according to the old manner of the Pagan
Philosphers, to salve it in the schools, telling us, that Bellarm. de Imag.
sanct cap. 25. Cultus qui per se and proprie debetur imaginibus est cultus
quida^ imperfectus qui analogice and reductiue pertinet ad speciem cultus eius
qui debetur exemplari, etc. Imaginibus Christi non dibetur latriae verae and
simpliciter, sed cultus sine co^paratione inferior qui tamen ad latria^
reducitur sicut imperfectum ad perfestum.
the worship that is given to images, is not the same that is given to the
principals, but only by a kind of analogy or proportion is reduced to it, and
therefore that to the images of Christ (or to the cross) there is not to be
given latria (the worship of God) but an imperfect kind of worship, which is
reduced to latria, as that that is imperfect to that that is perfect. This is
his own new device, and their schools before knew not this trick, or at
least approved it not, yet he says, that Ibid. Forte Thomas and Bonaue^tura
and a^^ hoc solum dicere volutru^^, etc. quod si ita est omnes conuenimus,
perhaps Thomas, and Bonauenture, and others meant in that sort, and then,
says he, we all agree. He says but perhaps, but knowing well that it is past
perhaps, and very certain that Thomas never had any such meaning, as appears
also very plainly by his words. Now M. Bishop willing to gratify the Jesuits
whom he so lately persecuted, leaves Thomas and follows Bellarmines device,
yet so as that being careful to save the credit of their deep Doctor as he
calls him, he sets it down in Thomas his name. Albeit to say the truth he
does not well accord either with the one or with the other, for whereas he
says that the Image being considered in it self, is not to be worshipped at
all, he contrarieth Bellarmine, who, as appears before, assigns a worship
to Images as they are considered in themselves, and not only as they respect
their principals. For the rest, Thomas says indeed, that Thom. vbi supra art.
3. in corp. Motus animae in imagine^ inquantum est imago est vnus and idem cu^
illo qui est in rem.
there is the same motion of the soul toward the Image, as toward that whose
image it is, whereof it follows as Master Bishop says, that they are
worshipped both at once with the same act of adoration. But whereas he says
that that is in a far different degree, Thomas was never so absurd as to
think, that in one and the self same act there can be a different degree, and
therefore absolutely concludes as I have before alleged, that the same
reverence is due to the image of Christ, and to Christ himself. Master Bishop
adds that they adore Christ properly as the true God, but the crucifixe
accidentally as a thing joined with Christ, but Thomas makes that a reason why
the cross is worshipped with the very same worship as Christ himself, Ibid.
art. 4. ad 2. Crux Christi etsi non fuerit vnitae verbo Dei in persona, fuit
tamen ei vnita per repraesentationem and contactum.
because by representation or touching it is united unto Christ, being in this
respect much more justly to be condemned of idolatry in thus worshipping the
cross, then Nestorius was for worshipping the sole manhood of Christ, because
albeit Nestorius acknowledged not any substantial or personal union betwixt
the godhead and the manhood, yet he acknowledged a far greater union then
that which Thomas assigns betwixt Christ and the cross. And here it were
worthy to be enquired, what manner of union or conjunction this is that they
tell us of, by what bond it holds, what effects it works, whether it be any
offering of violence to Christ, when the wooden Roode is rotten and
worme-eaten to hew him in pieces, and cast the same into the fire, and so
disunite the things that were before united? But Master Bishop somewhat
resolves us of this matter, teaching us to conceive of Christ and the
crucifixe, as of the King and his purple robe; the woorst is, that he says
that there is not any worship due to the robe, whereas Thomas out of his idle
dreams, has before told us, that we worship the Kings garment with the same
worship as the King himself. So then the matter is come to a fair pass, that
there is no worship at all due to the Crucifixe, because there is none due to
the Kings robes, and then what is it that we dispute of all this while? He
tells us, that the worship of the King cannot be separated from the robe that
is so closely joined to his person. But what, is the Cross or Crucifixe as
closely joined to Christ as the robe is to the King? If down before the
cross: but if Christ be in heaven and the cross upon the earth, then is this
a poor and simple defense of their worshipping the cross. The divine person
of Christ, he says, is properly adored. True, but that divine person of Christ
is in heaven, and why are they not content to worship him properly where he is?
Why do they under a foolish pretense of a Kings robe, bring in an improper
worshipping of that, which being here upon the earth, is so far and so wholly
disioined from him? Will not M. Bishop think him either a fool or a mad man,
who finding the Popes robes in his Castle of S. Angelo, will kneel down to
the robes, and make his request to them when the Pope himself is in his
Lateran consistory? Surely even so must we think that they egregiously play
the fools who stand babbling to a cross here on earth, when their suite is to
Christ himself sitting above in heaven. Thus we have given him an ear to the
hearing of all this, but we have therein heard what he says out of
Bellarmine, not what Thomas Aquinas says, but by Thomas his own words we say
still that he ascribes the same worship to the cross, as he does to Christ
himself.

15. W. BISHOP.
Lastly, M. Perkins says, without quoting any place, that Augustine and
Gregory in plain terms deny images to be odored, and so do we too, taking
adoring as they do for the worship that is proper to God.

R. ABBOT.
Saint Austine says that by the commandment of God, August epist. 119. cap.
11. Prohibetur coli ali qui in fig^ne^tis hominum Dei similitudo.
We are forbidden to worship any similitude or image of God that is devised or
framed by man. He notes Idem de morib. eccles. Cathol cap. 34. Noui
midio^esse sepulchorum es pictura^u^ adoratores, etc. Quos and ipsa ^o demnat
ecclesia, etc.
worshippers of pictures and relics to have been then condemned by the
Church. He commends Varro the old Roman a heathen man, for Idem De ciu. Dei.
lib 4. cap 31. Castius existiniat sine simula^^ris obseruari religionem Quis
non videat quantum propinquauerit veritati?
thinking that religion is more purely observed without Images, and affirms
that therein he drew near to the knowledge of the truth. Having in another
place showed how a shadow of the wisdom of God appears in men, in making
the pourtraitures and images of the creatures which he has made, and namely of
men he adds; Idem in lib. 83 quaest. 78. Qui talia opera etiam coluerunt,
qu^ntum deuiauerint a veritate hinc intelligi potest, quiasi ipsa anim ^hum
corpora celerent quae mu^to excellentius faebricata sunt and quorum sunt illa
^^itamenta, quid eis infaelicius diceremus?
As for them who have worshipped such, how far they have gone away from the
truth, may hereby be understood, because if they should worship the very bodies
of those living creatures, which are much more excellently made, and whereof
those images are but imitations, we would pronounce them to be most unhappy. In
a word, those discourses which he uses to show Idem in Psalm. 113. Jlla causa
est maxima impietatis in sanae quod plus valet in affectibus miserorum similis
viuenti forma quae sibi efficit supplicari quam quod manifestu^ est eam non
esse viuentem vt debeat a viue^te co^temni. Vide ibid. plura, and epist. 49.
the certain danger of superstitious fancies, arising of the resemblances of
images to the forms and shapes of men, do fully and without exception
determine against all use of Popish images. As for Gregory, he had some
special cause given him, fully to signify his mind as touching this matter of
images, and albeit he approved the historical use of them in the Church, yet
he absolutely condemned the worshipping of them. Serenus the Bishop of
Massilia, seeing the people to worship images, brake them and defaced them.
Gregory hearing thereof, writes to him thus, Gregor. lib. 7. epist. 109. Dudu^
ad nos peruenit quod fraternitas vestra quosdam imaginum adoratores aspiciens,
easdem ecclesiae imagines confregit atque proiecit. Et quidem zelu^ vos
habuisse nequid manufactu^ adorari possit laudauimus, sed frangere easdem
imagines non debuisse iudicamus. Id irco enim pictura inecclesiijs adhibetur vt
qui literas nesciunt saltem in parietibus videndo legant quae legere in
codicibus non valent. Tua ergo fraternitas and illas seruare, and ab earum
adoratu populum prohibere debuit, quatenus and literarum nescij haberent vnde
scientiam historiae colligerent and populus in picturae adoratione minime
peccaret.
It is lately reported to us, that your brotherhood beholding some worshipping
images, did break the same images being belonging to the Church, and threw
them away. And indeed we commended you for having a zeal, that nothing made
with hands should be worshipped, but yet we judge that the images should not
have been broken. For therefore are pictures used in the Church, that they who
are unlearned may by sight read those things at least upon the walls which in
books they cannot read. Your brotherhood therefore should both have preserved
the images, and yet also have forbidden the people the worshipping of them,
that so the ignorant might have whence to gather the knowledge of the history,
and the people might not offend in worshipping the picture. Serenus it seems
made some scruple of that which Gregory wrote to him; whereupon the same
Gregory wrote to him again to like effect as before, that Jdem. lib. 9. epist:
9. Quia ca^ adorari vetuisses omnino laudauimus; fregisse vero reprehendimus.
etc. Aliud est enim picturam adorare, aliud per picturae historiam quid sit
adorandum addiscere etc. frangi non debuit quod non ad adorandum in ecclesijs
sed ad instruendas solummodo mentes fuit nescientium collocatum. etc scripturae
sacrae testimonijs ostendendum est eis quia ^mne manufactum adorare non liceat
quia scriptum est, Dominum Deum tuum adorabis, etc.
he approved his forbidding to have them worshipped, but did blame him for
breaking them. For it is one thing, says he, to worship a picture or image,
another thing by painted story to learn what is to be worshipped. It should
not be broken which was set up in the Churches to be worshipped, but only to
instruct the minds of ignorant men. You are to show them by testimonies of
holy Scripture, that it is not lawful to worship any thing that is made with
hands, because it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only thou shall serve. After other words to the same effect he concludes,
Ibid. Siquis imagines facere voluerit minime prohibe, adorare vero imagines
modis omnibus deuita.
If any man will make images, forbid them not, but by all means avoid to
worship images. Consider here, gentle Reader, whether thou can find M.
Bishops distinction in these words of Austine and Gregory; whether it be likely
that they meant, that with some kind of worship which is proper to God, Images
may not be worshipped, but yet that they have also their kind of worship
wherewith they are to be worshipped. Think with thy self whether any Papist
would speak as they speak, and if no man would so speak that means as
Papists do, then surely these Fathers were far enough from Popish meaning. Is
any man so void of understanding, that being to show that Princes are not to
be obeyed in so high degree as God, will absolutely determine that Princes are
not to be obeyed? This is the case here; they expressly and without exception,
define that images are not to be worshipped, and that the people are so to be
taught, that they must not worship images, and would they be so mad as thus to
speak if they meant as in Popery it is, that the people must be taught to
worship images? Gregory says as we see, that they are not set up to be
worshipped, but only for the instrusting of the ignorant, and must we
understand that they are not only for the instructing of the ignorant, but
also to be worshipped. These are impudent shifts, bewraying corrupt and evil
consciences of men Tit. 3.31.
condemned in themselves, and yet wrestling and fighting against themselves.
These Fathers knew no religious worship but what belongs to God, and
therefore resolve that to give worship to images, should be to dishonor God.
Concerning Gregory's mind of placing images in Churches, I say briefly, that
he might by that which then befell, have somewhat discerned the peril and
danger thereof, but if he had imagined the horrible filthiness and
abomination of idolatry afterward thereof ensuing, he would have changed his
mind, and have regarded the words of him that says, Leuit. 19.14.
Thou shall not put a stumbling block before the blind, and again, Deuteronomy.
27.18.
Cursed be he that makes the blind to go out of his way.

16. W. BISHOP.
Having now answered to all that M. Perkins obiecteth against the worshipping
of images: let us now examine the reasons, which he makes in defense of it.

The first by him proposed is this Psalm 98. Cast down your selves before his
footstool, which was the Arc: now if the Arc were to be worshipped, because
it represented Gods footestoole, much more may the image be worshipped. M.
Perkins answers, that the words must be englished thus, Bow at or before the
Arc, not to the arc, but to God before the Arc.

Reply. If it were so, yet must they admit that we must kneel, at or before
images, so we kneel to honor or pray to God: against which, some of their
Preachers do cry like madmen: but the Hebrew phrase carries, that we must
kneel to the arc, as they who be skillful in the language do know, and that
the arc was worshipped of the Israelites, is otherwise very evident: for
first none, but the high Priest might come into the place where it was: and it
was carried before the camp with great solemnity 1. Reg. 4.
to search out a resting place for the whole host. And when they were to fight
against the Philistines, Cap. 6.
they had great confidence in the presence of the arc: and cap. 6.50000. of
the Bethsamites were slain for seeing the arc; and 2. Reg. 2.
Oza was by God smitten to death for touching the arc. Does not all this
convince in what reverence the arc was had, even by Gods own testimony?

To this may be added the authority of S. Jerome, Ep. 17 cap. 3.
who does teach that it was the more worshipped for the Cherubins and pictures
of Angels, that were erected at the ends of it: whereby he declares that he
thought images worthy of religious worship.

To this we may join that of S. Paul, Heb. 11.
that Jacob by faith adored the top of his son Joseph's rod: so does the
Greek text of S. Paul say, as Erasmus also translateth it: The Protestants
mangle the text pitifully, to avoid the place: see the Annot. of Rhemes
Testament.

R. ABBOT.
This was one of the notable arguments which M. Bishops Nicene Council used
for the worshipping of Images, because David says, Psalm. 99.5.
Bow your selves to his footestoole. Though it be full simple and slender, yet
we see for want of better they are content to use it still. If M. Bishop could
show us that images are to us the Lords footestoole, as the Arc was to the
Jews, he would handle us somewhat shrewdly; but the spite is they want a text
for that, and S. Paul moreover tells us that 2. Cor. 6.16.
the temple of God (which was 1. Chron. 28.2.
the house of rest for the Arc of the covenant of the Lord, and for the
footestoole of our God) has no agreement with Idols. And therefore whereas upon
M. Perkins answer that they were willed to bow at or before the Arc, M. Bishop
infers it as to be admitted, that we must kneel at or before images to pray
to God, it is a very drowsy conclusion, and fitter to come from the head of an
Idol, then of an understanding man. The Arc was no image, and why then does
he argue thus from the Arc to images? He will say that the Cherubims stood
near the Arc, namely at each end one, which with their wings ouershadowed the
Arc. Be it so, but what is that to his purpose, seeing the Prophet here
speaks not of bowing before the Cherubims but before the Arc? Yea, but says
he, a man could not kneel before the Arc, but he must needs also kneel
before the Cherubims. Well and if M. Bishop be in place where he cannot kneel
to God, but he must needs have an image before him, we condemn him not. We
cannot kneel to God, but there are many things before us, our Churches, our
houses, the air, the heaven, the Sun, the Moon, the stars, but there is
great difference what stands before us by casual or necessary position of
place, and what we set before us by intendment of affection. A man cannot
kneel before the King, but they must needs be before him that are about the
King, as must also the seat or the horse whereon the King sits, and yet we
do not say that he kneeleth before them that are about the King, or before the
Kings seat or his horse, because he has no intention thereof or of them, but
only of the King. The Arc was the place, whereat God had promised to the Jews
his presence amongst them. They kneeled before the Arc to kneel to God there
present, and to pray to him. The Cherubims were placed by the Arc, but their
kneeling had no reference to the Cherubims, but to God only, Numb. 7.89. Psalm.
80.1.
sitting between or upon the Cherubims. Take away the Arc and there was no
kneeling before the Cherubims, but though the Cherubims were away (as it is
thought they were long time after the taking of the Ark, til by Solomon they
were renewed) yet there was still kneeling before the Arc. Now if M. Bishop
could prove that we have the like promise of gods special presence at their
images and idols as the Jews had thereof at the Arc, there were some reason
whereupon to argue, that we are to kneel at or before Images, as they were to
kneel at or before the Arc. But unless he do so, we must still think they
are not mad men, that cry out against such as pray at or before Images to pray
to God, but rather judge the^ men sober and well advised, in that they condemn
such mad fools, who Origin. contra Cells. lib. 6. Incrudiussimos dicimus quos
non pudet alloqui res inanimas.
talk to dead things, and Jbid. lib. 1. Qui Deos manimes accedu^t, perinde
faciunt ac si fabulentur cum parietibus.
babble to the walls, as Heraclitus the Philosopher said, when they take upon
them to pray to God. That there is no use of images for prayer to God, I refer
him to those speeches of Arnobius and Lactantius which I have before set down
in the fifth Section. But to put his argument yet somewhat further out of joint,
it is to be remembered which has been before noted, that the Arc or footstool
of God, whereto the Prophet wills them to bow, was a thing wholly removed out
of sight. It stood in the innermost part of the Temple which was Sancta
sanctorum, the holiest of all, whither the high Priest only went in, and that
once only in the year, and before which there was a veil or curtain drawn,
that the Priests themselves coming into the holy place had no sight of it.
Whereby it is manifest, that their bowing to the Arc was a far other matter
then M. Bishop would have to be done to their images. He would think hardly to
have this heavenly show (as before he has termed it) locked up and imprisoned
in the dark, so that men should have no sight of it, and so much the rather,
for that their Nicene Council full wisely and learnedly concluded the setting
up of images out of those words of Christ, Mat. 5.15.
No man lights a candle to put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick.
Very impertinently therefore does he bring those words of David to approve
their kneeling at or before images to pray to God Albeit he is not therewith
contented, but will further have it proved, that we must kneel to the images
themselves: for the Hebrew phrase, says he, carries, that we must kneel to
the Arc, as they who are skillful in the language do know. But the skillful in
the language do also know, that it is no otherwise said, Bow your selves to his
footstool, then it is said afterward in the same Psalm, Bow your selves to
his holy mountain. The phrase is one and the same, and if by the one he will
say, that they were to worship the Arc, then by the other also he must say,
that they were to worship the mountain. If the latter do not prove the
worshipping of the mountain, then the former does not prove the worshipping of
the Arc. And indeed the phrase imports no other, but as we are wont to say,
to kneel to the East, that is, toward the East: or to lift up his eyes to
heaven, that is, toward heaven: and they are thereby taught to bend and direct
themselves in their worship and devotion toward mount Sion, and the Arc and
Temple seated thereupon, as the place where the Lord had promised to dwell, and
from thence to hear their prayers when they should call upon him. Which they
were not only to do when they were present or near at hand, but also when
they were removed further off. Thus Solomon prays for them, 1. King. 8.44.
being gone out to battle against their enemies, when they shall pray toward
the city which thou have chosen, and toward the house which I have built for
thy name, then hear thou in heaven their prayer. So being Ver. 48.
captives in their enemies land, when they shall pray toward the Land which
thou gave unto their fathers, and toward the city which thou have chosen,
and the house which I have built for thy name, then hear thou their prayer and
supplication, etc. Thus Daniel in the captivity of Babylon, though both the
city and Temple were destroyed for the time, yet because of the promise of God:
Psalm. 132.14
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell for I have a delight therein,
therefore did Dan. 6.10.
set open his chamber window toward Jerusalem, and kneeling upon his knees
three times a day prayed and praised God. This was their kneeling to the Arc
and to mount Sio^, and M. Bishop in arguing hereupon, that they worshipped the
Arc, deals as absurdly as the Pagans did of old with the Christians, who
because the Christians Tertul. Apol. cap. 16. Solemn credunt Deum nostrum, etc.
Inde suspicio quod innotuerit nos ad Orientis regionem precari
prayed to or toward the East, thought they worshipped the Sun, and gave out
that they made the Sun their God. The Christians worshipped Christ only in
bending themselves toward the East, and so the faithful Jews in bending or
bowing toward the Arc, intended the worship of God only, and therefore a
senseless part it is to allege those words of the Prophet for the defense of
the worship of Popish idols. And if they would prove the worshipping of any
thing thereby, or the praying at or before any thing, it should be the
worshipping and praying before that that was prefigured by the Temple and the
Arc. The Temple one way was a figure of heaven, as before was showed, wherein
Gdd does dwell, and has Dan. 7.10.
thousand thousands of Angels standing before him, and ten thousand thousands
ministering unto him. M. Bishop then should by his course of interpretation
conclude from the Prophets words, that we should worship heaven. But he should
rather conceive, that as we worship and pray toward heaven, but yet do not
worship heaven or pray to heaven, so did they also worship and pray toward the
Temple and the Arc, but did not worship or pray to them. Another way the
Temple was a figure of the Church of Christ, and of every faithful man: 1.
Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not, says the Apostle, that ye are the Temple of God: and again, 2.
Cor. 6.16.
ye are the Temple of the living God. The Arc whereat and whereby he is
present with us, and dwells in us, is the faith of Jesus Christ our Romans
3.25. (...).
propitiatory and mercy-seate, and by his presence the Angels also attend upon
us, Heb. 1.14.
being ministering spirits sent forth for their sakes that shall be heirs of
salvation. Now therefore M. Bishop should rather prove by the Prophets words our
kneeling in our prayers before a faithful man, or worshipping a faithful man,
then our kneeling before an Image, or worshipping an Image, and if it be absurd
thereby to affirm the worshipping of a living man in whom God dwells, much
more the worshipping of a dead and senseless block, which has no fellowship
with God. Yea and if by those words it were warranted to set up the images of
dead men, and to worship them, what was the cause that the Jews conceived not
so much? Why were they without that heavenly show, as M. Bishop in the height
of his earthly wisdom calls it? If they never conceived it, never practiced
it, what shall we but take them for cousiners and deceivers, who offer this
violence to the Scriptures, and most impudently wrest the^ to the maintenance
of that filthiness and abomination which expressly they condemn? But yet
Master Bishop tells us, that it is otherwise very evident, that the
Israelites worshipped the Arc. And how I pray you? First, none but the high
Priest might come into the place where it was. Well, and what then? It was
carried before the camp with great solemnity to search out a resting place
for the whole host. True, and what more? When they were to fight against the
Philistines, they had great confidence in the presence of the Arc. There was
great cause why they should so, carrying themselves respectfully toward God,
because it was the token that God had given them of his presence amongst them:
let us hear the rest. Fifty thousand of the Bethsamites were slain for
seeing the Arc. It is true indeed that for looking into the Arc so many of
the^ were slain: is there any thing yet behind? Oza was by God smitten to
death for touching the Arc. Well and what of all this? Does not all this
convince in what reverence the Arc was had even by Gods own testimony? As if
to prove M. Bishop to be a profound Clearke, a man should say: He has learned
a little Rhetoric, and less Logic, and is per saltum a Doctor of Divinity,
and per inopiam a Priest, and does not all this convince that he has some
learning? Witless cauiller, is there any thing in all those allegations that
imports the worshipping of the Arc? Nay mark (gentle Reader) that whereas
he propounds to prove, that the Arc was worshipped, he makes his
conclusion, that the Arc was had in great reverence. But they had the temple
also in great reverence, and the altars, and the offerings, and al things that
by the law were commanded to be holy, and will he thereof infer, that all
these were to be worshipped? They were to have the Priests in great reverence,
and specially the high Priest, and shall we therefore say that they worshipped
the Priests? What is this reverence but a religious respect and care of the
sacred and due usage of holy things according to their kind? Thus are we to
have our Churches in reverence with those vtensils and implements that belong
to them, that they be had and used with that decency and seemelinesse as
fitteth to things that serve for holy ministrations. As for Hierome M. Bishop
wholly abuses and falsifieth his words: for he says nothing at all of
worshipping the Arc for the Cherubims and pictures of Angels that were erected
at the ends of it (this is a very wilful and impudent forgerie) but he says,
that Hieron. ad Marcel. vt cont n^gret Bethleem Venerabantur quondam Iudaei
Sancta sanctoru^ quia ibi erant Cherubim, and propitiatorium and arca
testame^ti, Manna, virga Aaron, and altar aureum.
the Jews of old reverenced the Sancta sanctorum, because there were the
Cherubims and the mercy-seate, and the Arc of the Testament, and Manna and
Aarons rod, and the golden altar. He knew well that if he had reported Hieroms
words aright they would not sound for his purpose, but to frame them to his
turn, he changes the reuerencing of the holy place, because of the Cherubims
and the Arc, into worshipping the Arc because of the Cherubims, as if worship
were performed properly to the Cherubims, whereas Origin. contra Cells. lib. 5.
Coelestes Angelos nemo adorat qui se legi Mosis subdedit.
by the law of Moses, as Origin says, no worship was done to the Angels
themselves, and much less to the Cherubims which represented the Angels. The
word venerari which Hierome uses, albeit it be often used for worship and
service done to God, yet is of so large signification, as that it is yielded to
all those things to which we yield any reverend and dutiful respect. So does
August. de doctr. Christ. li. 3. cap. 9. Sicuti est baptismi Sacramentum and
celebratio corporis and sanguinis Domini Quae vnusquisque imbutus agnoscit vt
ea no^ carnali seruitute sed spirituali potius liberate veneretur.
Saint Austine use the word of the reverence that we use to the Sacraments, not
only the Lords Supper, but also the Sacrament of Baptism. So does Ambrose
say, that Ambros de ijs qui imitantur mysterijs cap. 8. Melchisedec protulit ea
quae Abraham veneratus accepit.
Abraham gave veneration to the bread and wine which Melchisedec brought
forth, and we suppose Master Bishop is not so far gone as to say that we
worship the Sacrament of Baptism, or that Abraham worshipped the bread and
wine. Thus therefore Hierome says, that the Jews had a reverend regard of the
Sancta sanctorum, but of religious worship as done to it, he says nothing, and
much less dreamed of any religious worship to be done to idols and images,
which have no institution from God as the Sancta sanctorum had. But to help
this argument Master Bishop further alleges, that Saint Paul says, that
Jacob by faith adored the top of his son Joseph's rod. So does the Greek
text of Saint Paul say, says he, as Erasmus also translateth it. And further
he adds, The Protestants pitifully mangle the text to avoid the place. But I
answer him, that the Protestants do see them to be in a pitiful case, who
hazard their souls upon a religion that is feign to use such pitiful
arguments for the defense of it. For howsoever it were granted, that Jacob
foreseeing by faith the kingdom that should befall to Joseph in his son
Ephraim, did in token thereof make an obeisance to the rod or scepter that was
in Joseph's hand, or that he yielded that obeisance or adoration in respect of
Joseph's present authority under Pharao, yet what should this be to the
worshipping of images? We know that adoration or worship ciuilly understood is
given to Princes. Abraham Genesis 23.7.
adored the Princes of the Hittites. The Israelites are said 1. Chr. 29.10.
to have adored or worshipped the Lord, and then the king, namely, king David.
If Jacob yielded the like adoration as to the kingdom and power of his son
Joseph, either present or to come, as some Greek Writers expound it, what is
this, I say, to the worshipping of images? But as touching this matter Hierome
says upon the place in Genesis whence those words seem to be taken, Hieron.
quaest. ^i^^r in Genes. Jn hoc loco quida^ frustra si ^^^am ado^asse Jacob
summitate^ sceptri Joseph quod videlicet honorans filium, potestatem eius
adorauerit, cum in Hebraeo multo aliter legatur. Et adorauit, inquit, Israel ad
caput lectuli, quod scilicet post quam et iurauerat filius securus de petitione
qua^ rogauerat, adorauerit Deum contra caput lectuli sui. Sanctus quippe and
Deo deditus vir oppressus senectute sic habebat lectulum positum vt ipse
tacentis habitus, absque difficultate vlla ad crationem esset paratus.
In this place some vainly imagine, that Jacob adored or worshipped the top of
Joseph's scepter, to wit, that honoring his son he adored or worshipped his
power or authority, whereas in the Hebrew it is read far otherwise, And
Israel worshipped toward the beds head, meaning, that after his son had
sworn unto him, being now secure as touching the request that he had made unto
him, he worshipped God toward the beds head. For the holy devout man being now
oppressed with old age, had his bed so set as that the fashion of his lying
might without difficulty yield him readiness to pray. Thus howsoever M.
Bishop cavil and wrangle, yet Hierome plainly resolves, that it was God
only and nothing else that Jacob worshipped, and therefore reads in his
translation thus, that when Joseph Genesis 47.31. Vulgat. Quo iurante adorauit
Israel Dominu^ conuersus ad lectuli caput.
had sworn, Israel worshipped the Lord, turning himself to the beds head. Now
the Hebrew text being manifestly against him, he takes upon him to urge the
Greek text of S. Paul, affirming it to be said there, that Jacob worshipped
the top of Joseph's rod, not caring for his own advantage to set the holy
Ghost at variance with himself, and to make him destroy in one place what he
affirms in another. But that which he affirms is untrue and false: S. Paul
does not say, that Jacob worshipped the top of Joseph's rod: neither do the
Protestants pitifully mangle the text to avoid the place, but the Papists
pitifully follow a translation apparently false, that the text may seem to
make for the^. The words are (...), he worshipped upon the top of his staff,
or as we more plainly express it, leaning upon his staff. By which words the
Septuagint translated the words of Moses before mentioned: Israel worshipped
upon or toward the beds head, their translation in Grammar construction fully
answering the words of the Hebrew, but that for mittah, a bed or couch, they
seem to have translated matteh, which signifies a staff or a rod, making it
by addition of a Pronoune, his staff or his rod, or for some special reason
thereto moving them, thought good in stead of the one, to take the
signification of the other, being of the same deriuation, and no difference
betwixt them in writing, but only by the vowels, thereby to express that
Jacob being very aged and weak, and keeping his bed, used the help of a
staff to stay himself as he worshipped upon his bed, or toward his beds
head. Thus they translated, upon what consideration we know not, but so as that
they nothing prejudice that which Moses says, because both may well stand
together, that he used a staff to rest upon, and that so doing he worshipped
toward the beds head. And that they therein expressed a truth, though not set
down in Moses words, yet otherwise received or coniectured, we fully and
certainly believe, because the holy Ghost has thus cited the words according
to their translation, observing the same course as commonly we see the Apostles
and Evangelists do in their citations from the old Testament, who so long as
the place retains from the original that for which they cite it, and
contains no untruth, forbear not to use the translation which was commonly
received and used, though happily otherwise it do not exactly accord with the
same original Hebrew text. Now the matter for which the Apostle cites those
words, stands in that that it is said, that Jacob worshipped, he giving
thereby to understand, that Jacob by faith so fully rested assured of that
which upon the promise of God he had believed, as that he worshipped and
praised God, as if he had then seen and enjoyed the performance and
accomplishment thereof. This therefore being expressly delivered in the text, as
the Septuagint have translated it, he makes no question of the other words,
though they be not exactly sorting with that which Moses has set down. But
here the matter of question is concerning the translating of that translation.
M. Bishop tells us, that we should translate thus, And he (Jacob) worshipped
the top of his (that is, of Joseph's) rod, and affirms that so it is in the
Greek text. We deny it, and say that that translation is false, because it
wholly leaves out the Preposition (...) in the Greek, answerable to the
Preposition (...) which is used in the Hebrew, there being no probability or
likelihood of reason, why they should so do. The Hebrew Preposition (...)
amongst other significations imports at, upon, near to, toward, over
against. The word rosch signifies the head, the top, the highest or uppermost
part of a thing. Symmachus therefore translateth the Hebrew words, (...), upon
the beds head. Aquila thus, (...), upon or at the top or uppermost part of the
bed, as if a man would say, upon his pillow at the beds head. Hierome in
Latin, as we see before, translateth one where contra caput lectuli, over
against his beds head: another where, conuersus ad caput lectuli, turning
toward the beds head. Accordingly the Septuagint though differing in the
signification of the last word, yet translate the former, (...), at or upon the
top. And of their Translation S. Austine mentions diverse translations into
Latin, all expressing the Preposition, Aug. in Genesis quaest. 162.
Super caput virgae vel in capite, sieve in cacumine vel super cacumen, at or
upon the top. Seeing therefore they will make use of the Preposition in
translating from Hebrew into Greek and Latin, and from Greek into Latin,
what reason should we have in translating from Greek into English to neglect the
same Preposition as if it were not there at all? They all agree thus far; He
worshipped at, upon, toward the head or the top, and therefore teach us to
disclaim them that say, he worshipped the top. Now then because the Greek
word (...) signifies a staff, and better fitteth to the former words, then to
translate it a rod, therefore we translate the words, He worshipped, namely,
God, upon the top of his staff, that is, as we say to express the meaning
more plainly, leaning upon his staff. He worshipped God inclining or bowing
toward the staff which he had in his hand, resting himself upon it, and
staying himself thereby. And that M. Bishop may know that we are not the
deuisers of this translation, let him understand that the old Syriacke
Interpreter, as appears by Tremellius, translated in the same sort: Tremel.
verse. ex Syriaca translatione Heb. 11.21.
Adorauit super summitate baculi sui: he worshipped upon the top of his
staff. So Theodoret expounding Genesis according to the Septuagint, albeit he
refer the adoration to Joseph in both respects before mentioned, which we
have seen before that Hierome wholly condemns, yet as touching the meaning of
the latter words says, that Theodoret. in Genesis quaest. 108. Sedit and baculo
innitebatur dextra apprehe^dens summitate^ eius.
Jacob sat up and leaned upon his staff, taking hold of the top thereof with
his right hand. S. Austin yet further justifies us in this behalf, saying,
that whereas Aug. in Genesis quaest. 162. Quod habent Latini codices, Et adorauit
super caput virgae eius, nonnulli codices emendatius habent, Et adorauit super
caput virgae suae.
in the Latin books it was read, Et adorauit super caput virgae eius, he
worshipped upon the top of his rod, (that is, of Joseph's rod:) many had it more
truly: Et adorauit super caput virgae suae: he worshipped upon the top of his
own rod. Which observation of his is of great moment for the discerning of the
truth as touching this point. If that which is here said be understood of
Jacobs rod, then Master Bishop knows well, that that which he fancieth has
no ground at all. But that S. Austine says is the true reading, not of Joseph's
rod, but of his own rod, not Ibid. Fallit eos Graecum verbum quod eisdem
literis scribitur, sieve eius, sieve suae sed accentas dispares sunt.
(...), but (...), as the common Greek text reads at this day, and by the
great Linguist Ar. Montan. text Graec interlinearis.
Arias Montanus is written in that sort. Now according to this reading Saint
Austine says, that Aug. ibid. Facile intelligeretur senem qui v^rgam ferebat
eo more, quo illa aetas baculum solet, vt se inclinauit ad Deum adorandum, id
vtique fecisse super cacumen virgae suae, quam sic ferebat vt super eam caput
inclinando ad^raret Deum.
the meaning is very plain, that the old man Jacob carrying or holding a rod
in such sort as old age is wont to do a staff, as he bowed himself to worship
God, did it upon the top of his rod which he so carried, as that bowing
himself upon it, or over it, he might or did worship God. Here is therefore
nothing but the carrying or holding of a rod or a staff to lean or to rest
upon, in such sort as old age is wont to do, thereby to stay himself as he
inclined or bowed himself to worship God. And this construction is no whit
empaired by the other reading, because by infinite examples it is manifest,
that the Pronoune (...) is used also in the reciprocal signification as (...)
is, and serves to return that whereto it is added, as belonging to the
subject whereof the matter present is affirmed. But if notwithstanding they
will refuse that reading, and say that they will not take it to be meant but of
Joseph's rod, yet Saint Austine there also excludes them from their purpose,
not reading as they do, He worshipped the top of Joseph's rod, but He
worshipped upon the top of Joseph's rod, and adding, to show what might then
be the meaning of it: Ibid. Quid est ergo, Adorauit super cacumen virga eius,
id est, filij sui Joseph? An forte tulerat ab eo virgam quando ei iurabat, idem
filius and dum eam tenet post verba iurantis nondum illa reddita mox adorauit
Deum? Non enim pudebat eum far tantisper insignae potestatis filij sui vbi
figura magne rei futurae praesignabatur.
Whether happily had he taken the rod of Joseph, when the same Joseph swear to
him, and whilst he yet held it after he had taken his oath, and not yet
delivered it, forthwith worshipped God. For he was not abashed so long to
bear or hold the ensign of his sons power, where the figure of a great
matter to come was foreshewed. Thus every way Saint Austin challenges the
adoration and worship to God, and teaches us, that if it be spoken of Joseph's
rod, yet it shall import that Jacob having in his hand the rod or scepter, or
mace, which was the ensign of Joseph's authority in Egypt under Pharao, did
lean or bow himself thereupon to worship God. In a word therefore here is
nothing any way to prove the religious adoration and worship of any creature,
but most fantastically of all other is it alleged for the worshipping of
Images. He further refers us to the Rhemish Testament, but he should withal
have confuted Doctor Fulkes answer to it, if he would have had any thing there
to be believed. There is nothing there said of this matter, but what is here
already answered.

17. W. BISHOP.
The second reason is taken out of Exodus 3. where God said to Moses, Put off
thy shoes, for the place where thou stand is holy. Now if places be holy and
to be reverenced by reason of the presence of Angels, why not, as well the Image
that represents an Angel or some Saint, which is equal to Angels. M. P. his
answer rather confirms than solueth this argument: for he says, that the
ceremony of putting off his shoes, was commanded to strike Moses with a
religious reverence; not of the place, but of the person there present, which
was not God, but an Angel, as the text there expresses. Exodus 3.
The place then being holy, required the reverend respect of putting off his
shoes, and the reverence done to the place, struck Moses with a religious
reverence of the Angel speaking in the person of God: even so holy pictures
being first duly reverenced, do strike men with a religions regard of the Saint
represented. To this, let us annexe that days be truly called holy and
worshipped, as the first and last days of the feast of Easter be: Exodus 12.16.
and the vestments of Priests Exodus 28.5.2.
, because they are dedicated and employed to holy uses: even so Images which
are made in honor of God and his Saints, and erected to move and teach us to
embrace heavenly courses.

R. ABBOT.
The place where Moses stood was holy, days were called holy, the Priests
vestments were holy, therefore Images are holy and must be worshipped. The
Sun shines in the colehouse, and the Moon in the Mustard pot, therefore all
M. Bishops wit lies in his left elbow. Do these men deserve any other but
scorn and contempt, who bring us reasons in no other sort, then as if they
were outright either mad or drunk? What is the medius terminus (I marvel)
that should co^uey holiness to Images from those things which he mentions?
The place where Moses stood was holy, as Origin rightly says: Origin. in Ios.
hom. 6. Per seipsum non erat locus sanctus, sed quia Dominus stabat cu^ Moyse
praesentia Domini sanctificauerat locum.
not of it self, but because the presence of God had sanctified the place. M.
Bishop says, it was not God but an Angel, but he speaks therein falsely and
ignorantly. It was an Angel indeed, but it was Mal. 3.1.
the Angel or messenger of the Lords covenant, Ios. 5.14.
the Captain of the Lords host, the second Person in Trinity, the Son of
God, usually termed an Angel in those apparitions, because he took upon him
the office of an Angel, to do the messages of the Godhead unto men. Eusebius.
hist. lib. 1. cap 2. Sa^e fas non est visiones Dei in Scripturis traditas
Angelis illis inferioribus ac ministris Dei tribuendas esse suspicari.
Surely (says Eusebius) it is not lawful to think, that the apparitions of
God delivered in holy Scriptures, are to be attributed to the inferior Angels
which minister unto God. Therefore he expounds them, and namely, this to
Moses as Ambr. in Psa. 43. Quis est in rubo visus Moysi nisi rimogenitus Dei
filius. Sic in Epist. ad Col. c. 1.
Ambrose also does of Christ the Son of God, and proves by the very plain
text, that the Angel there mentioned was God: Exodus 3.4.
When the Lord saw that Moses turned aside to sce, God called unto him out of
the midst of the bush, saying, Moses, Moses: And he answered, I am here. Then
he said, Come not hither, put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place
where thou stand is holy ground. Moreover he said, I am the God of thy
Fathers, the God of Abraham, etc. Then Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to
look upon God. Thus Act. 7.30.
the Angel speaking to Moses in the bush, as S. Steven terms him, is called
by our Savior Christ, Mar. 12.26.
God speaking to Moses in the bush. I did amiss therefore to term Master
Bishop ignorant in this behalf, for he could not but know the matter: I should
rather have termed him impudent, that to make an advantage and yet nothing
worth, would contradict that which the Scripture so expressly says. As for
days they were appointed by God to be holy in respect of being applied to holy
use, but that those days were called worshipful, it is but M. Bishops device,
because he would have us to take him for a worshipful wise man. So the
vestiments of the Priests were holy, because, as he says, they were dedicated
and employed to holy uses. Let all these things be taken for granted, as they
are: but what of all this to the holiness of Images? Surely we do not know, but
they may as well conclude that the Popes excrements are holy, the parings of
his nails, and the pollings of his head, or whatsoever other filth or foolerie
they will commend to us. No marvel if there were that holiness in the Vide
Hospinian. de orig Monachat. lib. 3. ca: 12.
Franciscan Friars weed, as that men desired as a matter of great safeguard to
be buried therein: or that the Franciscans breeches should be of great virtue
to yield women speedy travel, for days and vestiments of old were holy, and
the place where Moses stood was holy ground. But it is further to be observed,
that though all those things which Master Bishop names were holy, yet none of
them is found to have been worshipped. Moses did not worship the holy ground.
The Israelites did not worship the holy days, nor the Priests garments. The
Temple was holy, the altar was holy, the offerings were holy, the Priests were
holy, and many other things, and yet they worshipped none of them: how then
come we here to the worshipping of Images? Well, we must learn it our selves
if we can, Master Bishop can say no more then he has done. But it should be
very strange, that we should see more therein then the Church of the Jews
could ever see: they read and knew all those things to be holy which Master
Bishop names, and yet they could never find the worshipping of Images. He
tells us of the Cherubims which God commanded to be set wholly out of sight,
or were used as the pictures of Lions, and Bulls, and Flowers, and Trees for
the garnishing of the works of the Temple, and the fashion whereof no man does
know, as before was said, but what was the reason that knowing those Scriptures
whereof we speak, they could never light upon Master Bishops heavenly show of
the Images of dead men? Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 4. ca. 31. Sine simulachris
castius dij obseruarentur. Cuius sententiae suae testem adhibet inter caetera
gentem Iu^eam.
Varro the heathen Roman alleges them for example, that religion is more
purely and holily observed without Images. Tertullian mentions out of
Cornelius Tacitus, that when Pompey overcame the Jews, and Tertul. Apolo. cap:
16. Tacitus refert C^. Pompo^um cum Jerusalem cepisset, praetereaque templum
adisset speculandis Judaicae religionis arcanis, nullum illic simulachru^
reperisse.
entered into the Temple to view the secrets of their religion he found no Image
therein. King Agrippa tells Caligula, that in it Philo de legate. ad Cai^^n.
Nullu^ ibi simulachrum vel in occulto vel in propatulo.
there was no Image, neither secretly nor openly, in respect whereof being
strictly holden as a point of their religion, he disswadeth the same Caligula
from attempting to set up his Image therein as he went about to do. Clemens
Alexandrinus says, that Elem. Alex. in Protrept. Qui no^ opera hominum aurea,
aenea, and argentea, and eburnea, lignea, and lapidea hominum qui mortui sunt
adorant simulachra, quae inan^ consilio adorantur ab hominibus, sed fanctas
vlnes tollunt ad coelu^. etc.
the Jews worshipped not men's works of gold, of brass, of silver, of Iuorie,
of wood and stone, namely, the Images of dead men, which men upon vain
persuasion worshipped, but did holily lift up their hands to heaven. This the
Jews practiced, this they most religiously observed, and what should be the
reason hereof, if the Scriptures which Master Bishop alleges, do make for the
defense of the worshipping of Images? Surely, because they did thus for the
keeping of the commandment of God, we must necessarily take Master Bishops
worshipping of Images to be the invention of the Devil.

18. W. BISHOP.
The third reason proposed by M. Perkins in favor of the Catholics is: It is
lawful to kneel down to a chair of estate, in the absence of the King:
Therefore much more to the Images of God and his Saints in heaven glorified,
being absent from us.

To this he answers, that it is but a civil worship to kneel to the chair
of estate, and that very commendable, to show our loyalty unto our Prince: but
kneeling unto the Images of Saints is religious, and therefore not alike.

Reply. He proposes our argument to the halfes, or else this answer had been
prevented. For thus runs our reason: As the chair of estate is to be
worshipped with civil reverence, in respect of the te^porall Prince whom it
represents: even so the Images of holy personages that reign now in heaven,
are to be worshipped with a holy and religious kind of courtesy: for as
Temporal honor is due unto a Temporal Prince, so religious and spiritual
honor, is due unto spiritual and most holy personages. And as a good subject
testifies his loyalty and good affection toward his Prince, by honoring his
regal throne: So does a good Christian give testimony of his dutiful, both
estimation and devotion toward those heavenly creatures, by giving honor unto
their Images. At leastwise, why do not the Protestants exhibit civil
reverence as well unto the representations of Gods Saints, as to the shadows of
the secular Majesty? unless it be because they are fallen out with the Saints
of God, and are become adorers of sinful men.

R. ABBOT.
We may here conceive that images are brought to great distress, in that from
arguments in the schools they are feign to fly to the ceremonies of the
Court. It should seem strange that formalities observed to Princes in their
Courts for majesty and royal state, should be made patterns of religious
devotions to be practiced in the Church. But a man in danger of drowning is
glad to catch at every twigge, and this desperate cause of Images having no
manner probability of any approved reason or example for the justifying of it,
is glad to shift any way, and sets forth shadows and ghostes to make show
of armed and fighting men. M. Bishop says that M. Perkins answer had been
prevented, if the argument had been well proposed, but now that he has
proposed it, what does it contain but only a begging of that to be granted
him which is denied in M. Perkins answer? The thing that he should have proved
is, that there is a like respect of religious worship to Saints, as of civil
reverence to Princes, and he only affirms it, but reason he has none. But
to take such stuff as he brings us, first, we tell him that the chair of
estate is not bowed unto for that it represents the Prince, as he very idly
and fondly dreameth, but for that it is the Princes seat, it being holde^ for
a matter of princely majesty, that there be a reverence performed to those
things which serve in special manner for the Princes use. In which sort at the
Princes table, though the Prince not yet come unto it, yet the service is done
upon the knee, as with bowing and obeisance also at the tables of inferior
States, where we suppose M. Bishop is not so mad as to think that either the
meat* or the table, or any thing else does represent them in respect of whom
this duty is performed. On the other side, no such duty is done to the Princes
image, because it is not a matter of the Princes use, and if we should see M.
Bishop kneeling to it, we should either think him drunk, or take him for a
fool. No argument therefore can be drawn from the honor done to Princes, to
approve the honor that is done to Saints, because in that kind wherein it is
required to be done to Saints, it is absurd and ridiculous to be done to
Princes. Yea M. Bishop may as well conclude, that the Saints should have their
cloth of state, and carry scepters in their hands, and that our Lady the Queen
of heaven, as they call her, should have Ladies to bear up her train, because
Kings and Queens have so, as that we are therefore to kneel to Saints images,
because we kneel to the cloth of state. Well, yet Master Bishop tells us,
that as temporal honor is due to a temporal Prince, so religious and
spiritual honor is due unto spiritual and most holy personages. But vainly
and absurdly: for how should his proportion stand, when he puts Princes on
the one side, and subjects on the other? Let him say as he should say, As
temporal honor is due to a temporal Prince, so and much more religious and
spiritual honor is due to him, who spiritually, and in way of religion is our
Sovereign and Prince. If he can prove, that the Saints are appointed to be
spiritually our Kings and Sovereign Lords, he says somewhat; otherwise his
proportion halteth, and goes so lame, as that it cannot carry him whither he
would feign go. He tells us, that they now reign in heaven: but we answer
him, that they reign, and are Kings spiritually in heaven, by having a
victory and triumph over their spiritual enemies, not by having a dominion
and sovereignty over us. We are taught to acknowledge the Saints and Angels
for our Reu. 6.11. and 9.10.
brethren and fellow-seruants, who because they are no other, therefore will
not take upon them to be our Lords, neither can we without offense ^ender our
service and devotion to them. Therefore S. Austine says, as we have seen
before, Aug. de vera relig. cap. 55. sup.
We honor them not by service, but by love: they are to be honored by
imitation, not to be worshipped by religion. And of the Angels Origin says,
that Origin. contra Cells. lib. 5. Hoc nobis Angelos Dei reddit satis propitios
vt libenter pro nobis faciant omnia quod been affecti sumus erga Deu^, and quod
Filium eius verbum co^plectimur, etc. contendentes indies ad clariore^ eius
notitia^, etc. Et paulo ante: Ne quis audeat preces offerre nisi soli Domino
Deo qui vnus omnibus abunde sufficiat, per Seruatorem nostrum Dei Filium, etc.
this is it that gains their favor to us, and makes them willingly to do
all things for us, when they see us well affected toward God, and that we
embrace his Son Jesus Christ, striving daily to grow more and more to the
knowledge of him, but no man may dare to offer his prayers but only to the
Lord God, who is abundantly sufficient for all, by our Savior the Son of
God. Now therefore as servants and subjects to their fellow-seruants and
subjects yield affection and love, but none sets up to other a royal throne
to honor them as Princes, so we give our love and affection to the Saints, we
testify and commend their virtues, we lay before us their good example, we
acknowledge their bliss, we desire and long for the fruition of their
company: but we make them not our spiritual Princes and Sovereigns: and
therefore we give them no duty or service of religion, which is the royalty
of God, knowing that they would hide their faces, and exceedingly abhor to
have the same offered unto them. And hereby we see how idly M. B. goes on in
his tale, that as good subjects testify their loyalty and affection toward
the Prince, by honoring the regal throne, so good Christians give testimony
of their dutiful estimation and devotion toward those heavenly creatures by
giving honor unto their Images. For neither have we the condition of subjects
in respect of the Saints, neither do we owe any such devotion or duty to them,
neither have the images that are set up in their names that reference to them,
as the royal throne has to the Prince. We honor the chair of estate, because
of the Princes use thereof for majesty and state: but seeing the Saints are in
heaven, what have they to do with blockish idols here on earth, or if they were
upon the earth? what use should they have of them? And therefore it is an idle
and fond question which he asks, why we yield not civil reverence to the
representations of Gods Saints, as well as to the shadows of secular majesty,
because we have no civil conversation with the Saints, as we have with
Princes, neither is there any civil use of those counterfeit idols, as there
is of the Princes chair of state. Neither are we therefore fallen out with the
Saints, as he vainly cauilleth, but rather we labor to be, and hope to be the
same that they are. And because we hope so to be, and are neither so impious
nor so foolish, as to think that men hereafter should set up idols to us to
worship us thereby, therefore we hold it for impiety and folly to use any such
superstition to the images of the Saints. As for Princes though they be sinful
men, yet we have learned of Christ concerning them, Mat. 22.21:
to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and as they are unto us the
shadows of the majesty of God, so to give unto them ciuiliy some shadows of
the honor that belongs unto God.

19. W. BISHOP.
M.P. makes a third point of difference, that we may not worship God in any
such image in which he has apeared unto men. In this we do not differ, unless
he takes it otherwise the^ he delivers it. Those images we hold more reverend
then any others, as representations nearer approaching unto the Divinity, yet
because they do not express the Deity, God is not directly apprehended nor
worshipped in them, but only by collection, as for example: The form of a
grave old man in Daniel, does not represent Gods person, but we gather by that
ancient form Gods eternity, whereby we arise to a more perfect conceit of God,
who^ we adore: now other images of Christ and his Saints, do carry our minds
directly upon their proper persons, whom in their images we adore and worship
after their degrees. But we worship images with far meaner reverence than any
of the Saints, in regard only, that they do represent such personages, and do
induce us more to love and honor them, and do stir up our dullness more
often and ardently to honor God in the Saints, and the Saints in their
degrees: as also to imitate their holy example as has been said more then
once, that all may understand how far off we are from giving Gods honor unto
either Saint or Image. But this point of difference is made to bring in a
common argument of theirs, to wit, that the worshipping of the golden Calfe is
condemned as flat idolatry: Exodus 32.
and yet the Israelites worshipped not the Calfe but God in the Calfe. To which
we say, they did not worship the true God in the Calfe, but the God of the
Egyptians, which was taken by them to have the shape of a black Calfe with
white spots. See S. August. Lib 18. De ciuit. cap. 5.
And therefore making the golden Calfe to represent this false God, and
attributing their deliverance unto that supposed God, 1. De not. Deor. Verse. 4:
and not unto the God of Israel, committed idolatry, which the text proves
most manifest, these be thy Gods that brought thee out of Egypt. M. Perkins
answers, that the meaning is nothing else, but that the golden Calfe was a
sign of the presence of the true God: such glosses without any authority of
the ancient Fathers is ridiculous, being against the plain text: but says
he, we must not think the^ so mad, as to take a Calfe made with their
eare-rings to be their God, no: but we may well think them so ungrateful unto
the true God their deliverer, that they did ascribe their deliverance not to
him, but unto that God which the Egyptians served, whose pourtraiture was that
Calfe.

R. ABBOT.
It is one special faculty that men attain unto by Romish learning, that they
are able at any time by a distinction to mock God. Let God say what he will,
they will say the contrary, and yet by a distinction they will make it good.
God commanded his people that they should make no manner Deuteronomy. 4.16.
figure, or form, or image, whereby to represent or worship him. Accordingly
the faithful observed, and did throughout all their generations; they abhorred
always in any meaning to set up an image unto God. They dedicated Philo de
legate. ad Caium. Vt eximium fanum dicaretur inuisibili Deo sine vlla effigy.
their temple unto God without any image, says Philo. Thomas Aquinas says of
that time of the old testament, that Thom. Aquin. sum. part. 3. quaest. 25.
art. 3. Jpsi vero Deo cum sit incorporeus nulla corporalis imago poterat poni;
quia vt dicit Damasc. insipientiae summae est and impietatis figurare quod est
diuinum. Sed quia in nouo testamento Deus factus est homo, potest in sui
imagine c^rporali adorari.
to the true God being incorporall or without body, no corporal or bodily
image might be set up, and to that purpose cites out of Damascen, that it is a
point of extreme folly and impiety to figure that that is divine, and therefore
in the new testament approves no images of God, but as God was made man, that
is, the images of Christ. So M. Bishops Nicene fathers, albeit they were
idolaters as well as Aquinas and Damascen, yet they condemned the making of
images to the godhead, as before has been showed, and approved only the
images of Christ, and of the Saints. M. Bishop now tells us that they were
all fools, and made a needless scruple for want of the knowledge of his
distinction; for though God be not directly to be apprehended or worshipped in
an image, yet by collection he may, as by the form of a grave old man we
gather Gods eternity, says he, and thereby arise to a more perfect conceit of
God, whom we adore. Thus for want of his learning they wanted the means to
arise to the more perfect conceit of God, because they feared to picture God
in the form of a grave old man. But I have Sect 4. and 7.
before showed that this impious dream of his accords with the conceits of
profane Philosophers, who did not think that their images did or could
express the deity, but they used them only as steps, whence by collection
they might ascend to the contemplation of the divine power. It has been there
also declared, that it is wholly wicked and unlawful in any signification or
meaning to take upon us by an image to represent God. Whereas he seeks out of
Daniel to approve this form of a grave old man, he deals lewdly therein,
Daniel there says of Dan. 7.9.
the Ancient of days, his garment was white as snow, and the hair of his
head like the pure wool, but of a grave old man he says nothing. Of our
Savior Christ appearing to S. John it is also said, Revel. 1.14.
His head and his hairs were white as white wool and as snow; and will M.
Bishop be so fond hereupon, as to picture our Savior Christ like a grave old
man? Old age also imports not eternity, as he fancieth, but rather decaying
and declining; and therefore is very unfit to signify the infinite being of
the everliving God. But leaving that to the wisdom of God, why he has
thought good thus or thus to appear to men, we hearken to his commandment,
who says that in the giving of the law he appears in no likeness, because
he would have no image or likeness set up unto him. We follow also the example
and practice of the faithful people of God, who albeit they did read of these
apparitions of God, yet never durst presume thereupon to make any Image, whence
they might by collection arise to the more perfect conceit of him. As touching
their worshipping of the Images of Christ and his Saints, and that by vain
pretenses they bestow upon Saints and their Images the worship due to God
only, enough has been already said. So has it been also plainly declared
already, that Supra. Sect. 5.
the Israelites in worshipping their golden Calves, intended to worship the
true God, and Master Bishops assertion that they meant thereby to worship the
God of the Egyptians, is but upon his own word, and therefore we reject it as
a dream. Bellarmine in this matter waueth too and fro, he saw the truth
plainly enough, and therefore is forced to confess, that Bellarmin. de Imag.
sanct. cap: 13. Dicunt nec improbabiliter admitti posse quod Iudaei in idolo
putauerint se colere Deum verum.
it is not unlikely which Abulensis and Caietan, and other of their writers
say, that it may be admitted that the Jews in the idol did think to worship
the true God; but yet loath to stand to this, as being too directly against his
purpose, he comes in with perhaps this and perhaps that, and shows that
indeed he knew not what to say. But what sense is there in that Master Bishop
says, that the Israelites should imagine that the God of the Egyptians
delivered them out of the land of Egypt? If they had carried the opinion of many
Gods, it was more probable and likely for them to think, that the God of the
Egyptians would rather have done a favor to the Egyptians then to them, and
therefore would rather have kept them in Egypt, then have delivered them from
thence. They afterward went a whoring after other Gods, the Gods of the
Sidonians, the Ammonites, the Moabites, and others, and yet to none of them did
they ever ascribe the deliverance out of the land of Egypt, and how then is it
likely that they should ascribe it to the Egyptians God? And if they had meant
to worship the Egyptians God, there is no question but they would have
worshipped him in the same manner as the Egyptians did. But the Egyptians
worshipped their God not by a golden Calfe, but by a living Calfe, which was to
be of a certain color and certain marks, which Ludou. Vin. Annot. in Aug.
de ciu. Dei. li. 18. cap. 5.
they so much regarded, as that when that Calfe or Bullock was dead, they went
up and down with great mourning and lamentation till they had found another
colored and spotted in the same sort. Seeing therefore this was a matter of so
great moment, they would by no means have neglected it if they had meant to
worship the Egyptians God. How much rather should we think that they
intended by their golden Calfe to worship their own God for receiving of him
the like benefit, as for which the Egyptians worshipped their imagined God by a
living calfe? Ruffin. hist. lib. 2. cap. 23. Apin feru^t cu^ famis te^pore fru
nenta apud Alexandria^ defecissent, ex proprio affaetim ciuibus ali menta
praebuisse. Quo defuncto in honorem eius instituerunt Me^p^^s templum, in quo
bos quaesi indicium optimi agricolae nutritur, etc.
King Apis in a time of great dearth and famine, greatly relieved the
Egyptians, and specially the city of Alexandria; whom being dead they for that
cause honored as a God for reasons diversely coniectured, naming him Serapis.
For the worshipping of him, they made special choice of a calfe or bullock, as
fittest for memorial of the benefit for which they honored him, because men
are specially sustained and fed by the labor of the Ox. The Israelites at
that time in more miraculous manner, received the like benefit at the hands of
their God. He fed them with Manna from heaven when they had no means at all to
provide themselves bread. Aaron therefore being required to make them Gods,
being undoubtedly more intelligent, then either to impute their deliverance to
the God of the Egyptians, or to think God to be like a calfe, yea and not
being ignorant of the construction which the Egyptians made of their Calfe,
made a golden calfe, only as a sign and memorial of the God by whom they
were nourished and fed, whence according to M. Bishops rule they might by
interpretation and collection, arise to the remembrance and conceit of God.
Having then made the Calfe, he says, These are thy Gods, O Israel, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, in no sort referring them to the God of
the Egyptians, but remembering them thereby of their own God, who by Moses
brought them out of the land of Egypt. Which he does by that rule which M.
Perkins mentioned out of S. Austine, that Aug. ad Simplic. lib. 2. q 3. Solent
imagines earum reru^ nominibus appella^i quarum imagines sunt.
Images are wont to be called by the names of those things, whereof they are
images. For the rest I refer thee, gentle Reader, to that that is said
before. As for that which he says, that the Egyptians took their God to have
the shape of a black Calfe with white spots, if some other man had said it, I
should have said that he had spoken like a Calfe. He quoteth S. Austine for
witness of it, but S. Austine says no such thing. He says that Aug. de
ciuit. Dei. li. 18. ca. 5.
Apis being king of the Argiues, came into Egypt, and dying there became
Serapis the greatest of all the Gods of the Egyptians. He notes out of Varro,
that he was called Serapis of the coffin wherein he was buried, being
worshipped in his coffin before any temple was built for him; the coffin being
in Greek (...), which being added by way of composition to Apis, made Serapis,
and by change of a letter was turned to Serapis. He says that it was decreed,
that no man upon pain of death should say that he was a man, and that in all
temples where Isis and he were worshipped, there stood an image at the door
which had the finger laid to the mouth, as requiring silence, that no man
should say that they were men who were there worshipped. He adds, that Ille
bos quem mirabili vanitate decepta Aegyptus in honore^ eius delicijs
affluentibus alebat, etc. Apu^ vocabatur.
the Egyptians daintily kept and fed the bullock in the honor of Apis or
Serapis, but that they took Serapis their God to be like a black calfe with
white spots, neither he, nor Tully, nor any other ever imagined, till Master
Bishop by a mischance lighted upon it in a dream.

20. W. BISHOP.
But now before we end this question, I must let you understand what worthy men
they were that first began to wage battle against images: they were the Jews
in their Talmud. Ord. 2. tract. 1. did. 2. See Synod. 7. act. 5. A barbarous
Persian Xenias, as witnesses Nicephorus Lib. 16. cap. 27. Then Mahomet the
great God of the Turks. Alcoran. ca. 15. and 17. with such like infidelds,
sorcerers, and the scum of the earth.

See Card. Bellarmine de Imag. lib. 2. cap. 6.

I will with one or two testimonies of the auncientest Fathers finish this
controversy. Lactant. In car. de pass. Christ. Kneel down and adore the
venerable wood of the Cross.

Hierom, in vita Paulae: She adored prostrate before the Cross, as if she had
seen Christ hanging on it.

Basil against Julian cited, act. 2. Synod. 7. I honor the history of the
Images, and do properly worship them.

Finally, in the 7. general Council holden 900. years past, they are
condemned of heresy, that deny the use and worshipping of holy Images.

R. ABBOT.
Master Bishop in this worthy conclusion will tell us what worthy men they
were that first began to wage battle against Images, and first names unto us
the Jews in their Talmud. But he shows himself a very simple man to go
about to persuade us, that the Jews in their Talmud were the first oppugners
of the worshipping of Images, unless he had showed us withal, that their
forefathers before the Talmud had entertained and practiced the same. It was
but a thing mistaken by him; they were the Jews indeed that were the ancient
oppugners of Images, but those Jews were Moses and the godly Kings of Judah,
Asa, Hezechias, Josias, and such other, together with the Prophets of God, who
denounce the wrathful vengeance of God against this filthy and abominable
pollution of the true worship of God. If those faithful people of God had
worshipped Images, M. Bishop had had somewhat to say of the Jews later
detesting and abandoning of them; but because there is no example found of any
godly man that ever did so or so taught, we thereby understand, that what the
Jews do or have done in that behalf, they have done it by observing
constantly so far forth the doctrine and practice of their godly fathers. The
Turks also do that which they do in respect of Gods commandment. They
acknowledge the law of the ten commandments to be of God, and finding the
worshipping of Images to be therein condemned, they accordingly detest it. And
in this respect Popery has lien as a stumbling block in the way both of
Turks and Jews, and has caused them to fall into the greater hatred and
despite of the name and faith of Christ, and set a bar against them to keep
them from entering into the Church of Christ. They know that the worshipping of
Images is condemned of God, and therefore seeing the profession of the name of
Christ to be joined to worshipping of Images, they have wholly deemed the same
to be sacrilege and enmity against God, and have shunned it accordingly. This
scandal God has in part revenged already, by delivering those Eastern
Churches where this idolatry was first established, by cruel destruction into
the Turks hands. The Church of Rome has seen it, and it is verified in her
which Saint John prophesied, Revel. 9.20.
The remnant of the men which were not killed with these plagues, repented not
of the works of their hands, that they might not worship devils and idols of
gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of wood, and of stone, which neither
can see, nor hear, nor go. Therefore God has given over that filthy whore to
all abomination and uncleanness both spiritual and corporal, and will in
due time perform that which he has foretold, concerning a perpetual
desolation to befall unto her. As for Xenaias or Xenias the Persian, if he were
otherwise faulty, he was justly for that to bear his judgment; but in
oppugning the worshipping of Images, if he did so, he did the part of a just
and faithful man. I refer the Reader to that before has been said,
concerning him in Sect. 12.
answer of the Epistle to the King. But now that Master Bishop has thus
brought in by way of contempt, Turks, and Jews, and a barbarous Persian,
waging war against Images, we would look that he should bring us glorious
troops of the ancient Fathers, speaking in favor of them. Behold, gentle
Reader, the wretchedness of a damnable and wicked defense. He has here
offered us the verse of a Poet, the fact of a woman, and a counterfeit sentence
not found in Basils works, but fathered upon him most impudently four hundred
years after his decease. Surely if Popery had been the religion that was
professed of old, there could not have wanted many and most pregnant
testimonies for that which they now practice. But there are none; they are put
to a miserable shift to get any thing that may give but some show of grace to
that which they defend. But such as they are let us examine what they say.
First Lactantius by a Poetical fiction brings in our Savior Christ hanging
in ruefull plight upon the cross, and there calling to man to behold and
consider him in that state, Lactan. carm. de pass. Christi. En aspice crines
sanguine cocretos and sanguinolenta sub i^sis Colla comis spinisque caput
crudelibus haustum Vndique diua pluens vinum super ora cruorem, Co^pressos
speculare oculos et luce care^tes Afflictasque genas, arentem suspice linguam
Fell venenatam and pallentes funere vultus, Cerne manus clauis sixas
tractosque lacertos Atque ingens lateri vulnus, cerne inde fluorem Sanguineum
f^ssosque pedes artusque cruentos: Flecte genu lignumque crucis venerabile
adora Flebilis, innocuo terramque cruore madente^ Ore petens humili lachrymis
s^ffunde subortis, etc.
To behold his hair and his neck all imbrued with blood; his head all rent
with thorns, and shedding or distilling the warm blood upon his sacred face,
his eyes closed together and warning light, his cheeks buffeted, his tongue
dry and poisoned with gall, his countenance pale like death; Behold, says he,
my hands pierced with nails, my ioints racked and drawn forth, a great wound
in my side, and a stream of blood issuing from thence, my feet bored through,
my members all bloody. Hereupon follow the words which Master Bishop cites,
Kneel down and with weeping adore the worthy wood or tree of the cross, and
humbly kissing the ground bedewed with innocent blould, wash it with thy
tears. Where we see all framed to Poetical manner of speaking, and may easily
perceive that the Author intends no more, but that beholding by the
spiritual contemplation and meditation of faith, the bitterness of the
passion of Christ for our sakes, we should in heart and affection even fall
prostrate before him, as hanging upon the Cross, and kiss the ground bedewed
with his most sacred and innocent blood. We can no more suppose now the real
adoring of the Cross, whereof he speaks* then we can suppose the ground
now really moisted with the blood of Christ, and therefore can no otherwise
take it, but that he refers our meditation to the Gospel, where Gal, 3 1.
having Christ described before our eyes as crucified amongst us, we should in
mind and devotion as it were kneeling before his cross, humble our selves to
him. But that Lactantius was very far from worshipping spiritually the very
wood of the cross, he plainly enough shows when he resolves it Lactano
institut. lib. 5. cap. 9. Nesciunt quae^tu^ sit nefas adorare aliud praeterqua^
D^um.
to be a thing unlawful to worship any thing beside God. Yea, and we have
heard before out of Ambrose concerning the cross of Christ, even the very
cross whereon he was crucified, that to worship it were Supra Sect. 1. Ex
Ambros.
heathenish error and the vanity of wicked men. Whereby we learn to esteem
of that which Master Bishop further cites of Paula a noble gentlewoman of
Rome, of whom Hierome reports, that travailing to Jerusalem, and coming to
the place where Christ was crucified, Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae. Prostrata
ante crucem quasi pe^dentem hominu^ cerneret adorabat.
falling prostrate before the cross, she worshipped as if she had seen the
Lord there hanging before her. He tells us that she worshipped, but he does
not tell us that she worshipped the cross. The present conceit of the place
was a motive unto her there to fall down to worship Christ in heaven, but of
worshipping the cross there is nothing said there, much less of any thing
that should induce us to the worshipping of Master Bishops Images. Nay Hierome
says, Hieron. ad Ripar. ^du Vigilant. Ne sole^ quidem and lunam, non Angelos,
no^ Archangelos, no^ Cherubim, omne nomen quod nominatur in praesenti seculo
and in futuro colimus et adoramus.
We worship neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Angels, nor Archangels, nor Cherubim,
nor Seraphim, nor any name that is named in this world, or in the world to
come. The words cited under the name of Basil, can have no more credit then
they have who are the reporters of them, which is none at all. They are
alleged out of the second Nicene Council, and the Council it self is
brought as a witness of the worshipping of Images, but how base account is to
be made of that Council I have before given to understand in answer of the
Epistle. Albeit that thou may, gentle Reader, more particularly understand
the truth of that censure, it shall not be amiss somewhat further to note the
original and process of the said Council. It has been before showed, that
in the time of Gregory Magnus Bishop of Rome, which was about six hundred
years after Christ, Serenus the Bishop of Massilia seeing the people to
worship the Images in the Church, in great zeal brake the Images in pieces,
and threw them out of the Church, that there might be no occasion there left of
any such abomination. Gregory hereupon wrote to Serenus, and though he
disliked his breaking of them, yet commended him in that he could not endure
the worshipping of them. This was then the doctrine of the Church of Rome, that
howsoever Images might be used historically for remembrance, yet by no means
might men perform devotion or worship to them. But whilst under pretense of
that historical use they attained to high and honorable place in the Church,
and were gloriously set forth as great ornaments thereof, Satan hereby tickled
the fancy of the people, and bred in them an itching humor of damnable
superstition, which grew more and more, till Idolatry was openly practiced by
the worship of them, and the Bishop of Rome, who before had given sentence to
the contrary, became the maine champion to fight for the maintenance of this
abuse. This we find to have come to pass about an hundred years or very
little more after the time of Gregory, at which time the Emperors of
Constantinople with the most of their Bishop^, mightily opposed themselves
against this new devotion, and by their edicts caused Images wholly to be
defaced and abandoned out of the Churches. The pursuit of which cause when
Sigebert. Chro^. anno. 725. Paulus Diacon. de gest Longo. li. 6 cap. 49.
Leo Isaurus very earnestly followed, Gregory the second swaruing from the
steps of the former Gregory, took upon him Zonar Anna. tom. 3. Synodico
anathemate obstrinxit. etc.
to excommunicate the Emperor and all that took part with him in destroying of
Images. Gregory the third his successor went further, and assembled a Council
at Rome, and there decreed the worshipping of Images, and having so done,
renewed the former excommunication, and added thereto a sentence of
deprivation, and by rebellion and treason found the means to alienate from the
Emperor whatsoever* there was then in Italy remaining to him. Against that
Roman council Zonar. ibid. et Sigebert. an. 755,
Constantinus Copronymus the son of Leo about the year of our Lord 755.
assembled at Constantinople a Council of the Eastern Bishops, to the number
of three hundred and thirty, which wholly determined against the worshipping
of Images, thinking also the use of them in any sort to be not only
unnecessary, but altogether unlawful and contrary to the word of God. The
detestation that they had conceived of the impious and wicked abuse, made them
for the avoiding thereof to prohibit that use which was lawful, as a man
desirous to make a crooked rod straight, bends it too far the other way.
But this determination of that Council appeased not that contention, the
humor of superstition being restless and endless, never ceasing if it be
able to stir, till it gain strength for the upholding of it self. So it
was, that to Leo the son of Constantinus Copronymus was married Irene a proud
and wicked woman, who upon the death of her husband, abusing the minority of
her son, took upon her self the government of the Empire, and being of a
womanish affection delighted with babies, about four and thirty years after
that Council of Constantinople that generation of Bishops being in a manner
quite worn out, Func. comme^. in Chronel. anno 787. 788.
she commands another Council in the same place, the Bishops by that time
being well fitted for the doing of that which she desired to have effected. The
cause of their assembly being publicly known, namely that it was for the
bringing in again of the worshipping of Images, the people of Constantinople
gathered themselves together, and threatened to do some violence to them it they
should conclude any such matter. This fear hindered them from proceeding
according to that they had purposed, and hereupon Irene dissolved that meeting
for that time, and the next year after caused the same to be renewed at Nice
in Bithynia, where the first great and famous Council was holden against Arius
the heretic under Constantine the great. But we may here easily conceive a
great difference in course of proceeding betwixt that former and this latter
Council. The former Council continued for the space of three years and more,
long time and deliberation being taken for debating and discussing to the full
the points of question that should be decided in it. This latter continued but
only twenty days, being begun 8. kalend. October. and being ended 3. Id.
October. so that they seem to have before determined what to conclude, and for
no other cause met together but only to say what they had determined. The
President of this Council who managed the whole business thereof was one
Tharasius, who of a courtier and a soldier, contrary to the canons of the
Church, was made Bishop and Patriarch of Constantinople, a man very unfit and
unworthy for such a place. According to the weakness of the head was the
proceeding and behavior of the whole body, wickedly abusing the Scriptures,
wresting and perverting the sentences of the fathers; no reason so foolish but
they admire it, no lie so gross but they applaude it, nothing there read under
the name of any famous author, but it is certainly true; no man may speak
against it. The first action being spent in receiving of penitents, who were a
remainder of the former Council, and now for keeping of their places recanted
what they had there said, they come in the second to the reading of the letters
of Adrian Bishop of Rome, which being done, they all profess their consent to
that which he wrote, and so an end. In those letters he singularly abuses
Constantine the great, fathering upon him a tale of a leprosy, and that when
he had appointed the murdering of infants, that he might have their blood to
bathe himself in for the curing of it, Peter and Paul appeared to him in his
sleep, and recommended unto him the baptism and faith of Christ, and that by
means thereof he should obtain his health; that to this end they willed him
to send for Siluester the Bishop of Rome, who lurked in secret for fear of
falling into the persecutors hands, to whom when he was come, he declared this
whole matter, and asked him (if we will believe this notable cosiner) what kind
of gods he thought those two to be, namely Peter and Paul, that had appeared
to him? that Syluester telling him they were^ no gods, but servants and
Disciples of Christ, caused their Images to be brought forth, which when he
saw, he said, these are they whom I saw in that vision; (an excellent skill in
the Image-maker, that he could light so just upon the visages of them that were
dead almost three hundred years before:) that hereupon Constantine was
baptized at Rome, and restored to his health, and did set up many goodly Images
of Christ and his Saints in the Churches there. With this most impudent and
shameless forgerie, so plainly contradicted by Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib.
4. cap. 62.
Eusebius his story of the life of Constantine, by Ambros. d^. obit. Theodos.
Ambrose, by Hieronym. in chronico.
Hierome, by Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 26.
Socrates, by Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 32.
Theodoret, by Sozomen. lib. 2. cap. 32.
Sozomen, who all declare that Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia amidst
many Bishops there, and that newly before his death, which was So it is by the
computation of Funccius; but Sozomen. hist. lib. 1. cap. 16. says that Julius
the second after Syluester was Bishop of Rome at the time of the Nicene
Council; which being so, Syluester must be dead at least thirtteene years
before Constantine was baptized.
seven years at least after the death of Syluester; with this lewd tale, I
say, Adrian makes his onset for Images, and then proceeds to the
contaminating and profaning of the Scriptures, alleging that God made man
according to his Image, as if thereupon it should concern us to make images
and worship them; that Noe and Abraham set up altars unto God; that Jacob
erected a stone, and powered oil upon it, and called it Gods house; that the
same Jacob worshipped upon the top of his rod, as if worshipping of Images were
to be proved by examples of having no Images to worship; that Moses made the
brazen serpent and the Cherubims, and Si Israeliticu^ populum per inspectionem
oenei serpentis seruatu^ a sua peste credimus, Christi vero Dei et seruatoris
nostri omniumque sanctorum figuras contemplantes et venerantes dubitamus nos
seruari?
if, says he, the people of Israel were saved from their plague by looking
upon the brazen serpent, do we doubt but that we are saved beholding and
worshipping the Images of Christ and of all the Saints? as if there were the
like reason of that which God in one kind for special cause commands, and
that which in another kind man of his own head fondly presumes without God.
For further proofs he cites out of the Psalms, Psalm. 95. vulga.
Confession and beauty are before him; Psalm. 25.8.
Lord I have loved the beauty of thy house, and the place of the tabernacle of
thy glory: Psalm. 26.13.
My face has sought after thee, thy face Lord will I seek: Psalm. 44.14.
The rich of the people shall make their supplication before thy face; Psalm.
4.7.
O Lord, the light of thy countenance is sealed upon us. Can we hold him for
other then a grave and reverend Prelate, that could dispute so substantially,
so wisely, so learnedly for the worshipping of Images? May not we be taken for
blind buzzards, that cannot see the same sufficiently proved and warranted by
these texts? or rather are we not to take him for a lewd cosiner and peruerter
of Gods word, who would thus detort and wrest the Scriptures to that whereto
they give no semblance of approbation or liking? As he deals with the
Scriptures, so does he with the Fathers. He alleges amongst others one place
under the name of Basil, in which the words are which M. Bishop here cites,
which yet is certain to have been written by another a long time after the
death of Basil. Amongst other words there are these: Confite^r deinde sanctam
Mariam quae secundum carnem illum peperit hanc Deipara vocans.
I confess holy Mary, who brought forth Christ according to the flesh, calling
her (Deiparam) the mother of God; which there is no man so blind but sees that
they are purposely set down against the Nestoria^ heresy, and that without
doubt after the time of the Ephesine counsel when that name of Deipara was
first publicly avouched to the churches use, which was holden about 50. years
after Basils time. Yea and it was yet long after that also before these words
were written, inasmuch as there is affirmed the worshipping of images, whereas
there is no example of the worshipping of images then to be found in any Church
throughout the whole world. Some other of the Fathers he handles in the same
sort, citing them all either falsely or impertinently, whilst either he
impureth to them that which they never wrote, or impudently forces to the
gracing of the worshipping of images, that which they spoke only of the
historical and civil use. Yet upon these silly grounds the Council
proceeds, and they profess their belief to be Constant. iuxta teuorem
literaru^ quae ab Adrian^ etc. missae sunt hominibus consentio, etc. and c^
hac. fide ad tribunal Christi proficiscar, etc. Elias: perfecto eas adorans;
qui vero secus consitentur eos anathematiz^.
according to the tenor of Adrians letters, perfectly worshipping images,
says Elias Cretensis, and I pronounce anathema to them that profess
otherwise: yea Staurat. Imagines recipio, amplector and honor velut arrbabone^
existentes mea salutis; secus autem sentientes anathematize.
I receive, embrace and honor them, says Stauratius the Bishop of Chalcedon,
as being the earnest of my salvation, and I accurse them that think otherwise.
See here the worthy company of M. Bishops learned men, much respecting what
the grounds and proofs were that they would conclude upon. In the third action
after the receiving of some other penitents, they read the communicatorie
letters of Tharasius, lately before chosen Patriarch of Constantinople, to the
Patriarchs and Bishops of Antioch and Jerusalem, and their answers to him,
wherein they signify their consent to the worshipping of images. For proof
they care not; it is enough to say they profess it, and the rest of that act
is nothing but voices of approbation of that which they say. In the fourth
action they fall roundly to their business, and bring forth their proofs,
such as they have, and happy is he that can bring forth a place that but
speaks of an image; that is argument good enough for the worshipping of them.
First because they would have it known that they had a Bible amongst them,
they bring it forth, and there they read some few places out of Exodus,
Numbers and Ezechiel concerning the making of Cherubims, to which they add the
place to the Hebrews mentioning Heb. 9.5.
the Cherubims of glory ouershadowing the mercie-seate. Hereupon Tharasius
gives this worthy observation, Animaduertamus viri sacerdotes quia vetus
Scriptura diuina habuit Symbola, and ex haec assumpsit noua Cherubim gloriae
obumbrantia propitiatorium. Sancta Synodus dixit, Recte domine, itae est
veritas.
Let us mark, that because the old Testament had divine signs, the new has
from thence taken the Cherubims of glory covering the mercie-seate: the whole
Synod answering, Very right, so the truth is indeed. A company of very wise
men, that could not see that the new Testament no otherwise speaks of the
Cherubins then as of a matter pertaining to the old, and therefore what should
hence be gathered for auouching images in the new? Tharasius goes yet further,
Si vetus Scriptura habuit Cherubim obu^bra^tia propitiatorium, and nos quoque
imagines Jesus Christi et sanctae Deiparae, sanct^rumque habebimus ^bumbrantes
altariae,
If the old Testament had Cherubins covering the mercie-seate, we also will
have the images of Christ and his holy mother, and the Saints to ouershadow our
altars. What is a gentleman but his pleasure? We will have: and is it not a
stout reason that because Moses set up two Cherubims in the tabernacle out of
all men's sight save the high Priests once a year, and which we do not find
that ever any man did worship, therefore we should set up the images of Christ
and of dead men for all men to look upon, and that they may fall down before
them and worship them? They are soon weary of Scriptures, and to the Fathers
they go; they bring out of Chrysostom, that the people much delighted and
affected to have the picture of Meletius; and that he himself was greatly in
love with a picture describing an Angel destroying an army of barbarous
people: they allege that Gregory Nyssene and Cyrill say, that they had seen
exquisite pictures of Abraham offering up his son Isaac; that Gregory
Nazianzone in certain verses sets forth, that a harlot being by a young man
won to come unto him for practice of filthy lust, coming to the door and
seeing the picture of Polemon the Philosopher, went back as it were ashamed,
and left that filthiness undone; that Antipater the Bishop of Bostria makes
mention that the woman cured of the issue of blood set up an image of Christ;
that Asterius mentions an image describing the suffering of Euphemia the
martyr; all which being admitted for true, yet what is there herein for the
worshipping of images? I may not here omit the collection of Theodosius the
Bishop of Amorium, which he offers to the Council after the allegation of
all these things: D^ui^^ Apostolus sic docet, Quaecunque praescripta sunt, etc.
Ipsae igitur sacrae imagines and picturae tum mus^cis operibus, tum colorum
materia deliniatae in nostra^ doctrina^, zelum and typum criguntur and pictae
sunt, vt et nos illis conformes, idem certamen apud Deum exhibeamus, etc.
The holy Apostle thus teaches us, says he, Whatsoever things were written
before, were written for our learning: therefore sacred images and pictures
both of solid work and drawn in colors, are set up for our learning, zeal,
and figure, that we being like unto them may yield the like fight with God,
that he may place us in the same state and portion wherein they have been, and
make us fellow-heires of his heavenly kingdom. Was not here a man of a quick
nose and a very sharp sent, that could smell Images in those words of the
Apostle? Yea he would have us also like to the Images (for so his words sound)
that so it may be verified of us which the Prophet says, Psalm. 115.8.
They that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that put their
trust in them. Well, from hence they go to miracles, that in Caesarea Palestina
the relics of Anastasius being to be brought thither, a certain woman denied
beforehand to worship them. She is thereupon stricken in her loins with
intolerable torture and pain, so continuing for the space of four days.
Which being ended, in the evening Anastasius stands by her, wills her to go
to the Church, and there to beg of him to make intercession for her that she
might be made whole. As she came near to the church, beholding the image of
Anastasius, she cast her self down before it, and with great lamentation and
tears pacified the martyr, and straightwayes rose up whole and sound. If this
be not true, the devil is a very knave, and as little to be trusted now as
ever he was. The next is reported under the name of Athanasius, albeit it is
storied by Sigebert, as before I have noted, as a thing done four hundred
years after the death of Athanasius. But these men were their craftsmasters,
they knew well that great lies are not easily believed but upon the credit of
great names. A Jew forsooth in Beryth hired a house where a Christian had
dwelt, who after he had been there abiding, upon a time invited certain other
Jews his countrymen to dinner: as they sat at table, one of them lifting up
his eyes spied there an image of Christ; a wonderful matter, that the good man
of the house all this while could never see it. Well, they rail at him for
having such an image, they complain of him to their Elders and chief Priests,
they excommunicate him, they take the image from thence; they remember what
villainy and despite their fathers had done to Christ, and the like they do to
the image; at length they cause one to thrust it in the side with a spear, and
forthwith streams of blood and water issued out, insomuch that a whole paile
or waterpot was filled with it, and therewith all manner sick persons that
came thither were cured, so as that the Jews hereat were greatly amazed, and
hereby converted. Afterward the Bishop of the place being greatly in doubt
what to do with all this blood and water, at length took diverse glass bottels
and sent portions thereof about the world into Asia, Europe and Africa; only
it seems there was some default in the messengers, of whom there has been no
news until this day, by reason whereof we read not of any processions or
solemnities used abroad for the receiving and entertaining of this wooden
blood, nor any miracles done by it in any of those places to which it was sent,
otherwise we should wonder that it should be dried up and no news now to be
heard of it. May we not say of them that received these monstrous fables, that
2 Thessalonians. 2.
God had sent them strong delusion that they should believe lies? But here
Tharasius very unwarily took a course to mar the miracle-market, and did
enough to put his fellows from the telling of many wonders of their images,
but that they had good stomachs, and not easily overcome with any quaume. Sed
quispiam dixerit, Quam. obremmiracula a nostris imaginibus non eduntur? Cui
sane ita sit cum Apostolo responsum, Miracul^ non credentibus data sunt, sed
illis qui in incredulitate versantur H^ autem qui imaginem ita iractabant erant
infideles; qua de causa signum illis datum est a Deo per imaginem.
Some man will say, says he, why are no miracles done by our Images? To whom
let us answer with the Apostle, Miracles are not for them that believe, but for
them that are in unbelief. They who thus handled that image were infidels, and
therefore a sign was given them of God by the image. Tharasius knew well
enough that there were no miracles done by their images, but yet this could not
stop the mouths of them that came thither prepared to tell lies. Therefore
anon out they come with such other like tales of blood issuing out of the
images and relics of Martyrs, of a man molested and vexed by the devil, with
whom the devil conditioned to trouble him no more, so that he would give over
worshipping the image of our Lady; of a man cured of a fistula in his thigh by
praying to the images of Cosmas and Damianus, the same Saints coming to him
that night and our Lady in the midst, saying to them, See, here is the man,
help him forthwith: of another who having the pictures of Cosmas and Damianus
in wax, could therewith cure the toothache or any other pains; of another who
being suddenly taken with an extreme sickness and pain, applied to the place
where he was pained the image of Christ, and was by and by restored; of a
Goldsmith, who at the request of Neanias made a cross, upon which when it was
set up, there became miraculously wrought three pictures, and over them three
names written in Hebrew, Emmanuel in the midst, and on the two sides Michael
and Gabriel; of a man troubled with a cruel sore, who being brought into the
Church and set under the image of Christ, there dropped thence a deaw into his
sore, wherewith he was healed forthwith; of an image of our Lady in Zozopolis,
from the hand whereof dropped ointments for the curing of diseases. Thus there
were present there that knew more then Tharasius did; he knew no miracles done
by Images but only to Infidels, but they knew them very common to Christians
also. Amidst these and many other such gross fooleries, they allege some
names of the ancient Fathers, either counterfetly, as that of Basil mentioned
before by Adrian, or impertinently, as of Athanasius and Basil speaking of
Images ciuilly and historically used, but not saying a word for their
worshipping of images. Of a latter generation they bring first Leontius a
Bishop of Naples, who they say was about the time of Mauricius the Emperor,
but they say it untruly, as appears for that he is so pregnant for
Image Worship, which by Gregory Magnus was in the time of Mauricius so
expressly contradicted. This Leontius to serve his turn, openly falsifieth and
belyeth the Scriptures, affirming that Solomon in the building of the Temple
set up in it the images of men, and that Ezechiel in the pattern that was
given him for reedifying the same, was likewise willed so to do, which
appears by the text it self to be altogether untrue. There were pictures of
Cherubims, and Palme-trees, and Lions, and Bulls, and flowers for ornament of
the works, as before was said, but never was there in the Temple seen the
image of a man, save what by idolaters was brought in. The rest of his
discourse serves to show the Jew, in what manner and meaning they worshipped
images, before he has showed him that it is lawful to worship them at all.
They bring further the words of one Anastasius, putting a difference betwixt
adoration and latria, making the former common to men and Angels, the other
peculiar to God only; but yet not affirming any thing of either of them to
belong to Images. To supply that, they bring an Epistle of Gregory the third
to Germanus, who some threescore years before had been Patriarch of
Constantinople, and was condemned in the former Council there holden, and
three Epistles of the same Germanus himself, all by the like arguments and
with the same Sophistry handling this cause of Images, and under pretense of
using them for admonition and remembrance, inferring the worship of them. Which
done, upon these goodly grounds they come for conclusion of that session to
pronounce their anathematismes against all them that deny Images to be
worshipped.

In the fifth session they follow the same course. First they bring in
authorities nothing to the purpose, as of Cyril, noting it as an impiety in
Nabuchodonosor that he took away the Cherubims out of the temple of Jerusalem;
and of Simeon the Eremit, complaining to the Emperor Justinius the younger
concerning the Samaritans spoiling a church, and with indignity defacing the
images that were found in it, which, what do they appertain to the worshipping
of Images? Then they bring in testimonies of no authority, the parties being
of latter time and interested in this quarrel, as of one John Bishop of
Thessalonica, taking upon him to satisfy a Pagan, and of Leontius before
spoken of answering the Jew concerning the meaning of their worshipping of
Images, without any proof that it is lawful so to do. Indeed plain it is
that the worshipping of Images was a scandal and bar both to Pagans and
Jews to hinder them from admitting the Christian faith. They could not
dissuade the idolatry of the Pagans, because they themselves changing the
persons did the like. They could not persuade the Jews of the truth of
Christian religion, because they knew well that to worship an image is a thing
condemned by Gods commandment. But from thence they proceed to calumniate
them that impugned images, first for citing Apocryphal writings, as the
Iournals of the Apostles, and of men unsound in the faith, as Eusebius; and
secondly for taking part with evil disposed men, as Xenaias and Seuerus, as if
it should be any hinderance to the truth that sometimes upon occasion evil men
become defenders thereof: and thirdly for defacing such books as had been not
long before written for defense of such idolatry, wherein whatsoever they did,
they did it by just grieuance and caution against the increase and growth of
this abomination. Now this being but a sinister and indirect course, back
they go again to their trumpe, that is, to miracles, and as if it had been
some perfume to sweeten the room, they tell again the tale of the devil
promising not to trouble a man if he would forbear to worship the image of our
Lady; another of a woman who being greatly grieved at the charges that she had
bin at in the digging of a well and could get no water, saw one come to her in
her sleep, who willed her to get the image of one Theodosius an Abbot, which
being let down into the well, the water flowed abundantly: another of an
Eremite, who being sometimes to go from his cave, would pray to the image of
our Lady that his candle might continue burning till his coming again, and
that going sometimes for two or three months, sometimes for five or six
months, he found it burning in the same sort as he left it. No marvel if they
could sca^t hold at the hearing of these stories, and therefore they hereupon
fall to cursing them that condemned the worshipping of images, and so an end
for that time. The sixth action was the reading of an answer formally penned
against the acts of the former Council of Constantinople against images, the
examination whereof, because it would be too long, I leave to the Read, though
what it is may well be esteemed by their proceedings hitherto. The seventh
session which is the last, contains the Synodicall definition of the Council
for images to be worshipped, and their subscriptions thereto, with their
certificate thereof to the Emperor Constantine and his mother Irene the
Emperesse, as also to the Bishops of all Churches. Thus thou have (gentle
Reader) a brief of the comedy of M. Bishops learned Council, though I
confess I am far from acting it, to cause thee that mirth that the reading
of the Council it self would do. Their speeches are so ridiculous, so
unsavory, so void of all Christian gravity and understanding, as that thou
would think they al spoke but in a dream, or as being scant sober to advise
of that they say. Albeit there are two things which I wish thee therein to
observe: first that they approve no other images but only of Christ incarnate
and of the Saints, and do wholly condemn the making of any images of God, as
appears by the epistles of Germanus, by the speeches of Leontius against the
Jew, of John Bishop of Thessalonica against the Pagan, of Constantine the
Deacon the custos rotulorum of the Church of Constantinople in the fourth and
fifth actions. The second is that they wholly deny to images the worship of
latria, which they term the worship proper to God only, as appears by the
epistle of Tharasius to Constantine and Irene in the seventh act. In both which
points the church of Rome has gone beyond them, not doubting to make images of
God the Father in the likeness of an old man, as M. Bishop has before
acknowledged, and of the holy Ghost in the form of a Dove, and by the common
judgment of her Divines having affirmed that the worship of latria is to be
given to the image of Christ and his cross, as has been before showed, and by
practice yielded no less to the images of all the Saints. Thus have they
exceeded the measure of the idolatry there decreed, and never ceased till the
superstitions of the people had in a manner fully matched all the abominations
of Pagan and heathen men. The Council being ended, a copy thereof was sent to
Charles the great, who at that time was king of France. He having received it,
sent it over into this land to have the judgment of the Church here concerning
the matter of it. What followed, let it appear by the narration of our old
English historian Roger Houedon recited also by Matthew of Westminster. Roger.
Honed. Annal. part. 1. ann. 792. Carolus rex Francorum misi^ Synodalem libru^
ad Britanniam sibi a Constantinopoli directu^ in quo libro (heu proh dolor)
multa inconuementia and verae fidei contraria reperiebantur; maxim quod pene
omnium Orientalium doctorum non minus quam trecentorum vel eo amplius
Episcoporu^ vnanima assertione confirmatum fuerit, imaginesadoraeri debere,
quod omnino Ecclesia Dei execratur. Co^tra quod scripsit Albinus epistolam ex
authoritate diuinarum scripturarum mirabil^ter affirmata^; illamque cum eode^
libro ex persona Episcoporum ac Principu^ nostroru^ regi Francoru^ attulit.
Idem habetur apud Mat. West monasteriensem.
In the year 792. Charles the king of France sent a synodicall book into
Britain, which had bin directed to him from Constantinople, in which book
(alas for woe) many things were found inconvenient and contrary to the true
faith, specially for that by the agreeing assertion of almost all the Eastern
Doctor, being no less then three hundred Bishops or more, it was decreed that
images ought to be worshipped, which thing the Church of God holds altogether
accursed. Against which Albinus wrote an Epistle, wonderfully fortified by
authority of holy Scriptures, and in the name of our Bishops and Nobles carried
the same with the book to the king of France. By this we see what credit M.
Bishops Nicene Council had with the ancient Church of this land, and that he
does but play the Sycophants part in that he goes about now so highly to
commend the same unto us, contrary to so notable a judgment of our forefathers
and auncesters so long ago, yea we see how impudently they lie, in saying that
our forefathers from the beginning were of the same religion that the Church of
Rome is of now. But that was not all that Charles did; for he caused also a
Council to be assembled at Franckford in Germany of the Bishops of Italy,
France and Germany, who with common voice condemned that Nicene Council, and
plainly declared that the sentence thereof for worshipping of images was
contrary to the word of God. Abbas Vrspergensis speaking of this Franckford
Council, having showed that therein the heresy of Felix was condemned, who
held that Christ was but by adoption the Son of God, adds further, Abb.
Vrsperg. Chron. anno 793. Synodus et^a^ quae ante pautos a^nos in
Consta^tinopoli co^gregata sub Irene and Constantino filio eius septima and
vniuersalis ab ipsis appellata est vt nec septima nec aliquid diceretur quasi
superuacuae ab omnibus ab^icata est.
The Synod also which a few years before was assembled at Constantinople (for
there it was first begun) under Irene and Constantine, and by them called the
seventh, and an universal or general Council, was by them all rejected as
void, that it should neither be called the seventh nor any thing else. So
says Regino also coneerning the same council, (...) lib. 2. ann^ (...) Pse^
(...) Graecor^m^^^. pro ado^^^^ maginibus ^^cerant, a pe^^^ficibus reiecta est.
The false Synod of the Greeks which they had caused for the worshipping of
Images, was rejected by the Bishops there. The acts of this council were
published in a book under the name of Charles himself, as has been before
said, and a copy thereof was sent to Adrian the Bishop of Rome, who to the
Nicene counsel had binone of the great masters for the worshipping of Images.
He poor man playing the part of an Abbreniator, taking out of the book what
he list, and as he list, takes upon him to write an answer to it, some part
whereof is still to be seen adioined to that Council. tom. 3. edit surij.
appen. Nicen. council. 2.
Nicene council, but it is so pitiful an answer, as may well give us to
understand what is to be thought of the whole matter. Surius the Friar saw so
much very well, but he handsomely to color the matter says: Surius. ibid.
Lectors. Plerunque dum non satis ap te aduersarijsrespondere imperito lectori
videre potest, eostanqua^ aliud agens egregie slagellat.
Whilst commonly to the unskillful Reader he may seem not fitly enough to
answer his adversaries, he as it were being about another matter scourges them
notably. This was a Friarly device, to make the unskillful believe that there
are some deep mysteries in Adrians words which every man cannot see, whereas
any wise man may see that his answers are most putide and shameful, and very
unfitting indeed, as as he says, to those things which he would seem to
answer. Therefore in fine M. Bishops defense of his Image idolatry is such as
can give no wise man any just satisfaction for the approving of it.

To Doctor Bishop.
Thus M. Bishop, I have taken pains to give the Reader a taste of the marrow,
and a feeling of the pith of your many large volumes. Wherein if my opinion
deceive me not, he will find by taste so little sweetness, and by feeling so
little strength, as that he will take you either for a silly and iniudicious
man, who are your self abused, or for a wilful and wicked cosiner, that seek
to abuse others with such base and deceitful stuff. To touch the reputation of
your judgment and learning, I know should be as the handling of a sore, very
greiuous to your self, and offensive to your fellows and seduced followers,
whom you have won I know not by what means so greatly to admire you.
Therefore I will not here question your learning, let it be what it is thought
to be; it can be no preiudce to the truth, only I exhort you to take heed that
you be not found with that learning that you have to fight wilfully against
God. You have given shrewd tokens in sundry places of your book, of a very
malicious and wicked heart, sometimes wittingly and purposely calumniating your
adversary by false imputations of saying what he says not, sometimes
guilefully concealing for your advantage many things which he does say;
dissembling allegations and authorities which you could not answer, and
answering other some without ever looking what the authors say. I know the
blind eats many a fly, and they who know nothing to the contrary have taken
your arguments and answers for pregnant and very sure, and your book has
gone for a great oracle amongst them. But surely he that advisedly weighs the
course and manner thereof, will easily imagine that in very many places you had
one within you to tell you that you did but patch, and palter, and shift, and
desperately shut your eyes against the light that most clearly shined unto you.
It may doubtless be said of you which S. Austine confesses of himself whilst
he was entangled with the heresy of the Manichees, that you August. de duaeb.
animab. co^t Manich. Accidebat vt quicquid dicerent mirit quibusdam modis non
quia sci^bam sed quia optabam verum esse pro vero approbarens.
approve the things which you have been taught for true, not because you know,
but because you wish them so to be. Beware M. Bishop, of doing any thing
presumptuously in this behalf. Remember him that said, Acts. 26.14.
It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. By beating your self
against the rock, you do but harm your self; the rock shall never be
removed. Give glory to God by acknowledging the truth of God, the breath
whereof has already blown down the towers of Babel; the sound whereof as of
the Lords trumpet has cast down the walls of Jericho, and there is a curse
laid upon him that builds them up again. August. de ciu. dei lib. 6. cap.
1. Ea pu^atur gloria vanitatis nullis cedere viribus veritatis.
It is the glory of vanity, as S. Austine says, not to yield to any force of
truth. But the glory of vanity is but vain glory, and to take a pride in being
constant or rather froward in error, is the high way to confusion and shame.
You may think it to be a blot of your credit being a Doctor of divinity to
yield that you have been deceived all this while, but it is no blot, M. Bishop,
to confess that degrees and learning are no privilege against error. You
have been content though with some impeachment, to yield to the Jesuits, but
it shall be no impeachment to you to yield to Jesus, whose name you with others
by your Proctours have told us that that hyprocritall vermin does singularly
abuse to the cloaking and coloring of much falsehood and villainy. Take
experience thereof in your self. Whilst you have relied upon Bellarmine the
chief captain of them, you see how many lies and false tales you have
delivered upon his word, both generally through your whole book, and specially
in your Epistle to the king. Will you be any longer led by them who thus grossly
do abuse you? Return M. Bishop, and be a means for others to return out of
the bondage of 2 Thessalonians 2.
the man of sin, 2. Tim. 2
out of the snare of the devil of whom they are holden to do his will. Submit
your self to that truth which you see, I say you see, that you are not able to
resist. I speak not, I confess, as upon any opinion or hope that I have to
prevail with you. I know a dry stick never bends till it break, and I
fear you are more dry then that we may look for any bending of you. I pray
God I may have occasion to say that it was but a false fear, but if not, yet
these words of mine shall serve hereafter for witness betwixt God and you, and
therefore for conclusion I say to you as Cyprian said to Florentius; Cyprian.
lib 4. epist. 9 Habes it is literas meas et ego tuas: in die tudicij vtru^que
ante tribunal Christi recitabitur.
You have my writings and I have yours: at the day of judgment both shall be
recited before the tribunal seat of Christ.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 93. in marg. lin. 43. for voluntate, read necessitate. pa. 121. after
against them put in these words: Now it should seem that their divinity is
very low, where it is so high a point and not easy for the unlearned to
conceive, that God is the only efficient cause of all infused grace But, etc.
page 126. l. 30 for bring forth the seed, read bring forth fruit. page 159. l.
10. for not knowing, r knowing. p. 275. l. 14. for proper to say. r. proper to
David to say. page 318. li. 4. for trial, read tiall. page 325. li. 34. for
glorifieth, read glories. page 355. l. 35 for thereof, read whereof. page
36. ^. l. 5. for willing, read willed. pa. 459 l. 24. for only. assi^ted, r.
only assisted. p. 511. l. 5. for art, r. act. p. 547. l. 23. for health, r
faith. p. 549. l. 27. for his opinion etc. r. his ignorance. p. 555 l. 23. for
hope, r. help. p. 558. l. 29. after the commandments put in these words, When
say we the very prouocations themselves are a breach of the commandments For
etc. p. 56. 1. l. 19 for impossible, r. possible p. 567. l. 6. for unto us, by,
read unto us by. p. 762 l. 38. put out, and the untimely fruits of a barren
strumpet. p. 770. l. 34. for not the imputing, r. the not imputing. p. 963. l.
25. for the righteousness, read but the righteousness. p. 997. l. 38. for not
only, read only. p. 1079. l. 14. for having, read not having. p. 1104. l. 17.
for the cross, read the cross of Christ. page 1198. begin the first line
with these words, If he can make that good, he gives us some reason of falling


