A Sermon preached at Farington in Barkeshire, the seventeen of February,
1587.

At the burial of the right Honorable the Lady Anne Countes of Warwick,
daughter to the Duke of Sommerset his grace, and widow of the right
worshipful Sir Edward Vmpton knight.

By Bartholomew Chamberlain, Doctor of Divinity.



LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop at the broad
south door of Paul's. 1591.

To the right Honorable and most virtuous Lady, the Lady Doritie Vmpton:
Bartholomew Chamberlain wishes increase of health, wealth, worship, and
godliness with long life here to gods glory, and everlasting life hereafter
with Christ Jesus in heaven.
WHether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God,
as the Apostle says. Which when I remembered, to the glory of my creator, and
benefit of his church, I thought good to commit this little treatise to
writing, preached at the burial of your motherinlaw, a noble Lady, a
faithful wife, a virtuous woman, and a godly widow. And because your
Ladishippe (whose gifts of body and mind are excellent) heard it with
attention, as you do always the word of truth (to gods praise and your own
commendation be it spoken) I took it meet to dedicate it to you for a New
years gift, and declaration of my thankful mind, for your manifold courtesies
toward me. And forasmuch, as the days are evil, (sin abounding, and
charity being cold) I have therefore set down the judgments of God against
the dissolute people of this age, which have a show of godliness, but have
denied the power thereof. And seeing they give themselves to commit all sin,
even with greedines, being proud without humility, malicious without charity,
cruel without compassion, coueteous without measure, vain without virtue,
vile without the fear of God, like to the horse and mule in whom is no
understanding: therefore they shall undoubtedly taste the bitter cup of Gods
heavy displeasure, except they speedily and truly repent. Which, if they
shall do, though their sins were as crimsin, they shall be made white as
snow: though they were red as skarlet, they shall be as wool, and that they
may so do, I daiely and devoutly crave of God, in the gracious name, and
glorious face of Jesus Christ his son: who gave him self for us, to redeem
us from all iniquity, and to purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself
zealous of good works. To him therefore with the Father and the holy Ghost
three in persons, one God in nature, be all glory for ever,

Your Ladyships at commandment Bartholomew Chamberlain.

A Sermon preached at Farington in Barkeshire, the seventeen of February 1587.
O Death, how bitter is the reme^mbrance of thee to a man that lives at rest
in his possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things: yea unto him that is able to receive meat. O death
how bitter is the remembrance of thee to the Epicure, which believing no
resurrection of the body to life everlasting, but counting it pleasure to live
deliciously for a season, does spue out evil words, corrupting good manners,
saying: Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. O death how bitter
is ye remembrance of thee to the coueteous, whose trust is in uncertain riches,
not in the living God (which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy:) to
the glutton, whose God is his belly, and glory to his shame: to the Atheist,
which has no hope, and is without God in the world. O death how sweet is the
remembrance of thee to him, which has put on the brestplate of faith and love,
and the hope of salvation for an Helmet, living soberly, justly, and godly in
this present world, having his conversation in heaven, from whence also ye
look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, desiring to be loosed and to
be with him, which is best of all. O death how sweet is the remembrance of
thee to the man which looks not on the things which are seen, for they are
temporal, but on the things which are not seen, for they are eternal:
because to him thou art the end of all misery, and the beginning of all
felicity: because thou art a passage to the things, which eye has not seen,
neither ear has heard, neither came into man's heart, which God has prepared
for them that love him. Notwithstanding, though the remembrance of death to
some be bitter, yea bitterer then wormwood it self, yet it is appointed for
all men once to die. It is appointed therefore it is certain, for all men,
therefore none can escape once to die, therefore every hour death is to be
expected. It is appointed for rich Cresus, and poor Codrus, for wise Solomon
and foolish Esau, for godly Abell, and wicked Caine: for proud Pharao and
meek Moises: for virtuous Joshua, for mighty David: for fair Absolon, for
strong Sampson, for learned Tertullus, for prince and people it is appointed
for all once to die. Noah lived nine hundredth and fifty years, and died. Adam
lived nine hundred and thirty years, and died. Methuselah lived nine hundredth
sixty and nine years, and dyed. And of all the fathers of the old Testament,
though it be said they lived long, yet it is added they went the way of all
the world, that is they died. Now it is good to remember death, it is better to
learn to die: it is best of all in death to hope for life, knowing that if one
earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building given of
God, that is an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. Some
to remember death do go every morning into the church yeard and behold the
graves. Some will have deaths head engraven in a ring. Some death painted on
their houses. Philip king of the Macedonians, every morning before he came out
of his chamber, had one to cry thrice at his door, remember thou art a man:
Whereby he was put in mind of his mortality, that albeit he was a king, yet in
time he must lay down his tabernacle as well as others. Which consideration
might make him to rule discreetly, and to live orderly. For there can be no
stronger bridle to hold us back from sin neither sharper prick to stir us
forward to goodness, then to remember we must remove out of this body and
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, to receive the things which we
have done in this body according to that we have done, whether it be good or
evil. Saint Hierom was wont to say: whether I eat or drink, or whatsoever I
do, me thinks that terrible Trumpet sounds in mine ear: Arise ye dead, and
come unto judgment. This made him to hope in Christ steadfastly, to love God
sincerely, to overcome his affections valiently, to repent his sin
unfeignedly, to bear the troubles of this life patiently, knowing that the
afflictions, of this present times are not worthy of the glory, which shall be
showed unto us. O that we could remember three things past: What good things
we have omitted, what evil things we have committed: what time we have lost.
O that we could consider three things present. The breuity of our life: The
difficulty to be saved: The paucity of them which shall be saved. O that we
could foresee three things to come. The hour of death, then which no thing
more uncertain: The resurrection to judgment, then which nothing more
terrible: The pains of hell, then which nothing more intolerable. Remember
the end, and thou shall never do amiss. The end of sin is death. Here is a
spectacle, a Lady by birth, a Countes by marriage, by title right honorable, a
widow of a virtuous life, a woman of many years, a mother of good children,
whose body death has killed, whose soul Christ has taken, whose body must
to the earth, whose soul is in the hands of God. Behold in her the end of
all flesh: for as we are, so was she: and as she is, so shall we be: that her
trusty Servants, that her faithful friends, that her worshipful, dear, and
loving children, seeing God has wrought his will upon her, as in time also he
will upon you and upon all flesh, by calling her from earth to heaven, from men
to Saints, to Angels, to the fruition of his most glorious presence: praise
God for her. Let your lamentations be mixed with moderation, because she is
gone from a vale of misery, to a haven of all happiness, and when Christ, which
is her life shall appear, then shall she also appear with him in glory. For
though her body be sown in corruption, yet it shall be raised in
incorruption. Though it be sown in dishonor, yet it shall be raised in glory.
Though it be sown in weakness, yet it shall be raised in power. Though it be
sown a natural body, yet it shall be raised a spiritual body, when this
corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality.

Who may stand in thy sight, when thou art angry.
THe earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings
forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing of God.
But that which bears briars and thorns is reproved, and is near unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned, who so hears Christ's words, and does
the same, is likened to a wise man which has builded his house on a rock, and
the rain fell, and the floudes came, and the winds blewe, and beat upon that
house, and it fell not: for it was grounded on a rock. But whosoever hears
Christ's words and does them not, is compared to a foolish man, which builded
his house on the sand: and the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds
blew and beat upon that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof was great. If
any hear the word and does it not, he is like unto a man, that beholds his
natural face in a glass: for when he has considered himself he goes his
way, and forgets immediately what manner a one he was. But who so looks in
the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he not being a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his deed. When a woman
with a lifted up voice had said to Christ: Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the pappes which gave thee suck: he answered, yea rather blessed are
they, which hear the word of God and keep it. He that has my commandments
(says Christ) and keeps them, he is he that loves me. He that has them
(says Augustine) in his belief, and keeps them in his life: he that has
them in his words, and keeps them in his works, he that has them by
hearing, and keeps them by doing: He that has them by doing and keeps them
by continuing in doing, he, and none but he loves Christ. The fruitles tree is
good for nothing, but to be cut down and cast into the fire. That saucy
merchant which intruded himself into the marriage of the kings son,
without his wedding garment, was not only checked, but also commanded to be
bound hand and foot: to be taken away and cast into utter darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. The fig tree which had leaves, but no
fruit, was by our Savior accursed for ever. The foolish virgins which had
lamps without oil, though they cried, Lord, Lord open unto us: yet they
received a short and sharp answer: verily I say unto you, I know you not.
That evil, slothful, and unprofitable servant, which hid his masters talent
in the earth, had it both taken from him* and was cast into utter darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. That therefore we may be doers of
the word and not hearers only, deceiving our own salues: that the word may be
unto us, not the savor of death unto death: but the savor of life unto life.
That the word may be unto us lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then
any two edged sword, and enter through even to the deuyding a sunder of the
soul and the spirit, and of the iointes and the marow, and may be a disterner
of the thoughts and intents of our hearts, so that all things in us may be new,
let us by humble prayer look up to almighty God in the glorious face of Jesus
Christ.

When sinners once begin to despise the riches of Gods bountifulness and
patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the goonesse of God leads
them to repentance: when walking in the vanity of their mind, in darkness
of their understanding, in strangeness from the life of God, through the
ignorance in them, in hardness of their heart: and being past feeling shall
give them selves unto wantonness, to work all uncleanness even with
greediness: when they shall turn the grace of our God into wantonness, and
deny God the only Lord, and our Savior Jesus Christ, led with sensuality
as natural brute beasts, walking after the flesh in the lusts of wantonness:
when they shall think it lost labor to serve God, and no profit to keep his
commandments, neither to walk humbly before the face of the Lord of hosts:
when they shall say to them selves, our life is short and tedious, our breath
is as a smoke in our nostrels, our words as a spark raised out of our heart,
our spirits vanish away as the soft air, our bodies shall be turned into dust,
our life shall pass away as the trace of a cloud, our time is as a very
shadow, our works shall soon be forgotten, our name no man shall have in
remembrance: come on therefore let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, let
us be partakers of our voluptuousness, let us leave some token of our pleasure
in every corner, let the law of unrighteousness be our strength, let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye: when neither often warnings by his
preachers, nor fair promises of reward, nor long benefits of mercy, nor
sharp threatenings of punishment can do any good: then God (which in his wrath
is a consuming fire) playing the part either of a good schoolemaister toward
his negligent scholar, or of a naturail father toward his dissolute child,
or of a wise magistrate toward his disobedient subject, takes the rod in
hand, and executes judgment on those whom mercy could not allure nor draw to
amendment. Then his anger begins to kindle: for as God is the father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort to them which draw near unto him with a
true heart, in assurance of faith, their hearts being pure from an evil
conscience, and washed in their bodies with pure water, keeping fast the
profession of their hope without wavering, considering one another to provoke
unto love, and to good works: so is he the God of justice to them which bear
evil and unfaithful hearts, to depart away from him, fashioning them selves
like unto this world, dead in trespasses and sins, wherein they walk
according to the course of this world, and after the prince that rules in the
air, even the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience,
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. To the one he is loving as a
father, being his children elected of his grace, called by his word, justified
by his son, sanctified by his spirit, and reconciled to himself. The other
he hates as his enemy. For as the righteous Lord loves righteousness, whose
countenance might behold the thing that is just: so he hates all those that
work iniquity, not bearing in them his Image, which is righteousness and
true holiness, to beautify them, but the image of the devil, which is
unrighteousness and unholiness to deforme them: not speaking truth one to
another, considering they are members one of another, but deceiving one
another, by flattery* lying and dissembling: not speaking that which is good to
the use of edifying, that it might minister grace to the hearers: but using
evil words which corrupt good manners, not being courteous and tender hearted
one to another, freely forgiving one another even as God for Christ his sake
freely forgive them: but full of bitterness and anger, and wrath, cursing and
evil speaking with all maliciousness, not knowing the wisdom that is from
above, which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy,
and good fruit, without judging, and without hypocrisy: but following the
wisdom of this world, which is foolishness with God, The wisdom of the
flesh, which is enmity against God, the wisdom that is beneath, which is
earthly, sensual and devilish, do delight in envying, strife, sedition, and
all manner of evil works, despising Gods presence, abusing his patience,
offending his Majesty, and provoking his anger. But when to ascribe anger to
the most high, almighty and everlasting God, which is to be loved for his
mercy, and to be feared for his justice, they must not imagine any such
choleric passion to be in him, as is in man, as if God were moved of an
intemperate heat, when justly he strikes the contemners of his bountifulnes,
and patience, and long sufferance, and raineth upon the wicked fire and
brimstone, storm and tempest which is the portion of their cup. As there is in
God no corporal member of longitude, latitude, and profunditie: so is he void
of affections and passions which proceed in us from infirmity. Si quis in
Deo-humana membra humano more cogitet procul dubio de Deo in cord suo idola
fabricat. For God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and truth. And as we are not to think, that the Godhead is like unto
gold or silver, or stone graven by art, and the invention of man: so must we
not ascribe to the divine power corporal parts, bodily members. And though
the Scripture attributes to God sometime a head, eyes sometime, sometimes
ears, and sometimes hands: yet grossly to imagine these things to be in him
is not only erronyous, but full of Idolatry. And albeit the Scripture says
that man was made after the image of God, whereupon certain heretics grounded
their opinion of corporal substance in God: yet true it is, that God is a
spiritual substance, most glorious, most mighty, most wise, most good, and has
no such corporal parts. To be made after the image of God, is, to have
dominion as Adam and Eve had over all other living creatures before their fall:
also to be created in righteousness and true holiness. Deus totus oculus est,
quia videt omnia. He that made the eye, shall he not see, God sees sometime
with the eye of his mercy, sometime with the eye of his justice, with the eye
of his mercy to illuminate, with the eye of his justice to blind, with the eye
of his mercy to mollify, with the eye of his justice to reject, with the eye of
his mercy to pardon, with the eye of his justice to punish. Nathaniell (said
Christ) before thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. Here is the eye of
mercy. Nathaniell answered, thou art the Son of God, thou art the king of
Israel: here is the eye of faith, or here is faith the eye of the soul.

The Lord turned back and looked upon Peter: here is the eye of mercy: then
Peter went out and wept bitterly: here is the eye of faith, or here is faith ye
eye of the soul. With the eye of justice God saw Lucifer to throw him out of
heaven: Adam to cast him out of Paradyce: the old world to drown it for
sin: the cities of Sodom and Gomorra to burn them for iniquity. Pharao and
his host to ouerwhelme them with water for rebellion. Ananias and Saphira to
strike them stark dead for lying: Herod to consume him with worms, for not
giving him the glory: God has looked down many years upon this realm with
the eye of his mercy, giving us peace, plenty, with ye preaching of his
gracious and glorious Gospel: our sins do deserve why he should turn the
eye of his mercy from us, and look down upon us with the eye of justice. God
sees them which walk not honestly as in the day time: but in gluttony and
drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, in strife and envying: not putting
on the Lord Jesus, but making provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof. Comfortable to the godly it is, that God sees all their doings, and
terrible to the godless it may be, that the Lord beholds all their actions.
He that made the ear shall he not hear? hear a parable. The ground of a
certain rich man brought forth fruits plenteously. Riches are common to the
good with the bad, and that of the blessing of God, which makes the sun to
arise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the
unjust, and blesses the ground of the gracious and graceles. Therefore he
thought within him self, saying: what shall I do because I have not room to
receive in my fruits. This will I do, I will pull down my barnes, and set up
larger in their places, and therein will I gather my fruits and my goods. No
mention of a thankful mind, no consideration of God, no regard of the poor
neighbor, but how to enlarge the barns to gather in his fruits and horde them
up, then I will say to my soul, soul thou have goods laid up in store for
many years, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime: He remembers
not God, he forgets death, he trusts in ma^mon, he makes account of many
years, he purposes to line in sensuality, in ease, in eating, in drinking,
and in pastime: But God heard him and answered him, O fool thou make account
of many years, this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee, then whose
shall all these things be, which thou have gathered together? even so says
our Savior by the way of application is it with him which is rich in this
world, and is not rich in God. Some are rich in God but not in the world, as
Lazarus was: some rich in the world but not in God, as this Dives was: some
both rich in the world and rich in God as Abraham was: some neither rich in the
world nor in God, as those poor beggars which have nothing, yet do contemn
the word of God. Hear another parable. There was a Judge in a certain City
which feared not God, nor reverenced men. And there was a widow in the City
which came to him, saying: Do me justice against mine adversary: and he would
not for a time: but afterward he said within him self, though I fear not
God nor reverence men, yet because this widow troubles me, I will do her
right, lest at the last she come and make me weary. He said it within him
self, but the Lord heard him and answered, saying: Hear what the unrighteous
Judge says: and shall not the Lord avenge his people which cry unto him day
and night? yes surely he will do it, though for a time he differ. Comfortable to
the godly it is, that God hears all their sayings, and terrible to the wicked
it may be that the Lord hears all their words. As there is in God no
corporal member: so is he void of passions which proceed from infirmity. The
gifts and calling of God are without repentance. I am the Lord, I am not
changed: with God there is no variableness nor shadow of turning, God is not
as man that he should lie, neither as the son of man that he should repent:
has he said and shall he not do it? and has he spoken and shall he not
accomplish it? God in nature can not be changed: but in quality he may:
whatsoever is in God is of his substance: Nullum accidens cadit in Deum. In God
is knowledge without ignorance, wisdom in perfection: justice without respect
of persons: mercy without measure, and what else not that pertains to
excellency? and all these are of his substance. God is not sometime forgetful,
sometime mindeful, sometime pleased, sometime displeased, as man is. These
things are spoken for man's capacity. He is said to be forgetful, when for a
time he withdraws his supporting hand from his, for their trial, he is said
to be mindful. when he delivers such as call upon him faithfully. He is said
to be pleased, when he pours his blessings upon his servants. He is said to
be angry when he punishes the wicked, delighting in sin. God spared not the
Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into
the chains of darkness, to be kept unto condemnation, God spared not the old
world that had sinned, but saved Noe y^ eight person a Preacher of
righteousness, and brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly: God
spared not the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah that had sinned, but turned them
into ashes, condemned them and overthrew them and made them an example unto
them that after should live ungodly. If God spared not the Angels that had
sinned: if he spared not the old world that had sinned: if he spared not the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah that had sinned, if he spared not the natural
branches, shall we think he will spare us which are as proud as Lucifer, as
voluptuous as Sardanapalus, as envious as Cain that first murderer, as
malicious as Esau, as cruel as Phalaris, as lecherous as Amon which defiled his
own fister, as mistrustful as Ananias, as covetous as Judas which for money
betrayed his Lord and master: as sinful as the old world, as filthy as
Sodom, as much given to lying as ever was Saphira. Dearly beloved, let us not
deceive our selves: forasmuch as we say Lord, Lord, yet do not the will of our
heavenly father, and do acknowledge the way of righteousness, yet do turn
from the holy commandment given unto us: and have a show of godliness, yet
have denied the power thereof: forasmuch as our sins are grown ripe, and
cry to heaven for vengeance, therefore we may fear destruction. If ye refuse
the word of the Lord as ye do, and be rebellious against him, as ye are, ye
shall either be devoured with yt sword, or killed with the pestilence, or
consumed with fire, or starued with hunger, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it: But if ye will take away the evil of your works, from before the
eyes of the Lord of hosts, and cease to do evil, and learn to do well, ye shall
both eat the good things of the land as hitherto ye have done: and though your
sins were as crimsin, they shall be made white as snow: though they were red as
scarlet, they shall be as woll, otherwise ye may fear sudden destruction. For
when no other means may prevail, then the Lord strikes suddenly. Suddenly
he threw the proud angels out of heaven: suddenly he drowned the old sinful
world: sudde^ly he burned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah for iniquity:
suddenly he stroke dead Ananias and Saphira for lying: suddenly he consumed
Herod with worms for robbing him of his glory. The day of the Lord shall come
as a thief in the night, that is suddenly wherein the heavens shall pass away
with a noyce, the elements shall melt with heat, the earth and the works that
are therein shall be burnt up, seeing therefore that all these things must be
dissolved, what manner persons ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness.
But what manner of people are the greatest part? proud without humility,
malicious without charity, cruel without compassion, covetous without measure,
vain without virtue, vilde without the fear of God, like to ye horse and mule
in whom there is no understanding: and therefore hear the judgments of God.
The indignation of a prince is death, says Solomon. If the indignation of a
mortal prince be death to the subject, the displeasure of the king everlasting,
immortal, invisible, of God only, wise, the king of kings and Lord of Lords is
everlasting death to them which are taken away in his wrath without repentance.
Behold the day comes (says Malachie) that shall burn as an oven, and all the
proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall be as stuble, and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, and shall leave them neither root
nor branch. The Lord (says the Prophet David) is a righteous judge, strong and
patie^t, and God is provoked every day, if a man will not turn, he has whet
his sword, he has bent his bow and made it ready, if the Lord be angry the
earth shall tremble and quake, the very foundation of the mountain shall move
and shake. When Adam perceived the anger of God kindled against him for his
transgression, he could not abide his voice, but went about to hide himself in
the midst of Paradise: (sin makes men foolish) for he could not hide
himself from God which is present every where and beholds all things. When
Cain felt the wrath of God incensed against him, for embruing his guilty hands
with the guiltles blood of his righteous brother Abel, he fell into a desperate
mind: my punishment is more then may be borne, my sin is greater then it may
be forgiven, mentiris Cain (says Augustine) Mayor est Dei misericordia, quam
omnium peccatorum miseria. In the 21. of Nombers. The wrath of God was kindled
against certain tempters, and they were destroyed of serpents. The wrath of
God was enflamed against certain murmurers and they were destroyed of the
destroyer. Number. 14. The wrath of God was kindled against certain that
committed fornication, and there fell in one day twenty and three thousand. All
these things came unto them for examples, and are written to admonish us, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. This anger of God against sin how great
it is, by this it may appear, that when man had sinned, no creature in heaven
or in earth could appease it, but only he, which is ye love of the father, the
brightness of his glory, and the very ingraued form of his person, even Jesus
Christ our savior, who appeared to loose the works of the devil, and through
death destroyed him which had the power of death, that is the devil, and to
redeem us from the curse of the law, was made a curse for us, and being
consecrate was made the author of eternal salvation unto al them yt obey him,
and is made more excellent then the Angels, in as much as he has obtained a
more excellent name then they: penitent sinners confessing with their mouths
the Lord Jesus, and believing in their hearts, that God raised him from the
dead: to whom God has not given the spirit of fear, but of power, of love
and of a sound mind, need not to stand in fear of God his anger: for unto
them and for them Satan the author of sin is vanquished, sin the work of
Satan is destroyed, death the effect of sin is subdued. The curse of the law
is taken away, the wrath of God is pacified, and man to God everlastingly
reconciled. They which are subject to God his anger, are the wicked, men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, lovers of their own selves, no
lovers at al of them which are good, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God? having a show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof.
Notwithstanding, if they could forsake evil and do good, if they could cast
away all filthiness and superftuity of maliciousnes, and receive with meekenes
ye word which is able to save their souls, if they could put off that old man,
which is corrupt though the deceaueble lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of
their mind, and put on that new man, which after God is created unto
righteousness, and true holiness, they should not need to fear God his anger, for
God is pleased in Christ for his own sake. This is my beloved son in whom I am
well pleased, hear him. There are two sorts of sinners, some penitent, some
impenitent. Impenitent sinners are they which are led with sensuality as
natural brute beasts, walking after their own lusts, whose mouths speak
proud things, and the swelling words of vanity, whose eyes are full of
adultery, and that cannot cease to sin, whose hearts are exercised with
coueteousnes, whose minds are puffed up with pride, having no sense of sin,
no feeling of Gods mercy, no sweetenes in Christ his merits, not serving God,
for he is a spirit, and they are carnal: for he is charity, and they are
malicious, for he is light, and they walk in darkness of ignorance and sin.
which mind nothing but earthly things. Penitent sinners, are they which rent
their hearts and not their garments and turn to the Lord their God, having in
them that godly sorrow which causes repentance unto salvation, believing in
true repentance, that when they shall confess their sins, God is faithful
and just to forgive them their sins, and to cleanse them from all iniquity,
denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and studying to live soberly, justly,
and godly in this present world looking for that blessed hope, and appearing of
the glory of that mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from al iniquity, and purge us to be
a peculiar people unto him self, zealous of good works. To him therefore, with
the Father and the holy Ghost, three in persons, one in nature, be glory, and
majesty, and dominion, and power, both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

