SIX SERMONS NOW FIRST PVBLISHED, Preached by that learned and worthy Divine
Edward Chaloner lately decleas'd Dr in Divinity, sometimes Chaplain in
Ordinary to our Sovereign K. James, and to His MAJESTY that now is; and late
Principal of Alban Hall in Oxford.

Printed according to the Author's coppies, written with his own hand.

AT OXFORD, Printed by W. Turner, for Henry Curteyn. Ann. Dom. 1629.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROKE, LORD Herbert of Cardiffe,
Lord Par and Rosse of Kendall, Lord Marmion and Saint Quintin, Lord Warden of
the Stanneries: Chancellor of the University of Oxford, Lord Steward of his
Majesty's household, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of
his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I HAVE adventured to commit unto the public view, under your Honor's name
and protection, a second parcel of Dr Ed: Chaloners Sermons. I have quickly
named the Author and the Book, that they may be my apology for presuming to
your Lordships presence, (who otherwise should easily acknowledge, that no
shaft out of my own quiver, nor any plume of mine, durst mount so high,) yet
as I do ingeniously confess, that there is nothing of mine own, which I could
account worthy to prefer me to your Honor's notice: so do I verily believe,
there is not any thing of this Authors composing so mean, which your Lordship
will not value worthy your noble acceptance and patronage. The Reasons why I
have caused these Sermons to pass the press, besides those motives which
induced our Dr to the publishing of the former (the good affections of some,
his friends, earnestly desiring it:) first the Worth of the arguments, being
several choice pieces of holy writ dexterously handled, and such as may well
(if affection prejudice not my judgment) prove serviceable to the Church and
Common good: Next the love and grateful respect, which I deservedly bear to
the memory of the Author deceased, jointly excite me thus to make him the more
memorable; whilst I endeavor that as by the blessing of God, his Name yet
lives (and I wish his virtues too) in a Posthumus of his body: so both may
surviue in these Postnati, the happy issue of his mind. Why, I have
dedicated, and now offer them to your honor, I hope you will not interpret
boldness but duty; seeing not only those general relations, which gave you
interest in the former, continue the same to these, but a special right has
now more entitled you to the whole, even Justice; challenging the work to
him, to whom the Author has devoted himself in all his public endeavors.
Your Lordships countenance to the book shall secure it against the Critics
rankest censure: as for the Author, he is now farther above their reach and
venom, then the Publisher can be (though perhaps he is yet content to be)
below their envy.

Your Honors in all duty AB. SHERMAN.

THE TITLES AND SEVERAL Texts of the six ensuing Sermons.
SERMON. 1. The Cretians Conviction and Reformation. Titus. 1.13. This witness
is true, wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith.
page 1. SERMON. 2. The Ministers Charge and Mission. Matt. 20.6. Why stand you
here all the day idle? page 27. SERMON. 3. Gods Bounty and the Gentiles
Ingratitude. Romans 1.21. Because when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened. page 57. SERMON. 4. Affliction the Christians
Portion. Act. 21.14. For I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. Page 79. SERMON. 5. The duty and
affinity of the faithful. Luke 8.21. Then came his mother and his brethren,
and could not come at him for the preasse, and it was told him by certain,
which said, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to see thee:
And he answered, and said unto them, my mother and my brethren are those which
hear the word of God and do it. page 103. SERMON. 6. No peace with Rome. Gal.
2.5. To whom we gave place by subjection, no not an hour, that the truth of
the Gospel might continue with you. page 127.
THE CRETIANS CONVICTION, AND REFORMATION.
TIT. 1.13. This witness is true, wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may
be sound in the faith.


SInce the time that Adam grew disobedient to GOD his Father, all Mankind have
taken after the Earth their Mother, and whether the temper of the Climate which
we inhabit do enforce it, or the quality of the Soil wherein we breathe, or
the nourishment whereon we live, altering us somewhat, as it is altered by us;
plain it is, that we borrow our dispositions from our Countries, and our
humors are by consent of Nature so annexed, to our tenures, and entangled to
our possessions, that Geographers have now thought manners of people as
essential parts of their Art, as Regions; and a Map as precisely to be
drawn of the one as of the other. Wherefore the Apostle S. Paul in the
blossoming of the Gospel having planted Titus in the Episcopal See of Crete,
and delivering a kind of Decretalls, and Canon Law, touching the life and
demeanure of the Clergy; he thought it no less behoofefull for Titus amongst
other things to be acquainted with the manners of his Flock, then for a
Physician to know the constitution of his Patients, and therefore out of a
Prophet of their own, extracts for him a character of the Nation: (...): The
Cretes are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies. I will not stand to
discuss what Prophet of theirs it was which thus acted the Critic, whether
Epimenides, or Calimachus, since I find that Epimenides has amongst the
Learned prevayled for multitude of voices, nor is it expedient to vent all
reasons which are alleged, why he was here termed a Prophet, that name being
common to all, whose inventions could pace measures, and more particularly
appropriated to Epimenides, as who was esteemed by the report of Laertius even
of the Cretians themselves, to be such an one. The verdict you see he gives
up, finds them guilty of a threefold corruption: first, of a corruption of
the reasonable faculty, which sitting as supreme Judge in the Court of Truth
and Falsehood, they labored what they could to part it by wrong informations,
They were always liars: Secondly, of a corruption on of the irascible faculty,
which they cherished with malice, and brutish cruelty, They were evil beasts:
Thirdly, of a corruption of the concupiscible faculty, being better fed then
taught, pigri, idle companions, and ventres, belly-gods, (to speak with the
time) bad observers of Fasting-dayes, ill Lent-keepers, They were slow bellies.
Here is a cristall mirror of divine providence, wherein the sole mercy of GOD
is resplendent. Let our Pelagians of the newest devised fashion tell me, let
them which would exalt the decayed and dead will of man one link higher in the
chain of Predestination then the eternal decree of GOD, answer me, how was
Nature manured and pruned in these Cretians? how were her talents here turned
and winded in the bank for the best advantage, that thus beyond all plea of
desert, the Gospel should arrive in Crete, and Titus as Ambassador be sent
from GOD to win them unto Christ? Certainly if Cretians tongues be shaped
for the utterance of any truth, they might resolve our new Cretians the
controversy, from their own case, where the light of the truth so immediately
followed in their Island upon a midnight of ignorance, and blindness, and that
without any twilight interceeding or arising from the extinguished tapers of
man's natural understanding, that my Text makes their disease and their cure to
be close successors the one of the other; where we discover, first an
accusation against them, begun indeed by Epimenides, but seconded by himself,
This witness is true: Secondly, a reformation, in which (as if the grace of
GOD building upon no other foundation either of good nature, or moral honesty)
Titus must not exclude with Aristotle either youth or unbridled affections from
being hearers of his Philosophy, but must seriously intend their recovery,
Wherefore rebuke them sharply that they may be sound in the faith.

Concerning the first, namely the accusation; the Cretians found no Advocate
that I know to maintain their honesty, till the Jesuits entertained Eudemon
as being a native Cretian, and therefore best squaring with their discipline,
and admitted him into their society, whom when a writer of ours fitly reputed
for a notorious liar, with Cretenses mendaces, The Cretians are always liars,
he blusheth not to excuse the matter, as if Epimenides called them liars for
this only, because they affirmed that they could show the sepulcher of
Jupiter, whom both he and the rest of the Gentiles did conceive to be
immortal. This shift smells of the same dye with a Sophisme used in Logicians.
The Cretians are always liars; but Epimenides was a Cretian which said this;
therefore Epimenides lied, and so by a consequence it is false, that the
Cretians are always liars; for as in this Syllogism, a fallacy is committed
in arguing from mere particulars, the major, that the Cretians are always
liars, being but equipollent to this; that many, or a greater part are liars,
out of which route, Epimenides might well be exempted; so in the other caption
of Eudemon's, what lets, that Epimenides saying might be true in part, though
not in this; that Jupiter was immortal; yet in this; that the Cretians are
always liars, evil beasts, slow bellyes; which is all that our Apostle does
quote, Cretes erunt testes, nec fingunt omnes Cretes. A pretty world it is with
the Jesuits, that as heretofore they have put us to maintain the authority of
the Scriptures above the Church, so now we must defend the truth of them
against a Cretian. But Eudemon reasoning against so manifest a testimony of the
Holy Ghost, argues, that either his Countrymen have not yet left off their old
quality, or else that amidst the refined decisions of their order touching lies
and equivocations, an officious lie for ones Country is held current ware,
though the credit of an Apostle suffer by it. But let us leave Eudemon and his
Countrymen as condemned by the Sentence of S. Paul himself, besides an whole
jury of Proverbs packed against them, Cretizare, Cretizare cum Cretensi,
Cretensis cum Aegineta, Cretensis nescit mare, all which give no better
language then the lie to the Cretians.

The points which I shall desire you to consider in this accusation of S.
Paul's, are chiefly two. First, his Christian ingenuity in receiving and
approving the truth, though breathed from the lips of a profane Cretian,
where he rejects not the pearl because it was enclosed in a wooden casket, nor
disdaines the fruit because it was served up in an earthen dish; but rather the
more admires it, and commends it to Titus and these Cretians, to be tasted by
them also. This was far from the daintiness of many in our age, which think
no instructions availeable or of force, but such as proceed from men, of whose
inward calling they are persuaded, as if the efficacy of the Word depended on
the sanctity of the deliverer. Hence grows that loathing amongst some of their
Pastors and their doctrine, that they follow those teachers, not whom God by an
ordinary calling appointed them, but who^ they choose themselves. They pretend
as strict an observation of the Sabbath almost as the Jews, only to hear
whom they fancy; they can convert the Sabbath days journey, to spite the Pope,
from two Italian miles, to two high Germane. True it is, that as the bells which
hung in the Vestments of Aaron were intermingled with Pomgranates, so God
loves not a sound without fruit, and exe^plary piety is a second Sermon; nay,
to say the truth, there is not a figure in Rhetoric more potent then the good
opinion conceived of the speaker, in which respect both Arist. and Cicero,
required it even in a civil Orator: But this argues not the truth, uttered by
a profane person, of imperfection, but the stomachs of most hearers to be of
weak disgestion. The gift of the Holy Ghost mentioned in the Gospel, where the
Apostles were confirmed in the Ministry of the word, is not graetia
justificationis, a grace of justification; but gratia aedificationis, a grace
of edification, not gratia gratu^ faciens, as the Schoolmen, say, that is, a
peculiar grace given the^ for the salvation of themselves, but gratia gratis
data, a grace given the^ for the salvation of others. The Carpenters (you know)
builded the Arc, and yet were not saved themselves: and the Tyrians and
Sydonians furnished Solomon with materials for the Temple, and were
nevertheless themselves without the covenant: So this witness of Epimenides,
S. Paul converts to an instrument of winning the Cretians to true speaking,
which yet could not save Epimenides from venting a notorious lie, and that in
the very place it self touching Jupiter's eternity. But what imports it
whether the Physician do heal himself, so long as he prescribes us wholesome
Physic; or whether the prison key be in the hands of a prisoner, so long as
it open's the wicket, and sets us free from thraldom and bondage?

The second thing to be considered in this accusation, is the Christian
liberty, which S. Paul assumeth in inserting the witness of a profane Writer,
and that with no small commendations, into the bowels of Canonical Scripture.
In the verse preceding, he cited indeed one of their Poets, but the manner of
his citing of him is there somewhat more doubtful; here in my Text, saying,
this witness is true, the case is more cleared; and he declares himself that
he uses it as a confirmation or proof, not to be refuted by him, but to
refute the gainsaying of the Cretians by it. But what will some say, Is S. Paul
come to quote Poets? why? he has taught us, that the Scriptures are
sufficient, to teach, to instruct, to confirm, to reprove, that the man of God
may be perfect in every good work: how is it then that he takes up the
defense of an unhallowed Poem, and turns Patron to the assertion of an
Ethnicke Writer? Nay, he which professed his coming not to be in the
wisdom of men, does he borrow this furniture from Philosophers, and give
room to strangers to lodge under the roof of God's Sanctuary? But the Fathers
do upon this place note the prudence of the Apostle, who to the Cretians used
the authority of a Cretian, giving them their food in due season, and applying
Physic to the temper of his Patients, becoming all things to all men, unto
the Jew a Jew, unto the Gentile a Gentile, that he might win them unto
Christ. For what more clearenesse can there be, then to make men parties in
the proof, judges in their own cause, and witnesses against themselves? how
can one better confute the Jew, then by Paraphrast's, dispersed as well in their
Caball, as in their Talmud? How should one reason better against the Epicure
and Atheist, then by bringing the world and creatures therein for witness, or
these are the records which they louebest, and most believe, and from which
they are loathest to depart? How can one soundlyer confound the Naturalist,
then by the things that every man reads in his own nature, which he finds
inscribed in his heart, and has been uttered by natural men? Thus God
himself does oftentimes suite his manner of calling men, to their condition of
life; The Wise men which were Astronomers he called by a star, Peter a
fisherman by a draught of fishes, Dionysius Areopagita, of the Sect of the
Stoickes or Epicures, as Ambrose supposes, by a sentence urged by S. Paul at
Athens out of Aratus, and here is the same enterpris'd against the profane
Cretians, from a profane Prophet of their own, Epimenides. Certainly, seeing
it has pleased our Apostle to quote a saying of Natures Secretary, and to
insert it into his writings as an engine which he would employ for the
conversion of the Cretians unto godliness, and since we see the Spirit of God
to have sweetened the waters of cursed Jericho, and to have made wholesome
drink of them for the children of the Prophets, as also to have quickened and
made fertile these wild stocks, and to transplant them, to bud and bring
forth fruits of righteousness and faith in these Cretians; I cannot here by
the way but condemn them which think either the study, or citing of humane
writers in divine exercises, to be altogether unlawful. The maine prejudice
against these citations happens from a wilful blindness of a perverse
generation, which has not after so many years tutouring, learned to
distinguish between the lawful use and the abuse of a thing: I confess as it
was more in practice in the Primitive Church, then now it is, to cite some
Authors; so was there then another reason for the same the^ now there is, the
Fathers being then to deal with Ethnicks, and sometimes with learned and
judicious Philosophers, as was the case of S. Paul at Athens, and here happily
in Crete, in which Cydon might then as well yield an Eudemon as now, howsoever
the whole Island was famous in this, says Solinus, that it first gave laws to
letters before all others, and therefore the example of these men can yield no
sufficient pretense to any now-a-dayes, to make preaching the Word to be but a
rapsody or medly of Greek and Latin Poets; Bernard says truly, that humane
eruditio^ (too much of it) is but vinum inebrians, wine that makes a man
drunk: inflans, non nutriens; implens, non adificans; rather glutting, then
nourishing; and puffing up, then edifying, and to such as make their auditors
to surfeit of such raw and immature fruits, I may say with S. Hierome to
Eustochius, Quid cum Psalterio Horatius, cum Evangelistis Maro, cum Apostolis
Cicero; what makes Horace with the Psalter, what Virgil with the Evangelists,
what Cicero with the Apostles? Nay, we all know how unseemly a thing it is for
a subject to sit on the same Throne with his Prince, or an handmaid to bear
equal rule in the house with her Mistress; or the dog (as our Savior terms
these forraigners) to possess the room and place of the Children: Yet let me
say thus much; that the subject may usher his Prince, the servant attend his
Master, and the handmaide her Mistress. There is yet an Atheist in the world,
which says in his heart, there is no God, to him we may send Cicero, a man as
ignorant of the Scripture, as he incredulous of it, which shall certify him
of the consent of all Nations in the acknowledging a divine power. There are of
the Sect of the Epicures, which bid us eat, and drink, and sport, for after
death there is neither Heaven nor Hell, to these we may oppose Homer if blind,
yet seeing farther then they perhaps into the state of men deceased. There are
of the Stoickes brood remaining which mind not the providence of God, but
refer all things to destiny, to these the Orator or Plato, that Atticke Moses
will reply, that God's providence extends it self unto all things, and that
there is not a mote (as Democritus) so small which yet he does not mind and
order. Is this now to make the pulpit a Philosopher's School, or rather the
Philosopher's School a foote-stoole unto the pulpit, and an handmaid unto
divinity, to proceed better in the necessary work? I cannot tell what others
may conceive, but me-thinkes as often as we hear an Epimenides resolve us
morrally into the chaos of vice of which we consist, this meditation should
bud in the heart of every good Christian; Good GOD are those perilous times to
ensue in our days which thou foretold'st by thy Apostles, or do the minds of
men decay with the whole fabric of the world, that thus in the first
principle of our catechismes, Heathens should inform us of our misery, and the
Disciples of nature prove greater Masters then the Scholars of the Gospel?
Believe it, believe it (belooued) these are those Ninivites which will rise up
in judgment against you, these those Queens of the South which will conndemne
you, for they had not those lights which we have, and yet they saw far more,
then many of us do. Truly does Hierome observe upon the first of Daniel, that
if you turn over the books of the Philosophers touching manners, you shall
find part of the vessels of the house of God there; in Plato that was the
maker of the world, in Zeno the Prince of the Stoickes you may discover hell,
and the immortality of the soul, although they mixing the truth with much
falsehoode may be said to have taken not all the vessels of Gods house, but
some only, and those not whole neither, but cracked and broken. Something you
may find in Plato that is borrowed from Moses, whom he always means as
some think by this phrase, (...), as the old ancient speech has it: Something
in Homer that he might be beholding unto the same for; especially that in his
4th Iliad. Parents are to be honored that we may be long lived; where he
rellisheth of the fifth Commandment: nay D. Chytreus affirms all the writings
of Philosophers touching manners to be nothing else but so many commentaries
upon the five former commandments of the latter table. Now tell me I beseech,
you why (after the great captivity which Iaphet's posterity has suffered
under Satan; God having sent his Apostles and us their successors in Preaching
the word, to build an house unto him amongst the Gentiles) why I say, we may
not lawfully use those instruments which once were dedicated to the Tabernacle,
or not restore those things to the Temple, which once were stolen from the
Temple, or burn those lamps in our Sanctuary which once were lighted at the
altar, and have all this while lain unprofitably in the treasure house of the
God of the King of Babylon. I am not ignorant that this course has found
inveighers in all ages; it is reported that St Hierome was whipped in a sleep by
an Angel, for too much addicting himself unto Cicero's works, I am sure that
waking, Magnus scourged him, quasi candorem Ecclesiae Ethnicorum sordibus
pollueret, as if he polluted the candor of the Church with the filth of
Ethuickes. To be brief, I find that they deny not the use of humane learning
to be lawfully admitted in divine exercise, so that these four conditions,
observed also by S Paul himself in this very text, be not wanting. The first
concerns the end, that as our Apostle here make the mark (at which he
shot this arrow drawn from the quiver of Epimenides) to be the soundness of
the Cretians faith, so not vain glory, but the confirmation of faith, and the
removing of rubbes thereof, laid by its oppugners, either to hinder its growth
or fruits, must be that which gives us commission to make sale of that ware
in Christ's market. For Philosophers if they have spoken any thing consonant to
our belief, we are not only not to be afraid to meddle with it, sed etiam
ah ijs tanquam ab injustis possessoribus vindicandum, but also we are to
challenge it (says Austine) as being detained by unjust possessors, we are
not to shun learning because they say that Mercury was the first inventer of
letters, neither are we to reject virtue and justice, because the Gentiles
dedicated Temples to the worship of them; nay rather whosoever is a good
Christian will acknowledge the truth to be his Masters wheresoever he finds
it; and think it no villainy, so long as it benefits his Lords work, either to
go down to the Philistines to sharpen his axe, or to borrow of the Egyptians
gold and silver for the building of the Tabernacle.

The second condition is that the profaneness or Ethnicisme in them be
castrated, not so much in the press as in the mouth, for by this means we
gather the rose, says Theodoret, and leave the bryar, we take the gold and
let the dross go. We are to deal in these cases, says Hierome, as God
commanded the Israelites Deuteronomy. 21. If you see among the captives a beautiful
woman, and have a desire unto her, and would make her your wife, you must shave
her head, and pare her nails, and put the raiment of her captivity from off
her, and then you may marry her: So if we be enamored on secular wisdom, and
for the beauty and decency thereof do desire of a captive maid to make it an
Israelite, quicquid in ea mortuum, idololatriae, voluptatis, errorum,
libidinum, vel praecide vel rade, whatsoever is dead in it, whether idolatry or
wantonness, or error, or lasciviousness, either pare or shave, and then you
may lawfully beget of her, household servants unto the Lord God of Sabbath:
This rule is most excellently kept by St Paul in this my text, where he quoting
a sentence of Epimenides, the greater half he is contented to lay by; it
being, as Hierome, Austine, Chrysostom, and Theophilact do witness, tainted
with the immortality of Jupiter, and avouching of his eternity. The same course
he took with that of Aratus mentioned, Act. 17. (...), for we also are his
offspring; in which Calvin thinks that the Poet conceived some particle of the
divine essence to reside in the soul of man, yet this nothing let (says
he) why the Apostle might not thence extract a sense good enough to confute
the Athenians withal; so senseless is their position which think no
reformation to be lawful, but that which abrogates the whole use of a thing
for some partial abuse slyding hereby from an affirmative superstition, which
idolatrously touches what is unlawful, to a negative superstition, which
abstaineth from what is lawful.

The third condition is that we always so use humane learning that we ever
give the Scriptures the upper hand. So St Paul having condemned these Cretians
from the mouth of Epimenides, he thought this might serve as a good motive or
preparation to stir them up toward their amendment, but because Titus was to
go on a surer ground, he establishes that sentence from another of his own,
which proceeding from one inspired with the infallible spirit of truth, could
not incur suspicion of errors; (This witness is true,) for as much
difference as was between that riches which Solomon had to build the Temple,
and that which the Israelites borrowed of the Egyptians to build the
tabernacle; so much and more is between that testimony which nature brings, to
divine writings, and that which the penmen of the Holy Ghost bring unto it:
the which being well conceived, the contention (as the Fathers observe) 'twixt
Hagar and Sarah, may be composed, if Hagar flout not Sarah, as if she were
barren, nor Sarah exclude Hagar, as being her handmaid.

The last condition is that which Rhetoricians do give in like case, that these
citations of humane writers be used in divine exercise: non vt esculentis, sed
vt condimentis: not as meat, but as sauce. The Apostle therefore, though there
were many strains of poetry and proverbs touching these Cretians
imperfections, as common to be had as any vvare in the market, yet he contents
himself with one, and says not, haec testimonia sunt vera, these vvitnesses
are true, but, hoc testimonium est verum, this witness is true, not as if
more then one humane authority were unlawful, for he himself in a short
oration to the Athenians, did quote both an inscription upon an altar, and a
sentence of a Poet, but to teach us herein to use a moderation: for it were a
madness, because lace sets forth a suite, therefore to make a suite of lace
only, or because tapestry and hangings do grace a house, therefore to content
our selves with them insteede of stone and timber the most principal stuff in
building, which were as much as to say, I would build me an house, but in
effect make but an arbor. Poets and Orators are not the solid meats which
do nourish, but the green olive which provokes the appetite: (...), says
Pindarus, sub finem coenae dulcis est placenta: whereupon, as Gratian
observes, Gregory blames not those Bishops which studied and applied these
things, Sed qui contra episcopale officium pro lege Evangelica grammaticam
populo exponebant, but them which contrary to their office of expounding the
Gospel, read a grammar lecture unto the people, such as for wholesome food
proposed pepons and onions, and I know not what old ends to digest, as if he
were no body which compiled not a whole Homers Centons, or a Virgils Centons,
and vented them all at once to their auditory. Otherwise who can deny, but that
an ingenuous hearer may get some profit by hearing as well as another by
reading? as for them of the opposite opinion, I would wish them more charity,
then to grudge that other men see with two eyes, whereas they see but with one,
and will leave them with that saying of Hierome to Magnus, ne vescentium
dentibus edentuli invideant, and oculos caprarum talpae contemnant: that if
they want teeth, they would not envy them which eat with them, nor contemn
the eyes of goats, if themselves be Wantes and stark blind. And so I come
from the accusation taken up by our Apostle against these Cretians, This
witness is true, unto the reformation, whose steps and degrees succeed in
the next place to be handled, Wherefore rebuke them sharply that they may be
sound in the faith.

Was this witness true, and must Titus therefore be so hardy as to rebuke them
for it? Surely this was a service of no small danger; for first venture non
habet aures, the belly was never tender eared, especially in cases, wherein her
copy is questioned, and can it now brook with patience to be stinted, and
those ancient feasts famous in Creete for their antiquity and founder, renowned
Minos, to be censured? Again, that evil beasts should be curryed without
kicking, or giving some token of their ferall inclination, almost o'refloweth
the banks of all probability in nature: But to take the lie without a
challenge, to be twitted by St Paul, and then taxed by Titus for being (...),
always liars, the Valiant of our times, I am sure, will never be induced to
believe, that either the Cretians were men of resolution, or else that they
would pocket up a rebuke in this kind without a frey. I cannot tell, whether
since the time that duells have been thought the best means to disprove a
lie, although in them is made good, that which was never questioned, to wit,
skill in fencing, and not that which is impeach't, to wit, truth and honesty,
but these rather impaired, for hardly I shall believe him to regard his word,
which regards not his soul, whether (I say) reproves of this nature be now
warrantable? Certainly had Paul construed this language to be a subject
worthy of a combat, he would not have branded a whole nation with such a
vice, or at least thought to have wrought soundness in men's faith by so
unseasonable an instrument? We which challenge far higher places in Christ's
school, then these raw converts, must acknowledge our non-proficiency, if we
be more offended with others telling us of our faults, then with our selves,
for being faulty, seeing it is more disgraceful to be, then to be called so;
inasmuch as words are but aerie images of things, and to make the most of it, a
biting enemy is but a choleric physician that tells one his disease in his
anger. But counterfeit valor has confined reproves to such narrow limits,
and tied them to such nice terms, that for fear of an encounter they seldom
or never go abroad, and have scarce the pulpit allowed them for a sanctuary.
Hence springs that unhappy friendship, quae illum quem diligit, (as Carthusian
says) tacendo tradit diabolo, which favoring his brothers ears, breaks his
neck: hence that indulgency, and connivencie of parents, especially in cases
of virtue and religion, where if the question were to be decided, whether the
foul be ex traduce, that is, may be allowed by heralds, a place in pedegrees;
I might answer, no: seeing the neglect which they have of it does convince
sufficiently, that they begot their childrens bodies, but not their souls. The
Law in Deuteronomy is universal, thou shall not see thy brothers ox, or his
ass fall down by the way, and hide thy self from them: what shall we say,
(beloved) does God take care for oxen or asses? but the pity is (says
Bernard) cadit asina, succurritur ei, cadit anima, non est qui relevet eaem:
the ass falls, she is succored, a soul falls, and there is none which by
reproving, will relieve it. I find by the testimony of a Jesuit, Valentia 3.
Tom. 3. disp. and 10. q. that this duty of rebuking in my text, is so little
valued in the Church of Rome, that seldom either confessors are inquisitiue in
asking, or penitents careful to accuse themselves of any defect herein: but
yet to make us as deformed as themselves, they deliver that all rebukings
whatsoever are taken away by our doctrine, for what (says Bellarmine) will thou check him for not walking in the fields, whom thou supposest by abridging
the power of the will, to be shut up in prison? or if thou blame a man for
falling into a pit, because through his own fault he fell, yet willt thou
reprove him for not coming out, when thou make him so weak and feeble, and
the pit so high that he cannot? Yes, he may rightly be blamed for not being in
the fields, which ought to be there, shuts himself up, and is willing to abide
there still, and he is worthy to be chid which comes not out of a pit though he
cannot, if he by his own negligence brake the ladder, which should help him
out. Now man cast's himself into this pit, and shuts himself in this prison,
herein he is to be rebuked; he willingly would abide there still, herein he is
to be rebuked; he lost by his own default the means to escape thence, I mean
to avoid an occurrent sin, and herein he is to be rebuked. But they reply,
you show indeed in this, a justice in reproving, but by denying a power to the
will of using or rejecting these reproves, you deny the profit or necessity of
them. Why? admit that reproves take not their effect from the freedom of the
will, yet must Titus his talk be thought superfluous, and Cicero's rhetoric
be canonical scripture, frustra leges dantur, frustra objurgationes, lauds,
vituperationes adhibentur, in civil matters we deny not the will to have a
kind of regiment, though somewhat impaired, but ever in spiritual: do not
rebukes serve as so many rules and precepts to inform us what we should do?
do they not as sumners admonish us of our misery, do they not imprint a kind
of shame even in the wicked, touching the outward act; is not the justice of
God in punishing sinners preached in them? lastly, are they not ordained by God
as sharp instruments to search the benumbed wounds of his maimed children,
which by joining to them the saving oil of his grace, he makes effectual?
What matters, though they receive not their efficacy from nature, if they have
it from grace? Thus much my text assures me, that rebukes are to be used, and
if we believe our Apostle, they must not be regulated by Popery, which to make
the will a Lord, attires the understanding as nakedly as a beggar, and to
pamper the one, starues the other, (...), says the original, which is not a
bare reproof, but implies also a disproofe, as if he should have said,
tyranize not over their consciences in matters of religion, lap not up your
reproves in the general belief of the Church, but batter down the rampires
of sin with reason, and subdue self will with the weight of invincible
demonstration. This teaches us what ought to be the furniture of rebukes, if
we would have them effectual, to wit, that they be fraught with convincing
arguments, that Rhetoric enter not the listes without some weapons borrowed
from the arsenall of Logic, that we remember the Maxim in Philosophy, that
the will wills no more then the understanding understands. Checks have a kind
of signiory over the outward members, they may fetter the legs, (...) indeed
(adds the same Father) the ears of all men, but I convent the consciences of
some few, wherefore I say not, thou adulterer correct thy self, but whosoever
art infected with that vice in this people, correct thy self: Such doubtless
was the oratory of Titus, Paul bade him rebuke the Cretians for their lying,
this he might say, the love which you profess, is dissimulation, your vowing
of service, and all you have (if any such complement were then in use) is
nothing else for the most part, but a courteous and courtlike kind of Cretisme,
but to give the lie to any one in particular, herein, though the party hate not
the thing, yet he would hate the name, and the potion would turn to gall, what
should remove it? The reasons and grounds hereof, are principally two, the one
lest we arm shame with a braze^ vizard, to take up the patronage of a fault,
and so quem vis correctiorem, facis pejorem, says Austin, whom thou intendest
to mend, thou make worse: the other is, because a good name is like the
fasces and ensigns of honor, which usher the good actions of men, and make
them passable in the world: He which defames this, depriues his brother of an
instrument, without which neither his general calling of a Christian, nor his
particular almost whatsoever, can be so powerful. Alexander ab Ales therefore
disputing the question, whether contumelies are to be remitted, not only
quoad rancorem, as touching malice and rancor, but also quoad satisfactionem,
as touching satisfaction; he distinguishes of contumelies, that some are
injuriosae in personas, injurious to the persons; some, injuriosae in officia,
injurious to the offices which they bear: the former he says, ought not to
be greatly set by, but easily pardoned, but not the latter without some
amends, if it may be had. For in things which touch ones particular person,
we give an account to God, but for our selves; but in things which concern
ones office or calling we may give an account to God for others, and therefore
we cannot dispense with ought that belongs to them without being injurious to
our neighbors; now amongst these not the least is a good name, it being our
own indeed, as our riches are, in respect of the possession, but it is others
in respect of the use and benefit. Here therefore (beloved) I could wish that
in public speaking men would observe this distinction of him and them, more
seriously, whether they speak of those which bear sway in the commonwealth,
or them which are overseers in the Church. Chief Magistrates are set by God,
to be like Su^nes in the firmament, rash censures of these are like Clouds in
the middle region of the air, they hurt not the Sun it self, neither do
they abstract any thing from his permanent brightness, but they deprive us
which live below of that light and warmth which he deriveth to us. So likewise
Pastors in the Church, are trumpets of the Gospel which summon you to
battle against your spiritual enemies, he which defames them, does he
stop the breath of the trumpet; does he hinder it from sounding? no, but he
enchants your organs and puts wool into your ears, that you cannot
distinguish the sounding of it: I speak not this as if I would procure their
obliquities exemption from reproof, that they should be deprived of the means
prescribed by God for men's recoveryes, as the gloss would have the Pope, to
whom no man may say, Domine cur itafacis? for if vices once ascend the Pulpit,
where shall they not enter? if Satan plant ill manners in the most eminent
place of the Church, what will he not do in private houses? But what was
prescribed to Titus to be the square of his fraternall corrections, I commend
to all, redargue illos, not illum, rebuke privately him, publicly not him,
but them. But perhaps in the third place you will ask, how you must rebuke? my
Apostle here tell's you, when he says, Rebuke them sharply. The vices above
mentioned were so common and frequent amongst the Cretians, that the whole
Island seemed to be lulled a sleep and to need sharp reprehensions to rouse it
up. For as it is with ill humors, that a weak dose does but stir and anger
them, not purge them out; so it fares with inveterate sins, an easy
reproof does but encourage wickedness, and make it think it self so slight
as that censure imports. Upon which ground, Commentator upon the 1. Ethics,
disputing, whether young men swayed by their affection may be admitted into the
School of Moral Philosophy, determines affirmatively that they may, but with
this limitation, that the professers and readers of that discipline, do
oftentimes place opprobrious and contumelious speeches insteede of speculariue
arguments, the reason whereof I find given by Gregory, vt cum culpa ab actore
non cognoscitur, quanti sit ponderis ab increpantis ore sentiatur, that when
the fault is not conceived by the doer, the weight of it may be felt, from the
mouth of the reprouer. For a sharp reproof and a contumely do agree, as
Thomas well notes, in the matter, but differ formally, meaning that the same
words or phrases may be common to them both; for to call fool, Matthew. 5. is
judged a contumely and deserving hell fire, yet foolish, Luke 24. is a
reproof, and used by our Savior to the two Disciples, and to the Galatians by
St Paul, chap. 3. but because the signification of words do depend upon the
inward affection, therefore the form which denominates the action is taken
from the end and scope of the speaker, to wit, whether he intends the
dishonouring of the persons, or their reformation, as Titus when he made the
butt of his rebukings the soundness of the Cretians faith. But least we
should imagine the sinews and vigor of reproof to consist in Sarcasmes, or to
prevail only in the tongue of barking Doeg, St Paul here tell's us what
sharpness is most convenient, when he says, (...), signifying a cutting
off, and as some interpreters do note, used by S. Paul as alluding to
chirurgians who cut away the dead flesh which fostereth corruption in wounds,
whereby we may learn, that reproves are then most feeling and do pierce home,
when they not only make that sin bleed whose cure is intended, but also lay
the axe to the root of it, as well as occasions, and the like, which do
preserve and foster it. It were folly to preach obedience to the Prince,
unless we infringe and extirpate the sandy foundation of Papal authority: In
vain it were to rebuke lying, and not to cancel the grounds of equivocations,
to blame despair, and not take away the uncertainty of Salvation, to beat
down presumption, and proclaim open markets for indulgences. The last thing
which may be desired to be known in this precept of rebuking is the end,
wherefore it is to be done; and that is set down in the last place, That they
may be sound in the faith. Faithful are the wounds of a friend, says the
Wiseman, his accusations are instructions, his chastiseme^ts peace, his
precious blames shall never break our heads. But here likewise may be
questioned, what faith is understood by the Apostle, whether fides quae
creditur, the faith which is believed, or fides qua creditur, the faith whereby
we believe: I cannot altogether exclude this latter from an interest in my
text, seeing these two are relatiues, and therefore what touches one, does
obliquely concern the other; but yet I take the former to be principally
intended, the phrase importing no less, which says not that they may have a
sound faith, as implying a defect merely in the subject, but that they may be
sound in the faith, as implying an imperfection in the object, and the
circumstances enforcing the same, which mention, corruption of doctrine in the
teachers, and a mixture of Jewish fables in the things taught. When therefore
S. Paul lay's an injunction upon Titus to rebuke the Cretians for those three
notorious vices, that they might be sound in the faith, he seems to paint in
one small table the whole progress of heresies how they begin, how they are
promoted, and how they are established and confirmed: The liar which is the
first brocher of them tell's the tale, The evil beasts, which are his
contentious followers do defend it, and The slow bellyes are most hearers that
for want of pains taking in the inquiry do approve it. But to remove these
obstructions, Titus must turn Physician, and to procure soundness of faith
must take upon him the task of a spiritual Hypocrates. And to apply this to
our selves; the voice of more then a Titus is necessary in this decrepit age of
ours, wherein faith in many places lie's bed-ridden, and as if Crete had
dispersed new colonies throughout the world, it scarce is any where secure from
the assaults of a lying and contentious Cretian. What plott of ground feed's
not Minotaures which gore the sides of faith and Christian religion: what
pasture so level wherein some aspiring Ida lift's not up it is head, and
involues it is vain conceits in the clouds? Even the Labyrinthes of Dedalus
have left their subterranean habitations, and planted themselves in the
fallacies and impostures of homebred Donatists and neighboring Pelagians. I
wish that words were as coin, that so the many which this subject requires,
might be exchanged into fewer, and yet of equivale^t value, and I might co^tain
my self within that circle of time on which hope rather then assurance bidd's
me trespass: but this Presence commands me silence, where the example of our
royal Theseus himself in quelling these monsters, has supplied that which
you may suppose was the task of Titus, and engrafted (I doubt not) what my
text aime's at, with a silent Sermon, and real persuasion of it is own. For
conclusion therefore, I have hitherto entertained your ears with the anatomy
of a Cretian, and transported your thoughts a while from this Island of ours,
the gemme of the Western Ocean, and set them on shore on the most eminent and
renowned Island of the Mediterranean; what you have there beheld, I trust your
riper judgments will make use of, not as most trauailers do, by bringing them
home with you into your Country, but by learning how to avoyde them. In that
catalogue or inventory rather of Cretish trash, the first sophisticate ware
which offered it self for current, was the lie; if these quarters of Europe
do as much detest the thing, as distaste the name, think Titus rebukes bound
for some other coast, and not ours. But for the other moueables, fitter to
store parkes and forests, then towns or cittyes; namely, euill-beasts, I
should be also confident of our freedom herein as of wolves, were not slow
bellies, whereof our Soil is too copious, and sharp teeth ever individual
companions. My hope is, that parting from Crete, you will shake hands and
bidadew to those surquedries and superfluities which styled these Cretians,
slow bellies, S. Paul especially in my Text making this (...), that is, (as I
showed before) the pruning or paring off, of those things which breed and
foster corruption in us, to be the most necessary mean to arrive at soundness
of faith. Why should our pamperings, afford matter to any homebred viper to
censure us, as Epimenides did his Countrymen, or think the beasts which we
profane by sacrifice to our own appetites, do as they did to these Cretians,
incorporate their brutish affections with their carcasses: This time bid's them
live, that you may kill these. Thus must this sharpness of rebuking be
practiced, thus this soundness of faith here mentioned, be perfected.

AMEN.
THE MINISTERS CHARGE, AND MISSION.
MATT. 20.6. Why stand you here all the day idle?


IT is the inbred disposition of most men, no sooner to set hand to the plough
in the field, or to thrust a sickle into his harvest; but, whereas the maine
scope of their actions ought to be the good and benefit of others, they
always drive at, and chiefly intend the welfare of themselves. As Peter (in
the Chapter going before) scarce had three winters past, (as Writers note) when
from his travailes in the Deep, he had bin called to the quiet harbor of the
Gospel; and from a poor silly Fisherman, been promoted by our Savior to be
a fisher of men, but that he thinks fit already (good man) his portion should
be prescribed him, the slender service he had yet done, or could do his
Master, he thinks not of; but high promotions, and munificent rewards are
already his Butt he shoote's at, and his question is, What shall we have? God's
rewards (beloved) to his Servants are vneffable, Ye which followed me in the
regeneration (Christ Tell's them) shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel: an answer (no doubt) satisfying to the full both
Peter and his Companions; but so it falls out oftentimes, that the best
prescribed potions indiscreetly taken, prove banes unto the Patient, and the
wholesome proposes of an instructor, uttered for the confirming of one in a
good course, by mis-applying, produce the contrary effect. Christ therefore,
lest confidence should beget in them sloathfulnesse, his benignity prejudice
their forwardness, and too much security of the prize make them idle in the
race, in this Chapter he rouses them by the Parable of an Husbandman sending
out laborers into the Vineyard, where some being hired at the dawning of the
day, some at the third and sixth hour, others but at the ninth and the
eleventh, yet all equally receiving their penny, nay, the last, in some
respects, being preferred before the first; he giue's his Disciples to
understand, that it is labor, not early calling, which gett's precedence in
God's Kingdom, the mansion houses which their Father will bestow on them,
should be according to their diligence; as they multiplied their talents, so
should they be remunerated with Cittyes; if they look to sit on the Thrones he
told them of, and would shine as the brighter stars in Heaven, they must here
on Earth be more eminent then others in painful conversation; there are primi
vocatione, the first in calling, and there are primi affectione, the first in
affection; those oftentimes for their fainting in God's Vineyard, shall have a
lower place at his Supper, and these for their forward zeal after their
calling, shall sit in the higher room, and so the first shall be last, and the
last shall be first. Interpreters for the most part do agree, that by the
Husbandman in this Parable is meant GOD himself; by the laborers, Men upon
Earth; by the Vineyard, the Church of God; to which, men being called, should
in it (according to their vocation) do deeds of piety and justice; and by the
penny which was paid in the evening, to be understood, the Crown of glory,
which at the end of the World God giue's to his Elect. The difficulty rests
chiefly in the hours; some (as Hierome relate's it) would have the eleventh
hour to signify the calling of the Gentiles, and the former to be referred
unto the Jews, which lived before Christ's coming in the flesh; Gregory,
Beda, and Theophylact are of opinion, that the laborers of the first hour do
signify the Patriarchs from Adam to Noah; those of the third, the Fathers from
Noah to Abraham; those of the sixth, from Abraham to Moses; the ninth, from
Moses to CHRIST; and the eleventh, from CHRIST to the end of the world. But
herein I suppose that the Logic rule is to be observed, which says, Omnis
Similitudo claudicat; Chrysostom especially upon this place giving this note,
that in Parables we should attend chiefly to the general scope, and not be
too curious in particulars: wherefore with our best reformed Interpreters, in
that our Savior was pleased to name 5 hours, we rather take an ornament to
be added thereby to the Parable, then any mystery to be involved in the
number, and by those several hours do understand only several ages and
seasons of man's life, according to which, God calls some sooner, and some
later into his Church, some in their infancy, some at riper years, and some
not long before their death; of which latter sort, the Householder here in my
Text speaks, Why stand ye here all the day idle? Maldonat and the rest of
Popish Commentators, would have these loyterers to be blamed here in my Text,
not so much for that by their careless security, they endangered the loss of
that invaluable Crown, which God freely giue's to whom he pleases; but in
that forsooth they merited not ex condigno, and meritis operum, the Kingdom of
Heaven: wherein I know not whether they may justlier be branded with ignorance
or impiety; for pretend what they can, a maine difference will ever appear
between the merits which they maintain, and the practice of these men here in
my Text; for first the husbandman prete^ds here, that it is lawful for him to
do as he will with his own, the Papists will have him deal according to men's
deseruings; for justo Dei judicio debetur meritis bonoru^ operu^, merces vitae
aeternae, says Bellar. in his 5th book de Iustif. and 16. cap. Again, the
penny here was wages sufficient for the whole day; and therefore admit that the
first laborers were idle for some part of the day; yet they can never make it
good, that the laborers which wrought but one hour in the day, could
challe^nge the whole days hire ex meritis; and to conclude, Bellar. in his 5th
de Iustif. and 17. cap. would have good works meritorious, ratione pacti and
operis simul, in regard of the perfection of the work and the promise of God
annexed withal, whereas besides the first laborers, none are found in this
Parable to have had any pactu^ or agreement made with the^ (as their own men
observe,) and therefore their kind of merit can agree with none of the^, save
peradventure the first, which were least respected, last paid, and besides,
were noted to be great murmurers; in which regard, Musculus is content that the
Papists shall share with the^, and for their satisfaction, shall find something
correspondent to themselves in this Parable. The husbandman therefore in my
Text, dealing not with those which had turned over Peter Lombards sentences, or
Thomas Aquinas sums, used not (as I suppose) those school quiddities to
simple laborers; but seeing the^ sloathfull and idle, he thought good to blame
the^ for it, before he hired the^, as if he should thus have argued the case
with the^: Idleness you know is unprofitable to all men, and being laborers,
inexcusable in you, your Vocation (methinks) should prompt you to sedulity; and
where the harvest is great, and hirers many, you should be more solicitous for
your selves, and not be deficie^t in your own cause, your idle manner of
standing (it seems) is an impeachme^t unto you, and causes that either hirers
heed not you, or you not the^, and therefore, Why stand you idle? Again, you
are laborers of the Vineyard, and there it is that you should exercise your
endowments; this is a marketplace for buyers and sellers, a tribunal for
justice, a councell-chamber for actions of state, wherein you, by your Vocation
which another way had diverted your employments, cannot deal, and therefore,
why stand you here idle? To be brief, the day is the time, in which a man
goes out unto his work until the evening; would you be counted worthy of
your hire, and are you loath to sustain the brunt of the heat? He that
sleeps in harvest, shall be filled with poverty; and he which is sloathfull
in the day, shall not receive the penny at night: But oh! I fear by your own
negligence you will loose the opportunity of the time, the sweetness of the
labor, and the plenteousnes of the reward; and therefore, why stand you here
all the day idle?

The sum is a reprehension of idleness in all men which are laborers in
God's Vineyard, as indeed all men are, or at least, ought to be enrolled under
that title.

The things reprehended are three; the 1 Action, why stand you idle. 2 Place,
here in the marketplace. 3 Time, all the day.


Standing, that describes idlenesse's degree; the market place, that note's
opportunity; and all the day, that expresses perpetuity. [No place so fit that
I know to stand idle in, as the market place; and he that will loose no time of
standing idle, his best course is to stand idle all the day.] Within these
bounds I shall endeavor by God's assistance, and your Christian patience to
confine my meditations; and first for the action, which come's in the first
place to be considered, Why stand ye idle*

The usual place in great and large Cities (as ancient writers do observe)
where laborers stood for hire in the Romans time, to who^ suppose Judea now
subject, was the Forum, or market place; and it may be evidently gathered out
of this Parable, for there it was where the Householder found some standing for
him at the third hour, and either in the same, or not much differing place
that he found the rest standing at other times; for had they stood in a place
unusual to find laborers in, they rather would have given some satisfaction
to the Householder why they stood there, then why they stood idle, whereas these
laborers only to excuse their idleness, in saying that no man had hired
them, ver. 7. made no mention at all of the place they stood in. They whose
quills write with no ink but with the blood of Monarchs, and find no
Panegyricke theames fitting their paradoxall brains, but treasons against
States, murdering of Princes, and massacring of God's Elect, might with much
more ease (I doubt not) commend these men here in my Text, and with a great
deal better vizord of Christian charity, rank these silly laborers amongst
their canonized Saints; for if the son in the Gospel be blamed for denying to
do his Fathers will, Mat. 28.21. These men are to be commended in that they
came hither (as it should seem) on set purpose to do it. It had been little
acceptable in God's sight for them to have risen early, and late to have taken
rest, had it not been to a good end, and right use, but labor it was which
they aimed at, and patience it was with which they waited for it. The foolish
virgins which attended not the Bridegroome's coming, were justly rebuked: that
could not be objected against these men, for they waited and attended for hire
all the day, and what virtue is oftener ingeminated in holy Writ with greater
commendations, then patient waiting? Yet when Christ enters into judgment with
his servants, what flesh can appear righteous in his sight? whilst we live in
this world we must not expect any absolute perfection, and so far are we
unable (which our adversaries would have) to perform more then we need do,
that it is a matter impossible for us to perform what we should do. The
coming of these men to market to be hired, the patient expectation of hirers,
the willing undertaking of pains imposed upon them, was a thing (no doubt) to
God well pleasing, but that immaculate lamb, which is the true Pastor, and
Bishop of our Souls, has concluded all under sin that he might have mercy
on all; when he is pleased to ask a why? what man is he that can answer one to
a thousand? That which these laborers did, their intent to labor in the
vineyard, was in it self bonum, an action good and laudable, but there wanted
a been to it, and therein did the obliquity consist. When the harvest was
great and the laborers few, these came indeed for work, but yet diligently
they sought it not out, when any came into the market to hire laborers (as it
seems) they proffered not themselves, till the husba^dman or others asked them,
as negligent and careless people they heeded not the oportunities of the time,
but are said in an idle fashion to stand there, which being so blamed by the
husba^dman in my text, directs us to this observatio^.

That the laborers of God's vineyard should not stand only expecting when
labors should be imposed on them, but also should seek out and be
apprehensiue of all good ^ccasions, wherein they may be employed.

It is a position of Aristotle well known, that moral felicity consists in
action: and certainly if that may be esteemed our summum bonu^, or highest
felicity on earth without which we are assured of no felicity in heaven, I may
well conclude with the Philosopher, that our earthly happiness does consist in
nothing so much as in action. For does not our Savior tell us, that the tree
which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.
Matthew. 7.19? and the life of a Christian is it not compared by S. Paul both to
a race wherein God affords no toleration to standers by, and bestows a crown
upon none but such as so strive as they ought to do 2. Tim. 4? and again to a
time of sowing, wherein whatsoever a man sows in his life he is sure to
reap the same again in the world to come. Gal. 6.7? for though it be true
that Deus coronat dona sua, non merita tua, God crowns his own gifts not thy
merits, as says St Augustine, yet is it as true that to the making of the
wedding garment, with which we must appear clothed, when at the last trumpe,
the great King shall summon us unto his heavenly supper, there is required not
faith alone, but works also, as Hierome well observes upon the 22 Mat. Faith
I confess, is as the chief stuff of which the garment or coat is made; but
works are, that by which it is known and discerned: and in as much as that
the seed of the Serpent by hypocrisy and dissimulation has of ten made false
garments for the devil to mask in like an angel of the light, Christ will
never acknowledge the garment to be his livery, unless he find on it his own
badge, and that badge is works, Now in regard of this necessity of well-doeing,
I hope there is not in this assembly any so rudely catechis'd in the School of
Christianity, which will not from these premises infer with me, that if we
expect the promises annexed, we must diligently exercise the functions of our
calling when opportunity is offered; yet as in moral actions (...), that is,
prudence and perspicuity are so necessary that the Philosopher in the 6 of his
Ethickes, concludes no moral virtue to subsist without them; so are we to
think of the actions of our vocations, that they likewise will be unfruitful
without these requisites adjoined: for be our drifts never so religious, never
so laudable be our intentions, yet want there but prudence to direct us, or
perspicuity to apprehend and force the means conducing to our designs, and
we may easily mistake the narrow paths which lead unto life, and be misled
into the broad way which leads unto destruction* seeing therefore that a
Christian is on all sides so encou^tred with the wiles of Satan etc
inticeme^ts of the world, well and wary must he be, lest by standing idly or
carelessely with these laborers when oportunities are offered, he miss and
fail of the scope he intended. So far were the Saints in the old Testament
from omitting any opportunity whereby they might practice their piety, that on
the contrary side they sought out ways, and as it were plotted how to do good.
Abraham, Genesis 18. looks up and sees three men, and what does he? not look
aside like the mizers of our days, nor stand expecting when they should
implore harbor of him, though the Sun was as then at the highest, and the
time of the day by reason of heat unseasonable to travail in, but he runs to
meet them, lest they should overpasse him, bows to the ground that they might
not deny him, and petitions them if he has found favor in their sight, that
they would vouchsafe to turn in unto him. Remember Lot in the chapter
following, does not he likewise rise up to meet the men which came to Sodom,
bow his face unto the ground, and press earnestly upon them, which seemed
loath to be burdenous to so kind an inviter, that they would turn into his
house, and partake of his provision? Why these men became humble suitors unto
their guests, and not their guests unto the^? All the parcels of holy writ are
full of such examples; the zeal of David for the house of the Lord, Iehoas his
own care in purging the Temple, Paul's preaching in season and out of season,
and Nehemiah's solitary night-walkes about desolate Jerusalem, what are they
but lively patterns of that forwardnes and forecast, though not specially
stirred up by others, which every Christian should assume himself in the work
of the vineyard? I could here propose unto you the example of our Savior
Christ, whose compassion commonly then most appeared when it was lead implored.
Little did Jerusalem or Sion think of him, when he weeps for it, or the
soule-sicke Jew seek for him as the Physician, when he sought nothing more
the^ to salve him, sinful man which never had the grace either to discern his
own misery or to beg God's mercy, Christ seeing what he had need of, of
himself came down to cure his infirmity; and his mortal enemies which
abandoned him, and had lost the right of their inheritance, thirty-three years
and more voluntarily fights he with the devil, world, and death, that he
might purchase it a new for them.

These (believed) and the like examples should move us to bethink our selves of
those free and voluntary actions of piety which God requires at our hands, and
whilst we are here abiding in this Naioth as in a Source whence knowledge is
to be derived into the barren places of this land, let us not stand idle, or be
too beetle-sighted in apprehe^ding the good opportunities which are here
presented unto us to do good to others: and though we are not called to any
special charge; yet imagine we may not, that in the mean season God
challenges no mites at our hands to be freely bestowed on the hungry souls
which dwell by us, and which perish often for want of the smallest cru^mes that
fall from our tables; you know whose voice it was, Nunquid ego custos fratris
mei? am I my brothers keeper? O beloved? thou shall not see (says God) thy
brothers ox or his ass go astray, and hide thy self, thon shall in any case
bring the^ again unto thy brother: Deuteronomy. 22. I may ask you as the Apostle did
of another sentence of the law; does God care for oxen or asses? has he not a
greater care of men's souls? will thou the^ see I say, not thy brothers ass,
but thy Savior's sheep go astray, and not seek to bring it again unto him?
If we oppress the fatherless, or detain the right of the poor, mortui
sumus non otiosi, we stand not idle, says Chrysostom, but are then dead; but
though we do not this, yet if we seek not out the poor and give
voluntarily vntothem, stamus otiosi, says he, we stand idle. This is the
market place where the husbandman expects to find laborers, and it is
almost the twelfth hour with some that they have stood idle therein, shall
they say with these in my text, quia nemo nos conduxit, because no man has
hired us: why then belike the vineyard in this parable is not the Church of
God, wheresoever the brambles of sin are to be cut off; but some fat
benefice: nor the penny which the husbandman agrees to give them, the crown
of glory, which they must not receive until the evening; but some worldly
promotion, which they must harp after in the mean time. They indeed which
are possessed of a pastoral charge, have a more special vocation to employ
their talent in that place, which talent if they put up in a napkin, as some
do, they shall be beaten with more stripes then we, yet we have a general
vocation besides, by virtue whereof in those things which bear a relation unto
Christ our head, we have all an interest one in another, and in this respect,
we are commanded to admonish one another: Romans 15.14. besides, we are parts of
the same body, and have we no fellow-feeling when other members are wounded,
or do fester? we do fight the same battle, and think we it endangers us
nothing, when others break their ranks, or forsake their stations? We are
the flock of the same shepherd, and feed in the same pastures, and shall
we conceive our selves free from all peril, when we see others tainted or
infected? if any by preferring a Simon Magus before a prompt and learned Ezra,
do hinder thee somewhat from an ordinary performance of the works of thy
calling, this thing will God require at their hands, but if these neglect their
care of us, shall we wholly neglect our care of Gods flock? God grant there
be none here of whom, as the wiseman said of worldlings, that God gave them
riches, but he gave them not the heart to use them, so I may say of them, that
God has given them learning, eloquence and other blessings from above, and
has not given them the heart to use them. It was far otherwise (beloved) in
the Prophet Esaias, of whom we read, that so soon as God had but touched his
lips with a coal from his altar, his heart was straight inflamed to be set on
work, and when the House of Israel, and men of Judah, which were the vineyard
which the Lord of hosts had planted, and of whom he looked for judgment and
righteousness, when they had brought forth wild grapes, the sins of crying
and oppression, and God had said, who shall go up for us, and whom shall I
send? Esaias makes no delays but cries, send me. Let us reason together
(beloved) we are the vineyard of the Lord as was Judah and Israel, what could
he have done more for them, then he has done for us? and has not
superstition and Baalisme infected yet many an angle of our land, as it did
that of Judah, and to root out this, God says, whom shall I send? has not
simony and senselessness of religion invaded the richer sort, and to correct
these, God says daily, whom shall I send? Flattery, raines it not in palaces,
false balances in cities, and ignorance in cottages? and to reform these, God
says once and again, whom shall I send? Every minister is a watchman, and as
an officious messenger, is to say in these cases, send me. Now when God sends
us out into the ways, and wills us to bid as many as we can find, of poor and
distressed unto the marriage, can it suffice us to preach in high places only,
or kings palaces? This is with the people to seek Christ, not so much for
ought else, as for the loaves they eat, and which filled them; or With Judas,
to follow Christ rather for his bag, then for his doctrine Rouse up your
selves therefore (beloved) the harvest is great, and good laborers in many
places are deficient, knowledge decays in some parts, and how should it be
repaired but by you? the necessity you see is urgent, the opportunities
apparent, the reward eminent, and therefore why stand you here? which is the
place reprehended, and comes next to be handled. Why stand you here? The
place here reprehended by the husbandman was, in all probability, the
marketplace, and indeed the marketplace, if we may stand upon the letter, is
no fit place for the laborers of the vineyard to stand in. But to pass from
the letter to the sense; the market (says one) is the world, vbi omnia sunt
venalia, maxim vero animae, where all things are bought and sold, especially
men's souls; Lord to see how cheap the devil buys them! for how little
pleasure, how little gain or honor? the shrewd merchants of our days, who
will stick at a penny when they trade with their neighbors, will not stand
for their souls when they are to barter with the devil. But yet as our best
interpreters do observe, the vineyard being taken more particularly for the
Church, the market may signify any place out of Church, and not amiss, for
God forbid, that markets should be kept either in Churches, or Church matters,
since it pleased our Savior to whip both buyers and sellers out of the Church:
but this I note only by the way. The laborers of the vineyard being so
sharply rebuked by the husbandman for standing (here) that is, in a place
wherein their labor lay not, and whereof they were not laborers, does direct
us more usefully to this observation:

That a Christians labor should chiefly be employed in that place, whereof
his calling makes him a labourer.

This is easy to be confirmed by sundry places of holy writ, for first we
find that the Levites were watchmen, but yet by Moses law, as in their proper
place, they especially were to watch in the Tabernacle or the Congregation;
Number. 10. Israel must fight the Lords battle against Midia^, yet so that all
observe the place which their Gideon appointes them: Judge. 7. And the Elders at
Ephesus are commanded to watch and take heed, but it must be to the flock,
over which the Holy Ghost had made them overseers: Act. 20. Jacob, as we read
Genesis 31. when he once undertook to be his uncles shepherd, the homelines
of the task could not daunt him, nor the unkindness of churlish Laban diminish
his vigilance, but that for 20 years together, though the drought consumed him
in the day, and the frost by night, so that for care, his sleep departed from
him, he still abode with his flock in the field.

A good example (beloved) for us ministers, which either now have, or may
hereafter have a flock of Christ's committed to our custody, to teach us with
what care and diligence we should always attend on it. It is a vineyard
wherein the enemy will sow weeds to pluck down the vines, if we be not
vvatchfull as was this Patriarch: it is a camp on all sides oppugned by
Satan's stratagems, so that if we but budge from our station, he will immediately
find entrance: it is a flock which we must feed not verbo only, but
exemplo by example likewise, as we are taught 1. Pet. 5. and therefore if
through our absence any thereof do err or go astray, at our hands God will
require it again. Woe therefore, says Ezechiel, to the idle shepherd that
leaves the flock, the sword shall be upon his arm, and his right eye shall
be utterly darkened. But what (will some object) must the shepherd then be
always attending his flock, the labourer always laboring in the vineyard?
this is an hard saying, and who is able to bear it? Neither am I ignorant
what has befallen to many, who at the first have been so vehement in
speaking against any toleration in this kind, that afterward having more
feelingly looked into the case have changed their minds: a notable example
whereof we may have in Cajeran, whom Ambrosius Catharinus in his apology
against Dominicus a Soto, produces to prove the lawfulnes of this act, for
that he having once in his writings inveighed most bitterly against it, and
afterward being made Cardinal, accepted of a Bishopric, and resided not at
it, and so refuted his writings with his example. To come briefly therefore to
the point, I dare not be so peremptory against the practice of our Church as
some are, plain it is that this commandment of residing is praeceptum
affirmativum, an affirmative precept, as Eliseus, Valentia, with others do
observe, and therefore you know it binds not sempe, or ad semper, it must not
be laid in the balance stripped from those necessary material circumstances
which should give it weight. I grant therefore that there may be certain
cases which, though one be a labourer of this vineyard, or a pastor of this
flock, yet may excuse his absence for a time. As first intrinsecall
impediments, such as is the sickness of the body, for if the place be unfit for
recovery, it were hard heartednes in a flock to bar the physician of their
souls (as Mosconius notes) the lawful means to recover the health of his
body; and therefore leaving not his place unfurnished until his recovery, I
take, the husbandman excepteth this man though he be a labourer of the
vineyard from his censure of standing here. Secondly, there may be extrinsecall
impediments, which may admit of a dispensation of absence, as persecution, so
that the two rules which St Austine requires in his 18 epistle to Honoratus
be observed; the first is, that the persecution be not general but
personal: not general, that is of all pastors, or of the flock as well as
pastors, for if he then leave his station, he is compared by our Savior to an
hireling, who sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and the wolf
catches them, and scatters the sheep, Ioh. 10. and this persecution of
clergy and lay people together, is likened by that Father, to the equal
danger of mariners and merchants in the same ship in a great tempest, now
God forbid (says he) that the mariners, or specially the master of the ship
leaving his passengers behind, should save himself by a boat, or by swimming,
and commit the vnwealdy vessel to the mercy of the unmerciful waves. But the
persecution must be personal and proper not to pastors only, but to that
pastor or some pastors only, and in this case Elias fled from Iesabell: 1.
King. 19. Peter left the Church of Jerusalem to escape Herod's fury: Act. 12.
Paul left the Church of Damascus, when some particularly sought to kill him:
Act. 9. and Christ wished his disciples when they were persecuted in one city,
to fly into another, Mat. 10. The second rule which St Austine sets down, is
that the necessary offices of the pastor which is fled, be supplied by
others: and therefore, Paul when he fled the persecutours, left not Damascus
void of a necessary ministry, nor Athanasius left the Church of Alexandria
destitute of other teachers, when he fled from Constantius the Emperor, as
the same Father well notes. Thirdly, I deny not but that a labourer from his
special place, or a pastor from his particular flock may be absent, and yet
not come under the Husband-mans lash of Why stand you here: and this may be
qualitate negotij, when the business about which he goes, is to the profit
either of the universal Church, or of some particular. Naclantius, Campegius,
Mosconius and others which write upon this subject, do reduce to this title the
going to general or particular Synods, and helping to establish other
Churches, and the like, in which cases they agree that a pastor may leave his
flock for a time, so that the time be not very long, and the place not
unprovided of a sufficient substitute: for so we read of Timothy, to whom Paul
had committed the Church of Ephesus, and Tytus who was Bishop of Crete, how the
one was sent to establish the Church in Dalmatia, and the other both promised
to the Philippians, and also upon an occasion sent for to come to Rome: 2. Tim.
4. but yet so, that neither Titus his flock were left unprovided of many
instructors which before he had ordained there, nor Ephesus, as Calvin well
notes, wa^ted a Tychicus, which was sent unto them to supply Timothie's room.
But these former exceptions may be applied to all Churches in general, there
are some other alleged by our men which concern our Church of England more
particularly: for first, there is a liberty of absence granted to some, that
their knowledge may be increased in the University, and their labors by that
means, be made afterward the more profitable: secondly, to others, lest the
houses of great men should want that daily exercise of religion, wherein their
example avails as much, yea many times peradventure more then the laws
the^elues, with the common sort: thirdly, to others which are men of quality,
that as their services are in weight for the public good, so likewise their
rewards and encouragements should be the more, lest it might here be verified,
which we read in the first of Job, that the oxen should be only plowing, and
the asses feeding. But because it is controversed with no small fervency on
both sides, what are the true limits, without which it is not lawful to stray
in this point; and for as much as it cannot be imagined, that all circumstances
are so perspicuously delivered in the Scriptures concerning this, as that more
doubts, like Hydra's heads, shall notrise up a new to continue the fight; for
mine own part I could wish, that me^ would but first practice on all parts that
which may be certainly determined by the word of God. Fourethings we find
plainly expressed in the Scriptures concerning the duty of a Pastor. First,
that he is to employ his talent to the best advantage of the Church, lest the
grace bestowed upon him be in vain: 1. Cor. 15. Secondly, that he has a
particular calling to take heed to, and to feed that flock of God, over which
the Holy Ghost has made him ouerseer: Act. 20. Thirdly, that his hirelings
negligence shall not excuse him, if the wicked be not warned from his way, but
that the blood of that man God will require at his hands which is the true
watchman, Ezech. 33. Fourthly, that the feeding of his flock is to be
preferred before any worldly respect, be it either honor or wealth; and
therefore we are commanded to take the oversight thereof, not for filthy lucre,
but of a ready mind: 1. Pet. 5. and indeed our laws never intended, that the
outward pomp of the Church should be advanced with any prejudice to the
inward growth of it, as some think, who take the Church to be of the Spanish
humor, and could be content to have it is belly pinch't, rather then it is back
unguarded. These things, I take, may be sufficiently strengthened by many texts
in holy writ: if any will pretend that they can practice these by substitutes,
or can supply in effect by proxies what these challenge, let others take up the
first stone, I should be here silent: for mine own part I came not hither to
lay any aspertion of negligence upon those reverend pillars of our Church,
whose assiduous and frequent visiting of their flocks, besides other worthy
labors consumed in higher places, might serve to brande our rural sluggards
with perpetual ignominy: only for those, whose flock, (as St Paul terms it)
have scarce seen their face in the flesh, nor others in the pulpit; and which
abusing the scope of the statute, provided no doubt to a good end, think they
may go safely therein, as far as the very letter of the law will give them
leave; I know not what to judge; unless they are persuaded, that before Gods
tribunal, they shall be proceeded against by the common law, or else, that
they hope they shall be allowed a Counselor to plead their case at that day.
In the mean time, leaving the deciding of the question to others, let us apply
to our selves but those four points which before I mentioned, and consider
therein the duties which God exacteth at our hands: the first, which concerns
the employment of our talent, yields a caveat both to those, who having spent
their little stock in the country, make a color of coming hither like the
foolish virgins to buy more oil, that they take heed lest the bridegroom
pass by in the mean season, or that they show not themselves more foolish
then the virgins; and when they come for oil, mistake the vessel, and bestow
their talent upon a differing ware: as also to those which are well fraughted
with spiritual food, that they would not take hold of that dispensatio^ which
the law provided for emptier vessels; he which caused the widows barrel of
meal not to wast, nor her cruize of oil to fail until the day that se sent
rain upon the earth, will make thy lamp not to wax dim, nor thy store to
decrease till thou have watered and enlightened those barren and dark places
whither thou art sent. Consider the Prophet Jeremy, a man would think that he
had not a forty years vnder-age, but childhood on his side to avoid so
weighty a work, as to be a Prophet unto nations, but when God had once set him
to destroy and pull down, to build and to plant, (there was his calling) and
put forth his hand and touched his mouth, (there was the collocation of gifts
requisite to his calling) why his plea of want of years did him no good, ne
dicas, sum puer; say not then, I am a child, Ier. 1.7. The second and third
points (I proposed) which concern the care that God exact's of every man that
has a flock; do show those whom either services or greater employments have
called away; what conflicts (as the Apostle tells us) they should have for their
flocks, and I hope they will all herein imitate the example of St Paul, Col.
2.5. though they be absent in the flesh, yet they will be with them in the
spirit, joying and beholding their order: at least they will escape that
complaint of the Church, Cant. 1. My mothers children were angry with me, they
made me the keeper of the vineyards, but mine own vineyard have I not kept.
The last point which intimates the high respect we should bear to our office
of laboring in the vineyard, co^demnes in all sorts any proposing to
themselves of inferior ends or reasons inducing their absence, other then is
the profitting of the Church in general or in particular. O beloved, I fear
me if many pried but into their own hearts, they should find the state of the
question somewhat altered from that which they propose unto the world; it would
not be, whether they might dispense with themselves to be absent from the
place where their particular calling lies, upon case of sickness or
persecution, or the establishment of their neighbor Churches, or assisting of
Synods assembled; or lastly, (which seems to be Mr Hookers ground, and indeed
is an excellent one,) to bring to the Church in case of necessity a greater
profit: but they should find that pleasure too often would challenge as great
a privilege as persecution; and private profit would think her cause as good
as profitting of whole Churches, and herein would consist the controversy of
our worldlings, whether these be causes sufficient to make it lawful for a
labourer in the vineyard, or a Pastor in the Church, to live not for a small
time, but ordinarily remote from the place of which he is a labourer or
pastor, and to commit the principal work unto an hireling: I name not these,
as though other pretenses might not be inserted into the state of the question;
but these giving aim as it were unto the rest, and the difficulty herein
consisting not so much in scientia as in conscientia, all men upon what
pretense soever they live away, leaueing the higher subtilties to the Schools,
I desire them that they would but first according to these Criteria examine a
little their own souls. Fathers and Brethren, I know not what to say, if these
carnal motives are sufficient to make any negligence in this case excusable:
has not Christ taught us that a good sheepeheard will lay down, not his goods
or his wealth, (for that were a small matter) but even his own life for his
flock. Ioh. 10? Matthew had abounded more in wealth had be still fate at the
receipt of custom, and not followed our Savior; and Paul might more freely
have enjoyed himself had he still continued at the feet of Gamaliel. But
Matthew thou had been poor to Christ, had thou not made thy self poor
unto the world: and Paul had been hard hearted to us, had he not been cruel
to himself: the world had lost an example, we had lost our lesson, the Church
had lost an instructor, and Christ an Apostle. The good Fathers (I am ashamed
to speak it) Tertullian to Fabius, and Austine to Honoratus made more scruple
of leaving their flocks, when cruel persecutours fought their lives, then
many now adays do to abide with them when they are oppugned only by their
carnal appetites; they prodigal of their lives, and blood charged the enemy
in open fight, and cast him out, rescuing kingdoms and subduing the nations of
the world to Christ and his Gospel, and shall we when the field is won
forsake our colors, be slack inpursuite, and give the adversary leave once
more to make a re-entry? But the time bids me be brief, I will leave
therefore the farther application hereof unto your own consciences, and so I
come to the time reprehended in my texra all the day, Why stand yet here all
the day idle?

I showed you the Sun before in his rising, when to you (beloved) yet hanging
upon this our mothers breasts my advise was, that you would not stand idle
there, wanting not oportunities of entering into the vineyard; my next lesson
was for those which had taken earnest and were already hired, that they would
not stand (here) idle out of their proper place the vineyard, and lo, to them
the Sun stood as it were in the midst of the firmament;but now we must behold
him not stationary as at the prayer of Joshua, nor retrograde as in the dyall
of Ahaz, but going down, and the glorious lamps of heaven whisome obscured by
his brighter beams, almost ready to make their appearance: now was the time or
never for the husbandman to bestirre himself, now must the laborers do
something to earne their penny; poor men it was the 11. hour of the day, and
they in the same case as at the first. O but let not the Sun go down in this
manner, work the work of the husbandman dum dies est, whilst it is yet day,
the night will come when no man can work, then he which has stood all the
day idle, shall loose all the days hire, the the crown of eternal glory.
Many good conclusions might from hence be deduced; as first how dangerous a
thing it is for a man to defer his entrance into a new course of life: haec
parabola (says one) tollit desperationem, non docet praesumptionem, this
parable takes away desperation, not teaches presumption, for he which at the
11th hour was willing to accept of these men's labors, gave them no assurance
that they should find labor at the sixth. Besidcs, non semper manet in foro
Pater-familias, (says Austin) the lord of the vineyard is not always in the
market to set thee on work; and no marvel (says Gregory) if at the last
gasp he forget himself, who in all his life neglected to remember God. But
these I pass over, as being by others often beat upon: wherefore I desire
that you would return a little backward with me, and call to mind, how
Interpreters for the most part do agree, that the several hours and parts of
the day, do delineate unto us in this parable nothing else, but the several
seasons of of man's life, and how that the market place does paint out any place
out of the Church: that therefore the husbandman should brand all the day or
parts of man's life spent (here) or out of the Church with this blot of
idleness, I infer:

That all our life appears idle in Gods sight, which is spent before we truly
are inserted or engrafted into the body of the Church.

As the Church is distinguished into visible and invisible, so may a man be
said to be actually inserted either into the visible alone, which requires
nothing but an external profession of the true faith; or into the invisible,
which besides the profession, craves the inward spirit of adoption. The Papists
howsoever they make a fair gloss, and seem much to extol their Mother the
Church with extra Ecclesia^ non est salus, out of the Church there is no
salvation; a point acknowledged as well by us, as themselves; yet it is a
matter worth the observing, that lest the doctrine of merits and freewill
should quite go to the ground, so bold will they make with this their Mother;
as that Andradius on the one part, would have even Heathe^s, existing out of
the visible Church, by their good works to purchase salvation; and Bellarmine
on the other part, in his 1. book de Iustif. and 21. chap: thinks, that men
wanting justifying grace, and therefore not yet actually of the invisible Church
(if we should speak according to the truth) may perform works which, shall not
only appear not idle in God's sight, but over and above; prove meritorious ex
congruo of justification. Alas but if either of these doctrines might hold
play, it had been hard measure to have styled these laborers standing here
with so homely a title, as idle. Bellarm. quoting this Parable at least 7 times
in his 4th Tome, to prove free will and merits, cannot (if he be ingenious) but
confess, that if ever meritu^ ex congruo were found in any, it was in these
men: For what virtues requires he to merit of congruiry, which any way might be
defective in them? Faith enough for a Papist they had, for they knew the way
into the market, in which they were to stand for hire; and the Papists desire
to know no more for this merit, then where is the church: wa^ted their Hope
(another of Bellar. preparatiues) when they so steadfastly kept their station?
Slack't they their desire. or was their intent altered when they so patie^tly
expected the hire, until the 11^^ hour? nay, to conclude, lack't there
anything to the perfection of the actio^, when it took effect? They might have
excused themselves, saying, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that
we have stood here all the day to merit ex congruo our hire, that we might
merit ex condigno the penny. But behold the Husbandman like a good Physician,
first shows them their malady, before he applies the medicine, and by arguing
their infirmity, stirs them up to an acknowledging of their misery. What
shall we say (beloved) is it likely that God is so rigide in his censures,
that he will not spare to reprove even actions meritorious? his mercy was wont
to be above all his works, and will he now make well-deseruings the subject of
his high displeasure? God forbid! let him be just, and these laborers, how
glorious soever their actions, sinners; and being sinners, it follows, that
God which in the evening rewarded them above their merit, did now entertain
them without their merit; and that their works which after their calling into
the Church appeared pleasing, before this admission appeared idle and vain in
themselves: The reason is given by our Savior, Mat. 12. when he bids us to
make the tree good, and his fruit good; or the tree evil, and his fruit evil;
for as is the tree, such will be the fruit; the sacrifice of the unregenerate
or wicked, is an abomination unto the Lord, Proverb. 15. and the Lord Esaias 1.
cries out to the Jews which had forsaken him. Bring no more oblations in
vain, my soul hates your new Moons, and your appointed feast, they are a
burden unto me, and I am weary to bear them; and again in the 66. Chap: He
that kills a bullock, as if he slew a man, he that offers an oblation, is
as if he offered swines blood, he that remembers incense, as if he blessed an
Idol. Here nothing might pass for meritorious, ex opere operato, though it
were sacramental; but rather in that they wanted Faith, the seal of their
redemption, and gate of entrance into the Church of Christ; they had no fruit
in those things, their works yet did appear idle.

A point worth the considering by those who having once been freed from the
bondage of Antichrist, do like Lot's wise look back again toward Sodom,
if not with a resolution of returning, yet with a delight of beholding her
painted outside. Beloved, if we acknowledge them to be none of the true
Church, I may confidently pronounce their works as they are in Gods sight,
vain and idle. For Sodom will be Sodom and Antichrist will be Antichrist;
we cannot expect grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles. Affirmatively I
confess I cannot conclude, this or that man does outward good works,
therefore he is a member of the true Church; for God only who knows the
heart of man, can truly judge of the goodness of the work; but negatiuely I
may say, this man is no member of the true Church, therefore his life beit never
so laborious in the eyes of men, yet in the sight of God, with these laborers
in my Text, he stands always idle. And indeed the husbandman's argument so
runs. statis hic, you stand here out of the Church, ergo otiose; pretend
therefore what you list, defend your case how you can, you stand here all the
day idle. It has been a preposterous course therefore, as you may well
observe, which the Jesuits and Priests have used, in seducing our Countrymen
either at home or abroad, to win them to their side, by showing them the
devotion of their religious men, the liberality of their Lay people, or the
strange outward holiness of both sorts, at some times in the year; our men
should first, before they venture too far upon their works, sift the truth
of their Church; and before they suffer shipwreck in their practickes, sound
the depth or their shallowes in their theoricks. For from the glistering of
works to the verity of the Church, inference can be but probable at the most,
and often false; but from the corruption of doctrine, or from a nullity of the
Church, to the nullity of good works, the argument holds always strong, and
the conclusion necessary. Bellarmine himself acknowledges the former in his
5. book de gratia and libero arbitrio, and 10. chap: when he says, Ex
operibus ipsorum hominum qui nos docent, non posce cognosci doctrinam, cum
opera interna non videantur, externa autem sunt communia vtrisque. The doctrine
which men teach cannot be known by their works, because their inward works
are not seen, and their outward works are common to both sides. The latter I
confirmed before, and it needs not much amplifying; for if the root be
bitter, the fruit cannot be sweet; and if the member be rotten, it cannot but
be of small performance. But to come more particularly unto them, because they
seem herein to outface us: our men doc commonly give three reasons,
wherefore the works of those which exist out of the true Church, can by no
means be pleasing in God's sight; and should I not too far encroach upon
your patience, I could easily exemplify the^ in the Church of Rome; The first
is, because they proccede not from a true faith. and alas! what is the faith of
the Church of Rome? Antichrist has not so shed her horns, as she has
diminished that true faith to which Paul tells us, she was once obedient, that
faith was such an one as came by hearing the word of God: Rom: 10: and was like
that of Abraham's, by which he doubted not of the promises made unto him, Genesis
15: so that her eyes were knowledge, and her soul was a firm confidence in
the merits of our Savior; here you may see a strange alteration, Bellarmine
defining faith rather by ignorance, the^ knowledge, and telling us, that all
confidence in these cases is plain presumption: wherefore Rome's faith being
deprived both of sight and soul at once, can be no more operative, it must
needs be dead, and profit them nothing. The 2d reason why the works of those
which are not members of the true Church, are idle in God's sight, is because
they are not done to a right end: well said therefore S. Austin, Cum facit homo
aliquid vbi peccare non videtur, si non propter hoc facit, propter quod facere
debet, peccare convincitur. Now to instance in the Church of Rome, whither bend
their actions but to this end, to found the kingdom of Antichrist? Whither
tends all their doctrine and teachings, but only to rear up and fortify (as
Molineus well notes) the tower of confusion, new? Babell? some points to enrich
her treasury, as indulgences, pilgrimages and dispensations: some to augment
her power and authority, as ignorance of Lay People, multiplying of Fryeries,
the necessity of Confession and Absolution; some to conserve that which has
already been gotten: as the single life of Priests, exemption of Clergy from
secular Magistrates, the pre-eminence of the Pope above Princes, Councels, and
Scripture it self, with the like. See how out of the mines of the Gospel,
Antichrist labors to hew his throne, and make the Articles of faith nothing
but columns of a Papal Empire. But these may seem yet to be actions of
State; let us see what each member does in the closet of his soul: a man would
think that between onesselfe and God there should be plain dealing found;
yet behold, eve^ there do they err in their scope, and rob God of his honor,
rejecting him which is the way, and striving through their own works to beat
a path to the heavenly Canaan. How art thou fallen Babylon that great City, and
art become the habitation of devils! how have thou built thy fortress upon the
sands of humane wisdom, refusing the rock and cornerstone Christ Jesus! But to
be brief, the 3d reason, why those works are idle in God's sight, which are
done by men out of the true Church, is drawn a formali, because the works many
of the^ in their own nature are gross sins; and indeed it is a matter worth
the observing by all of us, that those fects which maintain not the truth of
the Gospel in purity and sincerity, are tainted commonly besides other errors,
with the defending of some gross sin or other, which displaies and add's
suspicion to all the rest: God in his providence detecting hypocrisy by some
apparent iniquity. S. Paul gives us an evide^t example hereof in the Gentiles
To. 1. who for that they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, to the
similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and foure-footed
beasts, and creeping things; God also gave them up unto horrible sins,
promiscuous lusts, which were against nature, and delivered them up unto a
reprobate mind, to do those things, which they knew that they which committed
them were worthy of death, and yet they not only did the same, but also
favored them which did them. And to say the plain truth, what are many of
those points which the Roman Consistory defends at this day, any other then
hay nous crimes hateful to all men? Perhaps their prayer for the dead, their
pilgrimages, fasting-dayes, vows and ceremonies, may seem to come from a
foolish ignorant zeal, and therefore the more excusable; but the doctrine of
murdering and deposing of Princes, their Powder * plots, the assertion of
aequivocation, their tolerating of public stews even in Rome it self, what
Christian can with patience abide to hear them? O heavens! open your doors,
and send thunder that may sound out these wicked and unnatural positions,
astonish the nature of things reasonable a while, that the nature of things
unreasonable may understand, and all God's creatures be abashed at such
impieties! It is not (I am persuaded) either the wheel offortune, or the
change of destiny, or the craft of the devil, that brings the adversaries of
our Church to believe such shameful doctrines; but it is God in his divine
providence which has permitted them, even there where the light of nature is
most apparent, so to stumble, that the meanest of God's Elect whom he has
decreed to redeem from the servitude of the Beast, by feeling the Law written
in their hearts, to thwart and contradict those strange assertions, nay grow to
a distrust in the rest, and by distrusting search, and by searching find the
true way which leads unto life everlasting. We may well remember how the
absurd selling of Indulgences or pardons for men's sins, by Leo the tenth, was
that which first stirred up Luther's generous spirit in Germanic, to make a
farther inquiry into Babylon's mysteries, and how that gross dispensation
from the Pope, for K. Henry to marry his brothers wife, was that which did
first animate him to shake off the yoke of Antichrist here in England. It were
now plain way wardnes with us, and simplicity unpardonable, especially in us
Scholars, either not to observe, or in observing, not to make use of these
things. There may be Balsecks, and Eudemons, amongst them, to carpe at the
actions of our men; we against them need no such libellers, the Pillars of
their own Church have in writing vented blasphemies enough to brand the^
withal, and their own pens in many countries have served as just
instruments of their confusion. To come to an end; This Land has seen with
watery eyes; the strumpet for many hundred of years together, sitting over
multitudes and nations, as over many waters; it has beheld her, fortifying her
self like a Monarch, and carrying the kingdoms of the Earth in open triumph;
let it suffice us now, that the good Husbanndman CHRIST JESUS, at the 11.
hour, at the end of the day of days, has opened our eyes to discern her
fornications, that we might go out of her; and has redeemed us from that
market where before we stood idle, at sale amongst her merchandises, by hyring
us out into the Vineyard of his Gospel. Let us beseech God, that we being now
reduced again into the right way, may no more fall back to stand idle in the
wrong; but that like good laborers we may work the work of the vineyard
wherein we are placed with all alacrity and diligence, that whether the Master
come at the 3d or 6^, or 9^ or 11^ hour, when he comes he may find us
well-doing, and in the evening, reward us with that penny, or Crown of
eternal glory, which before the foundation of the World he laid up for those
which would faithfully serve him.

AMEN.
GODS BOVNTY, AND THE GENTILES INGRATITVDE.
ROMANS 1.21. Because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither
were thankefully, but became vain hi their imaginations, and their foolish
heart was darkened.


THIS Chapter contains an arraignment of the Gentiles; the Judgment place, the
tribunal of Christ, where the defendant must plead guilty; the witness is
conscience which cannot lie, though to the prejudice of the owner; the accusers
sin and Satan, two tyrannous opposites; and the indictment an action of
wilful perverting the Law of nature, and detaining the truth in
unrighteousness. In this accusation we may consider,

Viz. 1. Gods bountiful declaring of himself objected to them: employed in
these words, because when they knew God etc. 2. The Gentiles gross neglect and
contempt of this bounty, detected in them both;


Viz. 1. From the parts of it, to wit, 1. Gloria Deo denegata, they glorified
him not as God. 2. Contumelia Deo irrogata, neither were thankful.
2. From the effects of it, which, were 1. A promptitude to invent vain
false-hoodes, but became vain in their imaginations. 2. An indisposition to
credit evident trueths, and their foolish heart was darkened.



The alleging of Gods bountiful declaring of himself in my text, was to
remove an objection which the Gentiles might urge in their own defense, it is
not expressly set down, but tacitly employed in that it is refuted, (...)
because, being a rational particle, and here used as instructiue, so that
whereas the Gentiles would perhaps have pleaded ignorance to excuse their
idolatry, the Apostle shows them, that their ignorance was crassa and
affectata, was gross and affected, such as the Pope now adays enjoynes his
subjects, and such as by the tenures of Philosophy does augement rather then
deminish an offense: for besides that to excuse ignorance is required; first
that it be not gotten by men's own fault, as theirs was by Adams
transgression; Secondly that they bewail their own ignorance, and acknowledge
it, and desire to be enlightened by the spirit of God; Thirdly, that God be
obleiged by covenant to restore them to that light which they wilfully lost: it
is farther exacted that they make good use of that light of nature which is
left them, and suffer it not grossly to be extinguished, in which the Gentiles
most of all offended. For what if they knew not God absolutely? as Bellarmine
in his fourth book de gratia and lib. arb. etc. Yet by the light of nature
they knew there was a God, and that God ought to be worshipped, though by their
wilful ignorance, they glorified him not as God: and so I come from Gods
bountiful declaring of himself objected to the Gentiles;s to their gross
neglect and contempt of the same detected in them both from the parts and the
effects of it, but first of the parts, which come in the next place to be
handled, Gloria Deo denegata, they glorified him not as God, and Contumelia Deo
irrogata neither were thankful.

The Gentiles glorified not God as God, two manner of ways, in the theorie,
and in the practike; 1. in the theorie, to wit, in the doctrine of his essence.
The Peripatetickes, as it appears by Aristotle in the eighth of his Physickes,
and first de Coelo, robbed him of the creation of the world, which with motion
they would have eternal. The Stoickes took from him providence, by referring
the events of things to destiny. Most of them deprived him of his unity,
Simplicity, immensity, and power, by faining a number of Gods, which they
confined either to certain nations or certain offices, and negotiations: thus
they glorified him not as God. In the practicke part of their divinity, which
concerned the outward worship of him, which S Paul well expressed in 23d verse
of this chapter, where he says, they changed the glory of the incorruptible
God, into an image made like to corruptible man, and birds, and foure-footed
beasts, and creeping things. Some of them went lower even to plants and herbs,
as if GOD could have grown in their gardens, with which the Poet derided the
Egyptians:

O Sanctas gentes quibus haec nascuntur in horto
Numina!
So that though we cannot deny in the Gentiles a good meaning and intention of
glorifying God, yet how little acceptable to him is devotion not directed by
true knowledge, no where appears better then in this example in my text of the
Gentiles. Who could be more solicitous and forward in the worship of God then
they? witness the sumptuous and magnificent Temples, the solemn feasts and
shows, the continual Sacrifices which they advanced in the honor of their
supposititious deities: but as Austine upon the 31. Psalm alluding to such
blind worshippers as these, says truly, that the swiftest runners being
once out of the way become greatest loosers, and that it were far better to
have the ship guided by slack and heavy mariners, then by a nimble and quick
pilot, who failing in his course, sternes the vessel with greater violence and
much sooner against the rocks: so questionless it had been less to these
Gentiles condemnation, if they had been sluggishly religious, then missing
their mark to be so zealously impious. Whence we may learn, says Beza,
that to propose, as these Gentiles did, the (...) GOD for one's scope, and not
to be grounded on sound and sure foundations, a good meaning is nothing
availeable to excuse one before GOD. To a good intention it is not enough (say
Divines) that the end be good, unless other two properties be present,
Goodness in the work, and Lawfullnesse in the means. Saul had a good end
when he sought to slay the Gibeonites, the text tell's us, it was in his zeal
to the Children of Israel and Judah, nevertheless it brought a famine upon
the land, and cost the lives of his seven sons, because the work was bloody:
2. Sam. 21. The Scribes and the Pharisees, no doubt, had a good end in their
laborious worship of God, but our Savior tells them, that in vain did they
worship him, because they taught for doctrines, the commandments of men: Matt.
15.8. If the end be sufficient to excuse an action, then Paul sinned not in
that he persecuted the Church of God, he should not have said, Accepi
misericordiam, I found mercy, but rather Mercedem accepi, I received a reward,
for he did it with zeal ignorantly: 1. Tim. 1. If sins, as our adversaries
would have them, may become venial from the end, then we are unjustly angry
with the murderers of the Apostles, for they were not only ignorant that it
was a sin, but thought also moreover, that they did God good service, Ioh.
16.2. How is it then that this answer flies with such plausible passage in the
world, that when ignorance and superstition reign together, neither the
ignorant is so careful to learn, nor the learned to teach, nor the taught to
remember; only because if the worst come to the worst, God will be merciful,
in that things are done (as we say) with a good meaning. Alas (beloved) it had
been happy for the Gentiles if any such plea could have served their turns,
compare but their Hecatombs with the Papists wafers, their Colossus's and
golden statues with these men's wooden or stony poppets, their cuttings with
others whippings, and you will say, that in the end they equalled, in many
other things out-stripped Popery, yet this begged not their pardons: the
Apostle tells us that the wrath of God was revealed from heaven against them,
because though God they glorified, yet they say led in the maine matter, non vt
Deum glorificarunt, they glorified him not as God. It is not therefore, we see,
the glorious title of a profession, not the antiquity, not the duration, not
the conspiration of a multitude in doctrine, or a religious purpose, which is
warrant sufficient for a Church to be true, so long as they first prove not
their worship to be free from idolatry, their ceremonies from superstitions,
their faith and doctrine not tainted with false conceivings of the deity, but
as they glorify God in word, so really, vt Deum glorificant, they glorify him
as God.

What is man if he be spoiled of reason, and senses, and motions, so what is
God, if he be supposed without his attributes? the Gentiles glorified him not
as god, because, as you heard, they robbed him of his simplicity, immensity,
power and providence, and what do the Papists when they impair his wisdom,
grace, and glory? They match traditions with the written word, therein
injurious to the wisdom of God; they mingle man's merits with the merits of
Christ, therein injurious to the grace of God; they communicate divine worship
to stocks and stones, therein injurious to the glory of God.

Thus have you briefly seen what the Apostle understood, in that they
glorified not God of God; what he adds, that they were not thankful, is but
a part, if not the same in substance with the former, for they glorified him
not as God, because they stripped him, besides other attributes, of his works of
creation and providence; and they were not thankful, because they
acknowledged not these things to be his doings and handie work. I will not
therefore stand long upon it, it requiring rather the comment of a grateful
convert, then of a curious interpreter. Only let me say, that if ingratitude
be so highly condemned in the sons of nature, it is much more to be pitied
in the children of grace; God might say to all, that he gave them a soul to
be commander of their bodies, thinking that it being placed by him, would
perform the ordinary respect of the work to be at his command, and at the
sinke-ports of the body, would admit no enemy which should impeach the quiet
of his government, he might allege farther, that he made them after his own
image, hoping that as Simile simili gaudet, their joy and contentation should
be to walk with him like Enoch, and not to go like cursed Caine from his
presence, but never did such arguments enter into the heart of any orator or
rhetorician, to stir the coals of gratitude and thankfulness, as are
conversant and familiar with the least of Gods elect. If you pervse the acts
and monuments of our redemption, that he of rich did become poor, this is more
then of a monarch to become a beggar, it was in the abstract, of riches to
become poverty; but that he so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son to die, and be subject to death, even the death of the cross
for us, when we were yet his enemies; here eloquence may cast in her mite,
and like the poor widow, be liberal of what she has, but admiration and
stupor must supply, what the tongue of men and Angels cannot utter. There is
therefore no ingratitude like the ingratitude of men to God, it is a contempt
of him, whose benefits they cannot want, it is (says Gregory) suis contra Deu^
donis pugnare, to oppugn God with his own gifts; thus are they unthankful
which acknowledge not Gods grace and protection, they which deny themselves to
be sinners, or brag of merits, they to whom God has given the means of
knowing him, as he did to these Gentiles, and they abuse it by not harkening
unto it, and living accordingly. I pray God it may not be imputed to us, that
in this respect we are not thankful, lest we participate of the punishments
of these Gentiles, in becoming vain in our imaginations, and having our
foolish hearts darkened and obscured. O that we could be taught by presidents;
and were not so blockish, as not to learn until our own experience be our
master. We know how heretofore the Eastern Churches contended for the Empire
of learning and knowledge with the whole world, where are now those famous
schools of Alexandria, where those seven renowned Churches of letter Asia,
where those Colleges of Monks dispersed through Egypt and Syria, where their
Basill's, Nazianzens, Chrysostomes, Nyssens, Cyrils? was not the ungrateful
world thought unworthy of these benefits, and therefore were those lights
extinguished, those candlesticks removed, and in their place nothing but
darkness and confusion? Greece it self, sometimes the flow and luxury of
wit, now contains nothing but extreme barbarism and stupidity: in it Athens
so glorious in times past for Philosophers, is now the temple of ignorance: as
in respect of her temporal estate, she has lost her beauty, pared her large
dimensions, deposed her scepter wherewith she overruled and sway ed all
Greece; so in respect of her wisdom, knowledge, and skill in disciplines, one
might now seek old Athens in new Athens, and not find it. As therefore God
dealt with the land of Canaan, which being sometimes the mirror of the world,
for fertility and abundance of all things, now for a testimony of punishment to
the ungrateful inhabitants, he has made it subject to many curses, and
especially to that of barrennes; so has he done to these nations, even plagued
them with extreme want of that knowledge, the abundance of which, their
fathers did so wanto^ly and unthankfully abuse. Now (beloved) for this which
he has done for our souls, what exacts he again at the hands of us his
creatures? temples, or basilikes, or marble palaces for his Majesty to dwell
in? Why, the earth is but his footestoole, and the heaven of heavens is not
able to contain him; or is it the blood of bulls and goats that he is
delighted with? why, Mill sui Siculis errant in montibus agni, all the beasts
of the forest are his, and so are the sheep upon a thousand mountains. What
tribute therefore is it which he demands at our hands, what is the coin that
he requires to be paid with? Why, the Psalmist tells us. Offer unto the Lord
the sacrifice of praise and thankesgiving. Well might we fear lest God should
have required some thing without us, some thing in the house that the mothes
had corrupted, some thing in the garner that the mice or vermin had consumed,
some thing in the field that the fox or wolf had devoured; but he sends us to
our selves, to our own ward, to the inmost closet of the soul, which none can
unlock but God only, ara tua conscientia, says Sr Austine, thy conscience is
thine altar, offer thereon the sacrifice of praise. Here you see how little it
is that God challenges, and yet as little regarded, I pray God it be not one
day as hard laid to the charge of Christians, as it was here to the Gentiles,
that they were not thankful. And so I come from the parts of that contempt
and neglect, which the Gentiles showed in the abuse of that knowledge which God
afforded them of himself, in that they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful; unto the effects of the same, which were, as before I showed you, a
promptitude to invent and foster vain falsehoods, and a difficulty to credit
the truth, but first of the pronenesse they had to invent falsehoods, which
comes in the next place to be treated of: but became vain in their
imaginations.

Bonaventure on the 2d of the Sent. is so confident, that he pronounces it
impossible, esse culpam in aliquo, quin ad ipsam poena sequatur
inseparabiliter, that there should be a fault in any man, which punishment
does not follow inseparably at the heels. We perhaps would cast about whence
this punishment should come; we look if our goods do diminish, our stock be
impaired, our health be abated, our friends alienated; but alas! then had this
maxim proved false in these Gentiles, which had no cause to complain of any
such disasters. But the punishment was in their minds, sin begot sin,
errors begot errors, falsehoods begot falsehoods, and that, says Durand,
either by way of a final cause, as one misconceit being more plausible unto
them then another, and to defend it, they invented others, in which kind
Aristotle in the first of his phys. says truly, that vno absurdo dato,
sequuntur mill: or else by way of an efficient cause, the one habituating and
disposing them, as we commonly see it experimented in liars, to coin other
fables with as great facility as the former. And thus stood the case with the
Gentiles at this time, they had no sooner detained the truth in
unrighteousness, that is, laid down one false Maxim of examining the truth
of the Godhead, by the fancies and inventions of men; but that straight (as
necessarily as a false ell makes a false measure, or light waights errors in
traffic) their brains conceived meteors and aerie speculations, and brought
forth idle and vain imaginations. And therefore the Apostle taking his phrase
from the dealing of a tyrant, which detaines hisprisoner unjustly in a dark
dungeon, not judging him according to form of law, says, that the Gentiles
detained the truth (...), in injustice; for injustice it is to try a man by
his enemy, and the wisdom of the flesh is at enmity with God: Romans 8.7. it
is injustice to make them of ones jury, which cannot understand the cause in
hand, and the natural man cannot understand the things that are of God: 1.
Cor. 2. As therefore (says Chrysostom upon my text) he which either
travailes in an unknown way, or sails in a dark night amongst dangerous
rocks, not only is not liliely to arrive at his intended port, but also for
the most part does miscarry; so they which enter upon the way to heaven, and
rejecting the light necessary to their journey, instead thereof do use the
darkness of their own inventions, seek for God incorporeall in bodies, for
God without figure in earthly figures, must needs suffer shipwreck, and sink
with the waves of their own vain imaginations. Neither has the Gentiles
only been partakers of these inconveniences, but the Jew also has tasted of
the like sauce, because (says the Lord, Esaias 28.) the fear of this people
toward me, is taught by the precepts of men, there was the truth detained in
injustice, therefore behold, I will proceed, or I will add to do a
marveilous work, and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall
perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Sr Paul in
the 1. Cor. 1. points at the fulfilling of this prophecy, when he asks where
is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of the world? has not
God made foolish the wisdom of this world? where (as a learned writer of ours
in his miscellanea sacra, has observed) are described the vain imaginations,
not of the Gentile only, who was puffed up with his own reasonings from effects
to causes, from accidents to substances, when he says, where is the wise? nor
only those ecclesiastical Doctors, which expounded the Scriptures according
to the grammatical sense for the instruction of the people, when he adds,
where is the Scribe? but also in concluding with the disputers, he would
signify the musical expositors of the Jews (whose apes our postillers seem
to be) which expounded not the Scriptures after the ordinary way, but busied
themselnes about allegorical, tropologicall, and anagogicall senses, and the
places in Jerusalem were called the houses of mystical disputes where they
taught* Now how vain were the imaginations of these Doctors, who, as
Antipheron Orietes in Aristotle, thought, that every where he saw his own
shape and picture going before him, so did these in all parts of Scripture
where they walked, persuade themselves that they saw the image of their own
conceits; and what gave occasion to this vainenesse in them? was it not that
they forsook the paths and ancient forms of teaching, which their Samuels
and Eliah's and Elisha's had in their schools of the Prophets children left
unto them? and their Rabbis being trained up, as it appears by Philo, in the
philosophy of Pythagoras and Plato, which was much symbolicall and
aenigmaticall, would show whose disciples they were in the pulpit, and attire
Sarah in the garments and weeds of Hagar the bondwoman? I do not here deny
the use of Philosophy in divine matters, it is a footestoole to the pulpit, and
as Laban when he gave Rachel unto Jacob, he gave also Bilhah to be her
maid; so in this latter age of the world, when it pleased God to restore the
light of his word so plentifully unto us, he graciously has adorned it with
the service and attendance of philosophy, and humane learning: but yet we must
remember, that philosophy is but the handmaid, she must not prescribe laws
and rules to her mistress, When some sought to examine the truth of the word
by the dictates of philosophers, and the speculation of humane reason, the
Apostle in 2d of the Col. bid's them beware, lest any man spoil them, through
philosophy, and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments
of the world, and not after Christ. By which saying Tertullian observes, that
he concondemnes all heretics, of which the philosophers were the Patriarchs,
for whence did Valentinus feign his forms and trinity in man, but from Plato?
Marcion the coeternity of matter with God, but from the Stoics; that God was
mortal, but from the Epicures; that he was of a fiery substance but from
Heraclitus? whence arose the impious conceits of the Artemonites, but from
this, as Eusebius in his fifth book of Ecclesiastical history confesses,
that they more were addicted to Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Gallen, then to
the Scriptures? Whence grew the errors of Origin; but from this, as Epiphanius
witnesses, that he triumphed too much in the disciplines of the Philosophers,
and contented not himself with the simplicity of the Apostles? whence sprang
the heresy of the Arrians, but from this, as Ambrose on the 118. Psalm
observes, that they examined the divine generation of Christ, according to the
grounds of Aristotle, and the use of this world? Thus by preferring their own
fancies and the sandy foundation of humane wisdom, before the sure foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, they detained the truth in injustice, and became
vain in their imaginations. The Fathers were (as Hiperius notes) for the most
part Platonists, and I know not if some of them may not elsewhere be said to
relish of his precepts; certainly if in any thing this age of ours may contend
with theirs, or else out-strippe it, it is there where in their commentaries in
imitation of him, they drench the literal sense too much with Allegories, as
Andradius confesses. S. Hierome, a man not too easily brought on to
acknowledge the errors of his writings, amongst those few things which he does
retract, censures nothing so sharply as the mistake of his youth in this kind,
thinking it one of the greatest sins of his youth, that being carried away
through an inconsiderate heat in his studies of Scripture, he adventured to
interpret Abdias the Prophet Allegorically, when as yet he knew not the
historecall meaning. I will not deny Allegories, Tropologies, Anagogies, as
several applacations of one sense, I will not deny more then one literal
sense, so that one be subordinate to the other; but to make all places, as the
Papists would have them, liable to as many senses as wit is able to faigne, to
draw the Pope's temporal sword out of Peter's scabbard, or to fish for his
vicaredge with Peter's net, this I leave to the limbeckes of the Jesuits, and
ask if my text fits not right to them, that detaining the truth in
unrighteousness, they became vain in their imaginations. Gerson in his tract
of Astrology tell's us, that it was a custom in the University of Paris, that
whosoever was licenciated in the arts, should take an oath to determine his
Philosophy problemes always agreeable to the Articles of faith, and that they
would dissolve the reasons of the Philosopher brought to the contrary; this was
an excellent course to give liberty to the truth of the Scriptures, whilst the
dreams of Philosophers kept it not in subjection; but he which shall read the
Sorbornes determinations in Theology, would guess that they had taken another
oath to determine their questions in Divinity according to the precepts of
Aristotle's Philosophy, and to dissolve the authorities of the Apostle's
brought to the contrary. And may not we here see my text well verified, that
these Schoolmen detaining the truth in unrighteousness, first in their
exposition of the Scripture, by keeping the literal sense from the view of the
world, and distasting those (witness the sundry apologies of Caietan) who
betook themselves to the literal sense, as knowing inwardly that their
positions were not sufficiently grounded, and that this kind of teaching opened
a gappe unto the world to discry their palpable abuses; Secondly, in their
positions relying first, as Daneus shows, upon Austine, afterward as Popery
more strengthened it self, upon Aristotle, and lastly upon the Tridentine
Council, and uncertain traditions, that these I say should not elsewhere in
their unprofitable questions, and more ridiculous resolutions, be seen, as my
text saye's, to become vain in their imaginations; perhaps their prayer for
the dead, their pilgrimages, vows and ceremonies, may seem to come from a
foolish ignorant zeal, and herein though their imaginations cannot escape the
lash of vain, yet they may be more pardonable. But to teach that colors may
subsist without a subject, that a man may be at the same time at home in his
bed and fighting against the Turks, that one may equivocate and dissemble to a
good end, that one may do evil that good may come thereof, that the rights of
laws and nations do lie under the Popes girdle, why this Philosophy was never
taught by Aristotle, or Plato, or Cicero, but as I guess, when Hermolaus
Barbarus questioned the devil for the meaning of (...), he added some further
instructions to be delivered the Jesuits touching these matters, for the
defending their tenants. And truly I am persuaded, that it is neither the
wheel of fortune, nor chain of destiny, nor craft of Satan, that has
brought our adversaries to believe such shameful doctrines, but it is God in
his divine providence which has permitted them even there where the light of
nature is most apparent so to stumble, not only to give the world a caveat,
that those which detain the truth in injustice, should become vain and
ridiculous in their imaginations, but also that the meanest of his elect which
he has decreed to redeem from the servitude of the beast, by seeing the law
written in their hearts, to thwart and contradict these vain imaginations, may
grow to a distrust of the rest, and by distrusting search, and by searching
find out the true way which leads unto life everlasting. And thus having
spoken of the first effect of this abuse of the Gentiles, concerning the
bountiful declaration of God unto us by his creatures, which was a promptitude
to invent vain and ridiculous falsehoods, they became vain in their
imaginations, I pass unto the second effect of the same, to wit, an
indisposition to credit or assent to evident truths, which comes in the last
place to be discussed, and their foolish heart was darkened.

In darkning of the heart we find three kinds of agents mentioned in holy
writ, first God, of whom our Savior out of Esaias tells us, that the Jews could
not believe because he had blinded their eyes, which he effects (says
Austen) non impertiendo malitiam, not by imparting or infusing malice, but non
impertiendo misericordiam, by not imparting mercy; or as upon the 12. of John.
he has it, deserendo and non adjuvando, by forsaking and not helping or
assisting them with his illuminating grace. Secondly, the devil, whom God
permits oftentimes to blind those, which he will punish, as when he
suffers a lying spirit to go into the mouths of the Prophets of Ahab, to
deceive them. 1. Kings 22. Thirdly, our selves, who by our corrupt and
inordinate affections, do cast a veil before our own eyes, that we cannot
see the truth oftentimes, when it is most palpable: this the Apostle seems in
general to intimate unto us in this whole chapter to have bin a maine cause of
the Gentiles blindness for that seeking after wisdom as it is 1. Cor. 1. and
applauding themselves with their humane inventions, they became less prepared
to yield atte^tiue cares unto the truth, so that the preaching of the cross
was foolishness unto the^, scoffed at by their Philosophers, and graced by no
better a title then babbling, Act. 17. in a word (says Ansten) quod curiositate
invenerunt, per superbiam perdiderunt, pride lost them that, which curiosity
had gotten. But more particularly my text does intimate it, when it discribes
unto us what heart it is that is darkened, to wit, cor insipiens, stultu^,
ineptiens, (...), a foolish heart; an heart which lodges in her chiefest
rooms vain guests, that will brook no wise thoughts to enter, but sets
wilfulness at the door to keep the^ out. In a word if there be any
prejudice, if there be any forestalling, if any preoccupation in a mind, bent
to vanities, that it becomes darkened, and cannot see the truth when it is most
obvious and plain, the Apostle comprehends it in this one saying (...),
afoolish heart. It is in man, as it was in the parable of the vineyard, let the
Lord go to a far country, I mean, let not his spirit be present with us, and
the soul which should root out the wild and sour grapes, that the whole
Vineyard of our bodies may yield pleasant fruit unto the Lord, will suffer
the inferior faculties to mutiny and resist his messengers, though his Son
himself come in Person unto us. This folly is not one single individuum, nor
one infima species, but like the Viper, which in every letter of the Alphabet
can show some of her kindred; so in all societies, all trades, all subjects,
this foolishnes of heart can brag, that she puts out to nurse some or other
of her young ones to do mischief, and darken the heart. The Psalmist therefore
when he would express how God punished the stiff-necked Israelites in the
desert, says not, that he sent false Prophets amongst the^ to seduce the^, nor
that he suffered them to be deluded by lying wonders; but he gave them up to
their own hearts lusts, and in this Chap. that he delivered the Gentiles unto
their affectios, to signify what legio^s of devils man carries in his heart,
what Lions, and Bears, and Wolves, and uncouth beasts within his breast, what
ignis fatuus in his brains, to transport him out of the way, though never so
broad, if God's Spirit sit not at the stern to direct the^? Read the
Scriptures from Genesis to the Revel. search curiously into the judgme^ts of
God therein registered, examine the causes, pervse the instruments, pry into the
wonderful ways of the Lord so far as he has revealed the^, and tell me if for
the most part, errors, falsehoods, and heresies have not been rooted in some
folly of the heart, in some corrupt and naughty affection, which darkens the
understanding. What could be more plain to the Israelits when they came out of
Egypt, the^ that the Lord was God, and that he was a strong pillar of defense,
in who^ they were to trust? They saw the wonders which he did in Eypt, they saw
the marvailous conduct they had through the red sea, they saw the terrible
delivera^ce of the law in mount Sinai, their noble conquest over Pharaoh and
all his host, their mighty victories over all their enemies that durst oppose
the^; why did these so often rebel against him, murmr against Moses, crect
Idols? Would you that I should recount either the waters of Meribah, or the
Quails and Manna in the desert, or the daughters of Moab? you shall see that
the grounds of all these revolts were lusts of the flesh, sensuality,
intemperancie, gluttony, and the like, which are the vanities and
foolishnesses of the heart. Solomon (you know) was a Prophet, and one beloved
of GOD, it was much that he should run a whooring after many gods, and err
in a principle which he sucked with his nurses milk, and had so thoroughly
been instructed in, both by the writings of Moses, the Law of Nature, and the
sundry apparitions of God, most graciously vouchsafed unto him. He spoke (says
the Scriptures) of trees, from the Cedar which is in Lebanon, to the hyssop
that springs out of the wall; whether he red Lectures of these Plants, or
else wrote books of the^, is something doubtful; but if he had but seen a
tree, and considered how it has a bark, and a stalk, and a trunk, besides
many boughs and branches, and an infinite number of leaves; if he had but
observed how the body has no likeness to the leaves, nor the leaves to the
fruit, nor the fruit to the blossoms, and yet how all these come from one
root, and that root again from a kernel; he could not think that all these
could be the work of any more then one workman, or that Nature could direct
us hereby to ought else then one beginning. He spoke also (says the same
verse) of beasts and fowls; in them he might have seen how the Bees have one
King, the Cranes in their flight follow one Captain, even herds in the field
naturally incline to one Leader, all which might have taught him, that all
things are subordinate, and moderated not by many, but by one Governor.
Besides, he was more wise then either was the Chaldees or Egyptians, and
therefore we can presume him to be ignorant of none of their Arts and
Disciplines; and did not their Arithmeticke teach him, that numbers do proceed
from unities; their Geometry, that magnitudes doc arise from indivisible
points; why the Perspectiues draws all lines to one center? Philosophy, all
causes to one first cause? Astronomy, all motions to one first Mouer? so that
there was nothing in all his learning from whence he might not have learned,
that of all things there is but one Maker, and so consequently, for all things
we are to worship and give divine honor but to one God. Yet lo this Solomon,
this bright morning star, sets in the West, and is housed in one of those
dark and smoakie degrees, mentioned by Astronomers; lust and love of his wives
possess his fantasy, and then whatsoever good object would present it self
to his understanding, it is by the interposition of these earthly vanities,
these foolishnesses of heart darkened: It might be wisely said of him, as S.
Austin once spoke of the Wisemen of his days: O Lord, with the understanding
which thou give unto men, they number the stars of the firmament, and the
sands of the sea; they measure the heavens with their instruments, and foretell
the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon many ages beforehand; they can say, that
such a year, and such a month, and such a day of the month, and such a hour
of the day, there shall be an Eclipse, and it falls out accordingly; and they
are lifted up, and greatly extolled which know these things; notwithstanding
per impiam superbiam recedentes ac deficientes a lumine tuo, tanto ante solis
defectuns in futurum praevident, and in praesentia suum non vident; through
impious pride, their foolish hearts departing away from thy light, so long
before they can foresee the darkening of the sun which is to come, and cannot
see their own darkness which is present. Let me lead you from the Old
Testament into the New, there suppose the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in
Moses Chair, and scanning the gestures, and words, and works of our Savior;
why did they not know him to be the Messiah? they heard John Baptist give
plain testimony of him, the same Christ fulfilled likewise all that was
spoken by the Prophets; why could not they see that he was the Savior of the
world? he made the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the
lame to go; he made the sick and diseased whole, he raised up the dead, he
told them even their thoughts and cogitations: how were their hearts so
darkened, that they could not know him? S. Paul informs us, that their foolish
hearts were possessed with pride, and that seeking to establish their own
righteousness, and to be justified by the works of the Law, they stumbled at
that stumbling stone: Rom: 9.32: if any therefore ask or demand, how it comes
to pass that so many see not the truth of the Gospel, if it be so plain as we
make it; whence it is, that the Scriptures which, we say, are so easy in all
matters of Salvation, be not yet understood, either by the wise Salomons, or
the learned Scribes and Pharisees of the Roman Church; I must answer with the
Apostle in my text, quod abscurum and obtonebratum est eorum cor insipiens;
because their foolish heart, their heart taken up with foolish and earthly
imaginations is obscured and darkened. The Apocalypse in describing the whore of
Babylon, notes two branches of this foolishness in her; pride in challenging
adoration, and covetousness in venting her Merchandices, which go beyond all
Markets that I know, but the devils, even to the souls of men. Cap. 19. and
are not our adversaries careful and diligent to fulfill the Scriptures?
whither tend all their doctrines and teachings, as some well note, but either
to enrich her treasures? as indulgences pilgrimages, and dispensations, or
augment her power and authority? as ignorance of Lay People, multiplicitie of
Fryeries, necessity of confession and absolution: or to conserve that which
has been already gotten? as single life of Priests, exemption of the Clergy
from secular Magistrates, the preheminences of the Pope above Princes,
Councels, and Scripture it self? See the witch-crafts wherewith she is
bewitched, the Cups wherewith she is drunken; the mists wherewith her foolish
heart is darkened and obscured. Can our adversaries object truly to us any such
follies of the heart, which do shut our eyes, that we are not able to discern
the acuteness of their Achillean arguments? yes, some of them have said, it is
a desire of Soveraigntie in Princes, and of licentiousnes in all, that casts
the veil before our hearts, and makes the^ foolish in things pertaining to his
Holiness. Why then belike these cause us that we do not allow of Friars and
Mookes. though in the fourth of Gen: it be said, as Bellar. urges it. then
began men to call upon the name of the Lord: for these it is that we do yield
unto the sacrifice of the Mass, though Solomon in the 9 of the Proverbs, as
Bellar. quotes him, says most plainly, that wisdom has built her an house,
slain her victuals, and drawn her wine. These make us that we will not kill
and devour those creatures the Kings and Princes, which perform not what the
Pope enjoynes and commands, though Baronius most subtly has concluded it
from the voice to Peter, kill and eat; hence it is that we require more then
an implicit faith in the Laytie: though the Master of the Sent: and Bell.
allege it, in the 1. of Job it is printed in fair Letters and good
Characters, that the Oxen were plowing, and the Asses feeding besides them. If
therefore foolishness do darken our hearts, that we cannot see so far as the
Lynxes of the Roman Church, I must say with S. Paul, that it is the foolishnes
of God which is wiser then men, and the weakness of God which is stronger
then men. But what marvel if others, whose hearts are the Cabinets of vanity
and folly, are purblinde in the way of truth, when as we our selves are so led
oftentimes by them in easy matters, that we become beetle-ey'd, and see
little or nothing? why do we not see the shortness of our life, but thus Iiue in
the world, as though we should live ever? why do we not see the vanities of
earthly things; but embrace them as though they had some substance in them? Why
do we not see our own imperfections and follies, but contemn our brethren,
as though our selves were some demigods upon earth. O beloved! if we list to
marvel at the darkness of others hearts, we cannot well marvel at any
thing so much as at our own darkness, that cannot see our selves. Let us look
at the last, into the Closet of our own souls, and if we find the room
then darkened, that in seeing we see not, and the Word is a sealed book unto
us; then we must know, that it is some foolishness in the heart which is the
cause of that blockish dullness which is come upon us, anger has troubled our
affections, pleasure has stolen away our attention, profit has corrupted our
judgments; then must we return unto the Lord with prayer, that by glorifying
God as God, and being thankful, we may have our vain imaginations removed,
the foolishness of our hearts expurged, and our dark understandings
enlightened through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, one God, and three Persons, be rendered all praise, honor, and glory,
might, majesty, and dominion, from this time forth for evermore.

AMEN.
AFFLICTIONS THE CHRISTIANS PORTION.
ACT. 21.31. For I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem
for the Name of the Lord Jesus.


I Think (says this blessed Apostle, 1. Cor. 4.) that God has set forth us
the last Apostles, as men appointed to death, for we are made a gazing-stocke
unto the world, and to Angels, and to men. If any of the Apostles could receive
this testimony, as indeed there was not any of them which lively expressed it
not in the whole course of his life, witnessing S. John's banishment, Peter's
imprisonment, James his beheading; yet much more was it true of S. Paul; were
they persecuted? so was he: were they afflicted? so was he; in labors more
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more plenteously, in deaths
often, 2. Cor. 11. Nothing seemed wanting to this valiant Soldier of Christ,
but the time of his offering; and lo, and Agabus is here present to foretell
him, that that likewise drew near and was at hand. What would you I should
propose unto you, a man wrestling with his enemies abroad, or with his friends
at home; with his own afflictions, or the Church's necessities? all seem to
dehort our blessed Apostle from his combat; yet he which desired to be
dissolved for Christ, speak 's roughly Pharaoh-like, as a son of thunder to
himself, Vinciatur Paulus modo libere discurrat Evangelii sermo, immo
occidatur Paulus, modo vivat apud omnes, vigeaque gloria nominis Jesus; Let Paul
be bound, so that the Gospel have its free passage; yea, let Paul be put to
death, so that the glory of the Name of Christ do live and flourish amongst all
men: pericula non respicit, coronas respicit; plagas non horret, sed praemia
numerat, says Cyprian: he respect's not the danger, but the crown; he fears
not the strokes, but conceives the rewards. Come therefore afflictions, come
torments, come bonds, come death, he is ready, not to be bound only, but to
dye at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

The sum is a protestation or declaration of S. Paul's zeal, constancy, and
forwardness in the maintaining and defending Christ's cause: Wherein observe
with me (I beseech you) these three parts,

viz: 1. Affectionem personae, the affection and disposition of the Person. I
am ready. 2. Gravitatem rei, the greatness of the thing which he was to
undergo, not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem. 3. Qualitatem
ceausae, the quality or nature of the cause, for the Name of the Lord Jesus.


Within these bounds by Gods grace and your Christian patience, I shall confine
my meditations, and first de affectione personae, the affection or disposition
of the person which comes in the first place to be handled, I am ready. He
says not, I will be bound, or I will dye, but (...), paratus sum, I am ready
to be bound and to dye. Whereupon says Thomas 2^ 2ae: q. 124. Non debet homo
occasionem dare alteri injuste agendi, sed si alius injuste egerit ipse
moderate tolerare debet: A man ought not to give an occasion to a Tyrant to do
ill, but if a Tyrant should do ill, he ought moderately to bear it. Raise not
wars thy self (says Chrysostom) for this is not a part of a soldier but
of a seditious person, but if the trumpet of piety shall summon thee, march
then on without lingering, contemn thy life, enter the lists with alacrity,
break the ranks with thine adversary, and retraite not till the victory be
thine own. Origin in his 31. hom, on St John gives the reason why we may not
give any occasion to others to persecute us, Not only (says he) because the
event of so great a temptation is uncertain, but also lest we be a cause
that others by shedding our blood become greater sinners then otherwise they
would be. The words are not therefore to be Categorically understood, but
Hypothetically, if a just occasion be offered, not absolute absolutely (say the
Schoolmen) but secundum praeparationem animi, one must have his mind
prepared for it; all beating upon this conclusion: That a good Christian should
always be ready and prepared in mind manfully, to undergo such crosses and
afflictions as it shall please God to object him unto.

In prosperity (says Chrysostom) expect adversity, in a calm think of a
tempest, in health of sickness, in plenty of want. There is not one minute
left us wherein we may so glut our selves with the enjoying of a present good,
as that we are not likewise, to prepare and fit our selves to sustain a
future ill. There is therefore a (...) or a (...) to day, or now, in all the
mandates almost of the King of heaven. So our Saviors Watch, Mark 13.37. the
Wise-mans Consider, Eccles. 7.14. St Paul's armor, Ephesians. 6.13. contain no
other thing* then what the same Apostle so much beats upon, Phil. 4.11. I have
learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content; I know how to be
abased, and I know how to abound, everywhere and in all things I am instructed
both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. All
backwardness is sliding back, and delays are denialls, when our Savior
says unto us, Take up thy cross and follow me. We must therefore be like
valiant soldiers always in arms, sober, watchful, ever expecting the enemy.
We must be prepared (in Christ's Scoole) to answer ad vnguem all the devils
sophistry, to refute the objections of the world with the answers of the
spirit, the motions of our appetites with Gods commandments, and to oppose
Satan's Hoc dabo, This will I give thee, with Christ's Scriptum est, It is
written. It was Nabal's curse to be stricken at his feast, and the rich-mans
doom to have his soul taken away when it was possessed with worldly projects.
Far be it from those which account this world but as an Inn where they may
non abide, and this life but the high way to a better estate, to be taken at so
unawares and to be assaulted so unprovided. As we know not when the bridegroom
will pass by, nor when the master will come: so know we not when he will set
us to our task nor how soon he will put us to our trial.

But I will stand no longer for the proof of a point so evident, I will now
come to apply it to our selves. These things are written for our instruction,
to admonish us to beware how we stand unprovided to undergo the crosses of
this world. It is strange to observe our improvidence herein, how cunningly we
can cousen our selves and be unfitted of munition until the last cast. But
had* we but the grace to consider what true preparation is, the wonderful
fruits of it, and the manifold difficulties that always cross it, most
evidently it would appear, that by this deceit more do perish, then by all
the guiles and subtilties of Satan besides: for that serpent which deceived our
first parents even in paradise, better considers he then we do, how that he
which is not fit to day, will be less fit to morrow; that an enemy the less
expected, the hardlier repulst; he knows the more our negligence is, the
easier is his entrance; the greater our improvidence, the more effectual his
violence, the less we are ready to suffer for Christ, the less Christ is
ready to protect us: whence our good inclinations are the weaker, our
understanding the more darkened, our will the more perverted, our appetite the
more dissordered, all our inferior parts and passions the more strengthened,
and stirred up against the rule of reason, whereby his footing is the stronger,
and our case the more desperate. Lastly he is privy to the crosses and perils
of our life, to the dangers that may befall us, to the objects that may
withdraw us, to the calamities that may at any time deject us, so that if once
he spy us but to lie open, he doubts not but to subdue us under him. Now
shall we see this net and be yet entangled? know the guile of this old
wreathing serpent, and yet never endeavor to prevent it? Most commonly there
is no man has so little care of himself but that he has desire to prevent
these inconveniences, and to prepare himself more seriously to resist the
temptations of the world, and when he hears the commendations of the Saints
of God, their resolution in defending Christ's cause, and manfulnesse in
sustaining such afflictions as befell them, he wishes in his heart that he
also were such an one, and groaneth oftentimes in conscience that he never has
endeavored so to be. But alas my good Christian brother! what lets at this
instant, that this course should not be taken, what inconvenience would follow
it, if presently this were practiced which for ever should do us good? Thou
should prevent the evil day which suddenly may overtake thee, thou
should have thy lamp ready whenever the bridegroom passes by thee, thou
should be in thy co^pleat armor when the enemy shall assail thee. In being
defective herein thou committest that which in matters of less moment thou
would be loath to commit. We would esteem him an unwise mariner which
will venture to sea in a calm, and not have his ship able to brook a
tempest; and him to be an inconsiderate statesman, which in peace thinks it
needless to provide munition for time of war: the pysmire may be our teacher
herein, which (as Solomon says) prepares her meat in summer, and gathers
her food in harvest; Now shall these unreasonable creatures and brute beasts
be more provident then man, the lord and ruler of them? shall the children of
this world be more wise in their generations, then the children of the spirit
in theirs? we are not to think that tempests, or winters, or wars are nigh
at hand or approaching only; but we are to conceive our selves to be always
in the field, ever in battle, continually in a storm; our whole life, says
Paul, is a warrefare; and it is nothing else, faith Augustine, but a continual
temptation. I confess it is no small task sufficiently to resolve ones self
herein: the Fathers meditations on this subject are not books but volumes.
Chrysostom thought it the best discourse to be always talking of hell, and St
Hierome says, this voice of Christ's continually sounded in his ears, and
awoke him, Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium, Arise you dead and come to
judgment. I cannot tell what others may conceive, but me-thinkes this
meditation should be sufficient to rouse the drousest spirit amongst us, and to
provoke him to a serious resolution to suffer under Christ's banner. Has God
made me and created me, and shall I for fear or favor basely subject my
self to be another creature? has he sacrificed his only son to redeem
me, and shall I think it much to mortify the desires of my flesh to please
him? O God thy mercyes toward man have been innumerable! the stars of the
firmament, and the sands of the sea are but as an handful to what thou have
heaped upon him; Et quid retribuemus Domino? What shall we give unto thee, o
Lord, for all the benefits thou have done unto us? Thou desire no sacrifice,
else would we give it thee, thou delightest no in burnt offerings: mill tui
Siculis errant in montibus agni, for all the beasts of the forest are thine,
and so are the cattle upon a thousand hills: behold therefore thy servants and
the work of thy hands, do with us even as it shall seem best in thy sight,
lo we are all thy creatures. You see (beloved) the use of this one word
Ready, though we have time enough to struggle with the crosses of this world,
and ability to use that time, and desire to use that ability, and grace to
prosper that desire; yet it were foolishnes to put off the practice thereof
until such time as the days of temptation shall come upon us, when Satan will
be at the strongest and we at the weakest: though there be twelve hours in
the day to walk in, and it be never too late (as the saying is) to be good;
yet we should hold it indiscretion, not to shut the door till the thief be
entered; and folly, not to put the head-peece on, till the blow be given. My
counsel therefore shall be that which St Paul gives to the Ephesians. c. 6. Put
on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the wiles of
the devil, and withstand in the evil day: stand therefore, having your loins
girt about with truth, and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and
your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace: above all, taking
the shield of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts
of the wicked, and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit
which is the word of God, that you may not only vanquish the allurements of
the world, but also the threatenings of Antichrist, not only the temptations of
the flesh within, but also the assaults of the adversary without, that bonds
may not dismay you, death not terrify you, but that in all just occasions you
may be ready and prepared for the name of Christ, not to be bound only, but
to die also: which is the second part of my text and comes next to be
handled, I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die, etc.

We see in the Apostle St Paul a notable example of obedience: he shuts
his eyes to all things else, and only opens them to Gods word: he makes a
way to serve God through all lets, all fleshly impossibilities, and being in
this way, he trampleth under him his own nature, and beats a path for Gods
word out of his own heart: finally, he regards not what men say, nor what
his own thoughts can say, but having received his mandat, resolves for his
journey, suffering Gods wisdom to reason for him, and Gods omnipotent power
and providence to work for him. For Paul was now such a man as might have
hoped for rest in his flesh, he might have said, Lord I have served thee these
many years in sufficient trialls of my love and obedience, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in stripes, in shipwreck, in hunger and thirst,
in cold and nakedness, now I am old, give me now immunity, let me be no
longer pressed. Again he had access to God and familiarity, he knew God was
pitiful, and merciful, and easy to be entreated, and yet he never spoke one
word for himself, or his own releasement: He complained not of his grief,
he desired not to have the burden lesned, but as if he had the feet of an
hind, runs many a tedious days journey by way of the commandment, till at
length he arrived at Jerusalem. Freedom and liberty are more worth then
gold, as the saying is, but skin for skin, and all that a man has he will
give for his life, Job. 2. the Casualists therefore in a matter of life and
death, forbid to administer an oath to any in his own cause: wherefore if any
thing might plead exemption from Gods edicts, then might this case of bonds and
death, and if any man, then questionless might St Paul more then any other in
this case: the state of the Churches, whereof some were not so sufficiently
confirmed, others, with wolves which crept in amongst them, not a little
distracted, did seem to require it, but he so resolutely undergoing that which
God commanded him, and submitting himself to whatsoever God, in the defense of
his own name should impose on him, may not unfitly direct us to this
conclusion: That neither bonds, nor death, nor any respect whatsoever, can be
of such force or power, at to privilege the least backewardnesse, or starting
back in defending of Gods cause.

He that loves father or mother more then me (says our Savior) is not
worthy of me; and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not
worthy of me; fear not them therefore (says he) that kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul, Luke 12.5. In regard whereof God has ever
emboldened some valiant soldiers or others, and proposed them to the Church
for the rest to imitate. Amongst his Prophets, one has his forehead as an
adamant, harder then a flint, not to be dismayed at men's proud looks,
howsoever they be hard hearted and rebellious, Ezech. 3.8. another is a fensed
brazen wall, not to be prevailed against, Ierem. 15.20. and hence grew the
resolution of Gods servants, not to shrink back or yield a foot, when Gods
honor lay at the stake, or his Churches preservation was any way interested.
So Hanani is bold with Asa, though the prison follow it, Thou have done
foolishly, 2. Chron. 16. The three children with Nabuchadnezzar threatening the
fiery furnace, We are not careful to answer thee in this matter, Dan. 3.
John with Herod, though his head pay for it, It is not lawful for thee to have
thy brothers wife, Matt. 14. and Peter with the Council breathing threatenings
and slaughter, Act. 5. We ought to obey God rather then man. In this life the
Church has need of more then a lions heart, for she shall ever find enemies
to resist, afflictions to wrestle with, tears to wipe, beasts to fight with,
calamities to subdue. In Egypt, it had Pharaoh's to oppress it, in Judah and
Israel Manasseh's, and Ahabs to vex it; in captivity, Hamans to destroy it;
and at return, Tatnai's and Sanballats to discourage it. To say the truth, it
is so appointed from the foundation of the world, that righteousness here
should suffer in secular conflicts; for so just Abel was slain in the
beginning, and before any example (says Chrysostom) first of all dedicated to
martyrdom: him followed an Holocaust, and whole Hecatombs of Prophets, of whom
as the author to the Hebrews tells us; Some were tortured, others mocked and
imprisoned, some, stoned and sawen asunder, others slain with the sword, or
wandered about in sheepskins and goate-skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented, of whom the world was not worthy, they wandered i. deserts, and in
mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth. To me therefore (says a
religious divine) the caves, and prisons, and wildernesses are most welcome;
for there it was either that the Prophets taught, or the Apostles preached, or
the Evangelists testified the truth of Christ. But such has ever been the
love of God in protecting of his Church, that whereas all other things by
vexation and oppression, do wane and decay; his Church like the moon, when
the Sun of righteousness seems to be in opposition against her, gives ever
most light, and is at the fullest. It is usual with the Fathers to compare the
Church to the arc, because as none were saved from the deluge but such as were
in the arc, so none are delivered from eternal death, but such as are really
existing in the Church. But the similitude holds, as well in respect of the
storms and tempests which always accompany it; the more the floods of
affliction do increase, the more it is elevated and lifted up toward heaven.
Hence were drawn those excellent allegories of ancient fathers; Gods people
(says Justin Martyr) are a vine planted by our Savior, if you prune or cut
it, the branches will sproute the better. The blood of Christians is like
seed, (says Tertullian) the more they are mowed and cut down, the thicker
they will grow. The Church (says Leo) is Gods field, the cares of corn are
his servants, the more grains fall to the ground, the more ears do multiply
and rise up. As plants seated by rivers of waters, so is the Church oppugned by
her adversaries, (says Chrysostom) no garden so flourishes being moistened by
the streams of running waters, as the Church when it is watered with the blood
of Martyrs. Howsoever therefore we esteem of afflictions and perfections, and
pray to be delivered from them; yet did we but thoroughly examine their ends
and singular uses, we would freely confess with the Wise man, Eccles. 7. It
is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the house of
feasting: And indeed the ends of these chastisings, proposed in the Scripture,
are manifold; the exercising and trying of the faithful, the waking of the
drowzie, the testifying of the truth, etc. whereby the weak are confirmed, the
sluggish roused, and Gods power in man's weakness the more manifested. To these
St Augustine in his 78 Sermon. de Tempore, prettily alludes the story of Esau and
Jacob, both struggling together in Rebeccah's womb: for when Rebeccah went to
enquire of the Lord concerning their strugglings, the Lord said unto her, Genesis
25. Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated
from thy bowels, and the one people shall be stronger then the other, and the
elder shall serve the younger. St Austin asks how this was fulfilled, for we
never read at any time that the elder did serve or perform obedience to the
younger. He answers therefore, the elder shall serve the younger, as wicked
men doc serve the godly, non obsequendo, sed persequendo, not by obeying, but
by persecuting, as the hammer serves the metal, as the mill serves the
wheat, and as the furnace the gold when it tries it. It is a memorable saying
therefore of Ignatius, when he was to be cast to Lions to be devoured of them,
I am the wheat and grain of Christ, I shall be ground with the teeth of wild
beasts, that I may be found pure bread. You see (beloved) how persecutions and
fiery trialls do always attend the Church whilst it wanders in this desert
of sin, so that so far I am from assenting any thing to Bellarmine, who
makes his 15th note of the true Church to be foelicitas temporalis, temporal
felicity; that rather with our own divines I take cruces, the crosses of this
world, though they are not a note, to be a condition of the Church militant.
Seeing therefore that sufferings arc necessary, it is a Christian virtue by a
magnanimous patience to make them voluntary: we must not revolt with Demas, nor
follow afar off with timorous Peter, nor dissemble our profession by
Jesuitical equivocation, but rest steadfast in the faith, knowing that if we
suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him, if we forsake houses, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for
his names sake; we shall be recompensed in this life with peace of conscience,
and in the other with felicity.

But (boloved) the loved of the voice of more then a trumpet is necessary in
these dastardly times of ours, wherein men are as far from the zeal of those
godly Saints, as they are degenerated from their virtuous manners. Every one in
the defense of his own cause will be eager enough, we want no courage to
stout and brave it in defense of our wicked lives and lewd manners, a man is
not afraid to challenge his brother into the field, and seek to shed his blood
with hazard of his own life, though he fight against God and the just laws
armed with vengeance; but in Christ's cause, he will be more faint-hearted then
Peter, who denied his master at the voice of a silly chambermaide; or at
lest-wise rather then he will loose a friend, will not stick to dispease God.
But alas! self willed and inconsiderate man, little do thou mark the
stepps thou treadest, or the downe-fall of that way wherein thou postest; shall
Christ be thought to be thy master, when thou art ashamed openly to be his
servant? shall he receive thee which rejectest him? or suppose, thou will
greatly esteem his robes of glory, which voluntarily do here put on the
devils livery? No, no (beloved) he has taught us otherwise: He that
confesses not me (says he) before men, him will I deny before my Father which
is in heaven: He that loves father or mother, or son or daughter more then
me, is not worthy of me. We are unworthy indeed to be his soldiers, if we
will not take up our cross and follow him. Alas! what thing of moment can
there be which may yield a colored pretense to shake off our allegiance to so
good a master? Shall persecution, or anguish, or tribulation, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? why, in all these we are more then conquerours
through him that loved us. Sufferings and bonds are not things execrable to
Christians; for a Christian man's breast, whose hope consists wholly in the
tree, dreadeth neither bat nor club; wounds and scarres of the body be
ornaments to him, such as bring no shame nor dishonesty to the party, but
rather prefer and free him with the Lord. Though in dungeons there be no
beds for his body to rest on, yet has he rest in Christ, and though his weary
bones lie upon the cold ground, you he thinks it no pain for him to lie with
his Savior. Ones feet may be fettered with bonds and chains, but happily is
he bound of men, whom the Lord Christ does loose; happily does he lie tied in
the stocks, whose feet are thereby swifter to run to heaven. Neither can
any man rye a Christian so fast, but that he runs so much the faster for
his garland of life; say one has no garment to save him from cold, yet he that
puts on Christ is sufficiently coated; say bread do lack to your hungry
bodies, but man lives not by bread only, but by every word proceeding from
the mouth of God. What if we shorten our days of misery, do we not the sooner
make our entrance into better of glory? What if we suffer torments of body?
but oh let us more sear, least we for ever loose the joys of the soul! But
some (perhaps) will think it impertinent to urge this hard and unsavory
precept at such a calm of the Church, wherein every man eats of his own
vineyard, who gathers quietly the fruit himself, which he himself has
planted, there are now no persecutions (men will say) no bonds nor death
threatened for Christ's name, (and God grant these words may never more be heard
in this our Israel, God grant it I say,) but in the mean time, shall we be so
senseless as to think that Christ's name is now banished this Island, and that
it surceas'd with the blood of Martyrs? No, it is conversant amongst us, and
summons her champions as resolutely to defend it as ever it did: but where is
it? why, it is every where; that poor man oppressed, is Christ's cause; that
sick brother, that wretch, that Lazarus, that naked body, that widow, that
orphane child; hear what our Savior says, Matt. 25. What you have done unto
one of the least of these my brethren, you have done it unto me. And do you
ask yet where is Christ's cause? why, it is in the midst of you; are any of your
neighbors drunkards or profane? there it is; are any of your servants
disorderly or negligent? there it is; are any of your children disobedient or
dissolute? why, there it is. Say not as the wicked do, it is in the
wilderness, it is in the desert, it is in Spain, it is in Rome; no, but
examine your own hearts, and if you find there written the God of the world,
then be bold to say, lo here is Christ*s cause, here I must fight valiantly to
destroy the kingdom of Satan and to vanquish Christ's enemy. No sack of a
city is so lamentable as when the devil enters into a soul, and when he
cries down with an heart and sinkes the whole man into ruin and perdition.
Come on therefore decre Christians, you which stand for Christ's name have a
strong cause, why have you faint hearts? I confess that there be Cananites
which must be expulsed before we can obtain the land of promise, and Schons
and Oggs, giants of monstrous stature to appale and affright us, but does not
the matter stand just so with the affairs of this world? Can one obtain any
thing here amongst men but he must get it by violence? seek we the^ with the
same violence the things in heaven, with which wicked men do seek the things
of this world. Here we can get nothing without labor, watching, trouble,
venture, fight; do but the same, and see heaven is offered! how much difference
in the ends, and see the means are both one. And so I pass a gravitate rei,
from the greatness of the thing which the Apostle was ready to undergo, ad
Qualitate^ causae, the nature of the cause, which comes in the last place to be
treated of, For the name of the Lord Jesus.

We read in histories how prodigal some have been of their lives; honor,
ease, devotion, shame, want, pain, any thing served them for a reason not only
to forsake themselves, or to expose themselves to vnevitable dangers, but also
to be their own executioners. Gellius in his fifteenth book and twentieth
chapter tell's of the women of a certain town, that in wantonness had brought it
up for a fashion to kill themselves. Next to them seemed to be those in the
Primitive Church, which invented new ways of martyrdom, with hunger;
wherewith they were so transported, that some of them taught, that upon
conscience of sin, to kill ones self, was by this act of justice a martyrdom:
upon which ground Petillian, against whom S Austine writes, canonized Judas for
a Martyr. The rage and fury of the Circumcellians in extorting this imagined
martyrdom, brought them first to solicit and importune others to kill them,
and if they failed in that suite, they did it themselves; and another sect
prospered so far in heaping up numbers of martyrs, that their whole sect, as
Epiphamius tell's us, was called Martyriani. Diverse therefore contributing
their Helps to the preservation and tranquillity of states, employed their best
inventions to remedy these inconveniences, and to divert men from such
precipitate courses. Aristotle in the 3. of his Ethickes and 7. chap. to
correct the opinion of getting honor by that act, taught that nothing was more
base and cowardly then to kill ones self, became (says he) men did it not,
either for henesties sake, or for the good of the commonweal, but only to
be freed from some inconveniences, which they thought might molest them. The
Spaniards in the Indies had another policy; when they found a general
inclination and practice in the inhabitants to kill themselves to avoid
slavery, they had no way to reduce them, but by some dissembling and outward
counterfeiting, to make them believe that they also killed themselves, and so
went with them into the next world, and afflicted them more there then they did
in this. Princes likewise have inflicted forfietures and infamous mulcts upon
them which should so slay themselves; and the Church by her Canons has denied
them burial. Thus in sundry times placet, sundry means have been thought of
to prevent and dissuade men from such inconsiderate actions. But Almighty God,
who disposes all things sweetly, has been so indulgent to our nature and
the frailty thereof, that he has afforded us a means how to give away our
life, and yet so as it shall be pleasing to him; which is, by delivering our
selves to martyrdom, so that it be for the testimony of his name, and the
advancing of his glory, For in this we restore him his talent with profit, our
own soul, with as many more as our example works upon and winnes to him.
This is that which S. Paul implies in the words of my text, declaring that he
was ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem. But because
martyrem non facit poena sed causa, as S. Austine tell's us, it is not the
punishment but the cause which makes a martyr; the Apostle would not so leave
us in a doubt, as if to dye simply were good or desirable, and as if it were
lawful in any occasion to be profuse and prodigal of ones blood; but
intimates the quality of the cause, which makes true martyrdom, not to be
fame, or honor, or any worldly respect, but only the name of the Lord Jesus:
from which example of our blessed Apostle may it please you to infer with me
this conclusion; That, that cause which warrants true martyrdom, is to be the
maintaining of Christ's truth and the defending of his name.

The wicked and the godly, may both have the same punishment, but not the same
cause; Christ was crucified and the thieves were crucified, but quos passio
jungebat, causa separabat (says Austine) whom the passion did join, the cause
did sever; which he sweetly thus presses from those words of the kingly
Prophet, Psalm. 35. Arife and wake to my judgment, even to my cause, my God and
my Lord: not to punishment (says the Father)but to my cause, not to that which
the theife has common with me, but to that which the blessed only can
challenge, who suffer persecution for righteousness sake: Mat. 5. Now that we
may the better know what is to be understood by the name of Christian in this
place, and in what respects it may truly be termed martyrdom, which one
sustaines in the defense of it; we must note that all true martyrdom for
Christ's sake is grounded upon one of these three pretenses and claims: The
first is the sealing with our blood the profession of some moral truth, which
though it be not directly of the body of the Christian faith, nor expressed in
the articles thereof; yet it is some of those works which a Christian man is
bound to do: Such was the martyrdom of S. John Baptist, when he was beheaded
for telling Herod that it was not lawful for him to have his brothers wife:
Mat. 14. The second is, the maintaining with loss of life the integrity of the
Christian faith, and not suffering any part thereof to perish and corrupt: Such
were the martyrdomes of the Prophets before Christ, of the Fathers in the Ten
first persecutions, and of the Protestants here in England in Queen Marie's
days. The third is, the endeavoring by the same means to preserve the
liberties and immunities of the Church: which are two fold, either native and
connaturall to the Church, as preaching the word, administering the Sacraments,
and applying medicinal censure; or accessory, such as for the furtherance and
advancement of the worship of God, Christian Princes have given unto it. If any
to whose charge God has committed these by an ordinary calling do loose his
life either in the execution of the former, or for a pious and dutiful
admonition to the Prince for the latter, we may justly esteem him for a
martyr.

But to come to our application; Christ has his martyrs, and Antichrist would
have his also. It may make some peradventure to wonder and stand astonished, at
the strange hardness of some priests and Jesuits of the Roman religion, their
resolution to dye for their Bell the Bishop of Rome; but should we but sift
the truth of the point, we should find that it is not Christ's cause that
they dye for; nor his Name which with the Apostle here they so stand for, but
that other reasons and by-respects do induce them to this false martyrdom. To
see one lavish of his blood, would persuade a simple man to think that the
cause could not be but good: but alas! it is not true zeal, but fury which
drives them to these exigences, it is not the love of their Master Christ, but
the hope of avoiding Purgatory, and of meriting heaven, which so advances this
corrupt inclination. Yet this I will say, that if the sustaining of death for
the defense of one's cause could end the controversy, Bellarmine the greatest
Doctor of the Romish Church, would give the Vmpire to our side, for in his 4th
book de signis Ecclesia and 2. chap. he ingenioussly confesses, that
Martyrdom can be no note of the Romish Church, because (says he) other sects
there are, amongst which he name's the Calvinists, who have ever bin most
forward in dying for their Religion. But let us go on, and examine a little,
whether those Jesuits and Priests, according to the ground laid down before,
can challenge the names of true Martyrs, or no. To begin therefore with the
first kind of Martyrdom, which is, for defending some moral truth; do they
dye for defending any such verity? No (beloved) it is for oppugniug even the
rirst Commandment, which concerns our duty toward man; that Commandment
teaches us, that we should honor our Fathers and Mothers, by which is meant
not only our natural Parents, but likewise all higher powers, and especially
such as have sovereign authority over us as Kings and Princes, whom the
Scripture does term nursing Fathers of the Church, Esaias 49. But they are
executed for plotting their deaths, for contriving powder-treasons, for
affirming that the Pope may depose the King, that he may excommunicate him,
and then give his Subjects a privilege to assassinate him, so that for
defending any moral truth they are not Martyrs, but rather for breaking of so
great a Commandment, they dye as guilty offenders both of God and the Laws of
the Land. Well then, let us go to the Articles of Faith, may they beterm'd
Martyrs, because they stand for the vp-holding of any part of the Creed?
therein do they maintain the Name of Jesus? No (beloved) though some of them
are called Jesuits, yet are they so far from being so indeed, that as
Whitaker a learned divine of ours has observed, there is no point of their
doctrine wherein they differ from us, but either therein they deny the Name of
Jesus, or the Name of Christ, one of our Savior's two Names is always
infringed by the^. But yet they will say (perhaps) that they dye for
maintaining their Church's immunities and privileges; and therein do descrue
to be called Martyrs: (They may well indeed say, their Church's, for I cannot
say, Christ's Church.) But what are the Privileges which they pretend? why,
any of their Priests will tell you, they are those which our Savior gave to S.
Peter, in Matt., 16. ver. 18. in these words, Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock I will build my Church. But what mean these words? are they any thing
else then that Christ would build his Church upon that rock, that is, upon
that confession of Peter's immediately before uttered, That he was the Son of
God? this indeed is the true sense; but yet the Pope's Canon Law has pleased
to give another interpretation, Thou art Peter, that is to say, in the Roman
speech, (I am sure neither in the Greek nor Latin) thou art Bishop of Rome,
and upon thee as thou art such an one, I will build my Church; but not only
upon thee Peter, for there shall be no moreBishops of Rome of that name; but
upon thee Gregory, upon thee Adrian, Julius, Ioane, upon every Bishop of Rome,
good or bad, holy or profane, Christian or Atheist, be he what he will, I will
build my Church; and under this I ordain thee Monarch, both of things
temporal, and things spiritual, Sovereign King and Bishop together; of
spiritual, to controlle the Old Testament, to dispense against the Gospel,
and against the Apostles, to make new articles of faith, to be above all
Councels, and when thou traylest men by thousands into hell, I would have no
man to question thee, why do thou this? Of Temporal, to dispose of all the
World, to distribute it at thy pleasure, as if it were thine own heritage, to
reign over Kings, to arraigne and indite them, to depose them, to absolve
their subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, to expose their estates for a
prey, their persons to murder, to bestow their Kingdoms on whom it shall
please thee, and lastly to change their tenures to fealty, or convert their
territories to their own demaine. Pity will strike one here into horror: but
sweet Jesus, were these the privileges which thou bequeathed'st to S. Peter?
were these the dignities which thou conferred'st on thy Church? thy profession
was wont to be that thy Kingdom was not of this world, that the servant is not
greater then his Master; and thy Apostles have taught us, that every soul
should be subject unto higher powers; and may now any be so hardy, as to claim
this Imperial sway from thy donation? Alas beloved, this challenge by the
Pope, is far from the promise of the Apostles, and of S. Peter himself!
let us look into his 1 Epistle, and 2 Chap. where he enjoynes all men to fear
God, and honor the King, and we shall perceive that his scope was obedience,
subjectio^, duty. Poor man whilst he lived he was in want and need, silver
and gold he had none; and see, since his death the Pope has provided for him a
mighty Kingdom. All the Church's privileges which they dye for (if they dye
for any) are these which you have heard; whether he deserves the name of a
Martyr, which dies for such manifest impieties, judge you. Of all their Martyrs
it may be said, as once S. Austine in his 68. Epistle said of the Donatists,
Vivebant vt latrones, honorab antur vt martyrs; they live murderers, and
traitors, and false Prophets, and a painted straw shall make them to be
honored as Martyrs. Our case (thanks be to God) is far differing from
theirs; we know whose name it is which we maintain: and if ever the Lord
marched before us in a pillar of fire to show us the true way we are to take,
he does it this day; here you see the representation of his death, these are
those remembrances he left us, to show how he was crucified in our cause, and
these are they which put us in mind what we are to do again in his cause. His
Supper he ordained to begirt and arm us to withstand his enemies. He which is
loath to put on this armor, is unwilling to fight his battle. Let no man
therefore drawback when Christ offers to assist him with such munition. Let
no man say, I am unworthy, but put his confidence in his Savior, which makes
him worthy. We may not deceive our selves (beloved) he is not unworthy to
eat his body and drink his blood, which thinks himself unworthy: for unto
such Christ says, Come unto me all ye which are laden, and I will ease you;
but he is unworthy which is loath to be made worthier, which is profane in
his life, and means yet to be so, which is malicious in his thoughts, and
resolv's to continue so, which is covetous in his heart, and purposes to abide
so; to the^ if any be here so minded, I give this counsel; refrain from this
holy Communion, touch not, taste not, handle not those sacred rese^blances of
your Redeemer: this Supper indeed is an armor of proof, to shield all such as
do fight truly in Christ's cause; but if you war under the divel's banner, it
will prove like Readiness armor to David, it will press you downwards: it is a
weapon left us to put Satan to flight; but if you fight not on God's side, it
will bend it self upon your selves, and like the Midianites swords, will
stick in your own sides. But I hope better things of you. In Baptism you
received your presse-money,and were entered into your Captain Christ Jesus his
Book; then you made your first vow, to fight against the world, the flesh, and
the devil: you must remember if that you will be expert and able soldiers,
you are often to be muttered and trained, often must you bear the colors,
often take the bread of munition during this spiritual warrefare. You see as
there is a prize to win, so there is a buckler to defend you, food to
strengthen you. Courage, courage therefore for Heaven, for CHRIST, for the
Crown of Glory: it is a shame in such a multitude of those that profess
CHRIST, that there are so few which truly follow him, and that men are like
Pharaoh's lean kine, in the rich and plentiful pastrures of the Gospel; the
blood of Martyrs was the milk which nursed the Primitive Church in her
infancy, and shall it be too hard for our disgestion now? it was the seed of
the Church out of which we sprung, and shall we grudge to tithe our selves to
God in any proportion that he will accept? But the Apostles are dead, and those
great lights of example the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and the holy Martyrs, and
we have their sepulchers with us; yet let their hope, their zeal, their
faith, their constancy, their patience live. I speak with more vehemence,
because I know not what concerns us more then this Scripture, He that loses
his life for my sake shall find it. Lo we stand upon our being, or not being;
upon having, or loosing of our souls: the God of love and peace give us all
the spirit of zeal, hope, and patience, that in the sweat of Jesus Christ we
may overcome all faintings of the heart, all reluctations of the flesh, all
bitterness of temptation: To him therefore, with the Father, and Holy Ghost,
one God and three Persons, be rendered all praise, honor, and glory, now and
for evermore.

AMEN.
THE DVTY AND AFFINITY OF THE FAITHFVLL.
LVKE 8. 21. Then came his mother and his brethren, and could not come at him
for the preasse. And it was told him by certain, which said, Thy, mother and
thy brethren stand without, desiring to see thee: And he answered and said unto
them; My mother and my brethren are those which hear the word of God and do it.


WHat the occasion might be which moved our Savior to make this reply,
Interpreters on all parts do not agree. Tertullian, Chrysostom, and
Theophylact are of opinion, that Christ here taxed his Mother and Brethren, as
if the scope of their coming had bin, to show their kindred with our Savior,
and their authority over him. Others think he reprehended only their
unseasonable and inconsiderate proclaiming of their affinity with him, because
by this means (say some) the devil might take an opportunity to extinguish
that opinion which some (a little before) began to conceive of his divinity.
But Hierome thinks rather, he blamed by this answer, him which interrupted him
in his preaching, as who should tempt him, whether he would prefer flesh and
blood before the spiritual work of his Vocation. Of all these the Popish
Writers can best brook them which cast any aspersion of a fault upon our Lady;
whom the Council of Trent in the 6. Sess: would redeem if not from being
conceived in original sin, yet from ever committing of any actual
transgression. Tolet therefore the Jesuit, would have these words in my Text to
imply no reprehe^sion, but rather an admonition or commonefaction; albeit
Iansenius, so he may save our Lady from a chiding, stands not greatly whether
it were bestowed upon Christ's brethren, or upon him which told our Savior of
his mothers being without. For mine own part, though I am not desirous to
impute any obliquitie to the blessed Virgin at this time; yet far be it from
me to say, that there was ever any (Christ only excepted) which lived without
sin. For what is that of our Saviors to Mary, Ioh. 2. Woman, what have I to
do with thee, but a reprehendsion? and shall Christ reprehend where there was
no fault? What other thing can those words of Maryes import, Luke 1. My soul
does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior? but that
she confessed her sins, when she acknowledged a Savior. Bellarmine
therefore in his 4th book de amissione gratiae, and 16. Chapter, denies not
that she had a Savior, and that remission of sins was necessary unto her,
as well as unto others; but he would feign recover himself with this shift,
saying, that those sins were remitted unto her, non in quae inciderat, sed in
quae incidisset, nisi gratia Dei per merit a Christi praeventae suisset: not
those into which she fell, but those into which she would have fallen, bad
not the grace of God prevented her; as if forshooth God used to impute those
sins to men which they never committed, or as if a King should be stow his
pardon of felony upon him which never stole, and yet think it a great favor.
As for the words of my text, I deny not but that the of died Virgin might come
with good intent unto our Savior, hoping either to hear him and see him, as
some would have it:or as others, to recover him from those traps and shares
which the Scribes and Pharisces laid to entrap him withal. Yet I may well
gather thus much, that if our Savior reprehends not in this place an error
already committed, yet he gives a caveat of one which might be committed; and
if I may not say he blames one past, it is plain he preve^ts one to come. For
what do not men conceive of the bond of kindred? might not the Jews suppose
that our Savior would have granted great privileges to those which claymed
affinity or consanguinity with him? or at lest have omitted his preaching and
teaching at their importunity? He therefore either to divert them from such
fancies, or to show by his own example how highly we are to value the exercise
of our heave^ly calling before al respect whatsoever to our earthly parents,
answered as we read it set down in Matthew, and Marks gospel, Who is my
mother, and who are my brethren? As if he should have said: it is so indeed
with the world that kindred and consanguinity are of great importance, that they
bear great sway in men's affections, and potent orators they are to turn them
which way they list. This wholly I dislike not, nay rather as I my self was
ever obedient unto my parents, so leave I this commandment unto you, that of
all others you most incline your ears to them and hearken unto their counsel:
but now I am about the business of my heavenly Father, I am performing the
work for which I was sent; I confess, that great is the privilege of our
carnal progenitors, yet greater is the pre-eminence of our p^^^tuall
alliance: if that other is to be respected as good yet this is to be preferred
as better. What therefore if my mother or brethren stand without, must I leave
my task of preaching the kingdom of God to converse with the^? No, no, I say
unto you, the nearenes which I have with the^ is somewhat, but the propinquity
I have with you in God is much more: are they of my blood? so are you; are they
of my kindred? so are you; is there my mother or my sisters or my brethren? why
know this also, that whosoever heaveth the word of God and does it, the same is
my mother, my sister and my brother.

The sum is a declaration of that near conjunction which they have with
Christ who are members of, him, and are truly engrafted into his body. Wherein
observe with me these two circumstances,

viz. First the titles here given unto them, my mother and my brethren are
these etc.

viz. Secondly, the properties required in them, which are two 1. Hearing the
word of God. 2. Doing it.


My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God and do it.

My mother and my brethren, there is the Invitation; are these which hear the
word of God, there is the Information; and do it, there is the Execution: so that
consanguinity and nearenesse of kin invites to hear, hearing is the means
to inform; and information directs us how to execute. My mother and my
brethren are these etc. It may seem strange to some that our Savior should in
this place use so harsh a Metaphor in showing the near conjunction and union
of himself with his members, as not only to apply to the same subject things
of diverse natures, but also differing sexes. Whosoever hears the word of God
and does it (says he;) he excludes not men, nor alters the case with women,
they are all of them both his mother and his brethren. Morally indeed (as
Iansenius expounds it) he may be termed his brother, because he is the son
of the same heavenly father and joint heir with Christ: Romans 8.17. and his
mother because Christ is borne a new in him by a spiritual nativity, according
to that of the Apostle: Gal. 4.19. My little children with whom I travel in
birth again until Christ be formed in you. But because it is true which S.
Paul has in the same Epistle and 3 chap: there is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for they are
all one in Christ Jesus; Literally should I explicate it, it imports by a
mentioning of the subject for the abstract, that they are his mother and
brethren, implying as much as this, what love a mother receives of her son, the
same you receive of me; what affection a brother challenges of a brother the
same impart I to you, what ever alliance, consanguinity or kindred effects in
provoking to compassion and mutual desires of each others welfare, the same
and greater passes from my bowels to them which hear Gods word and do it. To
be brief, he shows a new kindred, not such as Heralds can reduce into a
pedigree grounding upon a lineall descent of flesh and blood, but upon a
spiritual cognation with him; and here (says Ambrose) he which gave laws
and precepts unto us became an executer of his own edicts. For having
prescribed, that he which leaves not father or mother is not worthy of him,
practices it first in his own person, not that he might abrogate the duties
due to mothers, for it was his own decree, that he which honors not his
father and mother shall dye the death, sed affectibus quia paterius se mysterijs
ambitus quam maternis debere cognoscat, hut because he knows he ought more to
his fathers mysteries the to his mothers affections. The sum of all affords us
this observation;

That we are to esteem, no bond of kindred or consanguinity so great, as the
spiritual all^^nce which we have with Christ, and through Christ one with
another.

How nearely the elect and chosen vessels of God are linked to Christ, may
sundry ways be showed out of the writings of the holy Ghost. For first, they
have a near relation unto him in respect of nature, whereby he is their
father by the right of Creation; for though from their parents they take their
bodies derivation, as being Gods instruments in their production, yet upon him
they depend as upon the principal efficient: in him we live, and moon, and
have our being (says Saint Paul) Act. 17. and in this respect Adam is is
termed the Son of God, Luke 3.38. Secondly, they are nearly adjoined unto
him, in respect of grace; and indeed this seems a more near conjunctio^ with
him the^ any can be of kindred or affinity, for in this regard Christ is termed
the head, they the members, Ephesians. 4.15. Christ the husband, they the spouse, 2.
Cor. 11. Christ the vine, they the branches, Ioh. 15.1. Christ the fountain,
they the brook, Ioh. 4.14. and if any thing may more plainly express the
neerenesse and conjunction they have with him; he calls himself via and vita,
the way and the life, Ioh. 14.6. When a woman therefore had said unto him. Luke
11. Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck; yea
rather (says he) blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
yea. rather; non carnales pare^tes negat, sed spirituales Praefert; (says
Maldonat) he denies not his natural parents, but prefer's, his spiritual.
Matre^ matri, fraters fratribus anteponit, he preferres his mother hearing the
word, before his mother giving him suck: his brethren doing the will of God,
before his brethren descending from the same parents. What if Mary were his
mother by bearing him in her womb? yet her motherhood seemed redoubled in her
when she conceived him in her soul. If James and Ioses might call him
brother, because they were linked unto him by the bond of the flesh, yet more
truly were they then his brethren, when they were so made by the bond of the
spirit.

But I need not insist longer upon the proof of a point so evident. I will
now come to apply it to our selves; we see the near alliance we have with
Christ, and through Christ, one with another: the great King of heaven and
earth vouchsafes to incorporate us into his family, and as if it were too
little to place us in any remote degrees of alliance, he graceth us with those
excellent, and most affectionate names, of Mother and Brethren. O let us not
swell and be carried away with the mere titles thereof, but endeavor to make
manifest to the world, that our affections are correspondent to our
appellations. Men and brethren, are you ambitious of this high dignity, to be
called his brother? Would you be styled with so supereminent a title? Why, you
must perform then the offices of a brother to him, by reducing your selves,
and by winning others to his faith; you must raise up seed unto him, and become
the sons of the same heavenly father. Are any amongst you, which affect the
privileges of a mother? Think ye not that also to be a thing impossible
that our blessed Savior should be borne again, and that of any other besides
his virgin mother? though to natural man this seem impossible, yet to the
spiritual man it will seem easy, and of no difficulty to be performed.
Believe but his word, and you have conceived him in your womb; do but his
will, and you have brought him forth into the world; entertain but his
messengers, and you embrace him in your arms; releive but him which craves a
cup of cold water in his name, and you give him suck. This is a grace not
appropriated to women only, nor only to the married, for men also and virgins
themselue, may be the happy mothers of such an issue. But alas (beloved) how
is it that we so slight and so little value this unspeakable honor? we
recount our carnal pedegrees, and are puffed up if an herald can derive our
descent from any noted family upon earth, which yet began but yesterday, and
perhaps will perish before night; and do we think it a small thing that we
are here offered to be admitted into so noble an alliance, as to have God to
our Father, and Christ to our Son and brother? The greatest Monarch upon
earth can show his descent, but for some hundred of years, although few can
prescribe for so long; so subject to changes and alterations are all things
under the funne; and shall it not be our ambition to reject those vain and
vpstart descents, when we have such evidences as these to derive our pedigree
from eternity? In our natural descents there is great uncertainty, heralds
may be corrupted, wrirings lost, deeds changed; but in our spiritual
alliance with Christ, our names are written in the book of life which no
forgery can counterfeit, nor injury of time deface. But the world understands
not this, and the foolish will not believe it, a greater matter they think it,
to be of a noble house, and to have had such and such ancestors: why, (beloved)
let us reason together; what content can a man find to derive himself from
him whom hereafter he will Judge most vile and wretched? what a fondness were
it to build ones reputation upon the glory of such an one, as perhaps the next
day he shall follow to the place of execution with execrations and curses? And
yet this may be the case between us and our glorious progenitors, whom now
we so vaunt of; who knows whether at Christ's appearance he shall not rife up
in judgment against them and condemn them? Who can assure himself, whether
those which the world accounted as worthies, shall not be found at the last
day, to have been but painted clouts, and full of slime and corruption within?
And yet the greatest sort of men are proud, and self conceited, that they are
descended even from those, who were so cruel unto them, that the same moment
they gave them life, they gave them also the sting of death, in their flesh;
and in the mean time, they set at naught the alliance they have with the Lord
of life, or that they may be in so honorable a rank, as to be Christ's
mother or his brethren. And what is the issue of all? Why, we reject God from
being our Father, that we may glory only in earthly ancestors; we exclude
Christ from being our eldest brother, that we may apply our selves to the
brethren of our own house; we renounce for our kinsmen the blessed troops of
Saints and Angels, that we may have none of our stock but whom the world
applauds and counts happy. This was not the practice of the godly in the
Scripture, we read of Moses, how when he came to years, he refused to be
called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: Heb.
11.24. for, to say the truth, our earthly affinity is but transitory, and
abides not, if you would purchase an everlasting and never-dying kindred, call
them your brethren which are humbled with adversity, for these shall be
partners with you in the kingdom of God; call them your brethren, which have
forsaken the splendor of the world, for these shall reign with you for ever
in heaven; call them your brethren, which have renounced the ambitious titles
of honor, for these shall inherit with you the crown of righteoussnesse; call
them your brethren, which hear the word of God and do it, for these must
be your companions in glory. Link not your selves with the covetous for
wealth, with the proud for honor, with the voluptuous for pleasure, with the
hollow-hearted in religion for gain and preferment; but if you would knit an
inseperable knot of kindred, let your brotherhood be founded in Christ, lest
at your deaths you be both of you either everlastingly separated, or
everlastingly confounded. I confess it is an hard thing to persuade flesh and
blood to follow this, they will scarce believe that Christ by the right of
kindred, claims such an interest in them, as that by his example they should so
much preferred the spiritual alliance they have with him, before that which
they have with their own kindred. For do not we see the quite contrary
practiced every where in the world? Does not one think his wife nearer to
him, and for her sake either quits, or at lest is cold in the profession of
Christ's religion? Do not others think their mother or their brethren nearer
to them, and when they hear Christ taught in the Church, if any says unto
them, as here we find it in my text, thy mother and thy brethren are without
desiring to see thee, they will leave Christ's company to feed their fancies?
Do not all think their humors and pleasures and profits nearer unto them,
and for their sakes go to law with their brethren, reject all alliance they
have with any in Christ, and with slaundrings, backbitings, and raylings,
like foul birds defile their own nests? Moses when two Israelites strove
together, said, why smitest thou thy fellow? I say more, why strive we, we
are brethren? We may conceive our head Jesus Christ as saying from heaven,
why strive you my kinsmen? why make you divisions in our family my mother and
my brethren, which you are? Your are all children of the same heavenly Father,
children should dwell together; members of the same body, members should grow
together; soldiers of the same army, soldiers should gether; soldiers of the
same army, soldiers should march together. Thus we are termed in the holy
Scriptures, let it be our care to be answerable to such honorable
appellations. And now that you have seen your titles and prerogatives which
Christ bestows on you, of his mother and brethren, hearken but like mothers
and brethren to the propertyes required in you, which are hearing and doing,
and God will make you to be so indeed And first I desire hearing, which comes
in the next place to be handled: My mother and my brethren are they which hear
the word of God, etc.

There is nothing so necessary to a Christian which travells from this Egypt of
misery and oppression to the heavenly Canaan, as the knowledge of the word of
God; for by this he is directed in his way, conducted to his port, assured of
his safe arrival. This made the Prophets so often to ingeminate the hearing of
it unto Gods people: Hear ye the word of the Lord ye rulers: Esaias. 1.10.
Hear the word of the Lord ye house of David, Ierem. 12.4. You sheepheards
hear the word of the Lord: Ezech. 34.7. Hear all ye old men: Joel. 1.2.
Hear all ye people. Mich. 1.2. Princes, rulers, sheepheards, people, old,
young, all, liable to this task of hearing, in so much, that our Savior makes
this the burden of his Sermons, he that has an ear to hear let him hear.
But (beloved) in this place our Savior seems to go somewhat farther, and as
if our kindred and alliance with him were to be confirmed by charter, makes none
capable of that honor, but those which can show their title out of the word of
God. My mother and my brethren are they which hear the word of God; The
observation which I draw from hence, is this,

That it is required of all those, which would be adopted into Christ's family,
to be diligent hearers of Gods word.

I need not be large in proving the truth of this doctrine; It is sufficient,
that hearing is the ordinary means which Christ has left us to engraft us
into his family, and to make us the children of his heavenly Father: for by
faith we are made the heirs of salvation, and faith comes by hearing:
(says the Apostle) Romans 10. so that no hearing, no faith; no faith, no
salvation: He therefore which is of God, hears Gods voice (says our
Savior,) John. 8.47. And again, my sheep hear my voice. Ioh. 10.27. In
regard whereof, the Saints in all ages were bound to repair to the ministers
of the word, and to hear the Law at the Priests lips, Malach. 2.7. In the Old
Testament, we find that they resorted to the Prophets upon the sabbaths, and
upon other days; for when the Shunamite in 2. King. 4. craved leave of her
husband to go to the Prophet, he replied wherefore will thou go? it is
neither new moon nor Sabbath day, as if on those days the people used to
resort unto them to hear them. The like was used in the new Testament, for so
our Savior sent the Jews to the Scribes and Pharisees, Matt. 23.1. the Angel
sent Cornelius to Peter, Act. 10.32. and of these times Esaias prophesying,
says, that in the last days it shall come to pass that many people shall go
and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, Esaias. 2.3. For indeed the
ministry of the Gospel is that golden pipe (as one terms it) whereby and
wherethrough all the goodness of God, all the sweetness of Christ, all
heavenly graces whatsoever are derived unto us; It is that hook and bait which
Christ's fishers of men, his disciples and Apostles used, in the taking of
souls; It is that spiritual armor which casts down every thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and brings into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ; It is that blowing of the Levites,
which, if not at the first, yet at the seventh time, will beat down Jericho in
us, and hew a passage in our hearts for the entrance of the heave^ly
tabernacle. It is that poole of Bethesda, at which should lie every distressed
and impotent soul, and expect the moving of the waters, I mean, the first
moving of the spiritual waters of life, by the preachers of the Gospel. To
make use of this doctrine; there are two sorts of men which commonly fail in
the performance of this commandment, of hearing the word; the first are those
which say, they can read the Bible in their houses, that they have Gods word
which will instruct them as sufficiently at home, as any sermons in the
Churches. But these men foulety deceive themselves, for first they must know
that it is one thing to say that the Scriptures are sufficient to teach them
all things necessary to salvation; another thing to say, that they teach these
things so usefully without an interpreter, as with one. I deny not but that in
the Scriptures more excellent knowledge and profound mysteries are contained,
then the greatest Doctors and learned men withal their pains and industry
can attain unto: but so powerful and so profitable it is not to them when it
is read privately, as when it is preached in the Church; for who can say that
he shall not hear in preaching, many things expounded which (...) was
ignorant of, many godly instructions gathered, which he observed not, many
useful points applied to his conscience which he heeded not? I pass by his
sins ripped up, the weaknesses and diseases of his soul displayed to his
view, the threatening of the law denounced, the sweet comforts of the Gospel
produced, salues applied to his sores, balsome to his wounds, playsters to his
dying and putrefying members: besides a thousand excellent and heavenly
effects, which hearing brings with it. Thou came into the Church a vulture,
before thou departest, thou may be transformed into a dove; thou camst in a
wolf, thou may be changed into a lamb; not having thy body or soul so
altered that thou shall be no more a man, but thy foul mind, and beastly
thoughts expelled, which before would not suffer thee to be a man. I add, the
hearing of the word preached is a part of the service of God, and a duty
enjoined every Christian to perform, if therefore other things moved us not
unto it, yet methinks the commandment it self should be of virtue sufficient
to move a good Christian to be zealous in this kind, to say with David, One
thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, even that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to visit his holy temple. At the day of judgment when all the glory
of this world shall be as dross, when our riches shall fail us, our honor
not profit us, our friends forsake us, there will be nothing left us to do us
good, but what we shall have learnd by having heard Christ preached. But I
pass to the other fort of me which offfend like wise, and that perhaps more
dangerously in not hearing the word preached. These are they which are so far
from reading at home, that think it not greatly necessary for the either to
read or to hear any where; many of the^ will pretend that they are busied
about this or that business, they are craftsmen, they must follow their trade,
they have a wife, their children must be fed, their household provided for; and
lastly, they are men of the world, a little knowledge and a good meaning is
sufficient for them, it is for scholars, and such as give themselves to a
contemplative life, to be skilled in these points. But alas! (my good
Christian brother) is it not for thee to apply thy self to the hearing of the
word preached, because thou art distracted and encombred with cares and
businesses? why, so much the more it is necessary for thee to have the munition
of the word, by how much the more distressed thou art in worldly dangers; they
that be free and far from trouble and intermedling of worldly things, live
in safeguard, in tra^quillity, and in a calm, or within a sure haven; Thou art
in the midst of the sea of worldly wickedness, and therefore thou need the
more of ghostly succor and comfort; They fit far from the strokes of
battle, and far out of gunshot, and therefore they be but seldom wounded;
thou that stand in the forefront of the host, and nighest to thine enemies,
must needs take now and then many strokes, and be grievously wounded, and
therefore thou have most need to have thy remedies and medicines at hand. Thy
wife provokes thee to anger, thy child gives thee occasion to take sorrow
and pensiveness, thy enemies lie in wait for thee, thy friend (as thou take
him) sometimes envies thee, thy neighbor misreporteth thee, or picketh quarrels
against thee, thy mate or partner undermines thee, thy lord or superior
threatens thee, poverty is painful unto thee, the loss of thy dear and
well-beloued causes thee to mourn, prosperity exalts thee, adversity
brings the low, and lastly, manifold occasions of cares, tribulations and
temptations, do beset thee and beseege thee round about. Now where can thou
have armor or fortress against these thine assaults? where can thou have
salve for thy sores, but in the word of God, and in diligently hearing it
preached? O therefore (beloved) stop not up with earth, as the Philistiues
did, those fountains which are dug for you, neither yet with the Jews
run to broken Cisternes. If Christ come peaching unto you, entreat him not
with the Girgasites to depart out of your coasts; if his messengers are present
to instruct you, say not as Felix did to Paul, Go thy way for this time, and
when I have convenient season, I will call for thee again, but lay hold upon
all occasions and oportunities; when angels food is offered refuse not to taste
it, when clothing is proffered, be not way ward and go naked, but remember that
saying of a good father, he which harkneth not unto God inviting him, shall be
sure to find God taking vengeance upon him. And so I pass from the first
property which is required in those which are of Christ's family, to wit,
hearing the word, to the second, which is doing of the same; my mother and my
brethren are they which hear the word of God, and do it.

After hearing, our Savior inculcates doing, and that to good purpose, for to
hear the word and not to do it yields rather matter of condemnation then of
profit. For what says the Apostle? It had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness then after they have known it, to turn from
the holy commandment delivered unto them. Saint Peter therefore compares them
to the dog that turns to his own vomit again, and the sow to her wallowing
in the mire; Saint James to a man beholding his face in a glass, who when he
goes away, he straight ways forgets it; and our Savior resembles them
to him who built his house upon the sand, which, when the rain descended and
the floods came and the winds blew, fell and great was the fall of it. All show
the brutish and swinish fashion of those which spurn at the pearls of the
law, and like those in Saint James which devide faith from works, and say, I
have faith and thou have works. What God has joined together let no man
separate, as faith comes by hearing so hearing through faith must be operative
in good works, otherwise no kindred nor alliance with Christ, we can claim no
interest in his blood. If we would be his brethren we must hear his own
word, and yet not so only, but also do it: from whence I inferred this
observation.

That it is necessary for all those which would claim any interest in Christ
to be doers of his word.

For the fuller explication of the which assertion we must first distinguish
of necessity, a thing may be said to be necessary in a double respect, either
by way of a cause, and so the sun is necessary to make the day because it is
the cause of it: physic is necessary for the recovery of a man's health
because it is the cause of it: or else a thing may be said to be necessary by
way of an effect or of a condition, and so heat is necessary to the fire,
light to the sun, moystnesse to the water, not that heat is the cause of the
fire, nor light the cause of the sun, nor moystnesse the cause of the water,
but that the fire, and sun, and water, are rather the causes of them, and
they necessary effects of these. Upon this distinction depends the great
controversy between us and the Church of Rome concerning good works. We
agree on both sides, that to do and perform the word of God, to do good
works, is necessary for every man which expects to be justified by Christ,
the difference consists in this; they say that good works are necessary to
justificatio^, as being causes of it, we say they are necessary to
justification only, as being effects of it: I need not insist much upon the
deciding of the controversy in these barren times of ours, wherein there are
so few which do good works, I wonder what they aile to busy themselves so
much in musing what gain or merit shall accrue unto them from them, whether it
shall be a merit of congruity or desert, whether of the first grace or of the
second? when as their store, methinks, is yet so small, that though they sell
all they have and become bankerupt merchants, they shall never be able to
purchasse the least pearl which adornes the crown of glory. I know that
diverse are of opinion, that it is a good policy to persuade the common
people as the Pope does, that good works are the meritorious causes of
justification, and so by a consequence, of salvation, because by this means
the heat of sin (say they) will be repressed in many, and men will be the
more careful in the performance of good deeds. But were these men either well
catechized in their religion, or else were any whit skilled in the writings of
the adverse party, I doubt not but they would soon perceive, that their
doctrine of works adds fuel rather to increase the flame of bad desires in
one, the^ any way extinguisheth or diminishes the vigor of it. For besides
that they teach that many gross and heinous sins are no sins, and that they
mince many and of mortal make them venial, say that the hope of the reward
for their good works and the fear of punishment either in hell or in
purgatory for their bad, do something move and rouse the^ up to perform good
deeds, yet judge you (beloved) whether the easy avoiding of those punishments
which they have devised will not as much give the^ courage to go on in sin and
persevere in the way of wickedness? Why, mark but a little their doctrine; in
any sin there are these two parts, the guilt of it, and the punishment; the
punishment they make to be twofold, the one eternal, which is in hell, the
other temporal, wherewith (say they) God either afflicts men in this life, or
else in purgatory when they are dead. Now would you know how easy a matter
they make it to be freed from the guilt of sin, and from hell fire? Why
Bellarmine will soon resolve you for that, and tell you that these are taken
away by confessing of ones sins to the Priest, and by receiving an absolution
from him, in his 4th book de poenit: and 1. chapter and because contrition is so
necessary to make the absolution to be of force, he will tell you that a
servile contrition is sufficient for that purpose, such an one as arises not
from a fear of offending God, but only from a fear of the punishment which
God will inflict upon the^, as we find it in his 2d book de poenit. and 17.
chapter which kind of contrition and sorrow for ones sins, if it be sufficient,
I make no question but that the devil himself might be absolved from his
sins; for besides that he trembles, which argues that he is possessed with
such a fear as this; Saint James tells us moreover that he believes, which I
think is more then many Papists do, who content themselves with an implicit
faith (as they term it) and a blind zeal: but because when the guilt and the
punishment of hell fire is taken away they teach that God leaves a temporal
punishment to be undergone by them, either in this life, or after this life in
purgatory, you shall see that the means to avoid that will be, as casie as
the former. For to omit more going about then needs; if they would take a
speedy way, it is but purchasing an Indulgence of the Pope, they may have
plenam, pleniorem, plenissimam, as they term them, for half their sins, or
for one third or fourth part, or if the Pope please, for all, as we may well
see in Bellarm: his 1. book de Indulgent: chap. 9. Who would not be a Papist
if he were desirous to live as he listed? When besides the Indulgences, for a
certain number of Ave-Maryes (repeated at some altars, which the Pope
appoints) he may have a pardon for more years then the world is like to
continue? But to leave them a while to themselves, it shall be enough at this
time to show you, that howsoever we hold not good works to be the causes of
salvation, nor yet that we are to merit Heaven by them, as they do; yet that
we make them absolutely necessary for those which are the heirs of salvation;
and so withal that our doctrine rightly considered, does more necessarily
require them of us, then the Papists do. For first, we hold them to be
necessary, in respect, of God, that his Commandment may be obeyed, that his
will may be done, that we show our selves obedient children unto him, that we
be thankful for our redemption by CHRIST, that we may glorify our Father
which is in Heaven. Secondly, we hold them to be necessary, in regard of our
neighbors, that they may be helped, that they may be won by our example,
and that by doing good, the mouths of our adversaries may be stopped. Thirdly,
we hold good works necessary for our selves, and that notably in these
respects. First, that we may have some assurance of our faith, and of our
salvation; for when we cannot discern our faith, whether it be a true and
lively one or no, but only by the works which it brings forth, as the tree
is not known but by his fruit, it greatly concerns all those which would
overcome all temptations at their death, to make good proof of their faith in
their life, which is the thing pointed at by the Apostle S. Peter in his 2. Ep.
and 1. Chap: where he says, give diligence to make your calling and election
sure. And herein the Schools afford us a good distinction, and tell us, that
aliud est fiduciam ponere in operibus, aliud fiduciam oriri ex operibus; it is
one thing to put ones confidence in ones works, another thing to have a
confidence from ones works, though we put not the confidence of our ^alvation
in our works, as the Papists do, yet we hold that a confidence of our
salvation may arise unto us from our works, because our works do testify
our faith, whether it be a lively one, or no. Secondly, we hold good works are
necessary for us, because though the having of them deserves not Heaven, yet
the not having of them merits Hell. It was a good answer therefore which a
godly man made unto one, who asked him, what if there were no Heaven, wherewith
should his austerity and mortification be recompensed? He replied, but what if
there be an hell wherewith thy vices shall be punished? Thirdly, that we may
receive temporal benefits in this life, and avoid temporal punishments,
which otherwise God will inflict upon us, if we do amiss; for so says S.
Paul, Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. chap But I hasten to my
application. This serves (beloved) for a caveat to those which put all their
holiness in hearing, and think that will serve their turns, though they never
do any thing. Many there be in these days of ours, whose not only ears are
bent to hearing, but also their tongues are ready whet to all unprofitable
disputation; whom I could wish, as they be prompt of hearing, and vehement in
reasoning, so they were as ready and practiue to do good deeds. I mervaile to
recount whereof comes this strange hypocrisy, whence it happens, that the
Religion of Christ begins to wax nothing else but as it were a sophistry
and talking-craft. We hear the Scriptures, and we hear preaching, but in the
mean time we subdue not our selves by fasting, watching, and weeping, we
make not this life a meditation of death, we do not strive to be Lords ower
our appetites and affections, we go not about to pull down our proud and high
minds, to abate our fumish and rancorous stomachs, to restrain our indiscreet
sorrows, our lascivious mirths, our inordinate thoughts, our insatiable
hearing of vanities: but all our holiness consists in talking or hearing, and
we pardon each other for all good living, so we may stick fast together in
argumentation. What should I stand in persuading you to goodness, whereas no day
nor hour passes, wherein appears not some silent sermon, or real
persuasion to avoid sin, and practice goodness? If you cannot be induced
unto it, because of its own pulchritude, because it carries such a show of
honesty, such a grace and excellency, that the action it self may be a
sufficient remuneration; yet for your souls sake let me persuade you unto it.
I know whilst you are in your flourishing time, you are free from all despaires
or fears of desertion; but when the days of temptation shall come upon you,
and Satan like a hard creditour shall most press, when you are least able to
stand upright; in so dangerous a conflict, against so subtle an adversary, how
will you be able to maintain your own right? He Will tell you, you have no
right nor interest in Christ's family, you have no portion with his brethren,
for no unrighteous person shall inherit the kingdom of God; youll reply that
you stand not upon your works, neither expect, as the Papists do, to be
justified by merits; but your faith in Christ is that Helmet of salvation, and
the hand which lays hold upon the heavenly promises. True, he will answer, but
how can you assure your selves that you have true faith? That you cannot judge
of, but by the fruits; When bad company enticed you to intemperancie, did you
resist them? when wealth and preferment tempted you, did you forgo them,
rather than commit any dishonest action? when your acquaintance or friends
persuaded you to any wrong course, did you for the truth's cause only gainsay
them? when your enemies reviled you, did you bless the^? when they sought your
undoing, did you pray for them? these things will show whether your faith be a
lively* faith or no; and these questions you must be provided to answer unto,
if you would be able to refute the divel's sophistry. But perhaps I may find
many so senseless, that they shall have no feeling of their estate, in respect
of the world to come; because repentance never comes too late; the These upon
the Cross found mercy, and therefore why not they upon their deathbeds a more
likely place? Well, say that he may find mercy at the last, though no
merveile (says Gregory) if at the last gasp he forget himself, who in all
his life neglected, to remember GOD; but suppose the best that may be hoped
for, yet consider herein thy foolishness, which in matters of less moment
thou would be loath to commit; each day thou knittest knots, which once
thou must undo again; thou heapest that together, which one thou must
disperse again; thou eatest and drinkest that hourly, which once thou must
vomit up again, to omit thy ungrateful dealing with thy Lord and Master JESUS
CHRIST, whom thou servest thus at the length with the divel's leavings: and
then (forsooth) we will turn to be religious, when time will scarce permit
us to be wicked any longer. O what a senselessness is it, to make that the
task of thy death, which should be the practice of all thy life! and to settle
thine everlasting, thine only and surest Making and Marring, upon so
tottering, and sinking, and sandy a foundation! We see and know by experience,
that a ship the longer it leaketh, the harder it is to be emptied; a house,
the longer it goes to decay, the worse it is to repair; or a nail, the
farther it is driven in, the harder it is to pluck out again; And can we
persuade our selves, that the trembling hands, the shaking joints, the dazzled
eyes, the fainting heart, the failing legs of unwieldy drooping and
vndisciplinable old age, may empty, repair, pluck out, the leakes, and
ruins, and nails of so many years flowing, failing, and fastening? But
imagine thou think not of the Kingdom of GOD, because thou conceiuest thy
self to be too sure of it already, yet the horrible punishments mentioned in
the Scriptures, inflicted for sin even in this life (if thou had grace)
might methinkes, enforce doing good upon thee. For what cast Adam out of
Paradise? sin: what wounded him in nature, and spoiled him of grace? sin:
what brought first hunger and thirst into the world, but his gluttony? What
made so many poor men, such a number of beggars, but his original theft? What
caused our days to be so short, that many drop away in the very prime of
their years, but his inordinate appetite of divinity, and consequently of
eternity? Many examples could I bring out of the Old Testament, as deaths of
private men and Princes, subversions of Armies, dispersions of Countries,
mortality of thousands, famine, wars and plagues, captivities and
imprisonments, for no other cause inflicted, then sin and wickedness. But I
will give you this one lesson for all, and it is a point worthy your observing,
that howsoever God suffers the ungodly oftentimes to live in great prosperity,
and as the Psalmist says, to flourish like a green bay tree; yet let those
which hope for any part of inheritance with Christ, expect for certainty, that
if they be not allured to well-doing by Gods blessings, that at length they
shall be deterred from ill-doing by his chastisements. For it is a true
saying, Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives. All sins therefore (says Auselme) be they great, or be they
small, they shall be punished; here is only the difference, if we crucify our
selves unto the world, and so we first abandon it, plectuntur homine puniente,
they are punished man correcting them; if God crucify the world unto us, and so
make it and the glory thereof first to forsake us, plectuntur Deo iudicante,
they are punished God adjudging them. It is a fearful thing (beloved) to fall
into the hands of the living God. He therefore which only beholds the hearts
of all men, and turns them which way it seems best to his godly wisdom,
unite our hearts to serve him, and through him to love one another; that being
not only hearers of his Word, but also doers of the same, we may be adopted
into Christ's family, and become the sons of our Heavenly Father, to reign
with him for evermore.

AMEN.
NO PEACE WITH ROME.
GAL. 2.5. To whom we gave place by subjection, no not for an hour, that the
truth of the Gospel might continue with you.


COncerning the Ceremonial law, of which Saint Paul treates throughout this
whole Epistle, I find a differing practice of the Apostles. A while after our
Savior's death, they retained the use of it, at the least in many things;
because a sudden abrogation carries a show of violence, and breeds an
opinion of contempt; whereas Matter Synagoga (faith Saint Austin in his 19. Ep.
ad Hieronym.) cum honor sepelienda erat; the Mother the Synagogue was to be
buried honorably; she was to be brought to her sepulcher by her sons, and
not by a present forsaking, be exposed to the biting of dogs, and reproaches
of the enemy. In which respect, lest a prejudicate opinion should fore-stall
the Jews, and make them conceive that the Apostles held their ceremonies in
detestation, as things impious and abominable: we read how the Apostles
counseled the Gentiles for a time to abstain from things strangled, and from
blood, Act. 15. how S. Paul circumcised Timothy, Act. 16: and purified and
shaved himself with four others, Act. 21. all tending to no other end then
this, (says that Father) that the Jews might see the nature of their
ceremonies, that they ought nec tanqua^ necessaria appeti, nec tanqua^
necessaria damnari; neither be desired, nor yet condemned as things necessary.
But when the Gospel was sufficiently settled, and the Jews by infallible
proofs convinced, that all sacrifices and circumcisions ended with the
sacrifice of Christ Jesus upon the Cross, then the Apostles took the
Synagogue to be as buried; and that he which by a revocation of the
ceremonial law, should disturb her ashes where they lay in queit; would add
nothing to what she had in honor, but rake her out of her grave, and show her
wanne and dead corpse to the world with dishonor. Before, even as soon as her
Spouse yielded up the Ghost, they acknowledged her to be mortuam; but
afterward when they had divulged her death, and rung as it were her knell,
they proclaimed her to be not only mortuam, dead; but also to be mortiferam,
deadly. When therefore in Jerusalem and Galatia, some mistaking perhaps the
reason of the Apostles applying themselves at the beginning to the Jewish
customs, would yet continue in them, and seek to reconcile Iudaisme with
Christianity, to advance the liberty of the one, and yet to bring in the
bondage of the other; make one Religion of two, or else in the exercise of the
one, join as a thing necessary the outward rites and ceremonies of the other;
Saint Paul valiantly withstand's them; though before he had circumcised
Tymothy, which was to go amongst the Jews, yet Titus he would not suffer to
be circumcised, who was to preach unto the Gentiles; first see in my text a
courageous and resolute oppositition, To whom we gave place by subjection, no
not for an hour. Secondly, an urgent motive or induction, that the truth of
the gospel might continue with you; all directing us to this conclusion,

That reconciling of other religions, with that which alone is allowed and
approved of God, is to be withstood, as being most dangerous to overthrow, and
corrupt the truth.

There is nothing more destructive in nature, then the combining and uniting of
contraries, fire the most active element, if you apply once water to it, is
extinguished; a little leaven leavens the whole lump, the stars themselves
in conjunction with stars of other tempers, do change their influence and
operation; and from such preposterous engendrings of beasts of diverse kinds,
sprung that ancient proverb, Africa semper aliquid apportat novi. Africa is
ever brought a-bed of some strange, and uncouth monster. And as it fares in
nature, so does it in divinity; there has nothing proved more dangerous and
hurtful in it, then a reconciling of truth with falsehood, a medly of
religions, and a too facile persuasion to admit error within the pale of
verity. Hence was it that God by way of emblem, and as in a mirror teaching
us how far we should ever set a sunder worships of diverse nature, forbids
mingled seed, a plow of an ox and an ass, garments of linsey-woolsey. The
neglect of this commandment produced that pernicious heresy of Samaritanisme
before Christ; they which turned from captivity would be Jews forsooth in
profession; and yet because they thought their idolatrous worship was nothing
opposite to this course, therefore the text says, that they feared the Lord
and served their own Gods. 2. Kings. 17. It was that which hatched
Semi-pelagianisme, Semi-arrianisme in the Primitive Church; and it is evident
that Mahomets first position was this, that all men might be saved by their
own religion whatsoever it were; and so composed of Christianity, Iudaisme,
and Paganism, that most pestilent Alcaron, the Turks divinity. Herod had a
humor of indifferency in this kind, and as if the Prophets had been
turbulent spirits in exclaiming so against Idolatry, he would be a Jew with
the Jew, and an Ethnic with the Ethnickes, build a Temple to Caesar and to the
true God (says Josephus) at the same time. Julian the Apostate follows him,
but it was with a more divellish policy, he gave heretics freedom amongst
true believers, not that he cared for either, but that by their mutual
distractions he might destroy both. Tunc enim reddidit Basilicas haereticis
(says Saint Austine) quando templa daemoniis: he restored at the same time
Churches to heretics, and Temples to devils. The best advised therefore, and
most judicious have in all ages resisted with might and maine these crafty
divices of the devil, who, when he knows error to be too weak whilst it
stands in hostile opposition with the truth; would yet seek to advance it by
way of friendship and amity. Excellent was that resolution of Saint Basil to
the president of Valence the Emperor, who desired him to yield to some
moderation and not to make such a rent in the Church for small subtilties;
Those which are thoroughly seasoned with true religion, will rather suffer all
kinds of death, then give way for the altering of one syllable. A man would
think it but a small difference (it it but a little iota) between (...), and
(...); yet the right believers could never be (brought, (as Theodoret
witnesses) either to omit the one, or admit the other. It is true indeed which
Ireneus has written, It is better not to search the causes of things, and to
know nothing but Jesus Christ, then by subtilties ad bablings to fall into
impiety; and that of Hillary, that God calls us not to happiness by hard
questions; and again Dulce pacis nomen, that the name of peace should be
sweet amongst Christians, yet both of these, do they not with what vehemence
they can oppose errors? How many labyrinths and perplexities is Ireneus
compelled to rippe up, that he might frec the truth from prodigious fallacies?
how sollicitous and earnest was Hillary in dissolving the cavils of the
Arrians: shall we term these Fathers contentious, or rather good and obedient
soldiers? that where Christ proclaimed war, and said he came not to send
peace, but the sword, they would not be so inconsiderate, as to treat on the
Articles of peace. The Jewish ceremonies, you know, had been elements in their
time, and God had used them before, as the first letters of the book to
school his people with; yet the Gospel of Christ being planted in the Church
of Galatia, might have no copartnership with them; in this chapter Saint Paul
relates how he withstood Peter to the face, for admitting of them, ingeminates
anathema to such as Preached otherwise, and protests unto them, not hiding his
face, nor dissembling his name, Behold, I Paul, say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Now when Moses and Christ
together were so offensive to him, he would never have heard of a
reconciliation between Christ and Belial, light and darkness, righteousness
and unrighteousness, the Temple of God and Idols, the cup of the Lord and the
cup of devils, in the communion whereof he notes an impossibility in both his
Epistles to the Corinthians. If therefore the reconciling, and attoning of
truth and falsehood, be so dislike in Gods pure eyes, and so dangerous to his
Church, with what color can some in our days, take in hand the reconciling
Protestancy and Popery, of Christ and Antichrist, at the least, as they pretend
in all matters of moment, and points necessary to salvation: I fear it is not
a general agreement which they aim at on both sides, which is as impossible
to effect, as to bring the Northern and Southern pole into one center, but
rather as Calvin well notes, to gaiue a liberty to themselves in particular,
and a plausible acceptance, at the adverse party. This task I find
enterprized by diverse, first Cassander who was set on work by Ferdinand and
Maximilian the Emperors, to compose if possibly he could, the dissentions of
the Church, wrote his consultation of it, and thought that a mean betwixt the
rigid Papist and Protestant was best; whiles the one might remit somewhat of
their pride, and needelelesse ceremonies; the other, hard constructions of the
Papists determinations, which though they might be false, yet he took them
not to be so dangerous as they were conceived. To him we may join Andreas
Frisius de emendanda repub. Bartholomaeus Nervus, which defended Cassander, and
Seravius Modestus who in his tract entitled, the duty of a godly man, in these
dissentions would make the rupture and breach between us and the Church of
Rome, to be a case of scisme, and not heresy, that is, to consist in matters
of less moment, and not in fundamental points of salvation. After these,
others have continued the plea, in Germany the Interremists, in France hec,
whosoever hec were, that wrote the pacificall discourse, to prove that Hugonets
of good right may be accounted members of the Roman Church. With what success
or applause, the world has received these treatyes of peace, I leave to those
to judge who have observed with what violence and indignation these subtle
practices of the Pope have from time to time been resisted. It is not amity
and union which our men have in these things rejected; as far as they can in
all contoversies, the most learned have distinctly set down the points of
agreement; but they saw the fraud of the enemy, and therefore preferred just
war before an unjust peace. Temporal princes might respect herein the quiet
of their state, but the Popes instruments gain doubly by it; for first, they
would by bringing us to the unity of their Church, keep us in obedience to the Sea of Rome: secondly, by working an opinion of agreement in the maynest
points of religion, win us to come over to them the more easily in all
points. It shall not therefore be amiss, by way of prevention, to show
somewhat of this matter, and though it would be over long to run through the
differences between particular writers on both sides which are infinite, and
perhaps not so evident, to prove to all men my position; yet the state of these
dangerous times, (wherein too many do fall from cooling to benumbednesse, from
slackenes to defection, from indifferency to sencelesnesse, and a loathing of
all religion,) does require that somewhat be set down out of the allowed
books, and writings established by both Churches, whether the differences in
fundamental points be such, as hitherto we have made the world to believe.
That we may not be mistaken or thought over hot in parting the fray to make
it greater, I will set down certain conclusions, wherein we will not greatly
dissent from these peacemakers in this question. First, it is one thing to
speak of the Church of Rome before the Council of Trent, and another thing to
speak of it since the Council of Trent. I grant that before the Council of
Trent, though in many things there was a difference between us and them, yet
in most of greatest moment, there was not the precise difference between us as
is now, which happened, partly, because that the Church of Rome had not so
strictly defined those tenants in any Council before that time, as it did
then; partly, because though the current of the greater faction ran the quite
contrary way, yet they which were of our opinion submitted themselves to the
obedience of the Church of Rome, which Luther did not. So that if any ask,
where was our Church before Luthers rising? I answer, it was in Rome, and the
Roman Jurisdiction; perhaps not in the Popes privy chamber, yet in his Court
amongst his greatest counselors, agents, doctors, writers, prelates. Then
did Gregorius, Ariminensis doubt how any such place as Limbus puerorum might
stand with the doctrine of the primitive Church; then did Richardus de Sancto
Victore, Gerson and Durand, deny that distinction of venial and mortal
sins; then did Scotus, Cameracensis, and Waldensis refute those merits of
congruity and condignity; Bernard with others, justification by inherent
qualities; the^ did the M. of the Sentences not once mention
transubstantiation; Bonaventure doubted of it; Cajetan confes'd, that though in
word most do affirm it, yet in deed many deny it, thinking nothing less.
Then did many (says Bacon) deny that Purgatory could be proved by Scriptures:
Willielmus Altisiodorensis said, it was a common opinion of his time, that we
neither do properly pray to Saints, nor Saints for us: Then did Mirandula
withstand worshipping of images; the Sorbonistes the Popes infallibility; many
his indulgences and pardons; and most good men his Jurisdiction in the
temporal affairs of princes: So that he which shall seek reconciliation
between us and them, (because before the Council of Trent we jumpt in
opinions with many of their men, or at lest not greatly swarv'd from them) will
fight very much without an enemy, and forgets that the Papists by the Church,
which they would under pain of damnation, bind every man to believe,
understand not the Church which was sixty or an hundred years since, but the
present Church, as Bellarmine, and their great Doctors do interpret.
Secondly, we distinguish of Roman Catholics, whereof, as in all religions,
so in theirs, some are more moderate, and (whether through ignorance of their
own doctrine, or through an impartiality of judgment, as diverse learned men
in France, or through an accusation of their conscience, as most at the time of
death, especially touching the doctrine of merits) do greatly incline to our
tenants; others are professed Romanists both in letter and title, and swarne
not a whit from the determination of the Church. The former I leave in this
controversy, the demonstration of the problem shall be in the latter.
Thirdly, because we propose the question, whether we and they do differ not
only in lighter matters, but also in those which concern the foundation of
religion; lest any should misconceiue our meaning, let us add a third
distinction, that a foundation of religion is overthrow'd two ways; either in
flat terms, when a maine principle of faith is absolutely denied, as the
deity, and the consubstantiality of the Son, by Arrius; the trinity of the
persons by Sabellius and Servetus; the resurrection of the body by Hymenaeus
and Philetus; and the last judgment by S Peter's mockers; or 2ly by consequent,
when any opinion is maintained, which by just sequel overturneth the truth of
that principle which the defendant professes to hold. So the Minaei, of whom
St Jerome speaks, whilst they urged circumcision, by consequent according to
Paul's rule, rejected Christ; so the Pelagians, whilst they defended a full
perfection of our righteousness in our selves, by a consequent overthrew
Christ's justification. Popery comes in the latter rank, it pronounces the
same words of the Bible, and believes them; it repeates the same Creed
Apostolic, Nicene, and Athanasian, and adheres to it; but it denies each
article by a consequent, because it denies the true exposition of the article.
Non enim in verbis, sed in sensu fides est, (says Bellarmine) nec idem
symbolum habemus, si in explicatione dissidemus: Our belief stays not it
self upon the words, but upon the sense, nor have we the same Creed if we
differ in the explanation of it. The Arrians, Novatians, Nestorians, and almost
all heretics have ever agreed upon the same Creed; but because they agreed
not upon the meaning of it, they therefore consequently may be said to deny
it. The state therefore of our position in sum is this,

That a pure professed Romanist, which strictly adheres to the doctrine of the
Pope and of the Roman Church, since the Council of Trent; does differ from
this reformed Church of ours, in such fundamental points, that, if not
directly, yet by a consequence, we must needs hold him to deny sundry
articles of faith, and therefore all hope of reconciliation to be taken away.

In the proof of which assertion, because I will not stand upon such
differences as perhaps arise betwixt private persons on both sides, I will take
for the Papists side the Council of Trent, begun in the year 1545, celebrated
by three Popes, Paulus tertius, Julius tertius, and Pius quartus, received by
all succeeding Popes, and under pain of Anathema or curse, enjoined to be
believed by all Catholics: For our side I will take the book of Articles,
Homelyes, and such books, as to which we all do subscribe. And that we may
the better proceed in such points as may cause a separation from a Church, let
us examine those things which the 19th article makes to be the notes of a
Church, to wit, the pure preaching of the Word, and the right administration of
the Sacraments. Now the controversy betwixt us and the Church of Rome
concerning the preaching of the Word, are either of the Word it self, or of
the things delivered in the Word. Touching the Word, we agree that it is
infallible, but we differ mainely three manner of ways: first, in setting
down what is Scripture and what is not. The Council of Trent in the fourth
Session, reckons up all those books which we term Apocrypha, to be
Canonical;and says, that the Church does pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia
suscipere and venerari, receive them with the same reverence and affection, as
it does the other books of the Old or New Testaments Our book of Articles in
the sixth Article says of these Apocrypha books, that the Church does read
them (as Hierome says) for example of life and instruction of manners, but yet
does not apply them to establish any doctrine. So then it does not receive them
with the same reverence and affection, as it does the other. Secondly, we
differ in the interpretation of the Scriptures: The Council of Trent in the
same Session, forbids any man to interpret the Scripture, contra eum sensum,
quem tenuit, aut tenet sancta matter Ecclesia, contrary to the sense which the
holy mother the Church has held or does hold; by the Church (says Bellarmine
in his 3 book de verbo Dei, and 3 chap. understanding Pontificem cum Concilio,
the Pope in a Council, in which opinion he affirms all Catholics to
concur. Our book of Articles in the sixteenth art. says, that a general
Council, for as much as it is but an assembly of men whereof all are not
governed with the Spirit, and Word of God, may err, and sometime has erred,
even in things pertaining to God. And therefore, it holds not with the Church
of Rome, that the Church, much less the Pope in a Council, is the infallible
expositor of Scriptures, which none may upon any ground whatsoever gainesay.
Thirdly, we differ concerning the perfection of the Scriptures. The Council
of Trent in the same Session, supposing the Scriptures not to contain
perfectly all things necessary to salvation, enjoynes the world to embrace with
like respect as we do the Scriptures, traditiones sine scripto tum ad fidem
tum ad mores pertinentes, unwritten traditions pertaining as well to faith as
to manners. Our Articles in the 6 Art. says, that the holy Scripture
contains all things necessary to salvation, so that whatsoever is not read
therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it
should be believed as an article of faith, or be thought requisite or
necessary to salvation, well then, whereas it is required that every rule
should be known; first, what it is, otherwise it cannot without much
uncertainty direct: secondly, how it is to be understood, otherwise we cannot
use it: thirdly, that it be perfect and sufficient, otherwise it will not serve
the turn; why then, see that we, and the Church of Rome differ in the rule it
self, in the interpretation of it, and in the perfection of it; now they which
are so diverse in describing the principles, and very rule of their faith, I
much marvel, if they agree in the substance of it: But let us come now to the
thing delivered in the Word: it is necessary for every Christian, which would
be restored to the glorious liberty of the sons of God, to have a twofold
knowledge, the one, in what miserable an estate he is in; the other, how, and
by what means he may be freed from this misery; if I know not my disease, I
shall not seek to the physician for relief; and if I know not how to use and
apply my physic, I am yet in the same case of despair. To omit lesser
differences, let us see whether in those points which are necessary to the
knowledge of these things the Church of Rome and we do so far differ, as
that a moderate spirit may not reconcile us, and make us one. To begin with our
state and misery. The Council of Trent does sundry ways lessen our miserable
state and condition; first, by curtelling original sin, and making
concupiscence no part of it; the words in the 5 Session are these; hanc
concupiscentiam quam aliquando Apostolus peccatum appellat, sancta Synodus
declarat Ecclesiam Catholicam nunquam intellexisse peccatum appellari, etc:
this concupiscence which sometimes the Apostle calls sin, the holy Council
does declare, that the Catholic Church never understood it to be called a
sin, as if it were truly and properly a sin in the regenerate; but only
because it came from sin, and does incline to sin: Again, the Council
pronounce than Anathema, or curse, to those which affirm, that by the grace
which is conferred in baptism, non tolli totum id quod veram and propriam
rationem peccati habet; that whatsoever has the nature of sin, or may be so
termed in original sin, is not taken away. We yield, that in those which
are baptized, and are regenerate, original sin is taken away in respect of
the guilt; so that it be not imputed to us, and in respect of that absolute
rule which before it had in us; because, though it be, as St Paul says, a law
in our members warring against the law of our mind; yet has it not that full
sway in us after regeneration, which it had before, by reason that it is
suppressed greatly by the grace of God. But that concupiscence is no part of
it, or that it remains not under the title of sin after baptism, our book
of Articles flatly denies, both in the ninth Article, where it says, And this
infection of nature (namely original sin) does remain, yea even in them
that are regenerate, whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greek (...),
which some do expound the wisdom, some sensuality, some the affection, some
the desire of the flesh, is not subject to the law of God; and although there
is no condemnation to them that believe and are baptized, yet the Apostle does
confess, that concupiscence and lust has of it self the nature of sin, so
as for original sin, you see our tenants are contrary, and can no way be
reconciled: secondly, the Council of Trent lessens our estate of misery, not
only in diminishing that which is malum culpae, an evil (as the Schoolmen
say) of sin, but also in patching up other defects which are termed malum
poenae, an evil of punishment; to wit, by attributing to the soul free will:
We grant first, that we have a freedom of will in all respects; as free
imports as much, as not constrained or compelled, for God compells us not to
any thing contrary to our mind, but moves and sollicites, as it were, our
minds with his grace, to will willingly what he would have us to will:
secondly, we grant that in natural, and moral, and bad actions, we have a
freedom of will, as freedom is taken for a power, even before regeneration;
and in supernatural and divine actions after regeneration, though somewhat
imperfectly, and thus far the Papists and we agree. The question is, what
freedom the will has in respect of supernatural good works, either in
general before regeneration, or more particularly in the work of
regeneration. As for these works in generally, the Council of Trent in the 6
Session, and 7 Can. says, that whosoever affirms that all works which are
done before justification, howsoever they are done, to be truly sins, or to
deserve the hatred of God, let him be accursed. Our 13th Article says,
contrary; works done before the grace of Christ and the inspiration of the
spirit, are not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring not of faith in
Christ Jesus; yea rather for that they are not done as God has willed and
commanded them to be done, we doubt not but that they have the nature of sin;
Our Article is directly opposed to their Canon. As for the work of
regeneration the Council of Trent has provided for that in the 4th and 5th
Can. and puts down, that whosoever affirms the will of man to be extinct, or
as dead and merely passive in these actions, let him be accursed; whereas our
10th Article allows the will, no strength nor power to do any good thing, till
it be, as it were, revived by the grace of God preve^ting us. Whereupon say
some of our league-makers, the difference between the Papist and Protestant in
Freewill, is only this: they both compare a man after the fall of Adam to a
prisoner; the one conceiues that he cannot come out of this prison because he
is bound only, as the Papist; the other, because he is not only bound but
dead also, as the Protestant; both acknowledge that God is he without whom
they cannot be freed from this estate of thraldom; only the Papist says,
that God needs but only untie his bonds, and then he can come out of
himself, whereas the Protestant seems to increase his mercy, and says he
must not only loose his bonds, but also restore him to life. Now for as much as
both do attribute the power of coming out of prison to God; what great danger
say they, is in either opinion, which should so set us at odds about it? But
these observe not the whole difference: say that we both acknowledge God to
be him which gives us power to come out of prison; yet if he leave us there,
and persuades us not so effectually, that we not only may, but also will come
out: if being wounded, the chirurgian gives me a plaster, and then leaves me
to apply it to my wound, if I will, or otherwise not, why surely I must impute
the immediate cause of my deliverance or cure to my self, and not to the
other, which unties my bonds, or gives me my plaster; Now what says the
Council of Trent, in the 4. Canon and 6. Session; whosoever says, that the
free will of man being moved and stirred up by God, does not cooperate by
yielding to God, so stirring and calling him, whereby he may dispose and
prepare himself to obtain the grace of justification, and that he cannot
dissent, if he list; let him be accursed. So in the first act of regeneration,
it makes man's will a co-worker with Gods grace, and gives the will a power to
use or refuse this grace offered, (as before I told you of staying and going
out of prison, of curing or not curing of wounds:) whereas our tenth Article
tell's us, that the grace of God prevents us: how? why it says not only that
we may have a power, but that we may have a good will, nor does it, there
leave us, but works with us, when we have the will. The Papists tenent is
much derogatory from the mercy of God, which claims both the will and the deed
to himself; and in this point of free will, the Church of Rome, and We cannot
be reconciled.

Thus have you seen how Popery blindes herself in viewing herestate of
misery, how she covers her wrinkles and deformities, and stops her crevisses
with untempered mortar, if she taught not that concupiscence which is the
inmost garment of the soul, the first it puts on and the last it puts off, is
no sin, she could not affirm afterward that any man could perform the
Law, or be justified by inherent righteousness, and if she laid not with
another hand the sandy foundation of free will, she could not have out-faced
the world that the merit of any man were his own. So then having played her
part (as she thinks) with applause in the first scene of man's life his
forlorn estate of misery, she ventures from that to the second scene of his
life, his cure and recovery out of his former sickness by justificatio^.
Though as yet you se she is not so good a leech as to find out the extremity of
the disease, yet I wish her so good luck, as to light upon some good medicine
to remove it. Hence the question arises betwixt the Protestant and her,
whether she must look for nhe Physic within herself, or whether she must
look for it abroad. In a word; the chief quarrel is about the matter of this
Physic, and the instrument which applies it. First for the matter of it, we
agree on both sides that it is righteousness, and that this righteousness
must come from Christ. Now the righteousness of Christ is either inherent in
himself, and esteemed as ours by reason of our faith in him, or else inherent
in us, but proceeding from him being infused in our hearts by his grace, which
we call sanctification. The difference lies in this. The Council of Trent
makes the matter of this cure, that is, which works our redemption from death,
and purchases everlasting life, to be Christ's righteousness inherent in us,
which consists partly of habitual righteousness, to wit, grace and charity
diffused into our hearts by the holy Ghost, as we find it in the 6 th session,
and the 11th canon: partly of actual righteousness, to wit, good works
flowing from the former, as it is in the same session and 26th can. By reason
of the former of these, say the Schoolmen, we obtain the first
justification, having heaven made due unto us by title of inheritance; by the
latter we obtain a second justification, that is, we do corroborate and
increase the former, laying right to heaven by title of merit: Contrariwise our
11 Article tells us, that we are accounted righteous before God only for the
merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith: and not for our own
works and deservings. I might then reason here with Saint Paul, if we are
accounted righteous, then it is of grace, not of debt, if only for the merit of
Christ, then not for our inherent righteousness, if not for our own works
and deservings, then certainly not for any habitual or actual justice that
is in us: But here our peacemakers do interpose, seeing that both sides do
agree that we are absolved from our sins, and delivered from Hell,
originally by the blood or Jesus Christ, what does it import us whether another
pay our debts for us, as the Protestant teaches, or that he give us money in
our hands to pay it our selves, as the Papist affirms, are not both alike
beholding to him? I answer, it is true if it be first proved, that he does
give it us in our hands: for otherwise when we think our selves rich, and
venture to purchase a goodly Lordship, if we have no money to pay for it,
happily we may go without it: Again it must be proved, that we are able to
receive this money into our hands, if he should give it us: suppose one should
see a city, which he is desirous to be Lord of, the which the owners value
at the price of many millions, the party being destitute of money, begges of
some great Prince, whose favor he is in, to give him so much out of his
treasury, to pay for this city, as the sum amounts unto; the Prince gives it
him, and by this means, the party becomes Lord and Master of the city: but
how? does the Prince give all these millions into his hands, or lay them upon
his back? why the burden were unsupportable, and his hand incapable to hold
so great a mass; therefore he brings the sellers to the place where it lies,
and there shows them, where it is, and that way gives it them. So it is in the
work of justification, and in the purchassing everlasting life: the price of
it is infinite, it cost the death of him which was God and man, to gain it for
us; if he had been God only, and not man, he could not have suffered for
us, and if he had been man only, and not God, his sufferings had not been
of so great a virtue, as to merit for us, so goodly an inheritance; now is it
possible, that he which is God as well as man (that he might be capable of
such a merit) should make us again (which are but men and sinful men, and not
Gods) capable of this merit; why, surely we dare not say, that we are able to
carry all those millions, which must be paid for our celestial City, in our
pockets, as do the Papists; but we must bring the Lord of it to our treasury,
Christ Jesus, and bid him take from thence what will satisfy him. Thus you
see, the Papists and We do yet differ about the matter of our cure, or
justification: and in this we cannot be reconciled. Let Us now come to the
instrument whereby the plaster is applied to the wound. The Papists affirm,
that it is applied by habitual and actual righteousness. But yet amongst
these, they allow faith a share; we say on the other side, that faith only
does apply it, but yet not that faith which is alone, without inherent
righteousness habitual and actual; so that, say our truce-makers, for so
much as the Protestant and Papist do both hold, faith and good works to be
necessary for those which are saved, it seems they agree upon the same root
CHRIST JESUS, upon the same tree, springing and receiving nourishment from its
root, faith and works; the difference is only in the boughs, which we must
hold by: the Protestant (say they) lays hold of a sure one, which will
hold, it is faith in CHRIST; the Papists for more security lay hold on both,
faith in CHRIST, and works; seeing then it is but so, that both may be saved
by their hold; why should we so wrangle about trifles? I answer, that the
reason holds not, unless we conceive faith and works to be two firm
boughs, equally growing out of the same body, whereon one might hang; now
faith (I confess) is a firm bough, whereon we may safely venture; but
works, or rather righteousness, is not another bough equalling faith, but a
tender and weak twigge, blasted and half withered, sprouting out of the bough
which is called faith: So that he which shall hang upon it, shall certainly
fall down. Again, that faith which we rest upon, is a bough of the tree,
which we may put confidence in, and and may be bold to rely upon: their
faith is not the same bough (as men would make us believe) but another bough,
wanting sap, and juice, and strength, splitted with tempests, and shaken with
wind and weather, upon which they forbid any man to lay his assurance, and
indeed which cannot save them: mark but the difference; The Council of Trent
in the 6. Sess: and 12. chap: has these words, Nemo quamdiu in hac mortalitate
vivitur, de arcano divinae praedestinationis mysterio vsque adeo praesumere
debeat, vt certo statuat se omnino esse in numero praedestinatorum: Let no man
so long as he lives in this mortal life, presume so far of the mystery of
divine predestination, that he will resolve assuredly, that he is in the
number of the Elect: And in the 3d Canon of the 6. Sess* pronounces Anathema
to him whosoever he be, which assuredly, without doubting, by reason of his
own infirmities and unfitness, believes that his sins are forgiven; on the
other side, our Church of England in the 11. Article, as before you heard,
says, that we are accounted righteous before God only by faith; and for the
fuller explication of this faith, what it is; it refers us to the Homily of
Justification, confirmed likewise by public authority, which Homily in the
third part of it, tells us, that the right and true justifying faith is, not
only to believe, the holy Scripture, and all the foresaid articles of our
faith, are true, but also to have a sure trust and confidence in God's
merciful promises, to be saved from everlasting damnation by Christ: they are
the very words, and therefore I pray you mark them. Nowel's Catechism
commanded to be taught by public authority, says the like; that a lively,
true, and Christian faith, is a certain Knowledge of God's father-like good
will toward us through CHRIST, and a confidence in the same, and that none
have this true faith which do despair of God's mercy. I need not stand long
in proving either the former to be the Church of Rome's; (Bell. Valentia, and
the whole current of Popish Doctors, making it a main controversy between us)
nor to induce you to credit the latter as a firm position of our Church; for I
hope you hear no other doctrine preached unto you then this, that you must be
saved by a firm faith and confidence, that your sins are remitted in JESUS
CHRIST. Only let me for conclusion of all, frame this Argument: The Church of
England holds it necessary to salvation, to believe confidently and assuredly
one's self to be of the number of the Elect, and that his sins are remitted
in JESUS CHRIST; but the Church of Rome pronounces a curse to all those which
believe confidently and assuredly* that they are of the number of the Elect,
and that their sins are remitted in JESUS CHRIST; therefore the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome do differ in a point, which we hold necessary
to salvation; and therefore they can by no means be reconciled. Having showed
unto you what the maine differences ^re between Us. and the Church of Rome;
concerning the pure preaching of the Word, which is the first note of a true
Church. I will now come to the Administration of the Sacraments, which the 19.
Article, makes to be the second note. Wherein (for brevities sake) I will give
you only a taste, and that shall be in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. We
agree on both sides, that CHRIST is really present in the Sacrament, the
question is about the manner of it. The Council of Trent in Session 17th,
injoynes under pain of curse, to believe that CHRIST is there substantially,
by converting the bread and wine into the substance of his Body and Blood,
which the Church terms transubstantiation. Our 8th Article determines first
negatiuely, that he is not there by transubstantiation, for that the change of
the substance of bread and wine in the Supper of the Lord, is repugnant to
plain words of Scripture, and over-throweth the nature of a Sacrament, and
has given occasion to many superstitions. Secondly affirmatively, how Christ
is there, to wit, after an heavenly and spiritual manner, and received and
eaten by faith; Afterward, whereas the Council of Trent would have us to
worship this Sacrament with divine worship, the 31. Artic. of ours, well
co^plaines, that these sacrifices of Masses were blasphemous fables, and
dangerous conceits; Now if by the censure of our Church, the case stands so
between us, that the opposite side destroys the nature of a Sacrament, gives
occasion to superstitions, nay more, supports blasphemous fables, and dangerous
conceits, (as you hear it does) why, surely it is absolutely unlawful for us
to communicate with you in the outward worship of God, and therefore in a maine
point; even on the marks and notes of the true Church, the Pope and We are
unreconcilable.

What can the truce-makers then here object for their purpose? will they say
our differences do consist in niceties and mere subtilties? is this a nicety?
to know whence we are to be assured of our faith, which we believe; whether out
of the Canonical Scripture, or out of the Apocrypha writings and traditions?
or is it a mere subtilty, and unworthy the maintaining of a Christian, whether
we commit Idolatry or no, in receiving the Sacraments? how we are wounded in
nature, and despoiled of grace; and again, by what means we must be saved
from destruction? I omit the Pope's universal sway which he challenges over
things temporal, works of supererrogation, prayer for the dead, invocation of
Saints, Purgatory, worshipping of Images, the number of the Sacraments, and
their efficacy, auricular confession, venial sins, falling from grace, and a
multitude of other points, wherein it is impossible to reconcile us: would you
have us for quietness sake, in these to condescend to you? why, Gelasius tells
us, that to condescend* is to go from a higher place to a lower; nos
coascendere eos nobiscum rogamus ad summa de imis; we do entreat them rather
to ascend with us from the low place wherein they are, into an higher: One
thing I add, that to yield any way to them, besides the scruples which it may
breed in men's minds, and the unstableness it may work, were no less
impossible, for the points upon which we differ, then bootlesse for the
perverseness of the Romanists, with whom we deal; for though we accorded
with them in all other points, yet if we do not subject our selves to them in
this; that we acknowledge the Pope for Peter's successor, and the Head of the
Church, we yet are Heretics, and no members of the true Church, (says
Bellarmine in his 3. Book de membris Ecclesiae, Chap 19.) This supremacy of
the Pope is such an Article of their faith, that to defend it, and over-shaddow
it, there is nothing which the Court of Rome leaves unattempted; so that to
retain it, it passes not to forgo half her controversies, yea to renounce
the holy Scriptures, and the Articles of all the Creeds: For the dead, you may
choose whether you will pray for them; for Saints if you will, you shall not
be compelled to pray to them; Pilgrimages, and vows you may be dispensed
with; in all which, and more, the holy Fathers will bear with their weak
Catholics. Turn over a new leaf, and albeit thou be a good Catholic,
yet if thou say unto them, Father, I doubt somewhat of the pre-eminence of
the Pope, and of his Monarchy, whether it has so large an extent, as some
make it to have; these terms of his being God's-Vicegerent, and of his
Omnipotency, do wound my conscience; they are straight in an vproare; an
inexpiable blasphemy, and an Anathema: If thou think but to dull the edge of
this blade, or bend this temporal sword, if thou receiu'st not the thrust of
it with thy naked breast, thou art a dead man; had thou faith enough to
remove mountains from one place to another; had thou as much charity as to
suffer thy self to be burnt for thy brethren, yet the Ocean, were it turned
all into holy water, could not save thee, there is no peace for thee in this
life, nor remission in the world to come. Much more might be said, concerning
the unreconcilable differences between Us and Rome; but the many lives spent
in the quarrel, even of those which held right dear amity, and concord, the
constant opinion on both sides, our Soveraigne's heroical Defiance to Rome, in
his Writings, proclaiming the Pope, Antichrist, prevails so far with you, I
doubt not, as that I shall not need to insist any longer upon a point so
plain and evident: Now he which brought us out of darkness into light, open
our eyes, that we may discern light from darkness; and that now being made
the children of the one, we fall not back to be the servants of the other,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: To him therefore, with the Father, and Holy
Ghost, one GOD and three Persons, be rendered all praise, honor, and glory,
now and for evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 2. for entangled read intailed: page 2. l. 29. for part read
pervert: page 4. line 8. read omnia: page 17. l. 21, read (...).


