

The Book of BVLLS, Baited with two Centuries of bold Jests, and nimble-Lies.

OR, A Combat between Sense and Nonsense, being at strife who shall infuse
most Mirth into the gentle-Reader.

A Treatise in variety of pleasure second to none ever yet printed in the
English-Tongue; wherein is contained nothing already published.

Collected by A. S. Gent.

Imprinted at London for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at the Bull in
Little-Brittaine. 1636.

To the Blind Reader.
TO you the dull brood of Mydas, who are internally blind, I could find in my
heart to tell you as much as you already know, which is just nothing; because
you can discern no farther then you can see. Philosophers have been of
opinion that humane Souls, in discending, recive illumination in the Sphere of
Saturn, which Orb certainly your Souls baulked, since reason and you are as
contrary as fire and flame. Yet though posterity has long since registered you
fools, and antiquity heareafter shall confirm you such, I will in silence say
something to you. If these Bulls please you as much as they are like you, when
they calve you shall have more. You cannot dislike them, unless you are out of
love with your own compositions, for out of such simples as you they are as
certainly compounded as a log is made of a Beetle* you shall find here as
good sense as ever lip was laid to. In a word, or none, I dare compare for
sense with all the Ancient moderns. I will give place, but never precedence,
either to Pas^auantius, Matagones* de Matagonibus Mounsiur Goulard, or any
other Author famous for delineating wise Ignorance. If I shall have your
detracting comendations, say not a word, by which mutenesse of yours, I shall
apprehend that your consent argues silence But if your extolling ^oothlesse
Detraction must needs lay her ^enemous fangs on me, I then end with this
complementall Bull.

Farewell and be hanged.
TO The discerning Reader.
TO You the sacred issue of Apollo, I dedicate this book, because you only
are capeable* and apprehensive of the quick and nimble conceptions, and of the
gross ignorance, contained in it. you can quickly discover a Bull, when with
his horns* he gores and murders sense. Also you well understand the laws, and
nature of Apothegmes. You know their proper time to be chiefly at board, when
the mind is to be vnbended, and digestion aided by mirth. You are not ignorant
that there is an Antipathy between them, and all places where either sickness,
or sorrow have dominion, and therefore do always produce them in their sense.
You are taught by wisedoms self, that they are to mix with our discourse, not
to be made the subject of it, as also that they should resemble Children newborn in innocence, and in being toothelesse, for if they bite or offend they
are no longer ^est^, but affronts Lastly you can truly judge of their
dignity, being rightly informed, that men excellent both among the Greeks, and
Latins, have not been ashamed to Father them though now every illiterat sott
vents them by hundreds. For your recreation and mine own, I wrote them, yet
dare not commend one of them, til I know how you stand affected. Since I freely
confess that my liking depends on yours. And here I leave them to their fate,
and you to the custody of your better Angels.



TO The Bull-Reader.
THIS is the fruit of
Traveling, to swear
Thou were admitted
Natures Counselor,
Sworn to her privy Chamber,
to discrie
The entrails of
each hidden Mystery:
Such virtue have these Beasts,
to let you see
The Imps of Ignorance,
whose stupiditie
Stain man's perfections,
and bid you call
Nonsense Discoursive,
Monsters Natural;
Have you no Faith to credit
them? Then hear
The Martial Author by his
valor swear;
May his dear purchased credit
nere be salv'd,
Were he not Midwife when
his Bulls were Calv'd.
R. C. Cant

THE BOOK OF Bulls.
1.
A Fellow passing through S. Paul's Churchyard, and seeing so many great free
stones lie there ready squared out, said to one that was with him, I would I
had these stones at home in my yard; why, what would you do with them, said
the other? Marry said he, I would build me a brick wall with them round about
my house.

2.
One being demanded the definition of a Bull, he answered that a Bull was an
Ox with two stones.

3.
A great traveller swore that in the deserts of Arabia he had seen a Unicorne
with two horns.

4.
One being at the fall of a very fat gelt Dear, was asked by one (who was no
huntsman, and desired to be informed) how he called that Dear; to whom he
answered that it was a barren Buck.

5.
One whose usual protestation was wont to be as I live, being asked how he
did, answered, dead as I live.

6.
A Preacher at a funeral Sermon lamenting the shortness of man's life, told
the people that there were many beasts outlived a man, for example, the Raven,
the Heart, and the Oak, dearly Beloved.

7.
A Scholar complaining to his Governor, that one of his fellows had vvro^g'd
him, and being demanded wherein; if it please your worship said he, I had no
sooner turned my back, but he abused me to my face.

8.
A fellow at dinner demanded of one at the Table, what part of the Bullock a
Clod of Beef was, the other laughing at his ignorance, told him it was the
shoulder bone of the flank.

9.
One seeing a Peare-tree very full, wondered what the owner could do with
all those Pears; why said another to him, he sels them to the Bakers to make
penny apple pies of them.

10.
A fellow that was robbed, said the thieves had stolen all his linen except
only one brass pot.

11.
One speaking at a feast of the bravery of the great Turk then reigning:
another standing by desired to know what was the great Turks christen name.

12.
Two passing the street in a serious discourse, a dumb man begged of them
after his mute manner; Sir said one of them to the dumb man, can not men
pass the streets about their business, but you must thus disturb their
conference, Get you gone, or i will set you packing, and with that lifted up his
foot to kick him; O fie, said his companion, will you kick a dumb man? Is he
dumb, replied he, why did he not tell me so then?

13.
Many dining together at an Ordinary, after dinner was done, one ask't another
if he would play a rubber or two at Bowls, (marry will I) quoth he, if you will
play a piece Rubbers; No, answered the other, I never play above two shillings,
before (replied he) I will play for two shillings, I will sit down and walk
horses.

14.
Discourse arising at the table, of those creatures to which Nature had
allotted the longest life, one pleaded for the longevitie of one creature,
another of another; and one amongst the rest swore he knew that of all things
in the world an Eele lived longest after it was dead.

15.
One passing the Ferry at Hampton Court, the Ferry-mans wife at that time rowed
the Boat; vvhereat he vvondering, said to his companion, Lord bless us, I
never in my life saw a woman a ferry-man before.

16.
One coming before a Judge to be tried for his life, and being found guilty
pleaded hard for himself; but his fact being notorious he could by no means
obtain any favor; whereupon he burst out into immoderate weeping, and with
bended knees, and hands lift up besought the Judge that he would grant him life
for his wives sake, and his fatherless children.

17.
One relating to certain friends of his where he had supt the night before,
and how hard he and the company drank; said, I never tippl'd so hard in my
life, and a great while I bore my drink well, but at the length finding I was
so fox'd that I could not stand* I took my cloak, and ran home as hard as I
could drive.

18.
One telling another how healthful a thing it was to live in a good air, and
on the contrary, how unwholesome to live in a bad, The other thus replied,
what you say I know to be true; for I my self dwelt in the Fenny Country;
where if I had lived till this time I had been dead seven years ago.

19.
One discoursing of the succession of Popes, what brave worthy men some of them
had been, and what villains others had proved themselves: but for the Pope
then living, how good, and wise a man he was; a subtle stander by put this
question, I pray you my Masters, (quoth he,) if this Pope die without a son,
who shall be Pope next?

20.
Many sitting together at dinner, one of them complained of the scarcity of
money; how that heretofore he could have taken up an hundred pounds upon his
bare word; that now if he were to be hanged he knew not where to borrow five
pounds; one of the company said he thanked God that for his part he need not
complain; for quoth he, I have of late met with an honest Scrivener that will
lend me at any time twenty pounds upon my own Bond without Scrip or Scrowle.

21.
One coming into an Inn, and espying a handsome Hostess, fell into discourse
with her; and amongst other questions ask't her how long she had lived there,
to whom she answered, but three days; I pray you, said he, at the next word,
How many Barrels of Beer do you draw a week?

22.
Diverse swimming together in the Thames, at length all went out save one, who
stayed very long after the rest; wherenpon one of his fellows called to him to
make have out, in that it was late, I pray thee, said he, stay but a little, I
will but untrusse a point in the water, and come presently.

23.
Two playing together for a Piece, he that won finding the others Piece to be
so washed that the image was almost quite defaced, refused to take it;
whereupon the other referred it to the judgment of the standers by, whether it
were good, I or no, The rest refusing to judge it, as not knowing what it was,
by reason it was so defective; one undertook to judge it, and swore he knew it
to be an Elizabeth Jacobus.

24.
A horseman passing a Ferry, and having an unruly Jade, said to the Ferry-man;
honest friend, I have a skewing horse, wherefore I pray thee tie him to the
water.

25.
One being at Bowls in the afternoon upon a Sunshine day, and bowling very
ill, swore in excuse of himself, that the light of the Suns shade did so
dazzle his eyes that he could not see the Mistress.

26.
One in a great assembly praising the situation of London, said it was defended
from the rage of the North by hills, that to the South it had a pleasant river,
that to the East and West it had beautiful plains: to which another replied,
that indeed no exception lay against it but one; for said he, if it stood in
the Country it were the finest City in Christendom.

27.
A Citizen and a Gentleman made a match to run their Grayhounds at a Hare for
a wager, and when they came into the field, the Citizens Dog beat the other;
whereat he much rejoicing said to the Gentleman, How do you like the running
of my Dog, to which the Gentleman answered very well, but withal quoth he to
the Citizen, did you ever see a better Hare run; faith said the Citizen, I must
confess she ran well for a country Hare.

28.
A Lord walking in a Church where all his ancestors were buried, an old servant
of his then present said, O my Lord, what worthy men these were, I swear if I
live I will be buried close by them.

29.
Two played a game at Noddy for half a Crown, and he that won finding the
other had staked but two shillings, told him he had staked short, to which the
other replied, I find where your mistake lies, for you perceive not that one
of the testers I staked is a shilling.

30.
Two playing at Tick-tack for money, he that lost desired they might play a
while for nothing, to which the other assenting; he that before had lost so
many games, now won more; vvhereupon he said to the other, when we play for
money you always beat me, but if you will play for nothing, i will play with you
for a hundred pounds.

31.
Two walking together in a Cloister, and vaunting of their swift running, one
of them said to the other, do you run this way, and i will run that; and i will hold
you ten pounds i will meet you before you meet me.

32.
A Gentleman being drowned in Oxford, his Tutor sent a messe^ger for his Father
(who dwelt a hundred miles off) to come to the funeral of his only Son. The
messenger ariving at his Fathers house, found that he was dead also; whereupon
he returned in all have back, and when he came to Oxford, said to the Tutor;
Sir, the Son may now, if he will go, to his fathers Funeral; for he is dead
also.

33.
A singing man who always bore the base, being merry on a time with the rest
of the quire made this Challenge. We are six Bases only in this Quire, and
we six will play at any exercise with any other six that sing the same part
in the same Quire for ten pounds of my purse.

34.
One relating to another the death of one whom he loved most dearly, he thus
in a very great passion answered, It cannot be that he is dead; for had he
been dead, I know he would have sent me word.

35.
A purblind fellow in a misty day passing Paul's chain ran against one of the
posts, and taking it for a man said, I cry you merry Sir, and presently running
against the other, said, I cry you mercy again Sir, truly I think you and I
shall meet in Heaven.

36.
A Captain in thr Low Countries being in the company of one, who was a very
goodly and a properman demanded his name, and learning that he was named Bird;
he said, this is not that Bird whom Taverner killed, is it?

37.
A Merchant hearing on the Exchange that Marshall Byron was beheaded for
Treason in France asked the relator if he lost his head before his death, or
after.

38.
A Doctor and Captain Norris walked from London to Greenwitch, Where when they
ariv'd the Doctor being weary, said, I had not thought it had been so far
from London to Greenwitch as it is, why (said Captain Noris seriously, and
bound it with a great oath) no more it is not.

39.
One having dined in an Ordinary, seeking round about for his Cloak at length
found a Gamster sitting upon it, whereat he being much offended, said, What
Sir, do you make a Canopy of my Cloak; I pray you Sir, sit up, and give it me.

40.
One relating to others a mischance had befallen him; said as he rode over a
Bridge his horse skew'd, and fell with him off from the Bridge, and that by
some near at hand he was tataken up as dead as any man living.

41.
One passing by a Polterers shop, and seeing an exceeding fat Swan lying on the
stall, said to his companion, I would that Swan were mine, why said the other,
what would you do with it if it were, Marry, replied he, I would make me a
Goose Pie of it.

42.
One coming by chance into a very merry company, said, Gentlemen I think you
are merry in sober sadness.

43.
One asked another what a clock it was, to whom he answered, It is past
twelve very near.

44.
One reporting that ^elton had killed the Duke, another standing by said, There
was never such a cruel blow given, for he cut two of his ribs, and his Magna
Charta quite in two, He would have said, Vena Cava.

45.
One reporting what a huge great storm rose the night before, said, it shook
the whole house as I would shake this pillar.

46.
A hireling Player demanded an augmentation of his means from the Company, and
received a denial; whereat being much offended he said, I protest if you mend
not my wages you shall see me in Ireland within these two days.

47.
A Player being asked how he got his living all the sickness time, answered,
I taught (...) Dancing School.

49.
One said to another, I fared bravely the last night; for I bought a breast of
Mutton, and carried it home to my wife, and roasted her to my Supper.

50.
Two Serving-men failling out about the dignity of their Masters, one told the
other his Master was a Knight; O but, replied the other, my Master is a Knight
and a half, for he is a Barronet.

51.
A Gentleman having a fair* but an old house, one persuaded him to pull it
down, and build it up again, to whom he said; what my Masters, will you
persuade me to pull down a house that has stood in my great Grandfathers time,
and in my Grandfathers; nay, and (as I take it) in my Fathers?

52.
A knavish fellow who had a natural fool to his Master, and of great rank,
apparelled himself in all things like a Spaniard, and came to him and
presented him with the King of Spaines commends. Whereat his Master being right
joyful asked him how the King of Spain did, and how long it was since his
arrival, to which he answered a month; what, said his Master, and can you
speak no English yet? no indeed, replied the other; whereas indeed they had
spoken English all the while.

53.
A foolish fellow making lamentable faces as if he were in great pain, one
asked him what he ailed; O, answered he, I have such a pain in my thigh, that I
cannot lift my hand to my head.

54.
A blind Minister coming to speak with a Gentleman, his man came and told
him, that the old blind Minister was come to see him.

55.
Two fellows bragging what houses their Masters kept that Christmas, one of
them said, my Master kil's every day an Ox; Tush, said the other, my Master
kil's every day an Ox and a half.

56.
One brought a Butcher before a Justice, and accused him for killing a Cow that
died of her self, and selling her flesh in the Market.

57.
A Gentleman sent his man out of England into the Low Countries, and charged
him to make all possible have back. The servant making a very slow return, his
Master rebuked him, and ask't him the cause of his so long stay; to which he
answered that he was kept at Sea a long time by a contrary vvind: Why, where
was the vvind said his Master; Marry replied he, by North, and by South.
Indeed answered his Master that was a very contrary vvind.

58.
One reporting not without indignation an affront he had receved that day
from a very Goose, another in his company said; O, I know what Goose yon
mean, in my conscience you mean a Goose with two legs.

59.
A Citizens wife being in the Country, and seeing a Goose that had many
Goslings; how is it possible, said she, that one Goose should suckle so many
Goslings.

60.
One accused another before a Justice for stealing Pears off from his
Plum-tree.

61.
A foolish Gentleman using always to wipe his britch with the letters he
received, having list to go to the retrait called to his man for a letter; who
replied that he had none left, Then said he, take pen and ink quickly and
make me one.

62.
A Bull Prologu, to a foolish Audience.
YOu who sitting here,
do stand to see our Play;
Which must this night,
be acted here to day.
Be silent, 'pray,
though you alowd do talk,
Stir not a jot,
though up and down ye walk;
For every silent noise,
the Players see,
Will make them mute,
and speak full angerly.
O stay but here,
until you do depart;
Gently your smiling frowns
to us impart;
And we most thanklesse,
thankful will appear;
and wait upon you home,
but yet stay here.
63.
A fellow having a great kibe on his heel, swore it was as big ^s an ulcer,
and as sore as a walnut.

64.
One who had been in the Indies swore he had seen an entire Crystal rock
of pure Diamond.

65.
Amongst the Quaere's sent to the Prince De La'moar one is, whether or no the
Queen of Sheba; were she now living, would go as far to hear his
Highness say nothing, as to hear Solomon speak wisely?

66.
A fellow in way of derision said of another that he looked like King John
amongst tho Apostles.

67.
One asked another whether, or no he had ever read Venus and Diogenes.

68.
Another asked his companion whether, or no he had ever read Nero, and Leander.

69.
One falling from his horse, and pitching on his head ran amongst a great
assembly of his acquaintance, and swore his neck was broken.

One espying a very fine Bitch, enquired of the standers by whose Dog that
Bitch was.

70.
One saying that he was taking a journey to Oxford, a friend of his demanded
whether he rid or no, to whom he replied that he went a foot in a Wagon.

71.
Discourse arising at Table of the miseries of this world, one amongst the rest
said, I have so many (...) that I would (...) of this life, or out (...) world
(...) whether.

72.
One speaking very loud to another without being heard, swore the fellow was
dumb he could not hear.

73.
One telling his companions the danger a son of his escaped that day, made
the relation of the hazard. My boy, said he, being but three years old, and
playing in the street fell down, and was not able to rise; A Scavinger p^^^^ng
that way wi^h his Cart, and not seeing the Child, drove directly upon him, and
the first Horse of the (...) his feet, without touching him, and so did the
second; but the third had his foot up just over his head in all likelihood
ready to dash out his brains, but the tender beast (as if a man had said to
him, Horse hold thy hand) held his foot a long time up, in so much one who
passed by, and seeing the danger the Child was in, took him up, and brought him
home.

74.
A Player having in his part, All honor to this high imperial presence, said
thus, All honor to this high infernal presence.

75.
One bra^^ging what (...) suit he had, and another standing by, asked him where
it was, he answered, In my head.

76.
One threatening another absent, meaning to say that where ere he met him he
would kill him, though he found him pissing against a wall, swore hastily that
where ere he met him, he would run him through a wall pissing.

77.
One calling another son of a whore, a stander by rebukt him for so saying;
for said he, you know his mother to be an honest woman. It is true, replied
the other, I know his mother to be an honest woman, but he is the son of a
whore.

78.
One manning his Dog at the Beare-garden, and falling into a quarrel with
the Butchers, had his head broken in diverse places, and coming home, prayed
his wife to look carefully to him; for said he, I have twenty broken heads.

79.
One putting this qnestion to another, when shall we have a merry night? Marry,
replied the other, of all the nights in the year, let it be on May day in the
morning.

80.
One praising much the Lord Major of that year present, another standing by
swore he had seen a thousand better.

81.
A Butcher swore that his Dog fought with a Bear single four hours to one.

82.
One praying another to lend him a groat, he answered, he had but one about
him, and that was a single threepence.

83.
One swore he should never abide the Move more; for, said he, she served me
the most fluttish trick the other night; for she shone out till I came to a
Ditch, and then she slipped behind a cloud, and let me fall in.

84.
A fellow having a very neat beard, would needs have it cut off; for, said he,
it is nothing but hair.

85.
One being asked if he knew such a man, yes, replied he, I know him by sight,
though I never yet saw him.

86.
One disclaiming another acqaintaince, swore he knew him no more then a beggar
does his dish.

87.
One being in the water prayed another to come in also, to which he said, I
protest I can swim no more then a dog, and being entreated the second time,
he said, I vow I can swim no more then a post, and being more earnestly the
third time, willed to come in, he vehemently swore he could swim no more then
a Goose.

89.
One asking another in a Moone-shine night what a clock it was, he replied, I
have a Sunne-diall in my pocket will inform you presently.

90.
One in a great kindness told another he did indite him to break his fast
with him at supper.

91.
A Case being argued before a Judge, a Lawyer with great earnestnes affirmed
that his Clients right was as clear as a Candle by daylight.

92.
A Gentleman making a motion to his companion to ride to a friends house three
or four miles off, the other said, it is too far to go to night, we will rise
early in the morning, and not go at all.

93.
Two laid a wager how far it was to such a place, the one said it was ten
miles distant, the other that it was above; for I am sure, said he, it was ten
miles twenty years ago, and no doubt but miles, as all other things, have
their increase.

94.
One swore to another that he lodged not long ago in a chamber, where he was
so stung with Gnats that he could not rest, but was feign to lie standing all
night, and that he made his man rise to put out the candle, to the end they
might not see to bite him.

95.
One complaining of the folly of the age, swore men were far wiser in the
future times then now.

96.
One speaking of a strange Bird called a Phenicopter, another standing by, said
he had read all the Treatises of foure-footed beasts, yet never read of such a
Bird.

97.
In the great room one pair of stairs high, at the St. John's head within
Ludgate in a painted cloth is the picture of Jacobs Ladder, and the Angels on
it passing up and down, and underneath is written; Here are Jacobs Angels
ascending, and descending up to Heaven.

98.
One being prayed to s^t down to dinner said, I thank you for your kind
invitation, but I can eat nothing; for I have had a long time no more stomach
then a horse.

99.
One earnestly desired me, to tell him whether Shrovetuesday fell out this
year, on the Saturday or no, and how many there was in the year.

100.
Another asked one what Sir Timothy Thornhil; his Christian name was; another
answered he had almost forgot, but certain he was it was, George or Thoma^.

101.
A Gentleman coming to the chamber of an associate of his; where finding him
in bed (sleeping,) he waked him, saying, rise sluggard, do you not remember
where we promised to walk this morning; pray pardon me, quoth the other, I
cannot go with you, you must needs excuse me, I came late home last night;
late home, quoth the other, prithee how late was it, why 'twas five a clock in
the morning quoth the other.

102.
An other was saying all kind of Foul were two legged, to whom another standing
by replied I, but a Pig has four.

103.
A fellow looking in a Lattin Book, was asked by a friend (that overlooked
him) whether he could read it or no, to whom he replied, yes indifferently, but
it is the brokenst English that ere I saw.

104.
One coming to a Gentleman Prisoner in the Castle, in Oxford; he began to him
in this complement, how do you Sir, are you within, I rejoice to set you; I am
in some have, but pray stay here sir till I come again, and i will bear you
company an hour or two.

105.
A fellow hearing one cry Sandwitch Carrets, ran to him and desired to see
them; which being showed to him, you cheating rougue (quoth he) are these
Sandwich Carrets, I indeed are they Sandwich Carrets (said the other) to whom
he replied they may be Sandwich Carrets, but they were sown and reapt in
London.

106.
A fellow bragging of his knowledge in Music, swore he would play exempore
with all the Musicians in London and Christendom.

107.
A fellow having a broken groat in his pocket, coming to a Goldsmiths shop in
Cheapside desired the prentice no give him a little piece of silver as bigg as
an hazell Nut to zoder it again; when you come into our country i will give you
a piece of lead shall be twice as big.

108.
A couple of shopkeepers in the Excha^ge, seeing Lords, Knights and Gentlem^^
(which they knew) (...) into disputation which was the handsomest Gentleman in
that company (quoth the one) me thinks that is the handsomest Gentleman
(pointing to a Lord) which caused the other to laugh at him; why laugh you
quoth the other; why (replied he) he is a Lord, I said the handsomest
Gentleman.

109.
Two Gentlemen walking in a Meadow, one showing the other a fat Bull grazing
there, said to the other, will not that Bull have a brave pair of Cow heels
when he is killed.

110.
A fellow having received some abuse from his companion, swore next time he
met him he would make him eat his Dagger to a Sword.

111.
A fellow feeing his friend playing with his wife, swore they showed like the
two Germains.

112.
A friend of mine asked me once in what place of England* Ireland stood, and
was answered by another, in Wales.

113.
One told me, reading the works of a Philosopher: Either Publius Virgilius,
or Maro found such a Problem as he would not now be ignorant of for an hundred
pieces.

114.
A fellow speaking in praise of his Painter, said he drew his wives picture so
lively, he did not leave undone so much as an Eye or an Nose.

115.
A man reproving his neighbor with the ungraciousnesse of his children, swore
he would bring up his child to the gallows, ere he would suffer him to be a
thief.

116.
A Gentleman hearing his friend speak a piece of nonsense, admired him,
saying, was ever Calfe brought to bed of a Bull before?

117.
One jeerd a young Saylor, and said that he was but a fresh water Seaman.

118.
A Vintner showing his Sellar to a Gentleman, said (look you) all these empty
vessels are full of Wine, and yet I cannot please my guests.

119.
King James lying sick, one prayed in public that he might reign as long
as the Sun and Moon should endure, and the Prince his Son after him.

120.
One being sick of a Consumptio^, being asked by a friend how he did,
answered, I thank God I am heart whole, but I am troubled a little with a
Hectic Fever. [A Hectic Fever is either in the Spirits, or substance of the
heart.]

121.
A subtle Disputant said sense was divided into two parts, sense, and nonsense.

122.
A formal grave fellow said he was of opinion that Melancholy was nothing
else but a kind of sadness.

123.
An Engeneere threatened to blow up a City gates with a Petar of inundation.

124.
One having lost his hat, said I am so forgetful that in my conscience I
should loose my britch, did I carry it about me.

125.
One said to a Widow, that he could find in his heart to marry a woman were
she neither beautiful nor rich; so she were wealthy.

126.
A Seaman describing the manner of his Captains going aboard, said; No sooner
had my Captain set one foot aboard the shore, the other in the ship.

127.
One newly married being discovered by another to walk discontented, said,
This fellow now he is married walks up and down like an Image.

128.
One seeing another offer in way of jest to strike at him with a Clubbe, said,
take heed lest you hurt me, it is ill jesting with edge tools.

129.
A foolish fellow was angry with his wife for bringing home a shoulder of
Mutton without the Rumpe.

130.
One being upon Dover Castle, said he, could discover in Calis by his
prospective the sign of Saint Denis of England, and Saint George of France.

131.
A Gentleman said, I stayed but a little while by a fish pond, and leap says
one fish, leap says another.

132.
Two coming through a field where forms of men are cut in Ewe, the one
demanded what such an Image was; why, quoth the other it is Cain, and the other
demanding why Abel was not there also: marry, replied his companion, because he
killed his brother.

133.
One who dwelt in Kingstone was asked what good companions lived there; faith
answered he, except I. P. there is not one worth the hanging, as though he had
spoken much in his co^mendations. I. P. meeting him, said, I thank you sir
that you hold me worth the hanging; No, replied the other, J meant there was no
man in the Town that deserved but you, I, That deserved hanging, answered the
other, that is worse then the former.

134.
One said he rod his horse till he had never a dry thread.

135.
A certain fellow that had a great head like a thick rind Orange, but no juce
of wit in it, was reprehended because he spoke nonsense: well said he, it is
not for want of ignorance that I speak nonsense.

136.
A blind man was taking Tobacco, but could not find the candle to light it;
whereupon says he, pray neighbor put out the candle that I may see how to
light my Tobacco.

137.
An old woman that made water often in the night, having filled the chamber pot,
so that it ran over; O husband says she, the chamber pot has a hole in it,
fetch the cullender.

138.
A Country fellow being asked how old his horse was, why says he. He Is but a
young horse considering his age.

139.
A Seaman that was to be hired, being asked what he could do. Sir says he, I
do not love idleness, but whither I do any thing or not, I love to be
working.

140.
A Traveller on the way asked one how far it was to the next Town. It is
four miles says he straight forward, but the nearest way is to go about by
the Mill, for that will bring you clean out of your way.

141.
A maid being asked how long she had kept her maidenhead, why says she? ever
since my sister was married, and yet I scorn but to be as good a maid as she,
though she be married before me.

142.
A Country fellow being demanded, if he thought one were an honest man. He Is
an honest man says he, and no knave, I knew him to be one.

143.
One asked one how he liked a cup of Wine which they were tasting. Marry says
he I never tasted Wine that liked me so well, but I have drank better in
France.

144.
An old man was commending the days of old; well says he, there was more mirth
one Holliday, then there is now in a hundred.

145.
An old man being desired to come to banquet: Alas says he, I have no teeth to
eat sweet meats, if it were a hard crust I could eat it.

146.
One being advised to go to Sea, because he was in debt: no says he, I had
rather go by land all over the world, for a man need not fear drowning by
land.

147.
One asked what his Hat cost: why says he, it cost me ten shillings, for it is
made of as good blew wool, as the white sheep can bear.

148.
One desiring a neighbor of his to lend him a porridg-pot: faith neighbor
says he I would not have my pot worn out; if you will make porridge without
boiling, you shall have it.

149.
One being to eat a kind of meat called a Mllian: pray says he to another, do
you taste them, for if they poison an honest man, I shall never fear them.

150.
A Gentlewoma^ being at table, and mincing demurely: well says one, this
Gentlewoman has no skill to her dinner, yet me thinks she might fall too, and
dine when she comes home.

151.
One being to set a Hen upon Eggs: well says she, if my dozen of Eggs would
bring me fourteen Chikins I would not care.

152.
One complained that his tongs and shovell were worn out: whereupon says he
I will go and buy a wooden pair of tongs, for they will serve in the Summer
time to stir up the fire when there is none in the Chimney.

153.
A Maid that had a great deal of beauty but little wit, stood looking in her
glass, at last she set the glass before her a pretty distance of, so that the
reflection of something was seen in the glass; whereupon she said: well, it is
no matter, though the shadow be ryemouth'd, the substance is as right as my
leg.

154.
One having an extreme cough: well says he, one cough is very troublesome,
what should a man do if he had one and twenty.

155.
One that needs would have his clothes made in the fashion, said thus to his
Tailor; prithee says he make my clothes according to the old garb of Sir
John Oldcastle, for I love to be in the newest fashion.

156.
An old woman had scratcht her breech till it bled; whereupon she said: well
plainly I see that by scratching and scraping a body gets somewhat.

157.
One having a tooth to draw, and being very fearful to endure the pain:
prithee says he pluck it out gently, and then I care not if my tooth be drawn
and hanged in a Lute-string.

158.
One that went often to the house of Office said, that his maid Joan had not
scowr'd his vessel, and that was the reason he was troubled with a scowring.

159.
A woman that had a drunkard to her husband: well says she I care not if my
husband wonld be drunk every day, so he would not spend his money in
drunknesse.

160.
A young man being fallen deeply in love said: I wonder why I should stumble
or fall in love, for I never went a wooing but in the day time.

161.
One hearing a maid sing very sweetly, said: this maid has has a sweet breast,
I warrant she wears musk in her bosom.

162.
One being to ride over a great water: O says he if there were a bridge over
it, I would ride over the water if it were never so deep.

163.
One having a creek or pain in his back: well says he, a pain that takes one
before in his back is worse then that which takes one behind.

164.
A young fellow being to salute a Gentlewoman that had a mufler before her
lips: well says he, it is honor enough for me to salute the clout; it may
be the Gentlewomans lips are sweetest when they are strained.

165.
A young wench going to market, being asked by a neighbor how all did at home:
why says he, my father, and mother, and rest of our folks have bin visited
with sickness, but all the household is well in general.

166.
One being to tell a tale to make the rest merry, says he I would tell you a
tale, but to conclude in few words, I can remember nere a word on it.

167.
One traveling on the way saw a fair maid making water under a hedge side:
fie says he, she might have had more modesty, and made water on the top of
the hedge, for then she could not have been seen.

168.
One having a trunk that could not hold his clothes: well says he, the Tailor
has made my clothes too little, I wonder why they should be too big for my
Trunk.

169.
One having rid a horse, and alighting again said, this horse for a trotting
ambler goes the easiest that ever I felt.

170.
A sick man asked another how he did: I am well says he as you, or any body
else can be that is no better in health then I am.

171.
One asked another why he did not marry. I am about a Wife says he, but I am
afraid of entering into purgatory, for then I should have a cold time on it

172.
A Fiddler being desired to play a new Tune: Sir says he, let me stand behind
your back and i will play you a Tune was never played before.

173.
An old Churl in the Country said, that the days in Queen Elizabeth's time
far exceeded these for length; for now four and twenty hours to a day is
counted a great matter.

174.
One sitting by a fire, O says he these coals are exceeding good, four pecks
of them are worth a bushel of other coals.

175.
One going to the house of Office, fie upon it says he here is a house indeed
adoriferently; I warrant they eat no sweet meats that leave this sent behind
them.

176.
One being to sing a Catch, Faith says he, I had a good voice once, but I
spoiled it with drinking Eggs and Muskadine.

177.
One asked another which was the best pot-herbe; why says he, in my conceit a
leg of mutton is the best pot-herbe in the pot.

178.
A drundard passing through a Forest, and being scratcht by the Briars; if you
are loving friends says he, let me go home, I have but one penny left, and
that is in the outside of my pocket.

179.
One speaking of the weather, and the springtime, we are like says he to
have a backward spring, for Saint Matthias day lights on a Holi-day.

180.
One going by water, and seeing a Swan flutter on the water, O says he,
what an ass is yonder Goose, that had rather live on the water, then on the
dry land.

181.
One riding to Rumford on a sack upon a tired Jade: faith, says he, I never
rid harder in my life, considering the slownesse of my pace.

182.
A Ditcher wading in a ditch began to sigh unto himself, and thus he said:
well, of all trades ditching is the worst; especially, when a man must stand
dry-shod in water up to the knees.

183.
One that had a great Nose being laughed at: well says he, my Nose hangs
indeed in my light, or else I might have seen a knave, but howsoever if I were
hasty, no man might sooner take pepper in the nose.

184.
One making of Puddings said: It is very cold weather, and if my nose drop into
my puddings, my wife is not so much in fault as my running head.

185.
One looking on a Picture said: This must needs be an excellent Art, who
would not be hanged, to be thus drawn forth and quartered.

186.
A Justice examining a poor fellow said: sirrah, I understand you are a
Thief, but take heed; for if you be once hanged, your Book cannot save you
from the Gallows.

187.
One being asked how many friends he had in the world: faith says he I have
great store of friends that would be as glad to see me as their own hearts.

188.
One being troubled with a looseness in his belley: prithee said he to his man
tie my points hard, that it may stay my looseness, and set me a chair in my
chamber, that I may not go to the stool so often.

189.
One being to reach a thing to another out of a window; but could not: friend
says he reach it out with your left hand, for it may be the left hand is
longer then the right.

190.
A man having a wife that lay sick on her deathbed, and desired to make her
will: That needs not says her husband, you have had your will all your life
time, would you have your will when you are dead too.

191.
One asking a schoole-boy how far he had learnt in his Grammar: why says
he I am at finis funis; what is that says he; says he, it is an end and a
halter, I says the other, but if it had been an end in a halter, it had been a
better conclusion.

192.
One being invited to a funeral feast, because he would express some
dissembled grief: well says he, the party deceased our brother, was an honest
man: and whereas other Smiths pawn their tools, he kept his vice to his dying
day.

193.
A Cobbler was defyning the goodness of Ale; well says he, let my wife chide
never so much, if she should cut my throat I would drink strong Ale.

194.
A controversy arose between two young fellows concerning their trade; well
says the one, if I had followed my trade, I could have deceived you in my
calling, for I was never dull of reprehension.

195.
One was speaking of the height of Paul's steeple. In troth says he it is the
highest steeple for the breadth in the world, and the reason is because the
steps are higher in going up then going down.

196.
A Traveller telling his Host that he was gal'd; how came that to pass says
his Host: marry says he my saddle was soft enough, but I rid over a hard
stony causey, and that galed my breetch.

197.
One being to take his leave of his friends: well says he, friends must part,
and affection will break out of these dry conduits of my eyes, but farewell
and be hanged, I can but wish you well.

198.
A fellow that had no buttons to his doublet before: well says he, of all
fashions loopes and buttons is best, for though the buttons wear off, yet the
loopes will hold a man's doublet together.

199.
A wench that served hogs, being asked what wages she had: why says she I
have twenty shillings a year, that is six shillings a quarter, and please the
hogs.

200.
One was going upon the Ice which crakt under him: well says he if the Ice
should break I should be over head and ears, but it is no matter I can swim if I
were at the bottom of the water.

201.
One having got the drunken Hiccock: this it is says he to drink Aqua-vitae
and Rosa Solis, and such Latin hot-waters, that a man must be afterward put to
decline Hic, hoc, when he cannot speak English.

202.
One being sent by a Justice of Peace to carry a Goose in a basket to a
Gentleman's house for a present: faith says he, I could find in my heart to
let him out, for the Justice has charged him to go thither, and if he should
straggle away, the Justice can send Hu and Cry after him.

203.
Two going in a stormy day together they ran to the hedge side to defend
themselves from the weather, when presently it begun to thunder: whereupon
says the other, I never pray but in time of thunder, and then I can say forty
prayers that I forgot seven years ago, for fear will quicken a dead man's wits.

204.
One being to pass over a narrow bridge, and another meeting him half way:
friend says he, it was ill done to meet me thus full but, you might have had
the manners to have come after me, and met me behind.

205.
One having his Candle gnawed every night by a Mouse: well says he, I will let
my Candle burn every night, and then I shall be sure to save it from the Mice.

206.
One telling how a dog flew upon him: says he, the dog being tied in a
chain, came violently upon me, and so having a riding wand in my hand I strok
him down with my staff, so that standing on his legs he lay panting on the
ground ready to die.

207.
One being to carry a couple of Rabbits up to a Gentleman's table, carried the
legs forward, and being reproved for it by his Master: well says he, i will
carry them back again, and it may be they will come in again with their
heads forward and in better fashion; for they are meat of a good carriage.

208.
One having bought twelve Aples for a penny, laid them down again and said;
Pre^hee give me six Apples for a halfe-penny, for they are better ^hen twelve
for a penny.

209.
A Country Boy being brought to London young: where he saw a Parret talking
in a Cage he said: O where might one buy such a Cage for my mother, for they
say she will talk like a Parret.

210.
One being to buy feathers by the pound; fie on it said he, who would think
that a pound of feathers should be as heavy as a pound of lead.

211.
One seeing a Turkey brought to the table swore 'twas the fairest beast that ere
he saw or tasted.

212.
A Jack a Napes was ti'd on a Dogs back, and the Dog ran away; which an old
woman seeing, cried out, well rid little young Gentleman.

213.
One seeing in the Muses the great Horses raised, asked the Groom if that
would not make a brave courser, he stood so well on tiptoe.

214.
One extolling an ancient Don newly slain in the field; another answered, no
doubt he was a fine old man in his young days.

215.
Two Butchers set their dogs a fighting, which one seeing cried out, the
brinded dog will will prove himself the better man.

216.
One refusing to eat Chees-cakes, was asked his reason, he told the^ he loved
the flesh well, but was afraid of the bones.

217.
One asking whence Lobsters were brought, his fellow replied, one might easily
know their country by their coat, they are fetched surely from the Red Sea.

218.
One being asked what he would give for a Sow and seven Pigs, nothing, quoth
he, for the Sow, and less for the Pigs, if you will take that bring'um in.

219.
One pretending to pull down a Tree, his neighbor told him his only way to
pull it down, were to pulck it up by the roots.

220.
One making love to a country woman, having first kicked her sow, she told him
the Proverb condemned him, love me, love my dog.

221.
One asking which was the highest Steeple in England, his fellow said, Lincoln
without doubt, only Paul's was much higher.

222.
One feeding heartily on his neighbors barley bread, asked him what ground
that wheat grew on.

223.
One asking his neighbor for a hunting Nag, he told him if he meant to buy a
good one he must stay till leap year.

224.
One laying a wager on a Mares side, the owner bid him doubt not he should win
the money; if his Horse lost the race, he would cut off his stones.

225.
A Country Man hearing Paul's Organs, said London Fa^dlers made the best Music.

226.
One eating powderd Beef, which was hot in the mouth, told his Host, that his
Beasts nere drank any thing but salt water.

227.
One having a red Herring to breakefast, took a bit and went away; for said he,
I never eat fresh fish but I am sick after it.

228.
One told his companion that Pancrage Church was the first Church in England,
that is true quoth he, for that is the mother of all; and Paul's the father.

229.
One said Lent was the worst time in all the year, there were so many fridayes
fell together.

230.
One said there were two Shires in England that were most famous. It was Kent
and Christendom.

231.
A Scholar having Ink that looked black and writ white, said sure 'twas nothing
but Blackamores sweat.

232.
A young man asked a blind man's counsel how to choose a wife, i will tell you quoth
he, let me but see her face.

233.
One commended his Son for a good Scholar, and said he could read any thing
without book at first sight.

234.
A maid being chid for over-sleeping her self, told her Mistress, she would
lie awake al night, but she would tell her to a minute how many hours she
slept.

235.
Two Citizens met, and one said the red Cowes gave the sweetest milk, no says
the other, give me the Calfe with the white face.

236.
A begging Soldier was relating his shipwracks, and said, in a fight both his
Arms were cut off, and if he had not by chance laid hands on the side he had
been drowned.

237.
Diverse youths being jumping together, one protested, though he were now so
unweldy, yet he once jumped further then ere he did in his life.

238.
One driking small All, which was very thin, asked his Host how dear Hopps
were sold when that drink was brewed.

239.
One complained that he dreamed continually, and yet knew how long his fellow
advised him to lay his watch at his beds head.

240.
A Genrleman bearing love to a young maid, her father charged him to forbear
the house, and told him the next time he came in, he would shut the door
against him.

241.
Two walking together in the fields, were at length hemmed in by a great ditch,
which when they perceived, quoth one of them we must go back again; for this
ditch is too big for us to jumpe over; Nay, quoth the other, I protest I will
jumpe over though I light just in the middle.

242.
One going along the street in great have with a pot in his hand, was called by
a friend of his in the way, and entreated to stay and drink with him; to whom
he replied, he could not possibly stay, in regard he was going in great haste
to fetch a pot of Ale to make a Sack Possit of.

243.
One living in a Parish of London, espied the Clearke of the same Parish
passing by him, to whom he said, O Clearke you are very jocund now you have
bin at the burial of your Sexton; but ere it be long he shall do as much
for you.

244.
One (whoby habit seemed to be a Minister) was riding along the highway near
unto a Coale-kilne; where out at that time there came a fellow very black, by
reason of the smoakinesse of the place from whence he came: The Minister,
minded to make himself and his company merry, with a loud voice called unto
the fellow, and asked him what news from Hell? To whom he replied, I know
none but this; The Devil wants a Chaplin, and if you make haste to Hell, I
doubt not but you may have the place.

245.
One being troubled with a scolding wife, O says he, if my wife would but
scold patiently, we should live as quietly as two Lions.

246.
One meeting of a maid, sweetheart says he, if you cannot affectt me, pray
let me entreat your disfavour, for though I never come to visit you, yet I
must needs come to see how you do.

247.
One being to admonish a a friend to become a good husband. O says he, the
loss of time is the greatest benefit in the world, and therefore follow the
example of those that are to come.

248.
A milkmaid was going over a style, and so spild her milk: wherefore says
she, I h^^ rather have lost twice as much milk if it had been spil'd and
never fallen on the ground.

249.
An old man being told that he should not swear: well says he I will use to
wear falling bands, for I never swear but it is in my choler.

250.
One hearing a sowgelder wind his horn: would every Cuckold says he had such
an one, on that condition that I bought one.

251.
A Capenter being asked why his wife scolded. The reason is says he because my
wives tongue has got an Ague, and therefore it is now in a shaking fit.

252.
One hearing a Fiddler play very melodiously: fie upon it says he, this Music
makes me melt into passion like butter in a great frost.

253.
One that had been beyond Sea, being asked what country he had been in: why
says he I have been in a country that is so fruitful, that it flows with
Oat meal and puddings.

254.
One being desirous to see the Lions: well says he it is no wonder that I was
drunk at the sign of the Lion, for a Lion is a terrible beast dead or alive.

255.
One tying her shoe said: I would not be ti'd always to this, for it is unfit
the head should stoop to the foot.

256.
One being to pay a reckoning: well says he, do you pay for all that is come
in, and then i will discharge the reckoning.

257.
One being to give place to another at the table: friend says he, I esteem
you for my chiefest guest, you shall sit at the upper end of the table, and I
will sit in the middle right over against you.

258.
One asking him what house he came of: why says he I came of as ancient a
house as any in Covent Garden, and I was a Gentleman before I was borne.

259.
A Country fellow being asked if he would come to dinner: I says he, after
you have made an end, i will come and dine as soon as you.

260.
One being to ride a journey: well says he, I am to ride very far to morrow,
yet i will eat somewhat in the morning, for when my belly is full, I care not if
I fast all day.

261.
A Drunkard being laid drunk upon a bed; desired them to take away the pillow
that he might lie higher with his head.

262.
One being very cold: well says he I know the reason why I am so cold, for the
wind is got into my belly, and I cannot be warm before I have let a --

263.
A milke-maid was going over a style and spilt her milk: well says she, I had
rather have lost my maidenhead, for this milk I cannot recover, but I could
have got that again though I had lost it over and over.

264.
An old serving-man having lost his money at Tables, said; had I lost my money
at Dice it would never have grieved me.

265.
A Skullion having washed his hands very white; I marry quoth he this is
somewhat like, but if I had washed my hands in Snow water, then they would have
been whiter.

266.
Two being to fight: well says the one if you kill me then pray commend me to
my friends, but if I kill you, you may go and do your commendations your
self.

267.
One desiring to know how old the Moon was: another told him that the Moon
was out of date, so that although she do not rise until morning, yet she will
shine all night.

268.
A man being to teach an untoward boy to go to plough* sirrah says he, if you
do not learn by my destructions, i will take you from plough and se^ you to
serve hogs: for you are my Uncles son, and therefore nothing a kin unto me.

269.
One in a Sermon was saying that Hanniball, that Noble Roman Captain was wont
to sleep in his Armor to keep himself awake.

FINIS.
THE TWO LAST Centuries of Bulls, Jests and Lies.
A Foolish woman seeing her Hen (having sat her full time) did not hatch her
Eggs, desired her next neighbor to tell her the reason of it, and withal how
she should get them hatched, who told her that she must put them in a Cuckolds
cappe: whereupon she went to a man she well knew to borrow his hat, not
sticking to tell him the cause of her request, whereat he being netled beat
her soundly; Notwithstanding this beating she went to another, and another of
her neighbors, by whom she was likewise well swadled; with which being madded
she ran home in a Pet, and swore she wonld have a Cuckold of her own ere
night, and be beholding to nere a rascal of them all.

A loud Lie.
A Fellow swore that he had seen a Viol-de-Gambo as big as an ordinary
Church, and another demanding how it could be possibly played on, he said, he
that owned it made him a two handed Bow a furlong in length, and he and his
wife drew it ore the strings, while twelve of his children ran up the Frets,
and stopped in as due time with their feet, as any man could with his fingers.

Of a Fellow with a wide Mouth.
A Fellow with a wide mouth complained at his Supper that he could not hit it,
to whom a pleasant companion that sat next him said, If you put your meat in
any place between your ears you cannot miss it.

A Lie.
ONe made a relation of a Horse of his, who having been dead, and flayed three
days before, came to his parlour window and neigh'd; whereupon (said he) I
knowing well the neighing of the beast looked out and seeing it was he, and
loving him dearly, caused presently twenty Weathers to be killed, and clapped
them warm to his back, and this Horse lived seven years after, and yielded
me every year seven Tods of Wool.

Of one who thought to get another Sword by praising it.
A Gentleman liking extremly another sword, thought by praising it to make it
his own, believing that the other in civilitie would offer it him; but he took
his mark amiss; for the other smelling his plot, told him he should love his
Sword the better while he lived because he liked it, and that in remembrance of
him he would never part with it.

A Lie.
A Brother of the Whetstone swore that a Lady going a journey with four
Flanders Mares in her Coach, one of them chanced to fool on the highway, and
the Lady valuing the Mare at a high rate, caused the Fool to be put in one of
the Boots of the Coach, and I, said he, knowing the Lady well, and encountering
her on the way, lighted to salute her, and bowing to kiss her, the Fool clapped
his head between hers and and mine, and licked my Nose, whereat I was
extremely danted, thinking indeed it had been the Devil.

Of a Puritan.
A Puritan Minister inveighing against Pastimes and May-games, called the Town
May Pole, the forbidden Tree.

A Lie.
ONe swore he swallowed a Pin, and presently making a Cross on his Ankle,
pulled it out there.

Of two chollerieke Gamesters.
TWo chollericke Brothers dwelling in the same house, and playing often at
Tables; one day amongst the rest fell at difference about a cast, and withal
together by the ears; but their mother reconciled, and swore them never to
play more together; or, if they did, not to speak one word, how angry soever
they were: But after this oath taken they fell to play again, and he who
played with the white men being extremely angry with the Dice, (yet remembering
his oath) spoke not a word, but threw one of his men into the fire, and called
for a white crust in stead of it. Not long after, he that played with the
black men threw away one of them also, and called for a brown crust in stead
of it.: Thus they continued play, and burning their men, till all the Tablemen
were turned to white bread and brown.

A Lie.
A Soldier protested that being in the Wars between the Russian and Polonian,
there was in a great Frost a parley between the two Generals; one standing on
one side of a narrow river, and the other on the other. But, said he, the words
were no sooner out of their mouths but they were frozen, and conld not be
heard till eleven days after that a Thaw came which dissolved them; and made
them audible to all.

Of the Kings Evil.
A Notable drunkard passing the street, and having his chaps muffled with a red
cloth, was asked by a friend who met him what he ailed, to which he answered,
that he was almost starved, and therefore desired the other to have him to a
Tavern, and there to bestow on him some wine, and meat; promising to spend on
him an angel the next week; and the other demanding how he would come by an
Angel: marry said he, I have a great swelling in my chops, and I hope it is
the Kings Evil, and then the King will give me an Angel.

A Lie.
ONe vowed that on Salisbury-plaine he started a Hare, and having a swift
Horse under him, coursed her, and gave her twenty turns, at length his Horse
being weary, and he vexed that he could not tire her, threw his Hatte at her,
which lighting just before her, she ran into, and turned over, and over in it
so long that he had leisure to light from his Horse and take her up.

Of an old Man and a Boy.
AN old Man bringing his Son to be Catechized against Easter, the Minister
told him he thought he needed instruction as well as his Son; saying withal
that he did not believe that he knew, (as old as he was) who made him: and
thereupon put that question to him, and the old Man answering nothing the
Minister said; It is a shame that at these years you should be ignorant of
what concerns you so much, and your child knows better then you. Marry I
think so, replied the old man; for he is but newly made, and may well
remember it, but fourscore years are past since I was made.

A Lie.
A Dutch Admiral telling a loud lie before the States, was seconded with a
louder by one of his Captains; who being rebuked by one of the States for
broaching so notorious an untruth (he answered) I do but my duty in following
my Admiral.

Of a Gentlewoman who sung out of time, and tune.
A Gentlewoman having a very bad voice, and singing both out of time and tune,
was told by one of her Auditors that she sung most heavenly; who being accused
by a friend then present of gross flattery, he said, I spoke most properly in
saying she sang most heavenly, since there is no time in heaven, nor in her
singing.

A Lie.
A Notable Cheat, asked for Ashes, ten pounds a peck; and being asked why he
sold them so dear, he swore they were the Ashes of those Coals that burnt
Saint Laurence.

Of a Thief.
A Thief being arraigned, and asked what he said to his accusation, Marry
replied he, it is a foul matter, and I desire to hear no more of it. The same
Rogve swore he would bind the Judge to the Peace, because he stood in fear of
his life by his means.

A Lie.
A Notorious Liar said he saw a Stone falling from Heaven, and that it was
fifteen years in coming down, and that he never slept all that while, and
that he could see as well in the night, as the day.

Of a Fart.
ONe being asked what of all things was the most merry, answered a Fart; for
that does nothing but sing from its birth to its death.

A Lie.
A Faulkner affirmed with many oaths that he killed a hundred birds at one
shoot, and all in the eye.

Of a Three-penny-Ordinary.
A Fellow being at a Three-penny-Ordinary, the servant brought him a very
little piece of mutton in a great platter of pottage, which done, he went for
Bread and Beer. At his return he found the man stark naked; and wondering at
it, ask't him the reason why he stripped himself in such cold wether: Marry
replied he, if you had not come in as you did I had swomme to the Mutton; for
without swimming it is impossible ever to come at it.

A Lie.
ONe swallowed a Larkes Claw whole, and feeling a week after an extreme pain
in one of his sides, and wondering what it should be, he swore he espied the
Claw coming forth.

Of a Woman in Labor.
A Scholar lying in a Midwifes house, and seeing her on a time going out,
asked her whither she was going; to whom she answered that she was going to
a Woman's Labor. She returning some two hours after, he asked her if the Woman
was brought to bed, I or no, to which she answered no, then replied he, you
come from the Labor in Vain.

A Lie.
A Fellow swore by no small ones, that he ran a Grayhound Bitch great with
whelpe at a Hare; who taking a hedge, and the Bitch making after her, she
lighted on a stake, which rent her belly up, and that the whelps that were in
her womb ran after the Hare and killed her. I loved (said he) this Bitch so
well that I made me a pair of Buskins of her skin, which had the power to
indue me with such swiftness, that if at any time a Hare started in my
presence, I could not rest till I caught her.

Of a Glutton.
A Glutton wished at a great Feast that he had been created a Cow rather then
a man; for a man, said he, can eat but three or four times a day at most;
whereas a Cow chewed her Cudde, and eat continually. The same beast wished
that if he went to Heaven when he died, he might be wound up by a Jack.

A Lie.
A Fisherman affirmed, that he drew up an Eele in his Net as big as the Town
Maypole, and called his man to witness; who said, it was hardly so big, but
swore it was full as long.

A Lie.
A Traveller praising the City of Venice, and being questioned by one of the
company concerning some particular places of that City, he said, truly Sir, I
only passed through it Post, and the other objecting that no man could pass
there by Horse, but that all men went by Bote: he replied, that he rid
through it in a great frost when the Sea was frozen.

A Lie.
A Fowler maintained that he killed three hundred Snipes at a shoot.

A Lie.
A Keeper swore he shot off a Bucks right foot and left ear at a shoot, and
being asked how he could possibly do it, he answered, that the Buck was
lying, and scratching his left ear with his right foot when he shot him.

Of an Ape Carrier.
AN Ape Carrier before a great concourse of people asked his Ape what he would
do for the King of England? Whereat the Ape scipped: See, Gentlemen, said he,
How the poor dumb thing leapeth for joy at the very Name of the English King.
He then demanded what he would do for the Pope? whereupon the Ape couched
close, and grinned: You may see by this, noble spectators, said he, that the
ingenious beast is a good Protestant. He thought by this to catch his silly
audience, but was caught himself, and soundly beaten.

Of a Protestant, and a Papist.
A Lare French Protestant: in birth and knowledge equally great, confuted whole
swarms of Monks that came to convert him. They finding themselves too weak
by Disputation, betook them to corruption, and so by promotion made him a
Convert. Not long after a Papist encountering a Protestant in the street,
upbraided him thus. You see now Sir, the excellency and force of the Catholic
Religion, in that it is able to convince the most knowing, and eminent man on
your side; To which the other made this reply. Rather you may discern by this
the clearenesse of our Religion; and how far in value it surpasses yours, in
that you were feign to give boot.

Of two Gentlemen, and an Hostess.
TWo Gentlemen being in a Tavern, bespake of the Hostess a Leg of Porke
against a prefixed day, and bade her powder it thoroughly. In obedience to their
command she spared no salt, and made it so briny, that it was able to fire a
pallat of Ice: Well, the day being come, and the company met; one of the
Gentlemen longing to taste it cut a great slash, but the first bit was no sooner
in his mouth, then he spit it out again, and threw the dish with the meat
over his head, crying out with as loud a voice as men do fire: I willed the
salt Bitch, said he, to corn me well a Leg of Porke, and she has served
in a limme of Lots wife.

Of the Suns Eclipse.
A Company of women beholding the Eclips of the Sun, thought verily the Moon
and he had been together by the ears: whereupon some cried out, God bless
the Sun, God bless the Sun, for if the wicked Moon overcome him, we shall
be in everlasting darkness, o, said others trembling, it is to be feared she
will have the better of him. Marry, answered others, we pray Heaven she may,
and you are but unthankful wretches to pray, and rail against the Female
Star, to which in all your course you are so much beholding. No sooner had the
Sun recovered his wonted luster, but those of his party made haste to drink
his health, some in the Grape, others the Barley he had ripened for them.
Those of the Moons faction, studied who should honor her most, some made
oblation of Eggs to her in her own shine, and others vowed to offer up to this
horned Queen, horns of their own making.

Of a loving Wife.
DIscourse arising at a great feast of loving Wives, one there present made
mention of one of the most affectionate he thought, that ever the Sun looked
upon. Of this so much predicated affection he gave this evidence, that he had
heard her often swear, when ever her husband rose out of bed before her, she
used to conveigh her self into his warm place, so much she loved the heat
and impression his body left behind it. Tush, replied a merry fellow, This is
an infallible sign she loved his room better then his company.

Of a loving couple.
TWo antie^t friends meeting, fell into talk of a new married couple well
known to them both, and one of them being their neighbor, the other demanded
of him how they agreed; For said he, it is buz'd abroad they jangl^ often, of
which I desire to be resolved. The other answered, it was as mere a slander as
the Devil himself could forge; in that since the first two that peopled the
world, never any pair gave clearer demonstrations of a firm friendship. There
can be, quoth he, no more apparent token of a mutual dearnesse, then when two
joy one joy, and grieve one grief; and that they do. I will instance in this
only: If peradventure his occasions call him from home he rejoices, and she
rejoices; and when he returns back again, he grieves, and she grieves.

Of a Poet, and a Sculler.
A Famous Poet, out of mere charity took a house, on the Backside,
intending; indeed, what he could never comp^^^e, to civilize the Watermen. No
man more able then he to deliver himself by Tongue, or Pen, yet hardly able to
live. A hard case, when amongst the many who offer their service to Apollo, and
the nine Muses, so few should by them be owned, and yet those few receive such
hard bord-wages, and wear such bear Liveries. Well, this brave man standing a
beggar at his own door a Scullar being to change his Fares money came to him,
and (after the manner of those ignorant men) concluded what, indeed, he should
have questioned. Sir, said he, you cannot give me a groat and a two pence for a
six pence. What if I cannot you rogue? replied the good man, and being netled,
gave him a kick on the britch that set him half way to his boat.

Another of his touching a Pigge.
IT is a received opinion in London, especially on the Banck-side, that the
Dogs line the Sowes. This companion proved it to be most true; for his
neighbors finding him beating a poor woman, first took him off, and then
questioned what cause he had so to use her. A pox on the damned whore, said
he, she sold me a pigge that barked.

A Jinne of his to catch Fiddles.
BEing often troubled with unseasonable Fiddlers that played at his window
before day, at length he devised a Jinne for them. He boored holes through
half a dozen pieces of silver, and fastened them to a packthred; and when these
importunate rogues next came, he opened his window, told them he was not well,
and therefore could not endure any noise; yet thanked them for their good will,
and said, Here my masters, drink this Crown for my sake; then threw he down
the same money tied to the packthred, but no sooner did he hear it clink on
the ground, but he pulled it up again. Those Fiddlers that first stoop't for
it, were accused by the rest of theft; so from bad words they proceeded to
strong blows, and when day broke, to his extreme laughter, he discovered the
broken ribs of many slaughtered Fidles.

Of a journey of his into the Country.
He and his mate in wit, F. B. making a journey of pleasure into the Country,
in the company of many their merry companions, and riding a slow pace, one
amongst the rest made a motion to put their horses to a hand gallop, that they
might come to their lodging in a good hour; Pish, said F. B. Let us run
them; what is a false gallop amongst half a dozen? At length the two Poets
riding on two horses that halted worse then any Verse, laid a wager of six
pence a stumble, and twelve pence a fall, had judges deputed; and at night he
was crowned as victorious that had escaped the most stumbles, and overcome the
most falls.

Of one whose Horse tired.
A Pleasant Gentleman riding in post have, and his Horse beginning to fail
him, one that overtooke him ask't him from whence he came, to whom he
answered, From Sidon; he then asked him whither he went, he replied, to
Tire. The conceit is so easy it needs no explaining.

Of another whose Horse tired.
A Gentleman riding post, and forcing his Horse beyond the ordinary post rate,
at length he was so far spent, that he could not budge one foot further:
Well, said he, I have rid post all this day, and now I stand post.

Of a Gentleman, and a Carman.
ALl Carmen are as arrant beasts as their horses, and deserve indeed no other
employment then to carry one another to Tyburne. One of these meeting a
Gentleman in a narrow lane run him up against a wall, and after exchange of
bad language betwixt them, lasht him so, that the Gentleman when he came to his
lodging, swore to his Host, he met a fellow that with his whip set him up, and
made him spin like a top.

Of a Player, and a Bearward.
WIll Backsted the best Comedian, that ever trod on English Stage, drinking one
day with Master Henshman, Master of the ^ame at the Paris Garden, provoked him
so far, that Hensman struck him box on the ear; whereupon Will, who was
only tongue-valiant said, Well Pope Henshot, I will he even with you another
time Pope; thou slave, replied he, why call'st thou me Pope? I defy the Pope
and all his works. Why, answered Will, will thou deny that name? do thou
not send Bulls abroad every day.

Of a Boy that saw a Dog in a Wheel.
A Poor Woman in the Country sent her Son to a Gentleman's house upon some
errant or other. The loytering lad staid somewhat too long, whereat his mother
being offended, beat him soundly at his return. Execution ended, the boy told
her if she had been there she would have stayed as long as he, and she
demanding the reason, he said. O mother, it would have done your heart good to
see how daintily a Dog in a Wheel spinned roast meat.

Of a ridiculous Fellow.
A Ridiculous Fellow being laughed at by the whole company, told them that he
had a certain quality, which was to laugh at all them that laughed at him.
Have thou? replied one of his companions; then thou leadest the merriest life
of any man in Christendom, implying that all the world laughed at him.

Of taking the Wall.
TWo fellows falling out in the street, they drew, and one wounded the other;
the people who came to part them, asked him that was hurt how they fell out; to
which he replied that he knew not, having never seen the other in all his
life. They then ask't the other how he came to draw upon one he never saw
before and so consequently could not be offended by him, to which he
answered, that the day before the others Boat took the wall of his on the
Thames.

Of a House and a Sellar.
A Gentleman who was a good fellow, sent a man of his to take him a house in
London. After the fellow had wandered long up and down, at length he red this
bill on a door, Here is to be let a house with a Dining room, a Kitchen,
sixteen Chambers, and a Sellar ready furnished. Whereupon he ran to his
Master, and told him that he had found a House for his turn, with a Sellar
full of good liquor; the Ass thinking that the word (furnish^) had not
relation to the whole House, but to the Sellar only.

Of a witty Clearke.
A witty Clearke to a Justice of Peace, that for a bribe used to help
delinquents at a dead lift, speaking of two Justices; one whereof was crafty
and subtle, the other a Dunse said, he had as much ado to conceal a
business from the one, as he had to make the other understand it.

Of a Spitter before a Justice.
A Heinous Thief being brought before a Justice, all the time of his
examination would not speak a word, but hawk'd, and spit extremely; whereupon
the Justice called him unmannerly knave, and asked him why he spit so much; to
which he thus answered, I am endeavoring to clear my self.

Of a Tailor and a Horse.
A Tailour bought a large Horse of a Gentleman for seven pou^ds to be paid at
three months end, and in the mean time he altered a suit for the Gentleman,
which in his esteem could not amount to above forty shillings. When they came
to reckon, the Tailour brought him a bill of seven pounds; whereat the
Gentleman being amazed said, I firmly believe that it is impossible for a
Cammell to go through the eye of a needle, yet my horse being almost as big
as a Cammell, is gone quite through.

Of Evil in Good.
Two subtle disputers decided this question, whether or no there be any evil
in good, an old fellow sitting by, as moderatour, said, that he would
maintain that evil might be in good; and to prove it by demonstration
showed them an impostum'd leg in a new stocking.

Of a Jakesfarmer.
A Jakes-farmer passing the streets of London at his usual time of night two,
or three Citizens passing by him stopped their noses, and cried faugh, whereat
be being much offended, cursed them, saying; A murren on you for a company of
coxcombes, if you would stop your Arses, you need not at all stop your Noses.

Of a Child, and a fat Man.
A Verry fat Man walking abroad, a little Child espied him, and wondering at
him, ran into his mother, and said, O Mother had you been with me you should
have seen the strangest sight! There was a man passed by with two Arses, one
before and another behind.

Of Banks, and his Horse.
Banks being at Orleance in France, and making his famous Horse do tricks,
which to the French seemed so strang^, and wonderful that they thought they
could not be done without the help of the Devil, The Monks and Friars caused
him to be apprehended, and brought him before the Magistrate, and accused him
to be a Witch, or a Conjurer; Whereupon Banks desired them he might send for
his Horse, and then he would give them a plain demonstration that he was no
Devil.. They granted his request, and when the Horse was come, he entreated
one of them to hold up his Crucifixe before the Horse; which he no sooner did
but the Horse kneeled down before it, whereat they greatly marvelled, and
saying, the Beast was inspired; dismissed Banks not without money, and great
commendations.

Of two men stunge with Gnats.
TWo men lying together in a Moone-shine might, they were both so extremely
stung with Gnats that they could not take their rest: Yet at length one of them
of a tougher skin then the other fell asleep. The other lying still awake,
and being still tormented, bethought himself how he might secure his face
from the Gnats; At length he remembered he had been a Whisler in a Ma^^ the
Christmas before, and that he had a Vizard in his Trunk. He therefore rose,
put it on, and presently fell asleep. His bedfellow rising to make water, and
beholding such a face in bed with him, ran toward the Chamber door, and cried
out, The Devil; the other awakened with the noise, and hearing him name the
Devil, (forgetting he had his Vizard on) made after him, and both leaping
down the stairs, lay at the bottom of them well bruised, and bewrayed till
morning.

Of a Merry Fellow.
A Merry Fellow being in the company of many Ladies, and Gentlewomen happened
to let a fart, whereat they all laughed extremely, thinking to put him out of
countenance, but he nothing at all abash't said, Intruth Ladies, I had thought
a poor man's Tail would not have been heard amongst you.

Of one who ^^rswore being bound.
A Gentleman having sworn on the Bible to his wife never to be bound for any
man more; a friend of his came to entreat him to stand bound with him for
fifty pound, which he denied to do, alleging his oath; yet seeing the other
depart disconte^ted whom he dearly loved, he called him back, and said; I
have found a way to save my oath: I will be the principal, and thou shall be
bound with me.

Of a Gentleman and a Pandar.
A Noble Gentleman being abused by a base panderly fellow, did presently upon
the place beat him well-favourdly. Whereupon the braggadochya the next day
sent his boy to him, to certify him that his Master stayed for him with his
sword in St. G^^^ges fields; Whereunto the other thus answered, I pray thee
thee tell thy Master I do not mean^ to be so familiar with him, intimating
the disparitie between a Gentleman a and Rascal.

Of a Drunkards eyes.
A Drunkard having lost one of his eyes with drinking, was warned by his
Physician to leave off tippling, least he lost the other also; to whom he thus
replied, I care not if I do, for I have seen enough, but I have not drunk
enough.

Of a ^pend all in drink.
A Gentleman (if so ignoble a beast deserve so noble a name) having spent a
revenue of a thousand Per annum in quassing, happened to walk through a Market
Town of the same County where he lived. A certain fellow that well knew him
said to his companion, see thou that man, he has spent a thousand pound Per
annum in drink. The Drunkard overhearing him replied; yes that I have, and for
all that am adrie yet.

Of one who lost his nose with the French Pox.
THe Pox having eaten a fellows nose quite off, the scab forsaking that part,
had an ambition to take the circumference of his face, and beginning at one
ear, went round by his chin till it reached the other. A simple fellow espying
it, and taking it for a Ring-worme, said to his companion. Did thou ever see
a Ring-worme run about so? to which the other answered, thou art a fool, it
must needs go about when the bridge is broken down.

Of another nose lost with the same Pox.
ONe having lost his nose by the Pox was warned by his Chyrurgeon to venture no
further, least at last the contagion reached his brain. Tut replied he, you
counsel me in vain; think you I will give ore a looser?

Of Peter's being at Rome.
LIttle Captain Norris hearing a Divine at a Lords Table maintain that Peter
was never at Rome, replied with an oath that he lied; for he had heard Peter
himself say that he had been there, meaning one Captain Peter.

Of the same Captain Norris.
THis Captain being of a dwarfish stature, rid out one day alone to discover
the enemy. My Lord of Essex his General hearing of it, and knowing the
rashness and indiscretion of the man, said to the standers by. The enemy will
take this Urchion, and crampe him till he confess all the secrets of our
Army; wherefore half a dozen of you ride several ways, that you may find,
and fetch him in. They obeyed, and after a long search one of them found him,
and told the manner how. My Lord, said he; after a tedious enquiry after him, I
lighted on a shepherd, who told me he saw no man pass that way, but that a
horse an hour before went by with a Heart at the saddle pummell, by which
relation I knew it was little Norris, and riding after him brought him back.

Of an Annuitie given to the same Captain, by Sir Edward Norris.
SIr Edward Norris pitying this little Captains low estate gave him an
Annuitie of forty pounds per annum, and bound land for the payment of it. The
Lawyer read the Indenture to the little Captain; where it was specified that
the exhibition was to be pai'd him by twenty pound every half year, to wit,
at the Feast of our Lady, and the Feast of Saint Michael. Whereat the Captain
incensed, as having received an injury, snatched the writing out of the
Counselors hand, and tore it, and called Sir Edward Norris all to naught. The
Lawyer demanding a reason of his anger, he thus replied. Have you no body to
make a fool but of me? Think you a Soldier can make two feasts with forty
pounds. The Lawyer could not win him to accept of the Annuitie till he had
blotted out the Word Feast.

Of a short Cloak.
A Gentleman walking in Saint Paul's with a short Cloak that scarce reached to
the skirts of his Dublet, a pleasant fellow came to him, and said, Sir you
forgot to day to put on your Bases.

Of no Lawyer is Heaven.
THe Spaniards have a tale of a fellow who knocked at Heaven gates, and demanded
entrance, which being denied him by Saint Peter; he then besought him he might
have a Certificate that he had been there like a good Christian to demand
entrance. Saint Peter told him he should have one presently. But after a long
stay the Saint returned, and told him he must go back without one; for he had
been clean through Heaven to seek a Lawyer to make him a Certificate, but
could not find one.

Of a fellow who gave his eldest Son to the Devil.
AN old fellow being to swear in a cause, the Judge bad him beware he
forswore not himself, and told him the penalty of Perjury in plain terms,
not sticking to tell him that the Devil would have him if he forswore
himself. To which the aged man answered that he had given the Devil his
eldest Son already, and he hoped he would content himself with him. The
Judge bidding him explain himself more clearly, he sticked not to say that
he had made his eldest Son a Lawyer, and that he thought all of that
profession went to the Devil.

Of a foolish Constable.
A Constable commanding two Gentlemen that past by his Watch at an unlawful
time of night to come before him, he asked them whence they came, to which one
of them replied that he was an Ass; O, said he, speaking to his Watch, are
women or Christians? was ever the like heard of, that the Kings Substitute
should be called Ass? Beadle carry him away to the Counter. The Beadle
departing with the Gentleman, his friend left behind told the Constable he had
best be advised what he did, for he whom he had sent to prison was the Duke of
Buckingams kins-man. Whereat being amazed, and afraid, commanded a Watchman to
fetch the Gentleman back, who being returned, he ask't if he were a kin to the
Duke, to which he answered affirmative. I pray you said the Constable, how
near a kin are you? I am replied the Gentleman, cousin German quite removed.
Are you indeed, said the Constable? I would not for a world have committed you,
and I pray you to pardon my rashness.

Of a posie for a Ring.
A Gentlewoma^ whose name was Grace, desired a Poet her sweetheart to make her
a Latin posie for a Ring, who instantly presented her with this. Cupio iuire
Gratiam. The conceit in Latin is excellent, but cannot be Englisht.

Of a posie for a Ring.
A Fellow who was to marry a very hansome Wench, came to a Scholar, and
earnestly entreated him to give him a posie for a Wedding Ring. The Scholar
knowing his wife to be a very wanton, gave him for a posie the sixth
Commandment, Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Of one that called the Pope Antichrist.
A Distracted Schismatic fellow coming to Rome, and seeing the Pope, ride
in pomp, cried out to him, Thou art the Antichrist; for which incivillitie he
was forth with carried to the house of Inquisition, and the next day was
conveyed thence to be burnt as an Heretic. When he came to the stake, and
saw the combustible stuff prepared to burn him, he ask't his Ghostly Father
who endeavored his conversion, whether or no, it were not yet too late to make
his retractation; who answered, that the Popes mercy had no limits, and offered
(in case he was serious) to make a trial of the power he had with his
Holiness. The Delinquent accepted of his courteous offer, and presently the
Friar departed, and not long after returned with his conditionary pardon. He
no sooner arrived, but the offender made a public recantation with great
submission; whereat the Friar much wondering, ask't why he did not retract his
damnable opinions before? which had he done, he had saved himself from that
public disgrace. To this he replied, that he was resolved to die till he saw
the fire, which much terrified him; for said he, I came into the world a poor
raw thing, and would be loath to go out r^sted.

Of a Woman and her Daughters* ugly alike.
A Merry companion passing under a window, by chance looked up, and espied
three or four ugly Women looking out, and he presently made an inquiry who
they were, and was told that they were one Mistress Fowler, and her Daughters,
whereat he laughing said; their names are well fitted to their persons, they
having degrees of deformity; for there are amongst them, fowler, and fowler,
and fowler.

Of Knights oth' Post.
A Country Clown complaining to one that his witnesses were not come up to the
Term; a stander by told him, that he might find in the Temple Church Knights
of the Post, who for money would swear any thing. He having hired two of
these, and brought them into an open Court, the Judge asked him if he had
brought good witnesses; yes that I have, replied the simple fellow; for they
are both Knights, which his false witnesses no sooner heard, but they took a
fair pair of heels; whereat he ror'd out like a Bull, and the Judge
commiserating his case and simplicity, gave him further time to bring in his
witnesses.

Of a Formal Fellow.
A Formal fellow, being a professed lover of propriety of speech, was asked by
one how old he was; to whom he answered: I am three and three score; and why,
said the other, say you not threescore and three; because, said he, I was three
before I was threescore.

Of a Traveller.
A Gentleman told his son he would send him to travel, to the end he might
understand himself. The son in obedience to his command took his voyage;
but returned far sooner then his Father intended he should have done. His
Father demanding the reason of his so sudden return, he answered him thus.
Sir, you sent me abroad only to understand my self, and that I already do;
for I never understood any body else, since my departure; meaning that he had
not learnt one word of any foreign language.

Of a witty Wench and her Lover.
A Young Gentleman loved a beautiful, and witty Gentlewoman, but could not
obtain her Parents consent. Whereupon he being discontented went to travel,
and from Venice wrote his Mistress a petionary letter, that in requital of
his so constant love, she would vouchsafe to live yet seven years unmarried.
To which earnest request of his she answered, that she must needs grant any
petition coming from such a Suter; but withal entreated him to believe that
if she married sooner; nay, within a year, it must beimputed, to his absence,
which made one year seem to her as long as seven.

Of laying ods.
TWo Gamsters contesting about a cast, one of the^ in great earnestnes told the
other he would lay his head against a calves head on it, to which the other
replied, he would not take that bet, but if he would lay him any ods he would
hold him.

Of a blind fellow playing upon a wheeled Cymball.
Certain Gentlemen being earnest at play in their In at Saint Albons, they
heard a fellow playing on a Cymball in the yard, and asked one of their
fellows who had been below who it was that made that noise, to which he
answered, that it was a blind fellow rosting Sellingers round He played indeed
that Dance, and wound his hand about as men usually do in the turning of a
Spitte.

Of a long Nose.
STrada reports that a fellow lived in his time whose nose was so long that he
could not hear himself sneeze.

Of a Gentleman, and a Shrieve of London.
A Shrieve of London, who was a good fellow, and kept a brave table, invighted
a Gentleman, to Supper. The ^entleman sent him many thanks by his man, and
excused his not coming, alleging that the Shrieve used too much Maze with his
meat, a Spice which of all other his Master loved not. The Shrieve being
ingenious and apprehensive knew by this message that the Gentleman was in debt,
and (having first discharged his Catchpoles) sent fot him, and feasted him
royally.

Of a Silenced Minister, who spoke in the nose.
ONe hearing a silenced Minister speak in the nose, asked his companion
standing by the reason of it. Fool, said the other, how should he speak
otherwise then in the nose, when the Bishop has stopped his mouth?

Of a Puritans kneeeling to the Kings health.
A Certain Major at his table began the Kings health on his knee, on purpose
to fetch a Puritan Alderman down on his. The Puritan, contrary to all men's
expectation pledged it on both knees, and the Major dema^ding the reason why he
kneeled on both knees, he answered, that he kneeled on one in honor of the
King, and on the other to ask God forgiveness for so doing.

Of a blind Man.
Diverse Courtiers at Paris passing the new Bridge, espied a blind Man with the
balls of his eyes so fair that they suspected he was a counterfeit. A Duke
amongst them, being basely borne, told them he would make experiment of his
truth, for said he, if he can see he must needs know me, he daily sitting
here, and I daily passing by, and being a man of eminency. Whereupon he went
directly to the beggar, and pulled him by the nose, whereat the beggar roared
out, and called him bastardly rogve. My masters, said the Duke, he sees
perfectly, he could nere have known me so well else. But the man indeed was
blind, and this only a vicious speech often in his mouth.

Of a Captain and his Hostess.
AN oblivious Captain resident in Debelen, having forsaken the City for fear
of the Plague, a week after his being in the Country, remembered that he had
a hundred pound bag under his bedshead. Whereupon in post have he returns
back, and coming to his lodging finds, Lord have mercy on us, written on the
door. After he had knocked a while, his Landlady looked out, whom he asked for
his Bag. Noble Captain, said she, I pray you stay a while for your bag, for
the child is dead in the bed where the bag lies. Tush, replied the Captain,
I care not if the child had died in the bag, and therefore throw it me down,
which she accordingly did.

Of one demanding the way.
A Gentleman riding on the way, and seeing a man standing at his door, asked
him if he were in his ready way to South-hampton. The fellow asked whence he
came; Pish, said the Gentleman, what is it to thee whence I come; you say true,
indeed, answered the fellow, it is nothing to me whence you come, nor whither
you would, and with that whipped in, and shut the door upon the Gentleman, who
else had curried his coat.

Of an Usurer.
TWo Gentlemen walking abroad to take the air, they espied an old Usurer a
neighbor of theirs discending from a steep mountain. When they approacht
near him, one of them asked him where he had been, to whom he answered, that
he had been on the top of that hill to breath himself. The other ask't him
why he came down? Why said the Usurer would you have had me stay there
still? I marry would I, replied the other for thou will never come so near
heaven aagaine I will warrant thee.

Of a Doctor of the Civil Law created at Orleans in FRANCE.
THere is an universitie at Orleans in France where any man may proceed Doctor
for money though he be utterly void of learning. An ignorant German having
invited (as the custom is) the Doctor of the Chair, and the chief of the
universitie to supper. The German being in his cups asked the Doctor of the
Chair if he would take money to make his horse Doctor too; to whom he
answered, yes, for, said he, I may make a horse Doctor as well as an Ass,
intimating the German himself.

Of a Madman.
A Country man coming to London went to see Bedlam, where when he arrived he
fell into discourse with a madd man, and amougst other questions demanded if he
were married? no replied the lunaticke I am not so mad yet.

Of a fellow who had a shrew to his wife.
THe spaniards have a tale of two felows who came to Heaven gates to demand
entrance upon their first knock. S. Peter came to the door and asked what they
would have, to whom one of them answered that he desired entrance. Then S.
Peter asked him if he had past Purgatory, to whom he answered no, but that he
had a scolding wife who was to him a purgatory, nay Hell it self. Alas poor
man said S. Peter. Enter in peace. The other that stood behind, and heard all
their discourse, thought with himself that now he knew the way he would
surely get in too. Wherefore he knocked, and when Saint Peter came, he asked this
fellow as he did the other, whither or no he had past Purgatory, to whom the
man answered negatiuely; but withal affirmed that he had been husband to
three wives, the arrantest scolds the world could produce. A way, thou idle
fellow, replied Saint Peter, here is no place for fools; implying that he
should have taken warning by the first.

Of the builder of Bedlam.
SOme say the builder of Bedlam was a Lawyer, and gave out the reason of his so
pious work to be, that as he had gotten his estate by madmen, so to mad men
he would leave it.

Of a fellow three times imprisoned for naming his profession.
A Maker of Globes, Scales, and other Mathematical instruments, told me that he
had bin thrice committed by Constables for naming his profession. When the
Constable called him before him, and asked his profession, he answered truly,
he was a Mathematition; what, replied the Constable, does he mock me? carry
him to prison.

Of a Suter to a Widow.
A Gentleman being a Suter to a Widow, and having never a man, every time he
went to her, hired one or other to wait on him, so that seldom the same man
went with him twice. At length the Suter being to go into the country, came
to take his leave of his Mistress; after he had kissed her, she called to his
man, and asked him his name; who answered it was John. Then John, said she, let
me take my leave of thee too; for happily I may see thy Master again, but thee
I shall never.

A witty encounter between two.
ONe complaining in a great assembly that he could not find a house or place to
live in with a good prospect. One named Chambers standing by, said he could
tell him of a house for his turn, but it was built of wood. The other asking
him where it was, he made answer, at Tiburne. True, replied the other, that
were a fine house indeed, but it wants Chambers.

Of a most significant word.
ONe being asked what was become of such a man, made answer he was conduced;
the other demanded what he meant by that? he answered that he was hanged: being
demanded what was become of another, he answered he was conduced too. What
said the other, is he hanged; no replied he, he is drowned. Being asked what
was become of a third, he answered he was conduced too. Whereupon the other
much questioned him whether he were hanged or drowned, to which he answered;
neither, but that he was married. In truth said the other, this conduced is a
very significant word that stand^ in one place for hanging, in another for
drowning, and in a third for matrimony.

Of a Drunkard.
A Gentleman being very drunk, came to suppe at a friends house, and told him
he came a mile on purpose to sup with him, to whom the other answered; that his
obligation was infinite, in that he would vouchsafe to come to him before he
was come to himself.

Of an ugly Man, and a beautiful Woman.
TWo Gentlemen standing together, a very beautiful Gentlewoman past by;
whereupon one of them said to the other; There goes the handsomest Woman I ever
saw. She overhearing him turned back, and seeing him to be an ugly fellow
said, Sir, I would in way of requital I could say as much by you; to whom he
answered, so you may, and lie as I did.

Of the same Mouns^ere.
HAving one arm shorter then another, he commanded his Tailor to make him one
sleeve shorter then the other, which he accordingly did, for which he beat
him, saying to his servants standing by; I bad this R^gve make me one sleeve
shorter then another, and he has made one longer then another.

Of a one eyed Fellow.
A One eyed Fellow being newly married, and being assured by a friend of his
that his wife had caught a crack before he had her, one day called her to
account, and told her she came not to him so perfect as she ought, to which
she answered, neither did he come perfect to her, having but one eye, But I
replied he, lost mine eye by mine enemy, and I, answered she, lost my
Maydenhead with my friend.

Of a Musician.
DOctor Bull a fantastical man being Reader of the Music Lecture in Gresham
College, and hearing in the night one cry out fire, with a loud and shrill
voice, ran out and brake his pate, and the people asking why he did so, he
answered, because he cried out of tune.

Of two Beggars.
TWo Beggars after long space meeting by chance, one of them asked the other how
his Nephew Jack did. Jack? repli'ed he, the world is well mended with Jack
since you saw him; for he has gotten a staff, and a (...), and begges for
himself. How say you, said the other, I ever thought that boy would come to
promotion.

Of Lice.
A Young Soldier complaining to an old, that he was much troubled with Lice,
and that they bit him continually, the old blade said thus to him, we Soldiers
have a present remedy for that; for as soon as we feel a lo^^^ bite, we
insta^tly turn our shirts and then he has a days march before he can come
to the skin again.

Of Lice.
A Beggar boy be^oaning himself to his father, that he was much tormented
with Lice: the old man gave him this instruction. Sir, said he, when you
feel a Lowce sting, you must give but one shrugge; whereas you always give
two, the first of which lays him on his back, and the second casts him on his
belly again.

Of loosing Ears.
A Young resolute man sitting by others at play, asked an ancient Gamster if
he should go half with him at a double vie, at In and In* to whom the other
answered, No; for said he, should I loose your money, you would have me by the
ears: I had thought replied the young man you had none; yes Sir, answered the
old Cinquater, I have ears I thank God; I would wish you then, said the other
to make much of them for many an honester ^an goes without.

Of two Roarers.
TWo Roarers drinking together in a Tavern, one of them began his Lords
health, whom the other hating* he in a scornful manner pledged it, and then
began to the other a health to the Devil. He denying to pledge it, they fell
together by the ears, and tho Host of the house came in and parting them;
demanded the cause, of the quarrel, and understanding it at large from them
both, he told the Gentleman who refused to drink to the Devil, that he was
in the fault, in that the other having pledged his Lords health, he afterward
refused to pledge his Lord and Masters.

Of an ugly Woman.
A Gentleman Faulkner calling at a Farmers door for some Pigeons, the man of
the house past out by him with out speaking a word; and presently his ugly wife
came to the door also, of whom (having first demanded Pigeons) he asked if
that were her husband who came out but a little before: yes, answered she, for
want of a better; He is good enough for thee, replied the other, were he worse.

Of a Constable.
A Constable called one before him, and asked him whither he was going, to
which the other replied that he could not tell. With which answer the
Constable being offended bad his Watch carry him to prison. I marry, said the
fellow, now I know whither I am going indeed.

Of a Constable.
A Constable examining a drunken Captain what he made out of his lodging so
late, and receiving from him a contemptible answer, sent him away to prison.
The Captain entreated his guard to have him back to the Constable, promising
to give him a submissive satisfaction. Wherewith they being moved, carried him
back to their Master; whom he no sooner saw, but pretending to whisper to him,
he took him by the ears; and pulling his head close to him, bit of the end
of his nose. For this uncivil fact being carried to Jayle, and the next day
brought before the Justice, before whom the Constable showed a huge red bottle
nose full of whelkes. O cried the Captain to the Justice, It is punishment
enough to have had that putrified nose in my mouth, and with that before them
all laid up his stomach.

Of a Soldier.
A Gentleman on a certain night told a friend of his that he was to go over
with Mans-field, a Cornet to a troop of Horse. The next night he came to him
again, and told him he was to go the same voyage an Ancient of a Foot
Company. Out upon it said his friend, thou art a mere Carrier, sometimes on
horseback, sometimes on foot.

Of a begging Soldier.
A Soldier followed a Gentleman, and demanded an Alms in this manner. Noble
Sir, I beseech you to look down upon the Image of God; I am a Man as you are,
a Soldier by profession, and have both given wonnds, and received them. To
whom the Gentleman thus answered. I will give you nothing; for you Soldiers
have a custom to rail at those who deny you alms. The Soldier thus replied,
It is not my custom, Noble Sir to do so, Well said the Gentleman, I will try
you for once, and so went his way without giving him any thing; with which
bitter jest the Soldier being netled, reevil'd him abundantly.

Of a short Memory.
MAny good fellows meeting in a Tavern to drink and be merry; one of the
company refused to pledge a health, swearing by no small ones that he would
leave off drinking, because it made him have a short memory; whereat another
laughed, and swore he would drink on, in that it made him have a long Memory;
for said he, since I played the good fellow I am a year in remembering that
which before I called to mind presently.

Of a Fool.
A Natural Fool who served a German Emperor was commanded by his Lord to
give the Duke of Saxon his hand, which the Fool forthwith did, but gave him
his left; for which the Emperor rebuked him, and told him he must give the
Duke his right hand: O fie, said the Fool, that were a shameless thing
indeed, to give a mighty Prince that hand which I wipe my britch with every
day.

Of a Fellow having two Wives.
A Soldier in the Netherlands having a Wife, and Children, and being very
poor, gave them the slip and went into Pollo^ia; where it was his evil
fortune in the street to kill the Majors son of the town where he was
quarterd; for which fact being condemned to die, A maid seeing him pass by her
window to exe^ution, fell in love with him, and demanded him in marriage, and
laid claim to the custom of the Country that way. The Major could not deny
her, and the Delinquent loved his life, and his new spowse too well to confess
he had another wife elsewhere. Well, they lived a while very lovingly, and
happily together; but at length the Soldiers Conscience began to accuse him of
the wrong done his first Love: and he stole away from his second without
taking leave, and away back into his Country he hastes. She dearly loving
him had him in chase, and hearing still he was not far before her, arrived in
the Low Countries not long after him: Where being come, she challenged him for
her husband, and his first wife detaining him, they had a trial at Law whose
he should be. The Lawyers who pleaded for his wife said, he was hers during
life, True, said the Advocats for the second, but that life was forfeit by Law,
and now he is ours: The Judge being at a stand to which of them he truly
belonged, bad the Soldier take his choice. He looking on them with a loving
eye, said he would have both. The Judge answered, he was not able to maintain
them both, to which he thus replied. Sir, I always keep a maid, and they
shall draw cuts who shall be my wife the first week, and she to whom the
chance falls, shall have the other for her maid that week, and the other shall
have her for her maid the next.

Of a fellow in a Tempest.
A Fellow and his Wife being at Sea, and a Tempest arising, the Master of the
Ship commanded every man to cast over what he had heavy; whereupon the Fellow
threw over his wife, swearing that nothing in this world lay so heavy upon him.

Of a red-headed Host, and his more red-headed Guest.
A Guest with a head and a beard fire red, gave to a red-headed Host twenty
Crowns to keep, but he redemanded them within half an hour after, whom the
Host asked the reason of his so sudden a coming for his money again; to whom
he answered, that his red head was the cause: Why said the Host, your head is
redder then mine; I marry, replied the other, that makes me judge of you by my
self.

Of a red-headed Chymney-Sweeper.
A Red-headed Chymney-Sweeper having swept a Chymney from the very bottom to
the top, thrust out his head into the open air, which the people underneath
espying, cried out, fire fire: mistaking, as easily they might, the one for the
other.

Of one in danger of arresting.
A Gentleman passing thorough St. Nicholas shambles, his cloak by chance caught
hold of a Butchers flesh-hooke, and he being in danger of Arest, thinking it
was a Serjant that had him by the cloak, left it behind him, and ran away as
hard as he could drive. The more the people cried to him to come back, the
faster still he ran, suspecting it to be a mere trick of polisie to catch
him.

An Epitaph upon on who died of the French-Poxe.
HEre lies an old,
and pockie Knave.
Fit for a Dunghill,
not a Grave.
He did consist of Coughs,
and Rhumes:
Of all Diseases,
all bad Fumes.
His flesh, the Pox,
did surely wast it,
'Cause the Worms,
should never taste it.
For 'twas so leaprous,
and so foul,
That it infected,
had a Soul;
A Soul that without
question it is,
No body would have lodged*
but his:
And now it is gone,
and God knows whither,
But God grant mine,
may nere come thither.
Of two Sects of Philosophers, the Hennists, and Eggists.
A Merry companion used in all companies where he came to mention of two Sects
of Philosophers, the Hennists, and the Eggists; the first of which held that
the Hen was before the Egg, the latter, that the Egg was before the Hen. and
I have heard him swear that in all places he found more Eggists then Hennists.

Of taking the Wall.
TWo meeting in the street, one of them being fox't, bad the other give him the
Wall, To whom the other thus replied; I have not been sober at this time of
day these seven years, wherefore it is a wonder you find me so now: but to
morrow, if you will meet me at the same hour I will be as drunk as you are
now, and then you shall not have the wall, but for this time I give it you.

Of Baboones.
TWo Baboones being to be seen at a house by Fleet-bridge, many resorted
thither, and some laughed at their ugliness, and the strange faces they made;
whom a woman there present not without great anger, sharply thus rebuked. Do
you well, think you to laugh at strangers, who understand not your language?
If you were in their country, you would take it for a great abuse if they
should laugh at you.

Of a Glutton.
A Glutton being at a feast, and devouring more then all the other guests
joined together, one at the table marking his eager feeding, said to him; Sir,
you have, God be thanked, a very good stomach, and I make no doubt but where
ere you live you pay dearly for your food, and to ease you of that charge, if
it shall please you to go home with me, I will give your diet for your dunge.

Of the Duke of Lerma.
THe Duke of Lerma in Spain used still in way of Magnificency and State, when
he washed before a meal, to give a Ring to him that held the Basin, and
another to him that held the Ewre. One dinner amongst the rest, having on his
finger a Diamond of great value, he made this public proposition, that he
of that company who could make the saddest relation of his importunity in love
should have the Ring. Whereupon a Gentleman there present took him at his
offer, and thus began. May it pleas your Grace to uuderstand that I a long time
served two Mistresses, a fair, and a foul, a sweet Lady, and forlorn
despair; for she whom I infinitely loved, hated me as much. At length being
utterly uoid of all hope of comfort, I gave my self wholly over to sorrow and
solitude, who delivered me to a violent Feavor, which (as the Physitia^s) told
my friend could not end but by my death, my cruel fair one loving me (though
for some ends she had long conce^ld that soft passion) and hearing to what
weakness I was reduced, came to visit me, and smothering no longer her flame,
professed how violently she affected me, and how sorry she was her coyness
had brought me to that extremity. No Cordial could so revive my Spirits,
neither Julip so allay my unnatural heat, as did her mellifluous words. So
that in a short time I recovered my strength; when her father hearing of our
love, and vowed to cross it, locked her up from my sight, but finding, that
do what he could, we privately conveyed messages to one another, he
animated another suitor of hers to fight with me, knowing no hatred to equal
that of a Rival. To be brief, we fought, and I killed him, and (the Law
against Duels being severely executed) I fled my country, hoping in time my
friends would procure my Pardon. And to make my misery complete, in my absence
the Father of my Mistress, forced her by bitter usage to marry an old rotten
Count his neighbor. Now if your Grace do judge my calamity can receive
addition, and that my afflictions lay not claim to your Ring, as being the
greatest humane nature can under-goe, you may be pleased better to place it
then on wtetched me. He had no sooner ended his speech, but another thus
began. Great Prince, I must begin my mournful story where this Gentleman ends
his. He receiving at once both a pardon for the murder, and a letter from his
Mistress to make have into her embraces, the Count her husband being gone a
long journey, he desired me to associate him in this pleasing journey, and I
willingly yielded to his invitation; At length we arrived at the old Counts
Castle, where his Mistress met him with the same joy and gladness with which
the Spring welcomes the Sun. Long did their Kisses interrupt their speech,
which at length brake out into unfeigned protestations how much their past
miseries had endeared each to other: When they had chatted their f^ll, to
Supper we went, which finished a banquet succeeded for variety of taste, and
loveliness of color, second to none that ever ravished the pallat or the eye.
This ended, one comes in and rounds the Countess in the ear; whereat she
changed color, and cried out she was undone for ever, unless I did her that
friendly office, which should engage her to me during life. To this I
answered, I earnestly desired to receive that greatest Honor of dying in her
service: whereupon she told me that the old Count her husband was come home,
and newly gone to bed, being very weary, and expected her coming. Now Sir,
said she, so it stands with me that I dare not trust any of my maids with a
secret, because none of my house know of my servants being here but you and my
fairest sister. May it please you therefore about an hour hence to put on one
of my Coives, and one of my Smocks, and to go to bed to my husband, who I
believe will be asleep before you come; if he be not, all he will do to
you will be to stroke your cheeks, and kiss you; for any other dalliance you
need not fear him. Your Chin is smooth, and he will assuredly, not only take
you for a woman, but for me. Thus shall I, and my dear servant owe the
fruition of all loves delights to you alone. Well, I was not only attentive,
but obedient to her request, and into the supposed bed of the old Count I went,
where I was no sooner laid but I heard him breath, and felt him stir, and
move toward me, whereat (my heart being oppressed with the fear of his
loathsome touch) I shrunk half out of the bed, and so lay all night. Toward
morning I prepared to be gone, when on a sudden my friend, and the Countess
came dancing into the chamber he in his shirt, and she in her smock, my sovle
being at the instant divided between fear of being detected, and wonder at
their daring, they came to the bed side, holding each of them a ^apour in their
hand, and drawing the curtains, showed me the lamentable errovr I had layen
in all night, in taking her beautiful Sister (the fairest of her sex) for the
old Count her Husband. Truly worthy Prince, when with admiration I beheld her
beauty! and considered the loss of such an oppertunity, I could hardly refrain
from laying violent hands on my self. For my friend, he obtained the wished
end, of love; enjoying, but I was once unwittingly near possession of all
those sweets: which now are more, and more remote from me, so that I must give
my self wholly over into the Tyranny of restless desire, whose fierce flames
will consume me to a cinder. His speech coming to a period, the Duke said,
they both had deserved much, but the young Lady the Counts sister should have
the Ring, because she was so near a good turn, and mist it. This sentence of
his was applauded, not without laughter by all the company.

Of a foolish Moun-siere.
MOunsiere Vandosme of France desiring (as generally all of that Nation do) to
drink his Wine cool, set his bottles in the bucket, and let them down into
the well, and coming some few hours after to draw them up, espied his image
in the water, whereupon he ran in for his sword, swearing that the Antipodes
were drinking up his wine.

Of the same Mounsiere.
THE same Moun-siere bought him four ambling horses to make his Coach go
easy.

Of the same Moun-siere.
He showing one day to a Gentleman a friend of his a pure water running from a
cock, the Gentleman asked him from whence that water came; whereat he laughed
extremely; and being demanded the reason of his immoderate laughter, he
answered, This simple Gentleman asks me whence this water comes, though he
plainley sees it come out the hole of the cock.

Of the same Mounsiere.
He having new bread at his table, sent for his Baker, and beat him because
he baked him not stale bread.

Of a Poet.
A Learned Poet being asked what difference there was between a water Poet,
and a land Poet, answered, the same difference there is between a Scholar,
and a Sculler.

Of Poets in general.
ONe complaining of the poverty of Poets, another of the company made this
observation that when K. James came once to stamp his pieces with the Laurel,
he fell two shillings in the pound; for before were the pieces of two and
twenty shillings.

Of Purgatory.
THe Pope gave a Priest a silver basin, and endued it with this virtue that who
ever dropped a French crown into it, or to that vallue his friends soul should
instantly upon the sound of it be delivered out of Purgatory. There was in the
Town where the Priest dwelt a madd deboist young fellow whose Uncle had left
him very rich. To him this Priest came, and offered him that for a french
crown to free his Uncles soul from Purgatory. The young fellow said it was a
reasonable proposition, whereupon he presently took out a crown, and dropped it
in his Basin, and withal asked the Priest if he thought his Uncles soul was
yet out of Purgatory, to whom the Priest answered, I upon my life I dare
warrant it freed, which words he had no sooner said, but the young man took up
his money again, and put it in his pocket, whereat the Priest being much
displeased, said, If you take your money again your Uncles soul will again
enter Purgatory: Nay, answered the young fellow there is no fear of that, for
if my Uncle be as obstinate an old knave dead as he was living, if he be
once out all the Devils in hell cannot get him in again.

Of an Offering at a Wedding.
A Gentleman being invited to an offering, when he came to the Basin, offered
a piece, and put it up again, to whom the Churchwarden said; Sir, you have
given nothing; neither will I, replied the Gentleman, for I was not invited to
a Giving, but an Offering.

Of one who in a short time get a great estate by seven Wives.
A Citizen of London being borne in Essex in the hundreds, a most unhealthfull
place, yet not to him, because he was bred up there, married a rich wife and
carried her thither; who quickly there died. And finding this a speedy way to
get an estate, married six more in the space of two years, and buried them
all there.

Of a Hare.
KIng James loving Hunting extremely, went out in a great flood, though half
despairing to find an Hare; (...) to him in post have, and told him he had
found, whereat the Kin^ ^^ughed, and said, in my (...) thou have found a (...).

Of Sallets.
ONe asking at a Lords table, who first* invented Sallets, another answered
that Nabuchadnezar (was the first; for he having a long time been a beast, and
having ^ed on herbs, when he came to be a man again delighted still in the
eating of Sallets, which was his former food.

Of drinking with herbs.
A Fellow was so accustomed to drink Burnet, (...), and Burage in his Wine all
the Summer, that when Winter came, when he could procure no herbs, he could
not drink without putting a green Ribben into the Glass.

Of drinking with an Orange peele.
ONe was so used to drink with an Orange peele squee'zd through a candle, that
when he could get none, he used to take sneezing powder, and sneezed through
the light.

Of a new Papist.
A Young Gentleman being newly turned Papist, being invited to Supper had the
leg of a Woodcocke in his mouth, when on a sudden a scoffing fellow told him
he did ill to eat flesh on that day, because it was Notinghame Fair eve. He
having spit the piece of woodcock out of his mouth, thanked the other for his
admonition, swearing he would not for a thousand pounds have eaten a bit of
flesh that night.

Of a Tailors Bill.
A Tailor who worked to an Usurer, yet stood bound to him for money, brought
him an unreasonable Bill, for which he vowed to be revenged. The Bond wherein
the Taylour was bound ^^ the Usurer being due, the Tailor came to entreat
further day, and that he might continue it upon the old Bond, to whom the
Usurer said, Lord that you should entreat when you may command; whereupon the
Tailor departed well contented houlding his suit granted. But not long after
he heard that the Usurer had sued him to an out-lary, wherewith being much
incensed he came to the Usurer, and asked him why he had dealt so dishonestly
by him, to whom he said, I did it only to show you the difference between a
Tailors and a Lawyrs bill.

Of loosing ears.
ONe lying in prison (judged to lose his ears) was visited by certain friends
of his 3 or 4 days before he was to suffer. The visitants fell into a dispute
concerning the loss of ears one maintained that the excecutioner used to cut
the ear off by the root, the other affirmed that he used only to cut off the
tip, they grew so hot in this argument that they were like to fall together by
the ears which the prisoner perceiving entreated them to be patient and told
them he should be able within a sevenight himself to resolve the doubt

Of a Soldier.
AN old Soldier lying very sick, his Captain loving him well commanded four
or five of his Company to wait on him, who knowing the sick man had always
twenty pieces about him in a privy pocket to bury him, being vexed he died
not quickly; agreed to coffin him, and to share his money. He being weak, and
not able to resist, into the Coffin they put him, and away to Church they carry
him, but by the way they met their Captain; who ask't them whom they carried:
when the sick fellow hearing his Captains voice, cried out, Captain,
Captain. The Captain hearing a voice he well knew come from the Coffin, he
commanded them to set it down, and open it; which they had no sooner done,
but the sick man said, Captain, these rogues would have buried me quick for
my money. Whereupon the Captain laid them all by the heels.

Of a Welshman.
A Welshman, and an Englishman were cracking whose country had the most
fruitful soil. The Englishman said there was a close in the Town where he was
born, which bore so high grass, that if a man threw a cudgel into it
overnight, it would be so hidden with grass that he should hardly find it
the next day. Tush, said the Welshman, there is a close in the Town where I
was borne, into which if you put your horse overnight, you shall hardly find him
in the morning.

Of one who feared arresting.
A Gentleman who feared arresting lay with a Tapster in a beere-sellar four or
five nights, whither he invited a friend of his, who (...) him bitterly for
lodging in so base a place, to which reprehension he thus answered, My
Cr^ditors have vowed they will have me if I be above ground, which made me get
me under ground, thinking my self here secure.

Of three Universities.
THe Orator to the Universitie of Cambridge in a public Oration (praising a
great Lords learning) said he was a walking Academy; and to this land a third
Universitie. Whereupon a wagge of the same College with the Orator made this.

As there are three blue ^ea^e^
in a blue bladder,
As there are thrice three rounds
in a long ladder,
As there are three ^ookes
in a corner cap,
And three corners,
and one in a map,
Even so, like all these,
there are three Universities.
Of a Play.
THe University of Oxford at a great entertainment they made Queen Elizabeth
presented her Majesty with a Comedy wherein were represented the four
Elements. It happened that in acting, he who played Fire was out; whereupon he
who acted Water called to Air, and said, Air, help Fire; for he is out.

Of Frigiditie.
A Modest Gentlewoman being compelled by her mother to accuse her husband of
Frigiditie, making her appearance in the Court, desired the Judge she might
have the privilege to write her mind, in that shame forbad her by Tongue to
express some passa^^s she was to deliver. The Judge having granted her
request, A Clearke forthwith presented her with Pen, Ink, and Paper. Whereupon
she took the Pen (without dipping it in the Ink) and made as if she would
write; to whom the Clearke said, Mistress, there is no Ink in your Pen. Sir,
replied she, that is my case just, and therefore I need explain my self no
further.

Of (...) s^ipwrack.
A foolish fellow who had never been at Sea before, happened to be in a g^^^^
s^orme, in which having (...) a long time, at length by the violence of the
wind they were driven on sho^^ (...) this fool ^^joyci^g (...) cou^rage, my
Masters, I thank God we are now on ground.

Of a young Seaman.
A Young Seaman being at Sea in rough weather, and being extreme sick told
the Master of the Ship wherein he passed that if he would not hold the Ship
still while he spewed he would not pay him a penny for his passage.

Of (...).
SIr (...) came to a Widdowe^ house in the Country to whom she presented
(...) and (...) Cup of the same Beer, and said, Sir, I dare not commend the
Beer to you; for, indeed, it is dead: to which Sir Josllin replied, it may
very well be; for it was very vveake when I was here last.

Of a Disputation between a Protestant and a Papist.
BE^^ a learned Protestant disputing, by Henry the fo^rth^ co^^and in a Church
with a great Bishop concerning I^^ges, the Bishop, pointing to the Images in
the windows, said to him. Beza, Beza, these windows dispute against thee, to
which Beza (...), Great Sir, your argument brittle as the glass, and soon
broken.

Of Healths.
A Dutch Ambassador to a Protestant Prince of Germany passed through Geneva,
and invited to Supper all the Professors of Learning, and the best of the
town. But above all he applied himself to Beza, as being a man famous for
his brave parts. Being set at Supper he began in a great guilt Bole of Wine* a
Health to his Prince, and chose Beza for his pledger; who answered, he would
do him reason. The Ambassador drank all off, but when it came to Beza* he
only sipt, and set by the (...) Whereat the Ambssador being incensed said, Sir,
you vndervallue my Prince, and do me wrong, in that you promised to pledge
me, which Beza denying why, said the Ambassador, did not you promise to do me
reason? I did so, replied Beza, but there is a distinction, I see, to be made
between your doing reason, and mine, for yours lies in the bottom, and mine
in the brimme.

Of one in a storm.
A Master of a ship being in danger of ship-wracke fell down before the
Image of our blessed Lady, and said, Oh holy Virgin, deliver me safe out of
this storm, and I will place a wax candle before thy Alter shall be as big
as the mast of my ship. Well he landed safe, and many weeks passed, but in
all that time he spoke not a word of the candle, which his Boson observing,
said Master, where is the candle as big as the mast of your shipp, that you
promised to place before our blessed Ladies Altar? O, said the Master, the case
is altered, I am on land, I will make her be content with a little one now.
This verifies the Italian proverb; The evil being past, the Saint is despised.

Of a Sea Captain, and an Usurer.
A Sea Captain desired to borrow money of an Usurer, who ask't him whether he
were a land or a Sea Captain, to which he answered that he ever employed
himself in Sea-service. Whereupon the Usurer entreated to be excused if he
lent him no money; for you, quoth he, who can confine your self a whole year
to the narrow compass of a ship, will think your self at liberty when you are
in a large prison.

Of two who went to see two plays.
TWo Gentlemen went to see Pericles acted, and one of them was moved with the
calamities of that Prince that he wept, whereat the other laughed extremely,
Not long after the same couple went to see the Major of Qinborough, when he who
jeered the other at Pericles now wept himself, to whom the other laughing,
said, what the Devil should there be in this merry play to make a man weep.
O, replied the other, who can hold from weeping to see a Magistrate so abused?

The Jest will take those who have seen these two plays.

Of household stuff.
I heard once on the Bank-side a fellow cry, household stuff, Six pence a
peck, Six pence a peck, whereat I marveiling, asked the Crier, what household
stuff it might be that was sold by the peck? to which he replied they were
broken iron of diverse sorts, as Keys, Snuffers, locks; etc.

Of a Gentleman Arrested.
A Gentleman being arrested and carried to a Tavern, that he might send for
Bail, he called for wine and sugar, and having drunk three or four glasses a
piece, he swore all the oaths of God that he had mingled mercury with the
sugar, and that both he and they were poisoned. Wherewith they being frighted
ran to the Apothecaries for an Antidote, while this lying cheat escaped.

Of two Brothers.
TWo Brothers of the Ins of Court had spent and paun'd so long that they had
but one ^ute between them, so that they went abroad by ^ur^s Their father
coming to town came about three in the afternoon to their chamber, and
finding one of them a bed lash't him well favoredly with his wand, and bade him
rise, but he lay still, whereat his father wondering ask't him why he did not
rise, to whom he answered that if he did rise his Brother must come to bed;
for they had but one suit between them, at which reply of his the Father
chafed and laughed by fits.

Of a octour that disputed by Signs.
A Certain Emperor having condemned one of the Priuces of his blood to die
for Treason, yet set out a proclamation that if any man could be found who
within a month could dispute with a Doctor of his by signs, so that the said
Doctor could discover his meaning that then the condemned Prince should be
acquitted. A poor foolish Groom of this distressed Prince, undertook the
task, and being brought into the presence of the Emperor, and his nobles he
called for this famous Doctor; who no sooner appeared but he held forth to this
sot one finger, the fool held up two to him, and he again three to the
fool, then the fool shut his fist, whereat the Doctor amazed told the Emporor
he had met at length with the only learned man of the world* for* said he, I
held vpone finger, which signified God the Father, then he held up two which
Signified GOD the Father, and GOD the Son, then I held up three to signify
GOD the Father, GOD the Son, and GOD the holy Ghost, at which he shut his fist,
as much as to say, they are alone. When the fool came back to his Lord he was
asked by him in private his interpretation of the signs, to whom he thus
answered. The whoresonne Doctor made one horn at me; I made two at him, then
he made three at me, at which I knit my fist; for if he had made another at
me I would have taken him such a sowce that I would have made his head ring
noone.

Of two Drunkards.
A Fellow being so drunk that he was feign to be carried on men's shoulders
by chance espied two leading home another Drunkard, when bursting out into a
great passion, he said, O Jesus, is it not a shame, that men should be so
Drunk as to be led: the beast not knowing that he himself was carried.


