Ordinances made by Sir William Cecill, Knight of the Order of the Garter,
Baron of Burghley, for the order and government of xiij. poor men, whereof
one to be the Warden of the Hospital at Stanford Baron in the County of
Northampton, to remain in a Chest in a Chamber in the said Hospital, locked
up in a Chest with two several locks, the keys whereof to be in the custody
of the Vicar of S. Martins and the Bailiffe of the Manor.
xx. Augusti Anno xxxix. ELIZABETHAE Reginae, and Anno Domini 1597.
THe first five shall be named, chosen and admitted always by me William Lord
Burghley, during my life, and after, by mine heir male that shall be owner of
mine house and Lord of Burghley, whereof the foremost shall be called the Warden
of the Almeshouse of the Lord Burghley.

The next four, which is the vi. vii. viii. and ix. shall be named and
admitted by the Vicar of S. Martins for the time being, and the Bailiffe of the
Manor of Stanford Baron, in the County of Northampton, and the eldest
Churchwarden of S. Martins, and by them that shall be dwellers in the Nunry,
otherwise called S. Michaels, and in the Inn called the George of Stanford
Baron, or by the greater number of them.

The last four, viz. the x. xi. xii. and xiii. shall be named and admitted by
him that shall be for the time Alderman of the Borough of Stanford, in the County
of Lincoln, and by the Recorder of that Town, the Steward and Bailife of the
said Manor of Stanford, or the more part of them, whereof the Alderman to be
one.

Item, the Vicar of S. Martins, or the Curate of the Church for the time being,
shall keep a Register in writing of the names and sirnames of all the said
poor men, which book shall be kept in the Vestry within the Chancell of S.
Martins Church, and shall be written in order, beginning with the name of the
Warden, and then of the first four, and so following the second four, and
lastly the last four, and shall be signed with the hands of the Bailife of the
Manor of Stanford Baron, and of the Steward of that Manor, and so yearly
renewed as cause shall require, upon the decease or change of any of the said
poor men, and a double of this book shall be delivered to the Alderman of
Stanford, to be kept with the Records of the Town, thereby to know how the
number shall continue.

Item, when the warden and any other of the xii. shall die, or any of their
places become void, the place of such as shall die, or become void, being
either the Warden or of the number of the first four, shall be supplied by the
Lord of Burghley for the time being, and so the place of any of the second
four, dying or becoming void, shall be supplied by the foresaid Vicar, and
the persons that are authorized to name the second company of four: and the
like shall be observed by the Alderman of Stanford, and the others joined with
him for the supplying of such places of the last four, as shall from time to
time become void.

Item, if the parties aforenamed, or the more part of them, shall not supply
the void places of such as have been first chosen by them within xxviii. days
after the same shall be void, the same shall be supplied by any two others of
them that are authorized to nominate any of the said xii. and in default of
such nomination, the Lord of the house of Burghley and his heirs male shall
supply the same within two months, and in default thereof, some one or two of
the Feoffees or their heirs (to whom the annuitie of one hundredth pounds is
granted, that shall dwell nere to Burghley) shall supply the same.

Item, the Warden of the house shall have yearly a gowncloth of three yards
and of viii. s. the yard, and every of the other shall have every year a
gownecloth of three yards at vi. s. viii. d. the yard, of such color as the
Liuerie coats of the Lord Burghley or his heirs shall be for the time, which
shall be provided and bought by the Balife of the Manor of Stanford Baron, and
by the oversight of the Vicar of S. Martins and the Alderman of Stanford.

Item, in the nomination of the said Warden and xii. poor men, these
circumstances following shall be observed, or else none otherwise named shall be
allowed.

FIrst, every one so to be named, shall be presented in the Church of S.
Martins, upon a Sunday in the forenoone to the Vicar of the said Church, and by
him allowed to be of honest Christian profession, and able and well disposed to
say the Lords prayer, the Creed, and to learn to answer to the Ten
commandments, as are prescribed to such as are Catechized.

Item, none shall be thereto admitted, but such as have been borne in the
Counties of Northampton, Lincoln, or Rutland, or that have dwelt for the space
of vii. years within the space of vii. miles of the Borough of Stanford,
except the Lord of Burghley house shall for some reasonable cause dispense
therewith, neither shall any be thereto allowed that is under xxx. years of
age, or that has any certeinty of living above the value of liii. s. iiii. d.
by the year, nor any that is known to be diseased of any Leprosy or of the
Pocks called the French pocks, or of any Lunacy, or to be a common Drunkard,
Barretor, or infamous for adultery, theft, or such like fault.

Item, the said poor men shall be (as nere as may be) chosen out of such as
have been either honest soldiers or workmen, as Masons, Carpenters, or other
Artizans of handy crafts, or Laborers in any works or in Husbandry, or
servants that are by sickness, age, or other impediment, unable to get their
living by their handy work or by daily service, as beforetime they have done:
And if after that they shall be chosen to the places, any of them shall fall into
such infirmities of infectious diseases, or to be justly infamed and convinced
of such notable vices as above is in the next former Article mentioned, they
shall be displaced by them by whose authority they were placed, and their
allowance to cease within xiiii. days after their displacing, against which
time their places shall be supplied by such as have displaced them.

Item, none of the said xiii. poor men shall in Alehouses or other places play
at Cards, Dice, or any unlawful game, but if after once warning given to them
by the Vicar of S. Martins, or the Bailife of Stanford Baron or of the Manor
of the Borough of Stanford, to forbear from such unlawful play, shall a
second time commit any such offense prohibited, he shall be removed from his
place, and shall receive no more weekly relief, except upon knowledge of his
fault, and promise of amendment, he shall be restored by the said Vicar and
Bailife, and two others of the number that did first place him.

Item, every of these poor men shall resort in their Livery gowns to Common
prayer every Sunday, Wednesday, Friday, and Holyday to S. Martins Church at
Morning and Evening prayer, and shall sit or kneel in some place appointed by
the Churchwardens. Neither shall any of them be absent from the Church at such
times, without just cause by sickness, to be notified to the Vicar, and to be
allowed by him. And for every such default not excusable, the Parish Clerk
shall have vi. d. out of the weeks wages allowed to the poor man that shall
make such default.

Item, there shall be paid to the said Warden, and to the other xii. by the Vicar
of S. Martins, and the Bailife of the Manor in S. Martins Church, or by one of
them every Sunday after Evening prayer, these sums following, viz. To the
Warden of the Hospital the sum of iii. s. for the week following, and to
every of the other twelve the sum of ii. s. iiii. d. for the week following,
saving to the parish Clerk his due for the default before committed, (if any
shall be) as above is expressed, which he shall also receive at the same time.

Item, all these poor men, that shall be unmarried, and not notoriously sick,
shall lodge every night in the common house, without some special impediment,
to be allowed by the Vicar or by the Bailiffe of the Manor of Stanford Baron,
and such as shall be married, may live with their wives out of the common house,
so the same be within S. Martins Parish, or within the Borough of Stanford,
but yet they shall be bound one night in a month, to lodge with their fellows
in the common house, upon pain of loss of one weeks wages, which shall be
paid to the poor men's box in S. Martins Church.

Item, none of them shall go abroad in their gowns out of the bounds of S.
Martins Parish, or out of the Borough of Stanford, and the liberties thereof.

Item, the Vicar of S. Martins, or Minister shall upon the first Sunday of
every quarter of the year, assemble them together in the Church before Evening
prayer, and seuering them asunder, shall hear them say the Lords prayer, and
the Creed, and to answer to the Commandments: and such as will not in
convenient time learn, and be able to say the same, shall be avoided from his
room after fourteen days space given him to learn the same, and the Vicar
or Minister shall have for his labor v. s. every such Sunday, and the Parish
Clearke twelve pence for attending on the Vicar.

Item, they shall every first Sunday of every quarter go to Burghley house,
(if the Lord of Burghley, or the Lady his wife shall there keep household) and
there shall dine at one table together in the hall, where they shall have two
mease of meat, every mease of two dishes, one with pottage and boiled meat,
the other roste, (if it be no fasting d^y) and if it be a fish day, then they
shall have two like meases of white meat and fish. For the charges whereof, he
that shall dwell at Burghley as the heir of the house, shall defray the same,
or else in case of the absence of the said Lord Burghley, or the Lady his wife
from the house, payment shall be made out of the yearly sum of the annuitie to
the said thirteen poor men after the rate of iiii. d. a piece, to be paid by
the Bailiffe of the Manor, or by such as shall be authorized to receive the
annuitie, and to distribute it according to these orders, and the same to be
allowed upon the account.

Item, if at any time he that shall be mine heir of my house at Theobalds in
Hartfordshire, shall come to Burghley, or Stanford, the said poor men shall
present themselves duetifully unto him, and shall offer any service they can
do to him, in memory of the Founder William Lord Burghley, Auncestor of the
said Owner of Theobalds.

Item, if any doubt or question shall hereafter arise upon the words or
meaning of these former Articles or Ordinances, the resolution or determination
thereof shall be made, and in writing delivered to the Vicar of S. Martins, by
the Bishop of Peterborough, or by the Deane and any one Prebendarie of the
Church of Peterborough, whereunto all parties shall yield and obey.

Item, as these poor men shall at the first have their several rooms allowed
unto them in the Alms house, so shall they during their lives, or their
continuance in their places, continue their lodgings, and every one as he shall
succeed to the void place, so shall he succeed in the lodging without any
change.

Item, all the twelve shall at their entries openly in S. Martins Church,
promise to be obedient to the Warden of the house, in all things that he shall
advise them for the observation of the orders by these Articles prescribed. And
if any of them shall wilfully refuse to observe the same, he shall complain
thereof to the Lord Burghley for the time being, or in his absence to the Vicar,
and Bailiffe of the Manor, who shall remove such a wilful person from the
place, whereunto they that did first name him, shall appoint another.

Item, during the life of me the Lord Burghley, he that is, and shall be my
Bailiffe of my Manor of Stanford Baron, shall receive the said annuitie of one
hundredth pounds, out of my lands heretofore called Cliffe Park, in the County
of Northampton, and shall with the priuitie of the Alderman of Stanford, or the
Vicar of S. Martins, make payment thereof according to these orders, and the
rest that shall remain upon his yearly account, to be employed on the repair
of the house, or upon the poor prisoners in any Jail in the Borough of
Stanford, by the appointment of the Alderman, and the said Vicar for the time
being, before whom the said Bailiffe shall make yearly his account the second
day of November. And after my decease, if the said Alderman, Vicar, and
Recorder of Stanford for the time being, shall not like to continue the said
Bailiffe for the said service, they shall name and appoint either such as
shall be Bailiffe of the Borough of Stanford, or such as shall be Inhabitants in
the Inn or house called the George of Stanford Baron, or in the site of S.
Michaels Nunrie, or in default of them, such other as shall be meet for that
service, with the consent of the L. Burghley for the time being, or any of two
the Feoffees, which account shall be also yearly before the last of November
presented to the Lord Burghley, if he shall then be residing at Burghley, or
in his absence from thence to some one of the Feoffees.

Item, the said annuitie shall be paid by the Bailiffe or Farmors of Cliffe every
quarter of the year to the Bailiffe of the Manor of Stanford Baron, that is
to say, xxv. pounds at or before the feast of S. Michael the Archangel, and so
quarterly by equal portions, with which money the Bailiffe shall weekly make
payment of the foresaid sums as before is expressed. And now for the first
payment, he shall begin the first Sunday after the feast of S. Michael, and so
continue weekly.

There shall be also provided by the said Bailiffe with the priuitie and
allowance of the Alderman of Stanford, and the Vicar of S. Martins, gowns for
every of them according to the value above mentioned, which shall be delivered to
them yearly the Saturday before the first Sunday after Michaelmas.

There shall be also during the term of twenty and one years from the feast of
S. Michael the Archangel last past, yearly delivered out of the woods of
Cliffe Park, thirteen loades of fire wood for the said thirteen poor people
abiding in the said Hospital by Roger Dale gent. the Farmer or Tenant at Cliffe
Park, his executors or assigns, which thirteen loades, the said Roger Dale
his Executors or Assigns are bound by covenant to cause yearly to be carried
to the said Hospital at some conuentient time before the feast of all Saints,
and after the end of the said xxi. years, the said quantity of wood shall be
provided by the Bailiffe of the said Manor of Stanford Baron for the time
being.

William Burghley.


